                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  AGGREGATE IMPLICATIONS OF INDIVISIBLE LABOR, INCOMPLETE MARKETS,
                   AND LABOR MARKET FRICTIONS

                                             Per Krusell
                                        Toshihiko Mukoyama
                                         Richard Rogerson
                                           Aysegul Sahin

                                        Working Paper 13871
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13871


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2008




Earlier versions of this paper were presented at Princeton University, the University of Tokyo, the
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago and the 2007 SED conference. We thank Gadi Barlevy, Bob Hall
and seminar and conference participants. The views expressed in this article are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the position of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the Federal Reserve
System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Per Krusell, Toshihiko Mukoyama, Richard Rogerson, and Aysegul Sahin. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Aggregate Implications of Indivisible Labor, Incomplete Markets, and Labor Market Frictions
Per Krusell, Toshihiko Mukoyama, Richard Rogerson, and Aysegul Sahin
NBER Working Paper No. 13871
March 2008
JEL No. E2,J2

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper analyzes a model that features frictions, an operative labor supply margin, and incomplete
markets. We first provide analytic solutions to a benchmark model that includes indivisible labor and
incomplete markets in the absence of trading frictions. We show that the steady state levels of aggregate
hours and aggregate capital stock are identical to those obtained in the economy with employment
lotteries, while individual employment and asset dynamics can be different. Second, we introduce
labor market frictions to the benchmark model. We find that the effect of the frictions on the response
of aggregate hours to a permanent tax change is highly non-linear. We also find that there is considerable
scope for substitution between "voluntary" and "frictional" nonemployment in some situations.


Per Krusell                                         Richard Rogerson
Department of Economics                             Department of Economics
Princeton University                                College of Business
111 Fisher Hall                                     Arizona State University
Princeton, NJ 08544                                 Tempe, AZ 85287
and NBER                                            and NBER
pkrusell@princeton.edu                              richard.rogerson@asu.edu

Toshihiko Mukoyama                                  Aysegul Sahin
Department of Economics                             Federal Reserve Bank of New York
University of Virginia                              Research & Statistics Group
Charlottesville VA 22904                            33 Liberty Street
tm5hs@virginia.edu                                  New York, NY 10045
                                                    Aysegul.Sahin@ny.frb.org
1    Introduction

Although labor market outcomes have always figured prominently in macroeconomic anal-

yses, the way in which macroeconomists model the labor market has changed dramatically

over the last forty years. In particular, two underlying premises that bear on how to model

the labor market have become commonplace during this period: the first is that labor supply

matters for aggregate labor market outcomes, and the second is that trading frictions matter

for aggregate labor market outcomes. Interestingly, both of these views can be traced to

contributions that appeared in the Phelps (1970) volume, and each represented a radical

departure from the canonical macroeconomic model of that time period. From the household

perspective, the canonical model prevailing at the time assumed that desired hours of work

were independent of any features of the economic environment, including such factors as

wages, taxes, and transfer programs, and from the firm perspective this model assumed that

employment could be costlessly and immediately increased in line with any increase in the

demand for labor.

    Although these two premises are not in any sense in conflict, almost all work on aggregate

labor market outcomes adopts one or the other but not both. This is reflected in the fact

that the two standard frameworks for addressing issues related to the aggregate labor market

are either the one-sector growth model (extended to include an endogenous labor supply de-

cision as in Kydland and Prescott (1982)), or a version of the Diamond-Mortensen-Pissarides

matching model. The former abstracts from any trading frictions in the labor market, while

the latter abstracts from any labor supply considerations. One interpretation of this state

of affairs is that each feature is important for its own particular subset of issues; in fact,

however, both frameworks are routinely used to address the same set of issues, ranging from

the nature of business cycle fluctuations to the effect of permanent policy changes. Moreover,

in some cases the two models deliver results that are sharply different.

    In view of this situation, we believe that it is important to develop a better understanding

of the relative importance of these two features for specific issues of interest, and to assess


                                               2
whether there are important interactions among them. The goal of this paper is to take a first

step in this agenda. Specifically, the contribution of the paper is twofold. First, we develop

a general equilibrium model that incorporates both labor market frictions and a standard

labor supply problem. Second, we use our model to address one important issue in aggregate

labor market analysis: the effect of tax and transfer programs on steady state hours of work.

Following the work of Prescott (2004), this issue has attracted considerable attention and

serves as a useful starting point for thinking about the relative importance of labor supply

considerations and frictions.1

       The model that we develop possesses three key features: indivisible labor, frictions, and

incomplete markets. If one wants to capture trading frictions in the labor markets, then

indivisible labor is a natural assumption. While one can certainly formulate models of indi-

visible labor and trading frictions with complete markets, we believe that a market structure

that does not include either markets for employment lotteries or insurance markets for the

idiosyncratic income shocks that frictions generate is of particular interest.

       Our analysis provides several interesting results. First, we provide analytic solutions to

a benchmark model that includes indivisible labor and incomplete markets in the absence

of trading frictions. We show that steady-state equilibrium allocations are identical to those

that obtain in the economy when one permits trade of employment lotteries. Our result

extends the similar finding of Prescott et al. (2007) that considered continuous time, finite

horizons, and no discounting.2 We also provide a complete characterization of the individual

decision rules that obtain in this equilibrium. Two interesting properties emerge. One is that

wealth effects are non-linear in wealth. For either low or high wealth, increases in wealth

lead to equal increases in consumption, but for intermediate levels of wealth the effect on

consumption is zero. In contrast, for low and high levels of wealth the effect of wealth on
   1
     Ljungqvist and Sargent (2008) also consider taxes in a model with incomplete markets, frictions and
indivisible labor. But whereas we focus on how the presence of frictions matters for the effects of taxes, they
focus on how the presence of human capital matters.
   2
     Also see Mulligan (2001), Ljungqvist and Sargent (2006, 2008) and Nosal and Rupert (2007) for related
analysis.




                                                      3
labor supply is zero, but for intermediate levels the effect is positive, but only in a lifetime

sense. This last statement follows from another interesting property: current labor supply is

indeterminate for intermediate levels of wealth. Specifically, equilibrium imposes structure

on the amount of labor supplied over one’s lifetime but imposes very little structure on the

timing of labor supply. This indeterminacy has important implications for how individuals

respond to the presence of frictions.

   Second, we find that the extent to which labor market frictions affect the response of

aggregate steady-state hours to permanent changes in tax and transfer programs is also

highly non-linear. Specifically, in some regions of the parameter space the presence of frictions

has effectively no effect on the response, while in other regions of the parameter space the

presence of frictions leads to a dramatic reduction in the response of hours of work. But

importantly, this effect is not linear. For example, in the case of tax reductions, the effect

of frictions may only manifest itself for reductions beyond some threshold. Moreover, the

magnitude of this threshold depends very much on the initial equilibrium: starting from

some equilibria, frictions manifest themselves even for small changes. An important message

is that one cannot generally conclude that frictions do or do not matter for a specific issue.

Whether they matter depends very much on what region of the parameter space one is in

and on the nature of the policy change being considered.

   Third, we find that there is considerable scope for substitution between “voluntary”

and “frictional” nonemployment in some regions. Specifically, an increase in frictions need

not have any effect on steady-state equilibrium employment. Moreover, this can be true

even though the length of nonemployment spells is completely determined by the extent of

frictions. That is, individual level data on employment spells is not necessarily informative

about the response of aggregates to changes in policy.

   An outline of the paper follows. In the next section we provide some background in-

formation that helps to describe the context of the more general research issue concerning

the interaction of labor supply and frictions. This section also summarizes some related



                                               4
literature. Section 3 describes and analyzes the benchmark frictionless model that features

indivisible labor and incomplete markets. Section 4 introduces frictions into the model, and

Section 5 presents quantitative results for the effect of permanent tax changes and how the

effects depend upon frictions. Section 6 concludes and discusses directions for future research.


2    Motivation

In this section we report the results of a simple policy exercise in the context of two prototype

models that are used for thinking about aggregate employment. The first is the indivisible

labor model of Rogerson (1988), embedded into the growth model and calibrated as in Hansen

(1985). The second is the matching model of Pissarides (1985), calibrated as in Shimer (2005).

Understanding the differences between the two exercises serves to highlight the need for the

framework that we develop in this paper. Related to this, we argue that the results in the

existing literature are easily misinterpreted regarding the effect of adding trading frictions to

standard aggregate models.

    At a superficial level, the steady-state allocations in the calibrated models of Hansen and

Shimer seem very similar. Both models feature indivisible labor and generate steady states

in which the employment rate is interior and workers move stochastically between employ-

ment and nonemployment.3 However, despite this superficial similarity, the two models are

fundamentally different in terms of economic mechanisms. Central to understanding this is

to note the differences in the nature of the calibrated steady states. In the Hansen calibration

exercise, preferences are written as
                                     ∞
                                     X
                                           β t [log ct + α log(1 − ht )]
                                     t=0
    3
      Although these features are similar, the models might be viewed as connecting to the data in slightly
different ways—the indivisible labor model is probably best viewed as distinguishing between employment and
nonemployment, without any implications for different categories of nonemployment, i.e., unemployed versus
nonparticipating. The matching model, on the other hand, also has employed and nonemployed individuals,
but the nonemployed individuals in this model seem to reflect what the data captures as unemployed workers
rather than non-participating workers. The matching model also has predictions for one variable that the
indivisible labor model does not—the number of vacancies that are posted.



                                                      5
where ct is consumption in period t, and ht ∈ {0, h̄} is time devoted to market work. The

parameter α dictates what fraction of the population will be employed in the steady state.

If this parameter is set sufficiently low, implying that individuals do not value leisure very

much, then the steady state equilibrium will entail everyone employed. Given that in the data

the employment to population ratio is around 0.60, Hansen chose α so that the steady-state

equilibrium matches this observation. Equivalently, in his steady-state equilibrium, workers

only want to spend roughly 60% of their lifetime in employment.

   Next consider this same issue in the context of the Shimer calibration. Preferences are

now given by:
                                       ∞
                                       X
                                              β t [ct − bht ]
                                        t=0
and the output of a worker-firm match is y. A key property of the model is that it is

linear. If one removes the frictions from this model, then the steady-state employment rate

is dictated by the relationship between the leisure parameter b and the productivity parameter

y. Specifically, if b < y and there are no frictions, then everyone will work in every period.

Conversely, if b > y then no one will ever work (with or without frictions). In the knife-edge

case of b = y then everyone is always indifferent between working and nonworking, so that if

there are no frictions the equilibrium is indeterminate. In order for his analysis to be of any

interest, Shimer necessarily calibrated his model so that b < y–in fact, he chose b = 0.4 and

y = 1–so that the difference is quite large. Given this choice, the frictionless version of his

model implies that everyone works all the time. In other words, he calibrates the model so

that the labor supply decision is degenerate.

   This has important implications for how one interprets results from the two models. For

example, consider the case of asking what the impact would be on aggregate employment if we

instituted a permanent change in the tax on labor earnings that is used to finance a lump-sum

transfer. Both models predict that this will lead to a decrease in steady-state employment,

though in general they will give different answers. Specifically, for the calibrations employed

by Hansen and Shimer one finds that the decrease in employment is dramatically greater in


                                                  6
the Hansen model. In particular, whereas a ten percentage point increase in taxes leads to

roughly a ten percent decrease in employment in Hansen’s model, the decrease is only around

one percent in Shimer’s model.

   Because the Shimer model looks like an indivisible labor model with frictions, one might be

tempted to conclude that adding frictions reduces the impact of tax changes on employment.

But in fact, such a conclusion would be completely unwarranted, and the reason is precisely

because of the calibration issue noted above. To see why, note that if Hansen had calibrated

the value of α so that steady-state employment is at a corner solution, equal to 1, (and

is a long way from being interior), he would find that an increase in taxes has no impact

on employment. This is because the sole channel through which employment decreases in

his model is through labor supply, and by calibrating it to effectively remove the labor

supply choice, the effect of taxes on employment disappears. In Shimer’s calibrated model, in

contrast, the only mechanism through which employment changes in response to a permanent

change in taxes is via changes in the level of frictions (which in his model is captured by the

ratio of vacancies to unemployment).

   To summarize, the two exercises tell us about two different channels through which taxes

can affect employment. As a result, neither exercise can tell us how the presence of frictions

affects the importance of the labor supply channel, since one exercise has no frictions and

the other has no labor supply.

   This discussion suggests what we find to be an open and interesting question: What are

the properties of models which feature both non-trivial labor supply decisions and search

frictions? This basically calls for a merging of the two frameworks discussed earlier, which

one can view as either adding labor supply to the matching model or adding frictions to the

indivisible labor model. One may reasonably ask whether it is important to merge these two

frameworks; one view is that the two frameworks are relevant for different issues (one for

unemployment and one for participation) and that merging them is a mechanical exercise with

little expected payoff in terms of understanding substantive issues. To this we counter that



                                              7
it seems very intuitive that trading frictions would necessarily interact with the participation

decision. Moreover, our analysis shows that there are important interactions between the

two and that the nature of the interaction is very dependent upon where one is in parameter

space.

   It is important to note that the issue of merging the two frameworks is not simply to add

some dimension of labor supply to a model with frictions but rather to add it in a manner

that would allow the model to be consistent with applied work on labor supply. In particular,

specifications that feature utility that is linear in consumption are ultimately going to be of

little interest. Furthermore, one should not think that adding labor supply to matching mod-

els is synonymous with adding curvature. As our discussion of the Hansen model indicates,

the mere presence of curvature in preferences does not imply that an indivisible labor model

will feature a non-degenerate labor supply decision.

   If one seeks to merge these two frameworks there is another issue that must be dealt with.

In particular, another difference of interest between the Shimer and Hansen analyses has to

do with the existence of markets for insurance. Hansen implicitly assumes that individuals

can perfectly insure against idiosyncratic income shocks associated with employment lotter-

ies. Shimer assumes no insurance markets, though of course this has no real consequences in

his framework given that preferences are linear. If one studies a model with indivisible labor,

a non-degenerate labor supply problem and trading frictions, then the market structure does

matter. In what follows we will study a market structure that does not include employent

lotteries or insurance markets for idiosyncratic income shocks. Given that trading frictions

necessarily lead to idiosyncratic fluctuations in income, it seems natural to consider a struc-

ture in which the presence of these income fluctuations is not effectively assumed away. If

one considers the Social Planner’s problem for a model with complete insurance and trading

frictions, (e.g., Merz (1994) or Andolfatto (1996)), one can see that these models are isomor-

phic to models that exhibit aggregate adjustment costs on labor in the aggregate production




                                               8
function but no trading frictions.4 In this sense, adding complete insurance effectively severs

the connection between the idiosyncratic uncertainty associated with trading frictions and

labor supply. Given that we are precisely interested in the implications of trading frictions

for labor supply, it makes sense to not assume complete insurance. Moreover, there is a

growing literature that has already uncovered many interesting aspects of how labor supply

interacts with this form of market incompleteness in the absence of frictions.5

        For thinking about many policy issues, this market structure is natural. For example,

if one wants to think about the effects of unemployment insurance programs on aggregate

labor market outcomes, then it is natural to start with a market structure that does not

already provide a full set of insurance markets. Moreover, to the extent that one thinks

that the incomplete markets structure is a better description of reality than the complete

markets model, and that market structure influences the nature of individual employment

and consumption paths, then a strategy of using micro data to help calibrate the key features

of the model will be more reliable in the incomplete market setting.


3        A Frictionless Benchmark Economy

As stated in the previous section, our objective is to study a class of models that features

indivisible labor, incomplete markets, and frictions. The perspective that we adopt in this

work is to ask how the addition of frictions to an indivisible-labor model with incomplete

markets affects the implications of the model in the context of a specific issue, which we take

to be the effect of tax and transfer schemes on steady-state allocations. The benchmark model

for this analsysis is a version of the growth model that features indivisible labor, incomplete

markets, and no trading frictions. This section is devoted to an analysis of this benchmark.

In addition to being of interest as the natural benchmark for the question that we ask, this

analysis is also of interest for two additional reasons. First, we can obtain analytic results for
    4
     We note that although Merz and Andolfatto both have curvature in preferences over consumption, both
models imply that the employment rate would be one if trading frictions were removed.
   5
     Recent papers that examine labor supply in models with incomplete markets but no trading frictions
include Chang and Kim (2006, 2007), Pijoan-Mas (2006) and Domeij and Floden (2006).


                                                   9
individual decision rules in the steady-state equilibrium, and the features of these decision

rules will turn out to be very important in understanding how our findings are affected by the

addition of frictions in the next section. Second, this benchmark model allows one to assess

the extent to which the implications of an indivisible labor model with trade in employment

lotteries are affected by the consideration of alternative market structures.

3.1     Environment

The environment is basically the same as the model in Hansen (1985) without shocks, ex-

cept that we consider a market structure that rules out all insurance markets and trade in

employment lotteries. Instead, following Krusell and Smith (1998), we consider a market

structure in which individuals can only hold capital as an asset. The specifics of the model

follow.

      There is a continuum of measure one of identical households, each with preferences given

by:                                     "                               #
                                            ∞
                                            X
                                    E             β t [log(ct ) − d(ht )]
                                            t=0

where ct ≥ 0 is consumption in period t and ht ∈ {0, 1} is hours devoted to market work

in period t. Given that labor is assumed to be indivisible we need only assume that d is

increasing. We normalize d(0) to be equal to 0 and let d(1) = D. The discount factor β

satisfies 0 < β < 1.

      There is an aggregate production function that uses capital (Kt ) and labor (Ht ) to produce

output (Yt ) according to:

                                              Yt = Ktα Ht1−α .

Aggregate labor input is simply the integral of individual labor supply across households.

Output can be used either as consumption or investment, investment is reversible, and capital

depreciates at rate δ, with 0 < δ < 1.

      We assume that the government levies a constant proportional tax τ on labor earnings

and that the tax revenues are used to finance an equal lump-sum transfer payment Tt to all


                                                        10
individuals subject to a period-by-period balanced budget condition:

                                              Tt = τ wt Ht ,

where wt is the wage rate at time t.

       We consider a recursive representation of the competitive equilibrium. In a steady-state

equilibrium, prices for both capital and labor services will be constant, and we denote them

by r and w respectively. As noted above, we assume that the capital stock is the only asset.

We can additionally allow the consumers to borrow and lend using one period bonds in zero

net supply, subject to a borrowing limit. In such a case, it is easy to show that the return

on holding bonds must be equal to the return on holding capital, so that the net return on

bonds in steady state is the same as that on capital. In the following, we impose a borrowing

constraint at zero; i.e., that the net asset holdings for an individual cannot be negative.

       We show in the appendix (Proposition 2) that in the steady-state equilibrium of this

model, prices and the aggregate allocation are identical to those that obtain in the model

that includes markets for lotteries (i.e., insurance markets for idiosyncratic risk). In this

sense, the lack of complete markets in this setting has no aggregate implications. It follows

that the aggregate effects of tax and transfer schemes in this model are identical to those

in the complete markets model, and are therefore well understood.6 However, it turns out

that understanding the nature of individual decision rules in this context is very important

to understanding how the addition of frictions will affect aggregate outcomes, and so in the

next subsection we explore the properties of steady-state equilibrium decision rules. A nice

feature of this model is that we can obtain a full analytic characterization of the steady-state

decision rules.

3.2      Decision Rules in the Steady-State Equilibrium

If r is the rental rate on capital, then the effective real rate of return on assets is 1 + r − δ.

The only individual state variable for a household is the level of assets that they have at the
   6
   Although the aggregate behavior of the incomplete-market economies is the same as that of the complete-
market economy, the individual behavior of employment and asset dynamics may look very different.


                                                   11
beginning of the period, which we denote by a. The dynamic programming problem for a

household is then given by:
                                 ¡                                    0
                                                                        ¢
        V (a) = max {    max log  (1 + r − δ)a + (1 − τ  )w  + T −  a     − d(1) + βV (a0 ),
                          a0     ¡                        ¢
                                                        0
                         max
                           0
                             log  (1 + r − δ)a + T  − a     − d(0) + βV (a0 ) }
                          a

subject to

                                             a0 ≥ 0.

Given that preferences are assumed to be separable between consumption and leisure, the

Euler equation for this problem is

                                       1               1
                                         = β(1 + r − δ) 0 ,
                                       c               c

and is independent of the labor/leisure decision, where c0 is next period’s consumption. Thus,

for aggregate consumption to be constant, it is necessary that 1+r−δ = 1/β. In what follows

we will replace 1 + r − δ by 1/β.

   We further assume that β > 1/2. Proposition 1, which is stated formally and proven

in the appendix, characterizes the value function and decision rules for the above problem.

Here we focus on a diagrammatic representation of the results and some intuition. As noted,

this is of significant interest since an understanding of the decision rules in the frictionless

context will be very useful in understanding how the introduction of frictions in the next

section influences decision rules.

   Figures 1, 2, and 3 depict the decision rules for the work-leisure choice, the asset choice,

and consumption.

   Intuitively, we can interpret the result as three different types of behavior, depending on

the level of wealth, with two “buffer zones” in between. When the wealth level is very low

(a ≤ a: “work” region), the consumer always works, and the asset level remains constant

over time. In this region, a higher wealth level means a higher level of consumption. In

contrast, when the wealth level is very high (a ≥ ā: “leisure” region), the consumer never

works, but the asset level again remains constant over time. As in the previous case, a higher


                                                12
Figure 1: Decision rules for work-leisure choice




   Figure 2: Decision rules for asset choice


                      13
                          Figure 3: Decision rules for consumption


wealth level means a higher consumption. A worker who starts in either of these two regions

of wealth will have the same values for h, a, and c forever. It also follows that each of these

regions are absorbing states, in that once in either of these regions, an individual will forever

remain in them.

   Next we consider the case in which the wealth level is intermediate (a ∈ [a∗ , a∗ ]: “indif-

ference” region). In this region the consumer is indifferent between working and not working

in the current period. In general, the consumer will move between periods of work and peri-

ods of leisure, but consumption remains constant independently of the current work decision.

During a period of work, the consumer accumulates assets, and during a period of leisure, the

consumer runs them down. In this region, the consumption level is constant across different

wealth levels, but the wealth level changes over time. Many different dynamic work/leisure

patterns for the consumer are possible, though this will be clearer once we discuss the role

of the “buffer zones.”

   Between the “work” region and the “indifference” region and between the “indifference”


                                               14
region and the “leisure” region, there are “buffer zones.” Starting from these zones, the asset

level always moves towards the “indifference” region. Workers who start with wealth levels

in the “indifference” region can enter these buffer zones, but they are always brought back to

the “indifference” region. They will never leave the interval consisting of the “indifference”

region and the two buffer zones, so that the region (a, ā) is also an absorbing state. In the

buffer zones, the consumption level is the same as in the “indifference” region. Although

the labor decision is not determined inside the region of indifference, if a given household

were to repeatedly choose to not work (or work), then they would eventually transit to

the buffer zone that lies below (above) the indifference region, and at this point the labor

supply decision becomes determinate until they once again enter the indifference region. It

follows that the equilibrium places some discipline on the number of consecutive periods of

employment or non-employment, but apart from this places relatively few restrictions on the

nature of individual employment histories.

   It is of interest to consider the issue of how large the various regions are, and how

they respond to changes in various parameters. One can show that if β tends to one, the

relative size of the buffer zones (compared to the size of the indifference zone) tends to

zero. This finding is intuitive. In a continuous time model the buffer zones would not exist;

instead we would simply have reflecting barriers on either end of the indifference region. One

interpretation of the case where β tends to one is that we are making each period very very

short, and hence we approach the continuous time result.

   Although we will not pursue the issue further here, we think it is interesting to note that

the above characterization has some interesting implications for empirical work that seeks

to uncover various labor supply elasticities. Specifically, the fact that current labor supply

does not respond to an increase or decrease in wealth is potentially not at all informative

regarding the overall effect on labor supply. The associated changes in labor supply may

occur in the future instead of contemporaneously. Another interesting implication of the

above characterization is that a wealth transfer has very different effects on consumption,



                                              15
depending on the initial level of wealth. When the wealth level is very low or very high, a

(small) transfer in wealth increases the worker’s consumption level, but has no impact on

hours of work. However, the consumption level is unaffected by a (small) transfer if the

wealth level is in the “indifference” region. There, an increase in wealth is perfectly absorbed

by an increase in leisure time, though as just noted, not necessarily contemporaneously. In

other words, there is no wealth effect on consumption in this region. Similarly, the effects of

a wealth transfer on labor supply is also very dependent on the initial wealth holdings and

can be very non-linear in the amount of the transfer. For example, a positive wealth transfer

can push a household from the region of always working to the indifference region, but for

smaller wealth transfer there might not be any effect.

    It is also of interest to look ahead slightly and anticipate how the addition of frictions

will influence decision rules. Of particular interest is the indifference region. The key feature

of decision rules in this region is that the individual is indifferent between working and

not working in any given period. Depending upon the size of the indifference region, this

indifference applies not only for the current period, but also for some number of periods in

the future as well. Intuitively, depending upon the size of frictions relative to the indifference

region, frictions may not matter much at all for such an individual. Frictions imply that

it might take several periods for an individual to find a job even after they have decided

that they would like to work. But if the time it takes to find a job is small relative to the

number of periods over which they are indifferent between working and not working, then the

friction will have little effect. Conversely, in order for frictions to matter to the individual,

the frictions must be large relative to the size of the indifference region.


4    Frictions in the Benchmark Economy

We now introduce frictions to the labor market. Our approach to modeling frictions is in

the spirit of the island model of Lucas and Prescott (1974), though our environment differs

from theirs in some respects. In particular, we will assume that there are two islands, one of



                                               16
which we call the “production island,” and the other of which we will call the “leisure island.”

The production island is endowed with an aggregate production function that is the same

as that considered in the benchmark model in the previous section. We introduce frictions

by assuming that workers cannot freely move between the two islands. In particular, if a

worker supplies labor in period t (i.e., resides on the production island in period t), then with

probability σ he or she will begin the next period on the leisure island, and with probability

1 − σ will begin the next period on the production island. At the beginning of period t + 1,

any individual who either did not supply labor in period t (i.e., lived on the leisure island in

period t) or was sent to the leisure island at the end of period t, will be sent to the production

island with probability λw . These workers, plus any workers who resided on the production

island in period t and were not sent to the leisure island, all have the opportunity to supply

labor in period t + 1. All other workers do not have the opportunity to supply labor in

period t + 1. Loosely speaking, σ is the exogenous separation rate, and λw is the exogenous

job arrival rate. Note that given this formulation, the frictionless model in the previous

section corresponds to the case with λw = 1, since if all workers always have a job offer,

then separations are irrelevant.7 The key feature of this economy relative to the benchmark

model is that workers do not always have the opportunity to work. This manifests itself in

two different ways. First, if an individual chooses to not work in period t, then it is not

certain that he or she will have the opportunity to work in period t + 1. Second, even if an

individual works in period t, he or she is not guaranteed an opportunity to work in period

t + 1.

       Once again we will focus on a steady-state equilibrium. We assume the same market

structure as before, i.e., markets for output, labor and capital services in each period, in

addition to a one-period bond. We again denote steady-state values for the wage and rental
   7
     In contrast to standard matching models in which the frictions are endogenously determined, we assume
them to be exogenous. While our analysis can assess the extent to which the presence of frictions influences
the effect of tax changes, it does not directly assess the extent to which the answer might be affected by
allowing frictions to also change in response to the change in taxes. Nonetheless, our results do suggest when
this latter effect might be important.



                                                     17
rate for capital services as w and r. A worker’s state consists of his or her location at the time

that the labor supply decision needs to be made, and the level of asset holdings. Let the value

function for a worker in a productive island be W (a), the value function for a worker who

begins the period on the leisure island but before the job offer realization be S(a), and the

value function for a worker who does not work for the current period (nonemployed worker)

be N (a). Then, the Bellman equation for an individual who has the opportunity to work

and chooses to work is:


             W (a) = max
                       0
                             log(c) − d(1) + βE[σS(a0 ) + (1 − σ) max{W (a0 ), N (a0 )}]
                    c,a


subject to

                               a0 = (1 + r − δ)a + (1 − τ )w + T − c

and

                                              a0 ≥ 0.

The worker who begins a period on the leisure island has the Bellman equation given by:


                           S(a) = λw max{W (a), N (a)} + (1 − λw )N (a).


And an individual who does not work, either because he or she did not have the opportunity

or chose not to, has a Bellman equation given by:


                               N (a) = max
                                         0
                                              log(c) − d(0) + βS(a0 )
                                        c,a


subject to

                                     a0 = (1 + r − δ)a + T − c

and

                                              a0 ≥ 0.

   The firm and the government problems are formulated the same way as in the previous

section, so we do not repeat them here.


                                                 18
        The economy with frictions does not permit as sharp an analytical characterization as

was possible for the frictionless model. However, some properties can be established. For

example, the decision rule for whether to work has a reservation property with regard to

asset holdings. In particular, if it is not optimal for a worker with asset holdings a to work,

then any individual with assets greater than a will also find it not optimal to work. Similarly,

if an individual with asset holdings a finds it optimal to work, then any individual with asset

holdings less than a will choose to work given the opportunity.

        Note that adding frictions to the model serves to break the indeterminacy result that

we found for the frictionless model. There we found a region of asset holdings for which

the individual was indifferent regarding current labor supply, but with frictions this region

shrinks to a single point. An important quantitative issue is that there may still be a region

in which the individual is very close to indifference, so that even when the individual strictly

prefers to work this period, it may not matter much to them.8

        In contrast to the frictionless model, it will not be that the case that 1/β = 1+r −δ in the

steady-state equilibrium. The presence of frictions implies that individuals face idiosyncratic

income risk, and as is standard in models with idiosyncratic income risk and incomplete

markets, we will have greater accumulation of capital.


5        Implications of Frictions: Quantitative Results

In this section we analyze how labor market frictions impact the answer to a simple tax

experiment. Specifically, we consider tax policies of the form described earlier, in which the

government levies a constant proportional tax on labor earnings and uses the proceeds to

fund a uniform lump-sum transfer to all individuals, subject to a period-by-period balanced

budget rule. We examine how the presence of frictions affects the response to a tax changes

of a given magnitude.
    8
     Idiosyncratic variation in either productivity or preferences can also serve to break the indifference in the
frictionless model. Rogerson and Wallenius (2007) use age varying productivity or disutility from working
to generate determinate labor supply patterns over the lifecycle. Chang and Kim (2006) use idiosyncratic
productivity shocks to generate determinate labor supply patterns.


                                                       19
5.1      Calibration

In this subsection we describe how we calibrate the model. We will consider different levels

of frictions, but for our benchmark calibration we will also calibrate the parameters that

characterize the frictions. We set the period length equal to one month. Many of the

parameters can be calibrated using standard methods. Specifically, we choose values for

β, α, and δ so as to match three targets: a capital share of 0.3, an investment to output

ratio of 0.2, and a 4% annual rate of return to capital. This gives β = 0.9967, α = 0.3

and δ = 0.0067. We set τ = 0.30 as the tax rate, consistent with measured values of the

current average effective tax rate on labor income for the US. For the two parameters that

capture the extent of frictions we set λw = 0.2 and σ = 0.02. These values are consistent

with the transition probabilities between unemployment and employment in the CPS data.9

We normalize d(0) = 0 and set d(1) = −2.3 × log(1 − 1/3). From these, we obtain that 66%

of the population is working in the steady-state of the benchmark, which is similar to the

employment to population ratio in the United States.

       As noted above, we will also consider economies with different levels of frictions in order

to assess the importance of frictions for the answer to a specific policy question. Specifically,

we will consider various values of λw , holding σ constant. In these economies with different

values of λw we recalibrate all of the other parameters of the model so as to match the same

aggregate targets, i.e., capital’s share of income, the investment to output ratio, the real rate

of return to capital, and the employment rate.

       One of the economies that we study is the frictionless benchmark economy. When consid-

ering the frictionless model we assume that all the workers start from the wealth level in the

“indifference” region. As noted earlier, there is a large indeterminacy in the decision rules of

the workers in the “indifference” region. However, in the presence of frictions this indeter-
   9
     See Hobijn and Şahin (2007, Table 3). They report that the transition rate from unemployment to
employment is on average 20 percent for 1976-2005. Consistent with this, we set λw = 0.2 for our benchmark
calibration. Hobijn and Şahin also report that employment to unemployment transition rate is on average
1.6 percent for the same sample period. Since λw = 0.2 fraction of unemployed workers find jobs in the same
period, we set σ = 0.02 which is consistent with a transition rate of 1.6 percent.



                                                    20
                                                   K/H
                                      λw   = 1.0   128.7
                                      λw   = 0.3   128.7
                                      λw   = 0.2   129.0
                                      λw   = 0.1   131.8


                                 Table 1: Capital-labor ratio


minacy does not exist–instead there are reservation asset levels. If we want to think of the

frictionless economy as the limit of the economy with frictions as the level of frictions tend

to zero then it seems reasonable to focus on decision rules for the frictionless economy which

also impose a reservation asset rule, and so we do this when solving for the equilibrium of the

frictionless model. We let the threshold asset holdings be denoted by ã: work when a ≤ ã

and take leisure when a > ã. Although there are many values of ã that are consistent with

optimal decision rules, there is only one choice of ã that is consistent with the steady-state

aggregate values of K and H. It is typically the case that K is increasing in ã, so ã can be

pinned down by the aggregate value of K.

   We consider four values for λw : 1.0 (no frictions), 0.3, 0.2, and 0.1. Although the targets

used in the calibration are the same across all economies, the economies do differ along some

dimensions that are not targeted. Table 1 shows the values of capital-labor ratio K/H for

the various calibrated economies.

   Given that aggregate employment is the same across all four economies, these differences

reflect differences in capital accumulation. Note that this value is the same for λw = 1.0

and λw = 0.3, but that it increases as λw is decreased further. Given the literature on

precautionary savings (see e.g., Huggett (1993) and Aiyagari (1994)), it is intuitive that

K/H increases as frictions increase, since greater frictions lead to greater uncertainty in the

individual income process, and therefore additional precautionary savings. What the table

tells us is that this effect only becomes quantitatively noticeable when frictions are quite

large, since even when λw = 0.3 the amount of capital accumulated is effectively identical to



                                              21
                               Equilibrium                   Frictional Nonemployment Only
                       Employment Nonemployment              Employment Nonemployment
          λw   = 1.0       1.9             1.0                     −              −
          λw   = 0.3       6.4             3.3                    71.4            3.3
          λw   = 0.2       9.6             5.0                    62.5            5.0
          λw   = 0.1      19.1            10.0                    55.6           10.0


                  Table 2: Average duration of employment and nonemployment


that in the frictionless economy. Key to this result is the fact that in our calibrated economy,

individuals only want to work roughly two thirds of the time. This makes it easy for the

individuals to accommodate some frictional nonemployment. For example, if an individual

in the frictionless economy were simply told that he or she would not be allowed to work

every tenth period, this would have no effect on his or her accumulation of assets.

       It is also of interest to examine how individual employment histories vary with the extent

of frictions. Table 2 presents the average duration of employment and nonemployment spells

in steady-state equilibrium for the four different economies.

       The final two columns report the duration of employment and nonemployment spells that

would result if there were only frictional nonemployment. Interestingly, the average duration

of nonemployment spells in all of the economies with frictions is exactly that which would

emerge if all nonemployment were frictional. It follows that individuals in these economies

effectively never turn down an employment opportunity. To understand this result, note that

any individual who has spent one period not working must necessarily have asset holdings

below the reservation asset level. If they are nonemployed because of job loss, then their

assets at the time of job loss must have been below the reservation level, and spending

one period without working will have reduced them further. If, on the other hand, they

became nonemployed by choice, by virtue of having spent a period in unemployment they

will necessarily have reduced their asset holdings.10 Because the steady-state employment
  10
    Of course, a worker who suffered a job loss at the end of period t but who would have chosen not to work
in period t + 1 will not accept a job opportunity in period t + 1 even if offered.




                                                    22
rate is above 0.5, it must be that one period of unemployment necessarily pushes their assets

below the reservation level. It follows that no-one who has spent one period unemployed ever

turns down a job opportunity. One might conjecture that if individuals never turn down job

offers, then employment must be determined by the frictions. However, this table shows that

employment spells are much shorter than those that would obtain in an economy in which

nonemployment were only due to frictions. In other words, labor supply considerations are

very much at work in equilibrium even though all unemployed workers will always accept an

offer to work.

   The table also shows that a key impact of frictions is to change the nature of individ-

ual employment histories. In particular, as frictions increase, the average duration of both

employment and nonemployment spells increase. Average employment durations respond to

changes in λw even though the probability of job loss is constant across these economies. The

reason for this is that when λw is low, a worker knows that if they choose not to work today,

it may be several periods before they get another opportunity to work. Since they need to

have sufficient assets to provide for consumption during this nonemployment spell, they need

to work longer to accumulate more assets before choosing to not work in an economy with

low λw .

   It is also of interest to examine the difference in asset distributions across the four

economies. This is done in Figures 4 and 5.

   As one might expect from the previous intuition, as frictions increase, the asset distribu-

tions become more spread out.

5.2   Results

In this subsection we report the effects of changes in taxes on steady-state allocations for the

four economies that differ in the extent of frictions.

   We begin by examining the effects on aggregate employment. Table 3 presents the results.

Recall that the calibration set τ = 0.30, so that by construction, employment is the same for

all four economies for this value of the tax rate.

                                               23
            0.03

                                     No friction
           0.025



            0.02
 density




           0.015



            0.01
                                        λ =0.3
                                         w


           0.005                          λ =0.2
                                           w
                                                   λw=0.1

              0
               0       50                    100            150
                                a




 Figure 4: Wealth distributions for employed workers, τ = 0.30




            0.03


                                    No friction
           0.025



            0.02
 density




           0.015



            0.01
                                         λw=0.3

           0.005                             λ =0.2
                                              w
                                                   λw=0.1

              0
               0       50                    100            150
                                a




Figure 5: Wealth distributions for nonemployed workers, τ = 0.30



                              24
                              τ = 0.00   τ = 0.15     τ = 0.30   τ = 0.45    n̄
                λw   = 1.0      0.99       0.80         0.66       0.52     0.00
                λw   = 0.3      0.92       0.80         0.66       0.52     0.03
                λw   = 0.2      0.91       0.80         0.66       0.52     0.07
                λw   = 0.1      0.85       0.79         0.66       0.52     0.15


                               Table 3: Aggregate employment H

   The table reveals a striking asymmetry. If taxes are increases from 0.30 to 0.45, then the

effect on aggregate employment is independent of the level of frictions in the economy: in

all cases the employment rate drops from 0.66 to 0.52, implying a decrease in hours worked

of over 20%. Similarly, if taxes were reduced to 0.15, then the employment rate increases

in all cases, and the increase is virtually identical across the four economies. However, if

taxes were reduced to 0, then the increase in employment varies quite substantially across

the economies, with the increase in employment being a decreasing function of the level of

frictions. For example, when taxes are reduced from 0.15 to 0.00, the increase in aggregate

hours is almost 25% when λw = 1.0, but less than 8% when λw = 0.1.

   To understand these results it is instructive to note that if all consumers choose to work

whenever they have the opportunity (i.e., there is frictional nonemployment only), then the

nonemployment rate evolves according to:

                             nt+1 = (1 − λw )nt + σ(1 − λw )(1 − nt ).

Note in this expression that a worker who separates at the end of period t will not necessarily

be nonemployed in period t + 1, since they will still have probability λw of obtaining the

opportunity to work in period t + 1. The above expression implies that at the steady state:

                                               σ(1 − λw )
                                      n̄ =                   .
                                             σ(1 − λw ) + λw

This value is reported in the the last column in Table 3. Looking at the numbers in the final

column, the following pattern emerges. As long as actual nonemployment is not too close to

frictional nonemployment, then the level of frictions is effectively irrelevant for the response

                                                 25
of aggregate employment to changes in taxes. But as the two values become closer, frictions

start to have an effect. Interestingly, however, it is not the case that frictions matter only

if the frictions bind in terms of the maximal steady-state employment rate. For example,

consider a reduction of τ from 0.15 to 0.00 in the λw = 1.0 and λw = 0.3 economies. When

τ = 0.15, both economies have employment rates of 0.80. As taxes are decreased from 0.15

to 0.00, the frictionless economy has employment increase from 0.80 to 0.99. The maximal

steady-state employment rate in the λw = 0.3 economy is 0.97. But the employment rate in

the λw = 0.3 increases only to 0.92 when taxes drop to 0.00, substantially below the maximal

level dictated by the frictions. Note that whether we are considering raising taxes from 0.00

to 0.15 or lowering taxes from 0.15 to 0.00, the elasticity of employment with regard to taxes

is less in the λw = 0.3 economy than in the λw = 1.0 economy.

   To summarize, a key implication of these results is that in economies where individuals

do not desire to work in every period, there is the scope for a great deal of substitution

between frictional nonemployment and voluntary nonemployment. In this case the level of

frictions are not very relevant for how the economy responds to permanent tax changes. If

however, the level of nonemployment approaches that of frictional nonemployment, then the

level of frictions matter, and in particular, responses to permanent tax changes will be less

in economies with greater frictions.

   It is also of interest to ask how individual employment dynamics change as we change

taxes, and how these changes are affected by the level of frictions. Table 4 shows the combi-

nations of average employment and nonemployment durations for each of the economies as

we change taxes.

   The table shows that all of the adjustment takes place along the employment duration

margin. As was true in the calibrated economies, nonemployment durations are completely

dictated by the arrival rate of employment opportunities, and in all cases a worker who has

been nonemployed for at least one period will always work if presented with the opportunity.




                                             26
                               τ = 0.00    τ = 0.15    τ = 0.30     τ = 0.45
                  λw   = 1.0    15.4/1.0    4.0/1.0     1.9/1.0      1.1/1.0
                  λw   = 0.3    40.6/3.3   13.1/3.3     6.4/3.3      3.6/3.3
                  λw   = 0.2    49.7/5.0   20.0/5.0     9.6/5.0      5.3/5.0
                  λw   = 0.1   55.5/10.0   38.1/10.0   19.1/10.0    10.7/10.0


                 Table 4: Average duration of employment/nonemployment


6    Conclusion

This paper analyzes a model that features frictions, an operative labor supply margin, and

incomplete markets. While much has been learned about models with frictions that do not

feature an operative labor supply margin as well as about models that feature operative labor

supply but no frictions, little is known about models with both features. We have argued that

an important goal is to determine for which issues these various features are quantitatively

important. The analysis carried out here is only a first step. In particular, we have only con-

sidered a model with homogeneous individuals, and the only experiments that we considered

were permanent changes in the size of tax and transfer systems. Nonetheless, we feel that

the analysis has provided several important findings. For example, there is substantial scope

for substitution between voluntary and frictional nonemployment in our model. This creates

the possibility that incorporating frictions into the analysis may have little or no impact on

the aggregate effects of some policies. If employment is close to the maximal amount allowed

given the extent of frictions, then incorporating frictions does affect the aggregate response of

the economy to changes in policy. In particular, the effects on aggregate employment will be

diminished. The effect of frictions was found to be highly non-linear, suggesting that one can-

not determine whether frictions are important without consideration of what type of policy

change is being considered, and what the initial equilibrium is. We also found that caution

must be used in interpreting job acceptance decisions to infer the relevance of labor supply

considerations. In our calibrated economies, all individuals who have been unemployed for at

least one period will accept any opportunity to work, but aggregate employment is far from


                                               27
the level that would result if labor supply considerations were not relevant and employment

were dictated only by frictions.

   The model we develop can also be used for addressing other questions; more generally,

it is a good vehicle for gauging to what extent frictions and/or labor supply considerations

matter quantitatively for the answers. Already in the present setting, one could perform

other comparative statics exercises. As for the case of the policy change we considered

here, due to the nonlinearity of the model, some of these questions may have quite different

answers depending on the exact details of the experiments. For other issues, such as for

example the analysis of how average hours worked are influenced by a permanent increase in

productivity, we suspect that the answer does not depend on the degree of frictions; for this

question, whether there are frictions or not, we expect very small effects under the preference

specification adopted here, since substitution and income effects cancel each other out.

   Of particular interest here is the extent to which adding frictions to the indivisible labor

model might mute the size of employment fluctuations in response to productivity shocks.

Additionally, the nature of employment histories at the individual level may be very different,

so that incorporating frictions and incomplete markets might provide a consistent framework

in which we understand a larger set of observations. For example, the indivisible labor model

without frictions might not do a good job of accounting for the patterns we see in individual

employment histories, and adding frictions may help in this dimension. The framework might

also have very interesting implications in the context of heterogeneous agents. We offer one

example here in the context of business cycles. Shimer (2005) argues that layoff rates cannot

drive cyclical employment rate fluctuations because they produce an inconsistency with the

Beveridge curve. But if one considers a more general model it may be that layoffs are the

dominant source of fluctuations for some groups while labor supply considerations are the

dominant source of fluctuations for other groups, and that by combining these the aggregate

Beveridge curve is well behaved. Loosely speaking, one might imagine that for many prime

aged workers it is the increase in layoff rates coupled with search frictions that accounts



                                              28
for much of their cyclical fluctuations in employment, while for younger and less attached

workers layoffs play very little role.




                                           29
Appendix

Proposition 1 In the steady-state equilibrium, a worker’s decision rules on asset accumu-

lation and the work-leisure choice are summarized by the following five cases, based on the

level of the current asset a. Let I be indicator function which takes 1 when working and 0

when not working.

   • Case 1: When a ≤ a:

                                                  a0 = a,
                                           1−β
                                      c=       a + (1 − τ )w + T,
                                            β
     and

                                                  I = 1.

   • Case 2: When a ∈ (a, a∗ ):

                                      1                     (1 − τ )w
                               a0 =     a + (1 − τ )w + T −           ,
                                      β                        D
                                                  (1 − τ )w
                                             c=             ,
                                                     D
     and

                                                  I = 1.

   • Case 3: When a ∈ [a∗ , a∗ ]:

     Indifferent between
                                      1                     (1 − τ )w
                               a0 =     a + (1 − τ )w + T −           ,
                                      β                        D
                                                  (1 − τ )w
                                             c=             ,
                                                     D
     and

                                                  I = 1;

     and
                                             1       (1 − τ )w
                                      a0 =     a+T −           ,
                                             β          D

                                                30
                                                    (1 − τ )w
                                               c=             ,
                                                       D
      and

                                                    I = 0.


   • Case 4: When a ∈ (a∗ , ā):

                                              1       (1 − τ )w
                                       a0 =     a+T −           ,
                                              β          D

                                                    (1 − τ )w
                                               c=             ,
                                                       D
      and

                                                    I = 0.


   • Case 5: When a ≥ ā:

                                                    a0 = a,
                                                   1−β
                                              c=       a + T,
                                                    β
      and

                                                    I = 0.


   Here, the thresholds on a are defined as the following.

                                   β((1 − τ )w − D((1 − τ )w + T ))
                            a=                                      ,
                                               (1 − β)D

                                            β((1 − τ )w − DT )
                                     ā =                      ,
                                                (1 − β)D
                                       a∗ = a + β(1 − τ )w,

and

                                       a∗ = ā − β(1 − τ )w.

Note that ā − a = β(1 − τ )w/(1 − β). Also note that ā > a∗ > a∗ > a holds.




                                                   31
Proof: We proceed by the “guess and verify” method. It turns out that the borrowing

constraint will not be binding (it can be verified easily from the solution), so we ignore the

constraint in the following. First, guess that the value function takes the form described

in the text. To verify, we need to solve the problem with the above value function at the

right-hand side (RHS) and see if we get the decision rules above and V (a) at the left-hand

side (LHS).

   Note that the value function is (weakly) concave, so the two maximization problems

inside are each concave programming problem. So we can solve each optimization problem

(for working and not working) one by one using the first-order conditions, and compare the

values. Details are filled in later.

   • Case 1: When a ≤ a:

         – First optimization (working): From the first-order condition (FOC), a0 = a follows.
                                                                  1−β
           Therefore, from the budget constraint, c =              β a   + (1 − τ )w + T follows. Thus,

           the value from working is:
                             ³                        ´            log( 1−β a+(1−τ )w+T )−d(1)
               W (a, 1) = log 1−β
                                β  a  + (1 − τ )w + T   − d(1) + β       β
                                                                               1−β
                              log( 1−β
                                    β
                                       a+(1−τ )w+T )−d(1)
                          =               1−β             .

         – Second optimization (not working): From the FOC, a0 = a − β(1 − τ )w follows.
                       1−β
           Thus, c =    β a   + β(1 − τ )w + T . Thus, the value from not working is:
                                              ³                        ´
                              W (a, 0) = log 1−β β a +  β(1 − τ )w + T   − d(0)
                                                    log( 1−β
                                                          β
                                                             a+β(1−τ )w+T )−d(1)
                                               +β                1−β             .

      One can show (see the details later) that for a ∈ [0, a], it is always the case that

      W (a, 1) > W (a, 0).

   • Case 2: When a ∈ (a, a∗ ):

         – First optimization (working): From the FOC,

                                              1                     (1 − τ )w
                                       a0 =     a + (1 − τ )w + T −
                                              β                        D

                                                      32
       and thus
                                                     (1 − τ )w
                                                c=
                                                        D
       follows. Thus, the value from working is

                         log( (1−τ
                                D
                                   )w
                                      ) d(1) + 1 βD((1 − τ )w + T ) + (1 − β)Da
              W (a, 1) =               −        +                               .
                            1−β          1−β           β(1 − τ )w(1 − β)

     – Second optimization (not working): From the FOC, a0 = a − β((1 − τ )w) follows.
                   1−β                         1−β
       Thus, c =    β a + βw.    Thus, c =      β a + β(1 − τ )w + T .   Thus, the value from not

       working is:                          ³                            ´
                                              1−β
                         W (a, 0) = log         β a + β(1 − τ )w + T         − d(0)
                                            log( 1−β
                                                  β
                                                     a+β(1−τ )w+T )−d(1)
                                         +β              1−β             .

  One can show (see the details later) that for a ∈ (a, a∗ ), it is always the case that

  W (a, 1) > W (a, 0).

• Case 3: When a ∈ [a∗ , a∗ ]:


     – First optimization (working): From the FOC,

                                        1                     (1 − τ )w
                                 a0 =     a + (1 − τ )w + T −
                                        β                        D

       and thus
                                                     (1 − τ )w
                                                c=
                                                        D
       follows. Thus, the value from working is

                         log( (1−τ
                                D
                                   )w
                                      ) d(1) + 1 βD((1 − τ )w + T ) + (1 − β)Da
              W (a, 1) =               −        +                               .
                            1−β          1−β           β(1 − τ )w(1 − β)

     – Second optimization (not working): From the FOC,

                                               1       (1 − τ )w
                                        a0 =     a+T −
                                               β          D

       and thus
                                                     (1 − τ )w
                                                c=
                                                        D

                                                33
       follows. Thus, the value from not working is

                           log( (1−τ
                                  D
                                     )w
                                        ) d(1) + 1 βD((1 − τ )w + T ) + (1 − β)Da
             W (a, 0) =                  −        +                               .
                              1−β          1−β           β(1 − τ )w(1 − β)

  Thus, W (a, 1) = W (a, 0) and the agent is indifferent.

• Case 4: When a ∈ (a∗ , ā):


     – First optimization (working): From the FOC, a0 = a − β(1 − τ )w follows. Thus,
            1−β
       c=    β a   + (1 − β)(1 − τ )w + T . Thus, the value from working is:
                                          ³                                 ´
                                         1−β
                         W (a, 1) = log    β a + (1 − β)(1 − τ )w + T           − d(1)
                                       log( 1−β
                                             β
                                                a+(1−β)(1−τ )w+T )−d(0)
                                    +β               1−β                .

     – Second optimization (not working): From the FOC,

                                              1       (1 − τ )w
                                      a0 =      a+T −
                                              β          D

       and thus
                                                   (1 − τ )w
                                              c=
                                                      D
       follows. Thus, the value from not working is

                        log( (1−τ
                               D
                                  )w
                                     ) d(1) + 1 βD((1 − τ )w + T ) + (1 − β)Da
             W (a, 0) =               −        +                               .
                           1−β          1−β           β(1 − τ )w(1 − β)

  One can show (see the details later) that for a ∈ (a∗ , ā), it is always the case that

  W (a, 0) > W (a, 1).

• Case 5: When a ≥ ā:


     – First optimization (working): From the FOC, a0 = a − β((1 − τ )w) follows. Thus,
            1−β
       c=    β a   + (1 − β)(1 − τ )w + T . Thus, the value from working is:
                                          ³                                 ´
                                         1−β
                         W (a, 0) = log    β a + (1 − β)(1 − τ )w + T           − d(1)
                                       log( 1−β
                                             β
                                                a+(1−β)(1−τ )w+T )−d(0)
                                    +β               1−β                .


                                              34
        – Second optimization (not working): From FOC, a0 = a. Therefore, from the
                                          1−β
           budget constraint, c =          β a   + T follows. Thus, the value from not working is:
                                                 ³              ´              log( 1−β a+T )−d(0)
                                                    1−β                              β
                          W (a, 1) = log             β a+T −        d(0) + β           1−β
                                                  1−β
                                              log( β a+T )−d(0)
                                          =          1−β        .

     One can show (see the details later) that for a ∈ [ā, ∞), it is always the case that

     W (a, 0) > W (a, 1).

   This completes the proof.


Details: Here, we fill in the details of the proof. In particular, we check two things for each

case (except for the obvious ones).

  1. That we are taking FOC at the right region of V (a0 ) in each optimization for a0 .

  2. The work/leisure inequality.

   In the following, we will check them one by one.

   • Case 1: Clearly, the FOCs (both working and not working) are taken at the first region

     of the value function. Now we check that W (a, 1) > W (a, 0). This is equivalent to

     showing that
                            ³                               ´
                             1−β
                      log        a + (1 − τ )w + T − d(1)
                              ³β                       ´
                      >   log 1−ββ a +  β(1 − τ )w + T   − (1           − β)d(0) − βd(1).

     That is,                         Ã                             !
                                           1−β
                                            β a + (1 − τ )w + T
                                log       1−β
                                                                        > (1 − β)D.
                                           β a + β(1 − τ )w + T
     Since the LHS is decreasing in a, it is sufficient to show that this holds when a = a.

     Using the expression of a and rearranging, the inequality we need to show becomes

                                      − log(1 − (1 − β)D) > (1 − β)D.

     Since − log(1 − x) > x for any x > 0, the result follows.

                                                       35
• Case 2: First check the FOCs for each optimization.

  First optimization: To show: a0 is in [a, ā]. This can be checked by the expression of a

  and the fact a ∈ (a, a∗ ). It turns out (with some algebra) that a ∈ (a, a∗ ) corresponds

  to a0 ∈ (a, a + (1 − τ )w). Since β > 1/2, β((1 − τ )w)/(1 − β) > (1 − τ )w. Thus,

  a + (1 − τ )w < a + β(1 − τ )w/(1 − β) = ā.

  Second optimization: a0 < a can easily be seen from the expression of a0 .

  Now, we check that W (a, 1) > W (a, 0). We need to show that
                    ³        ´
                 log (1−τ
                        D
                          )w
                               − d(1) − 1 + βD((1−τβ(1−τ
                                                   )w+T )+(1−β)Da
                                                         )w
                      ³                        ´
                        1−β
                 > log β a + β(1 − τ )w + T − (1 − β)d(0) − βd(1).

  That is,
                          −(1 − β)D − 1 + D((1−τ   )w+T )    (1−β)D
                                                          + β((1−τ )w) a
                               ³               (1−τ )w                 ´
                                 (1−β)D      D(1−β)    Dβ(1−τ )w+DT
                          > log β(1−τ )w a + (1−τ )w +     (1−τ )w       .
  Both sides are equal when a = a∗ . Thus, to show the claim, we only need to show

  that the slope of the RHS, as a function of a, is larger than the slope of the LHS for

  a ∈ (a, a∗ ). The slope of the LHS is

                                            (1 − β)D
                                            β(1 − τ )w
  and the slope of the RHS is
                                       (1 − β)D     1
                                                 ×      ,
                                       β(1 − τ )w f (a)
  where
                              (1 − β)D      D(1 − β) Dβ(1 − τ )w + DT
                    f (a) ≡              a+           +               .
                              β(1 − τ )w    (1 − τ )w    (1 − τ )w
  For a ∈ (a, a∗ ), f (a) ∈ (1 − D(1 − β), 1). Thus the slope of the RHS is always larger.

• Case 3: We only need to check that we are in the right region in the optimizations.

  First optimization: Check that a0 ∈ [a, ā]. From the expression on a0 and a0 ∈ [a∗ , a∗ ],

  a0 ∈ [a + (1 − τ )w, ā] follows.

  Second optimization: Check that a0 ∈ [a, ā]. From the expression on a0 and a0 ∈ [a∗ , a∗ ],

  a0 ∈ [a, ā − (1 − τ )w] follows.

                                             36
• Case 4: First, check the FOCs.

  First optimization: a0 ≥ ā can easily be seen from the expression of a0 .

  Second optimization: To show: a0 ∈ (a, ā). This can be checked by the expression of

  a and the fact a ∈ (a∗ , ā). It turns out (by some algebra) that a ∈ (a∗ , ā) corresponds

  to a0 ∈ (ā − ((1 − τ )w), ā). Since β > 1/2, β((1 − τ )w)/(1 − β) > (1 − τ )w. Thus,

  ā − ((1 − τ )w) > ā − β((1 − τ )w)/(1 − β) = a.

  Now, we check that W (a, 0) > W (a, 1). We need to show that
                 ³        ´
              log (1−τ )w
                            − d(1) − 1 + βD((1−τβ(1−τ
                                                )w+T )+(1−β)Da
                   ³D                             ´ )w
                     1−β
              > log β a + (1 − β)(1 − τ )w + T − (1 − β)d(1) − βd(0).

  That is,
                          βD − 1 + D((1−τ  )w+T )     (1−β)D
                                                   + β(1−τ )w a
                               ³       (1−τ )w                              ´
                                 (1−β)D       D(1−β)(1−τ )w         DT
                          > log β(1−τ )w a +      (1−τ )w    +    (1−τ )w       .
  Both sides are equal when a = a∗ . Thus, to show the claim, we only need to show

  that the slope of the RHS, as a function of a, is smaller than the slope of the LHS for

  a ∈ (a∗ , ā). The slope of the LHS is

                                               (1 − β)D
                                               β(1 − τ )w

  and the slope of the RHS is
                                          (1 − β)D    1
                                                    ×     ,
                                          β(1 − τ )w g(a)
  where
                               (1 − β)D      D(1 − β)(1 − τ )w      DT
                      g(a) ≡              a+                   +           .
                               β(1 − τ )w        (1 − τ )w       (1 − τ )w
  For a ∈ (a∗ , ā), g(a) ∈ (1, 1 + D(1 − β)). Thus the slope of the RHS is always smaller.

• Case 5: Clearly, the FOCs (both working and not working) are taken at the third region

  of the value function. We check that W (a, 0) > W (a, 1). This is equivalent to showing

  that                ³           ´
                       1−β
                log        a+T        − d(0)
                        ³β                             ´
                >   log 1−ββ a+    (1 − β)(1 − τ )w + T − (1 − β)d(1) − βd(0).

                                                37
      That is,                Ã                                         !
                                            1−β
                                             β a   +T
                        log       1−β
                                                                            > −(1 − β)D.
                                   β a   + (1 − β)(1 − τ )w + T
      Since the LHS is increasing in a, it is sufficient to show that this holds when a = ā.

      Using the expression of ā and rearranging, the inequality we need to show becomes


                                   − log(1 + (1 − β)D) > −(1 − β)D.


      Since − log(1 + x) > −x for any x > 0, the result follows. ¥


Proposition 2 Consider a complete-markets version of our model where an employment

lottery is available. The aggregate values of K and H, are identical between this complete-

markets model and the incomplete-markets model in which all individuals have assets in the

indifference region.


Proof: We start by characterizing equilibrium for the incomplete markets economy. In equi-

librium, K is equal to the sum of the individual asset holdings a and H is equal to the mass

of individuals who decide to work. From the first-order conditions of the firm,
                                                   µ       ¶α−1
                                                       K
                                            r=α
                                                       H

and
                                                           µ       ¶α
                                                               K
                                          w = (1 − α)
                                                               H
hold. From the worker’s Euler equation,
                                                   µ       ¶α−1
                                     1                 K
                                       =1+α                         −δ                     (1)
                                     β                 H

holds.

   Integrating across all the workers’ budget constraints we have that:

                                         1
                                  K=       K + w(1 − τ )H + T − C.                         (2)
                                         β

Given that the government balances its budget each period, we have τ wH = T .

                                                   38
   Further, assume that this economy has workers only in the (a, ā) region. Then, everyone

has consumption given by (1 − τ )w/D, and
                                         µ       ¶α                        ¡ K ¢α
                       1                     K           (1 − τ )(1 − α)    H
                    K = K + (1 − α)                   H−                                    (3)
                       β                     H                     D

holds. We can obtain K and H by solving (1) and (3). T can then be calculated as T = τ wH.

   When an employment lottery is available in a complete-market setting, in the steady state

a worker solves the following problem:

                  ¡                                  ¢
   V (a) = max
            0
               log (1 + r − δ)a + λ(1 − τ )w + T − a0 − λd(1) − (1 − λ)d(0) + βV (a0 ),
            a ,λ


where λ is the employment probability. The first-order condition for the asset choice yields

                                      1               1
                                        = β(1 + r − δ) 0 ,
                                      c               c

so again, in steady-state, 1/β = (1 + r − δ) has to hold. Since the firm’s first-order condition

is identical to the incomplete-market case, equation (1) has to hold in this model.

   Note that λ = H in equilibrium. Summing up the budget constraint in this economy

yields the same equation as (2). The first-order condition for λ yields

                                                      1
                                       (1 − τ )w        = D,
                                                      c

therefore
                                                 (1 − τ )w
                                         c=                .
                                                    D
Note that this is identical to the incomplete-market case. Thus, the equation (3) holds in the

complete-market economy. Since K and H solve (1) and (3) in both economies, the solution

has to be identical. ¥




                                                  39
References

 [1] Aiyagari, Rao (1994). “Uninsured Idiosyncratic Risk and Aggregate Saving,” Quarterly

    Journal of Economics 109, 659-684.

 [2] Andolfatto, David (1996). “Business Cycles and Labor Market Search,” American Eco-

    nomic Review 86, 112–132.

 [3] Chang, Yongsung and Sun-Bin Kim (2006). “From Individual to Aggregate Labor Sup-

    ply: A Quantitative Analysis based on a Heterogeneous-Agent Macroeconomy,” Inter-

    national Economic Review, 47, 1–27.

 [4] Chang, Yongsung and Sun-Bin Kim (2007). “Heterogeneity and Aggregation: Implica-

    tions for Labor Market Fluctuations,” American Economic Review, forthcoming.

 [5] Domeij, David and Martin Floden (2006). “The Labor-Supply Elasticity and Borrowing

    Constraints: Why Estimates are Biased,” Review of Economic Dynamics 9, 242–262.

 [6] Hall, Robert E. (2005). “Employment Fluctuations with Equilibrium Wage Stickiness,”

    American Economic Review 95, 50–65.

 [7] Hansen, Gary D. (1985). “Indivisible Labor and the Business Cycle,” Journal of Mone-

    tary Economics 16, 309–337.

 [8] Hobijn, Bart and Ayşegül Şahin (2007). “Job-Finding and Separation Rates in the

    OECD,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report No. 298.

 [9] Huggett, Mark (1993). “The Risk-Free Rate in Heterogeneous-Agent Incomplete-

    Insurance Economies,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 17, 953–969.

[10] Krusell, Per and Anthony A. Smith, Jr. (1998). “Income and Wealth Heterogeneity in

    the Macroeconomy,” Journal of Political Economy 106, 867–896.




                                           40
[11] Ljungqvist, Lars and Thomas J. Sargent (2006). “Do Taxes Explain European Unem-

    ployment? Indivisible Labor, Human Capital, Lotteries, and Savings,” in Daron Ace-

    moglu, Kenneth Rogoff, and Michael Woodford (eds.) NBER Macroeconomics Annual

    2006, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.

[12] Ljungqvist, Lars and Thomas J. Sargent (2008). “Taxes, Benefits, and Careers: Com-

    plete versus Incomplete Markets,” Journal of Monetary Economics 55, 98-125.

[13] Lucas, Robert Jr. and Edward C. Prescott (1974). “Equilibrium Search and Unemploy-

    ment,” Journal of Economic Theory 7, 188–209.

[14] Merz, Monika (1995). “Search in the Labor Market and the Real Business Cycle,” Jour-

    nal of Monetary Economics 36, 269–300.

[15] Mulligan, Casey B. (2001). “Aggregate Implications of Indivisible Labor,” Advances in

    Macroeconomics 1, Berkeley Electronic Press.

[16] Nosal, Ed and Peter Rupert (2007). “How Amenities Affect Job and Wage Choices over

    the Life Cycle,” Review of Economic Dynamics 10, 424–443.

[17] Phelps, Edmund (ed.) (1970). Microeconomic Foundations of Employment and Inflation

    Theory, W. W. Norton & Company, Inc., New York, NY.

[18] Pijoan-Mas, Josep (2006). “Precautionary Savings or Working Longer Hours?,” Review

    of Economic Dynamics 9(2), 326–352.

[19] Pissarides, Christopher A. (1985). “Short-Run Equilibrium Dynamics of Unemployment,

    Vancancies, and Real Wages,” American Economic Review 75, 676–690.

[20] Prescott, Edward C. (2004). “Why Do Americans Work So Much More than Euro-

    peans?”, Quarterly Review of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, July 2004,

    2-13.



                                           41
[21] Prescott, Edward C.; Richard Rogerson; and Johanna Wallenius (2007). “Lifetime Ag-

    gregate Labor Supply with Endogenous Workweek Length,” mimeo, Arizona State Uni-

    versity.

[22] Rogerson, Richard (1988). “Indivisible Labor, Lotteries and Equilibrium,” Journal of

    Monetary Economics 21, 3–16.

[23] Rogerson, Richard and Johanna Wallenius (2007). “Micro and Macro Elasticities in a

    Life Cycle Model with Taxes,” NBER Working Paper 13017.

[24] Shimer, Robert (2005). “The Cyclical Behavior of Equilibrium Unemployment and Va-

    cancies,” American Economic Review 95, 25–49.




                                           42
