                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        LABOR MARKET FLUCTUATIONS IN THE SMALL AND IN THE LARGE

                                         Richard Rogerson
                                       Lodewijk P. Visschers
                                          Randall Wright

                                        Working Paper 13872
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13872


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2008




For input on work related to this project we thank Iourii Manovskii. We thank NSF for financial support.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Richard Rogerson, Lodewijk P. Visschers, and Randall Wright. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Labor Market Fluctuations in the Small and in the Large
Richard Rogerson, Lodewijk P. Visschers, and Randall Wright
NBER Working Paper No. 13872
March 2008
JEL No. E2,E3,J2,J6

                                              ABSTRACT

Shimer's calibrated version of the Mortensen-Pissarides model generates unemployment fluctuates
much smaller than the data. Hagedorn and Manovskii present an alternative calibration that yields
fluctuations consistent with the data, but this has been challenged by Costain and Reiter, who say it
generates unrealistically big differences in unemployment from the differences in policy we sees across
countries. We argue this concern may be unwarranted, because one cannot assume elasticities relevant
for small changes work for large changes. Models with fixed factors in market or household production
can generate large effects from small changes and reasonable effects from large changes. This is reminiscent
of attempts to improve the labor market in the Kydland-Prescott model, especially ones incorporating
household production, like Benhabib, Rogerson and Wright.


Richard Rogerson                                     Randall Wright
Department of Economics                              Department of Economics
College of Business                                  University of Pennsylvania
Arizona State University                             3718 Locust Walk
Tempe, AZ 85287                                      Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER                                             and NBER
richard.rogerson@asu.edu                             rwright@econ.upenn.edu

Lodewijk P. Visschers
Department of Economics
Simon Fraser University
Burnaby BC
Canada V5A 1S6
lpv@sfu.edu
1       Introduction

In this paper we comment on the recent debate concerning the aggregate
labor market, bringing to bear ideas some of us were thinking about two
decades ago, when similar economic issues were being discussed in a di¤erent
class of models. The recent discussion focuses on the search-based model of
the labor market in Mortensen and Pissarides (1994). Shimer (2005) …nds in
his calibrated version of that model that, when one feeds in realistic cyclical
productivity shocks, the implied ‡uctuations in unemployment are way too
low – i.e., much lower than those in the data.1 Hagedorn and Manovskii
(2006) show that for an alternative calibration strategy the same model
yields unemployment ‡uctuations that are very much consistent with the
data. This seems like progress. Costain and Reiter (2005, 2007), however,
call into question the Hagedorn-Manovskii parameter values for the following
reason: they seem to imply that for large changes, like the di¤erences one
sees in labor market policies across countries, the model should predicts
changes in unemployment that are unrealistically big.
    We show that this last conclusion may not be warranted. The simple
reason is that one cannot necessarily extrapolate under the assumption that
the elasticities relevant for small changes are also relevant for large changes.
We show explicitly that for models that take into account …xed factors in
either market or household production, we can generate large e¤ects from
small productivity changes, just like Hagedorn and Manovskii, and we can
also generate more reasonable e¤ects from large changes such as the ones
that concern Costain and Reiter. This demonstration is reminescent of an


    1
     The literaure discussing these …ndings is too large to go through in detail, but a
representative sample might include e.g. Hall (2005), Hall and Milgrom (2007), Farmer and
Hollenhorst (2006), Kennan (2006), Mortensen and Nagypal (2007), and Menzio (2005).


                                           2
older discussion concerning alternative ways to improve the performance of
the business cycle model in Kydland and Prescott (1982). Of the many
contributions to this discussion, we are particularly fond of ones that incor-
porated household production into business cycle theory, such as Benhabib,
Rogerson and Wright (1991). We …nd it interesting that home production
may be as relevant for the current discussions of Mortensen-Pissarides as it
was for the Kydland-Prescott model.


2    The Idea

We begin with some background. In the late 80s and early 90s the Kydland-
Prescott (1982) model became the workhorse of business cycle research.
There were many reasons for this, including: it is based on …rm microeco-
nomic foundations; versions of the model without all the bells and whistles
that are sometimes added are tractable and deliver transparent economic
e¤ects; and it …ts many of the stylized business-cycle facts well. As regards
this last point, that model predicts that in response to realistic technology
shocks output will ‡uctuate almost as much as in the data, consumption will
‡uctuation less than output, as we see in the data, investment will ‡uctua-
tion more than output, and so on. One aspect in which the baseline model
does less well is the performance of labor market variables. For one thing, it
predicts employment will ‡uctuate only about half as much as output, while
in the data the variables display very similar ‡uctuations. For another, the
correlation between employment and either wages or productivity is much
too strong in the baseline model.
    Improving the performance with respect to the labor market was a chal-
lenge for business cycle research, and many attempts were made to amend
the basic model by adding a variety of ingredients. For example, the orig-


                                      3
inal Kydland-Prescott (1982) paper introduced preferences for leisure that
were not separable over time; Hansen (1985) introduced indivisible labor
as in Rogerson (1987); McGrattan (1994) introduced taxes; Christiano and
Eichenbaum (1992) introduced government spending shocks; and Benhabib,
Rogerson and Wright (1991) introduced household production. While all
these extensions proved useful and interesting, home production was espe-
cially appealing for several reasons. First, Becker (1988) had previously ar-
gued using simple, intuitive, economic reasoning that some notion of home
production ought to be incorporated into macro. Second, the data indi-
cate that household production is signi…cant at the aggregate level.2 Third,
home production …ts easily and elegantly into the standard model, in terms
of both theory and calibration. Fourth, the model with home production im-
proves the performance of the baseline model along a number of dimensions,
including the labor market.3
    While the Kydland-Prescott (1982) model is alive and well despite re-
peated attacks from various ‡anks, and indeed is still the main paradigm for
addressing many issues, the Mortensen-Pissarides (1994) model has arguably
become dominant in terms of the labor market. In part this is because it
generates unemployment in a simple, natural and interesting way –for one
thing, unemployment is a state variable for both the individual and the ag-
gregate economy, which is not true, say, in the Hansen-Rogerson model of
   2
      For example, the representative household spends almost as many hours in nonmarket
work as they spend in market work, and investment in nonmarket capital like residential
structures and consumer durables actually exceeds investment in market capital like plant
and equipment; see Benhabib et al. (1990).
    3
      See Greenwood et al. (1995) for a survey of early home production business cycle
models where these points are discussed in much more detail. At the same time, adding
home production brings up some new challenges both in terms of theory and measurement,
and this framework is the subject of ongoing reseearch. See Greenwood and Hercowiz
(1991), Gomme, Kydland and Rupert (2001), McGrattan, Rogerson and Wright (1997),
Rupert, Rogerson and Wright (1995, 2000), Parente, Rogerson and Wright (2000), Fisher
(2007), Aguiar and Hurst (2005, 2006, 2007), and Gomme et al (2004) for some examples.


                                           4
indivisible labor. The Mortensen-Pissarides model can be used to address
a variety of issues qualitatively and quantitatively, including the e¤ects of
various labor market policies.4 Although the model in its usual incarnation
has some weaknesses compared to the growth model –e.g. it is not so easy
to add risk-averse agents and capital –it seems fair to say that it has been
successful on a number of fronts.
   But there is a problem. Shimer (2005) considers performing an exercise
with the Mortensen-Pissarides model similar to what people were doing
with Kydland-Prescott many years ago: Calibrate it to match some key
observations, hit it with shocks to productivity, and compare the predictions
with the data. Since the main (almost the only) interesting variable in the
model is the unemployment rate (ok, there is also the vacancy rate, the ratio
of these two rates, and so on), let us focus on movement in unemployment
over the cycle. It turns out the model performs quite poorly: unemployment
barely moves at all in the model, certainly much less than in the data. This
observation set o¤ an industry attempting to amend the structure of the
basic Mortensen-Pissarides model, with a variety of results, but little in the
way of overwhelming success. At the end of the day, a fairly robust …nding
is that the model as calibrated along the lines of Shimer (2005) delivers a
very small e¤ect on unemployment from changes in productivity.
   The situation is depicted in Figure 1, where s = y              z, y is output per
employed worker, and z is some notion of output (or utility, since preferences
are linear) per unemployed worker; it is only the di¤erence y z that matters
for the issues at hand. Note that z can include UI payments from the
government, the value of leisure, and the value of home production, all
measured in the same units as y. For now we interpret changes in s as coming

   4
       Ssee Rogerson, Shimer and Wright (2005) for a recent survey with many references.


                                            5
from shocks to market productivity, y. Actual productivity ‡uctuations over
the cycle are not big, as indicated in the diagram by the values s      " and
s + ". Also, for this discussion, it su¢ ces to imagine comparisons across
deterministic steads states rather than ‡uctuation in a dynamic-stochastic
equilibrium, since as is well known the model generates some but not much
internal propagation (although unemployment is a state variable, without
capital it adjusts quickly). So what we are interested in is really just the
magnitude of the change in unemployment u when productivity moves up
and down across steady states, as this is a good approximation to what
happens over the cycle.
   As Figure 1 shows, in a stylized way, with Shimer’s calibration u moves
only a miniscule amount for these " changes in s. The reason has been
discussed at length in the literature, so we will be brief. The key endogenous
choice in the model is an entry decision by …rms: whether to post vacancies in
an attempt to recruit workers. When s goes up, …rms are in principle willing
to post more vacancies, which through the search process leads to a fall in
u. But when there are more vacancies, the return to search goes up, which
workers parlay via the bargaining process into a higher wage w. A higher w
eats up much of the gain that would have otherwise accrued to …rms, and so
in equilibrium entry and hence u end up changing very little. Of course, just
how little is a quantitative matter –e.g. the increase in w is stronger when
workers have more bargaining power. Hagedorn and Manovskii (2006) show
how an alternative calibration strategy, di¤ering from Shimer mainly in the
‡ow value of unemployment z, changes the results dramatically. Given their
parameters, Hagedorn and Manovskii …nd the model …ts the facts very well
indeed, again represented stylistically in the Figure 1.
   There is something to be said for the Hagedorn and Manovskii calibra-


                                      6
tion. Shimer pinned down z by assuming the only ‡ow utility one gets while
unemployed comes from government UI bene…ts, which has the advantage
of being easy to measure but the disadvantage of being totally unrealistic,
since it completely ignores the value of leisure and home production. Mak-
ing z bigger has the following e¤ect. Roughly speaking, when z is higher,
a worker has a better outside option, and we can give him low bargaining
power without changing the results. That is, the steady state looks similar
if we give the worker low bargaining power and high outside option, instead
of high bargaining power and a low outside option. But, in response to a
change in an exogenous variable, including an increase in productivity, low
bargaining power for the worker means w does not react much.5 Hence,
the e¤ect discussed above is mitigated, so both entry and unemployment
respond more to changes in s.
    Hagedorn and Manovskii argue that it is not only possible to …nd pa-
rameters that make u in the model move as much as in the data, but that
   5
     In the most extreme case where the …rm has all the baragining power, e.g., w = z in
any equilibrium and the wage is independent of y.


                                           7
these parameters emerge from a calibration procedure that is designed to
match not volatility in u, per se, but independent observations. This is an
important point, although perhaps not everyone is convinced; in any case, it
not our main concern. We are interested in asking this: although the model
works well at explaining the response of u to changes in y for some para-
meters, are these parameters reasonable? Asking if they are reasonable is
weaker that asking if the parameters emerge in a robust way from a convinc-
ing calibration strategy. Well, are they reasonable? The knee-jerk reaction
by some in the profession was to say no because these parameters imply the
unemployed have only slightly lower ‡ow utility than the employed –which
of course has to be true when the match surplus y               z is small. We do not
…nd this argument scienti…c, because ‡ow utilities are not measurable, so
we do …nd it compelling.6
    A more interesting argument is due to Costain and Reiter (2005, 2007).
Suppose the Hagedorn-Manovskii version of the Mortensen-Pissarides model
is correct: we accept their parameters and hence can generate reasonably
big response in u to realistically small changes in s due to business-cycle
productivity ‡uctuations. Let us try to extrapolate to large changes in z,
caused by big di¤erences in productivity, or big di¤erences UI, or whatever,
as would be relevant when look across countries instead of over the cycle.
Then the model predicts huge changes in u, far bigger than we actually see.
Figure 1 show this stylistically, with u getting extremely high when s goes

    6
      There is no sense writing down formal models if at the end of the day one is going
to assign excessive weight to one’s priors about the “voluntary” or “involuntary” nature
of unemployment. Moreover, this line of argument leads to a rejection of a much bigger
set of models than the Hagedorn-Manovskii version of Mortensen-Pissarides – we would
have to dismiss all Walrasian models, where the employed and unemployed get the same
‡ow utility, as well as any indivisible-labor models with e¢ cient risk sharing, where the
unemployed actually get a higher ‡ow utility under reasonable conditions (Rogerson and
Wright 1988).


                                            8
much below s. Labor market policies like UI do in fact di¤er a lot across
countries, and while unemployment rates do, too, not that much. This seems
to be a problem. As Costain and Reiter (2007, p.30) themselves put it,

     “Our …ndings suggest that modeling labor market frictions by
     calibrating a very small match surplus, as Hagedorn and Manovskii
     (2006) advocate, is unhelpful because it is inconsistent with ro-
     bust observations about the e¤ects of labor market policy.”

   Although this is certainly serious, we want to take issue with this conclu-
sion. The …rst issue is that, taken at face value, the argument seems totally
defeatist. The endeavor of reconciling the discrepancy between the model
and data pointed out by Shimer comes down to generating a big elasticity
of u with respect to s. As soon as one succeeds in this endeavor, by whatever
means, one is subject to the same dismissal –an elasticity su¢ cient to yield
reasonably big responses of u to small changes in s seems to inescapably lead
to unreasonably big responses of u to bigger changes in s. Whether success
at the …rst stage comes from Hagedorn-Manovskii or something else –e.g.,
an alternative wage setting theory – it seems hard to avoid disaster at the
second stage. At least this would seem to be true if not for our other issue
with the Costain-Reiter argument. It is based on a fairly naive extrapolation
exercise, and we think there are some important nonlinearities that call this
into question.
   Simple extensions of the baseline model that we describe below indicate
that we can get large changes in u from small changes in s without predicting
huge changes in u from bigger changes in s. Our conclusion from this is that
existing versions of the model, including Hagedorn-Manovskii, may be good
local approximations to the world and hence work …ne for small changes in s,


                                      9
but ought not be taken seriously for very big changes, because there are other
factors (literally) that come into play. To show how this works in a simple
example, consider an economy with an additional factor necessary for the
production of y –it does not matter what it is, and perhaps something like
“managerial expertise” may be quite relevant, but for now let’s call it land,
`. To make the point in a stark way, we begin with a Leontie¤ technology: 1
unit of ` is needed in any worker-…rm match to generate output y. Assume
` is traded in a frictionless market, where any …rm that recruits a worker
can get the required unit if it is will to pay the competitive price.7
    Suppose there is a measure 1 of households and a …xed quantity of land
L < 1, and at s = s steady state unemployment is u < 1                      L. Then in
and around the steady state, demand for ` is 1               u < L, and so it’s price
is 0. Therefore the e¤ects of small changes in s around s are exactly as
in the standard model. But consider a big increase in s. As u falls, the
demand for ` rises until it reaches L, at which point we run out of land,
and cannot reduce unemployment further. Any attempt to decrease u bids
up the price      of ` until it exhausts the surplus of the …rm, making entry
unpro…table. In Figure 2, we cannot lower u much more than what we get
at s + ", no matter how big we make s.8 This is extreme because we used a
Leontie¤ technology. With a more general CES technology, as u falls demand
for ` goes up, driving up , and although this may not choke o¤ expansion

   7
       It does not matter for our purposes who owns this factor. If it is the workers e.g.,
their income from selling ` does not depend on their employment status and hence does
not a¤ect any marginal decision, including their wage bargaining. So general equilibrium
e¤ects here have no bearing on u, even if they do a¤ect worker consumption and utility.
     8
       This would not be the case in the long run if we could increase the supply of the
factor that is …xed in the short run. For example, if the factor were reproducable capital
k, the argument may not be valid across steady states since presumably k can increase
with s. But at the business-cycle frequency, when k is nearly …xed, the point is valid. We
like using a …xed factor because then we can maintain the useful result that steady state
and business cycle e¤ects are the same, which is not the case in models with capital.


                                            10
altogether it will dampen it. With a more general technology, there is an
e¤ect in the other direction, too: as s falls and u increases, the Leontie¤
case is the same as the standard model since ` is free, but if   falls this will
mitigate the increase in u, as shown in Figure 2.




   The general idea also works with a …xed factor in home production, say
h, which we call housing for the sake of illustration. Starting again with a
Leontie¤ technology, each unemployed worker needs 1 unit of h in to produce
a home good. Assume a …xed stock H such that u < H near steady state,
so that h is free. Now consider a fall in s. As long as this fall is not too
big, h remains free, and u rises exactly as in the standard model. Once u
hits H, however, the number of workers who would like to have a unit of
h exceeds the available supply, and the price ! gets bid up to extract the
entire surplus from home production. An argument parallel to the case for
a …xed factor in market production can be used to show that at least over
some range u will not increase at all above H when s falls. And again, if we
relax the Leontie¤ technology in favor of CES, we get a smoothed version


                                     11
of the same e¤ect that works in both directions. See Figure 3.




    The bottom line is that extrapolating the predictions of the model for
small changes in s might not work for big changes. In the Leontie¤ example,
with a …xed factor in market production the decrease in u implied by the
standard model is correct only up to some point after which u falls no
further, and with a …xed factor in home production the increase in u implied
by the standard model is correct only up to some point after which u rises
no further. With less extreme technologies, the e¤ects are smoothed out,
but the basic idea remains valid. The Costain-Reiter critique of Hagedorn-
Manovskii based on simple extrapolation therefore simply may not be valid.
The model may be accurate for small changes in s, which means it is good
for the business cycle, but not for the big changes in s like those across
countries.9


    9
      It is no help trying to argue that one can use econometric estimates of the elasticity
(of u with respect to policy) that ought to be equally valid for small and big changes –the
whole point here is that the elaticity is not constant, and may well di¤er a lot for small
and big changes.


                                            12
3     A Simple Model

It is standard to reduce the Mortensen-Pissarides model to a free entry
condition,
                                        (y z)
                                        f
                              k=                              ;
                                   r + + (1  )            h
where k is the cost of posting a vacancy,            f    is the arrival rate for a …rm
with a vacancy,      h   is the arrival rate for an unemployed worker,               is the
bargaining power of the …rm, r is the rate of time preference and                    is the
job destruction rate, taken for simplicity to be exogenous. This sets the cost
of recruiting k equal to the probability of hiring                f   times the …rm’s share
    of the surplus y      z, appropriately discounted. The term (1                   )   h   in
the denominator captures feedback from the arrival rate of workers on wage
bargaining. The arrival rates come from a standard CRS matching function
N (u; v), with   f   = N (u; v)=v and       h   = N (u; v)=u. Inserting these as well
as the solution v = v(u) to steady state relation N (u; v) = (1                    u) , the
above condition reduces to one equation in u.
     This is the standard model. Suppose we extend it by writing the value
of market and home production as

                           y = max ff (`)            `g

                           z = b + max fg(h)              !hg ;

where as in the previous section f (`) is the output of a …rm with 1 worker
and ` units of some additional factor and           is the price of `, while g(h) is the
home-produced output of an unmatched worker as a function of h and ! is
the price of h. Here b is UI plus the value of leisure. Assume f (`) = A`
and g(h) = Bh , which are derived from the obvious CRS Cobb-Douglas
technologies. We include A and B to capture shocks to market and home
productivity.

                                            13
   Individual factor demands for a matched …rm and for an unmatched
                                  1                                     1
worked are `D = ( A= ) 1              and hD = ( B=!) 1                     !   . Aggregate factor de-
mands are therefore
                                               1                                        1
                   D                  A    1
                                                            D                    B     1 !
               L = (1       u)                      and H       =u                           :
                                                                                 !
Assume supplies of these factors are …xed, and normalized to 1 without loss
in generality. Then equilibrium factor prices are                                =     A(1       u)1   and
! = Bu1       !.   Since market clearing implies 1 = (1                              u)` and 1 = uh, in
equilibrium, we have:
                                      A(1     )
                                  y =
                                      (1 u)
                                          B(1                   )
                                  z = b+
                                            u
Inserting these into free entry, we get
                             f                     A(1   )                      B(1     )
              k=                                                    b                        :
                       r + + (1       )   h        (1 u)                          u
   In the standard model, an increase in market productivity A leads …rms
to post vacancies, but this is dampened by the fact that more vacancies
reduce   f,   and also increase       h   which increases the wage w. In this model
there are other e¤ects, as discussed in the previous section, because more
vacancies reduce u which raises the price of ` and lowers the price of h as
more matched …rms and fewer unmatched workers compete for the necessary
scarce factors. This further dampens the increase in vacancy creation, but in
general it may happen in complicated ways. We saw in the previous section
that the factor price e¤ects can be small –actually, zero in the Leontie¤ case
–for small changes in and yet very important for big changes. Hence, small
shocks might lead to ‡uctuations in u that work as if y z was approximately
independent of u, as in the standard model, while big changes are dampened
by the factor price e¤ects.

                                                   14
                                  Figure 4 shows, for a numerical example, unemployment vs. productivity
                        in our model with …xed factors as the solid curve and in the standard model
                        as the dotted curve. Both models have the same steady state u                                    0:05.
                        In this example, our model generates even higher response to productiv-
                        ity shocks than the standard model when those shocks are small. But as
                        productivity falls, u does not rise nearly as much. Indeed, in the standard
                        model with y and b independent of u, as y approaches b the market shuts
                        down and u goes to 1. In the model with …xed factors, however, as produc-
                        tivity drops u increases, but it cannot go too high because then the price
                              =             A(1            u)1         would go to 0, which means y = A(1          )(1   u)
                        would go to 1 in this Cobb-Douglas case. As can be seen, the increase in
                        u is moderate even when productivity falls a lot. By moderate we do not
                        mean realistic, since the model was not calibrated to match the e¤ect of big
                        changes, we mean the e¤ects are much small than in the standard model.

                                                   .67

                                                         0.6



                                                         0.5



u( .95, ρ , δ , η , κ , 1 , 0 , zz , 1 , .5)             0.4

u( b , ρ , δ , η , κ , α , θ , Z , H , k)

z ( u( b , ρ , δ , η , κ , α , θ , Z , H , k) , α , b , H) 0.3



                                                         0.2



                                                         0.1



                                                     0      0
                                                             0.85                        1                  1.15
                                                                 .85                 zz , Z , Z             1.15




                                  Another way to look at the same phenomena can be seen in Figure 5.
                        The solid curve gives the steady state unemployment rate as a function of

                                                                                    15
              b for the …xed factor model, while the dotted curve does the same for the
              standard model. The horizontal line denotes an unemployment rate of 5%,
              and from the intersection of this line with each curve, one can read o¤ the
              value of b needed to get the right long-run unemployment rate. A value of
              b – which we recall captures UI plus leisure – of around 0:83 works in our
              model, while a value closer to 0:95 is needed in the standard model. An
              increase in b of a given percentage –say, 5%, which one can think of coming
              from a 10% increase in UI –leads to a reasonable increase in unemployment
              in our model, while in the standard model it drives u up to nearly 1.

                                        .5




                                             0.4




                                             0.3
u( b , ρ , δ , η , κ , 1 , 0 , Z , 1 , .5)

u( b , ρ , δ , η , κ , α , θ , Z , H , k)

.05
                                             0.2




                                             0.1




                                         0    0
                                               0.75      0.88                    1
                                                   .75    b                      1




                         The examples we present are speci…c but the point is general. One can
              get similar results e.g. by introducing home production in other ways –all
              we require is dependence of the surplus s on unemployment. Thus, u may
              a¤ect s because the value of home output (rather than the cost of inputs)
              depends on the number of individuals in nonmarket activity. Consider a
              domestic service, like a nanny. Assume demand for nannies is independent


                                                         16
of u (this is easy to generalize), while the supply is exactly u. Concretely,
an unemployed worker can provide nanny services at competitive price p
according to a technology g(e), where e is labor input or e¤ort. Then z =
b + pg(e)   e, assuming utility is linear in e¤ort. Maximizing with respect
to e and equating supply to demand, we get something very similar to the
formulation with …xed factors.


4    Conclusion

We considered here the debate over aggregate labor market ‡uctuations
in search models from a new perspective, by in some sense looking at the
issues from an older point of view going back to earlier business cycle theory.
The bottom line is that the resolution of Shimer’s puzzle due to Hagedorn
and Manovskii may or may not be de…nitive, but one cannot base one’s
conclusion about this on the critique due to Costain and Reiter. The reason
is that the elasticities relevant for small changes may not be relevant for large
changes. We show explicitly that for simple extensions of the model with
slightly more elaborate descriptions of either market or home production, we
can generate large e¤ects from small changes as in Hagedorn and Manovskii,
and still more reasonable e¤ects from large changes like those that concern
Costain and Reiter. We repeat that we …nd it interesting –almost charming
– that home production may be as relevant for the current discussion as it
was for earlier business cycle theory, as argued in Benhabib, Rogerson and
Wright (1991).




                                       17
     References
Aguiar, M., and E. Hurst (2005): “Consumption versus Expenditure,” Journal of
     Political Economy, 113(5), 919–948.

         (2006): “Lifecycle Prices and Production,” University of Rochester Working
     Paper.

         (2007): “Measuring Trends in Leisure: The Allocation of Time over Five
     Decades,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(3), 969–1006.

Becker, G. (1988): “Family Economics and Macro Behavior,”The American Economic
     Review , 78(1), 1–13.

Benhabib, J., R. Rogerson, and R. Wright (1991): “Homework in Macroeconomics:
     Household Production and Aggregate Fluctuations,”The Journal of Political Econ-
     omy, 99(6), 1166–1187.

Christiano, L., and M. Eichenbaum (1992): “Current real business cycle theories
     and aggregate economic ‡uctuations,” American Economic Review , 82, 430–450.

Costain, J., and M. Reiter (2005): “Business Cycles, Unemployment, and the Cal-
     ibration of Matching Models,” Discussion paper, Working paper 872, Universitat
     Pompeu Fabra.

        (2007): “Business cycles, unemployment insurance, and the calibration of match-
     ing models,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, forthcoming.

Farmer, R., and A. Hollenhorst (2006): “Shooting the Auctioneer,”NBER Working
     Paper no. 12584.

Fisher, J. (2007): “Why Does Household Investment Lead Business Investment over the
     Business Cycle?” Journal of Political Economy, 115(1).

Gomme, P., F. Kydland, and P. Rupert (2001): “Home Production Meets Time to
     Build,” Journal of Political Economy, 109(5), 1115–1131.

Gomme, P., R. Rogerson, P. Rupert, and R. Wright (2005): “The Business Cycle
     and the Life Cycle,” in NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2004 , ed. by M. Gertler,
     and K. Rogo¤. MIT Press.



                                            18
Greenwood, J., and Z Hercowitz (1991): “The Allocation of Capital and Time over
     the Business Cycle,” The Journal of Political Economy, 99(6), 1188–1214.

Greenwood, J., R. Rogerson, and R. Wright (1995): “Household Production in
     Real Business Cycle Theory,” in Frontiers of Business Cycle Research, ed. by
     T. Cooley, pp. 157–174. Princeton University Press.

Hagedorn, M., and I. Manovskii (2005): “The Cyclical Behavior of Equilibrium Un-
     employment and Vacancies Revisited,”University of Pennsylvania Working Paper.

Hall, R. (2005): “Employment Fluctuations with Equilibrium Wage Stickiness,”Amer-
     ican Economic Review , 95(1), 50–65.

Hall, R., and P. Milgrom (2007): The Limited In‡uence of Unemployment on the
     Wage Bargain. Stanford University Working Paper.

Hansen, G. (1985): “Indivisible Labor and the Business Cycle,,” Journal of Monetary
     Economics, 16(3), 309–327.

Hornstein, A., P. Krusell, and G. Violante (2005): “Unemployment and Vacancy
     Fluctuations in the Matching Model: Inspecting the Mechanism,” Federal Reserve
     Bank of Richmond Economic Quarterly, 91(3), 19–51.

Kennan, J. (2006): “Private Information, Wage Bargaining and Employment Fluctua-
     tions,” NBER Working Paper no. 11967.

Kydland, F., and E. Prescott (1982): “Time to Build and Aggregate Fluctuations,”
     Econometrica, 50(6), 1345–1370.

McGrattan, E. (1994): “The macroeconomic e¤ects of distortionary taxation,”Journal
     of Monetary Economics, 33(3), 573–601.

McGrattan, E., R. Rogerson, and R. Wright (1997): “An Equilibrium Model of
     the Business Cycle with Household Production and Fiscal Policy,” International
     Economic Review , 38(2), 267–290.

Menzio, G. (2005): “High Frequency Wage Rigidity,” Univ. of Pennsylvania Working
     Paper.

Mortensen, D., and E. Nagypal (2007): “More on unemployment and vacancy ‡uc-
     tuations,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 10(3), 327–347.


                                            19
Mortensen, D., and C. Pissarides (1994): “Job Creation and Job Destruction in the
     Theory of Unemployment,” The Review of Economic Studies, 61(3), 397–415.

Parente, S., R. Rogerson, and R. Wright (2000): “Homework in Development
     Economics: Household Production and the Wealth of Nations,”Journal of Political
     Economy, 108(4), 680–687.

Rogerson, R. (1988): “Indivisible Labor, Lotteries and Equilibrium,” Journal of Mon-
     etary Economics, 21(1), 3–16.

Rogerson, R., R. Shimer, and R. Wright (2005): “Search-Theoretic Models of the
     Labor Market: A Survey,” Journal of Economic Literature, 43, 959–988.

Rogerson, R., and R. Wright (1988): “Involuntary Unemployment in Economics
     with E¢ cient Risk Sharing,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 22(3), 501–515.

Rupert, P., R. Rogerson, and R. Wright (1995): “Estimating substitution elastic-
     ities in household production models,” Economic Theory, 6(1), 179–193.

        (2000): “Homework in labor economics: Household production and intertemporal
     substitution,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 46(3), 557–579.

Shimer, R. (2005): “The Cyclical Behaviour of Unemployment and Vacancies,” The
     American Economic Review , 95, 25–49.




                                             20
