                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       AFTER MIDNIGHT: A REGRESSION DISCONTINUITY DESIGN IN LENGTH
                     OF POSTPARTUM HOSPITAL STAYS

                                          Douglas Almond
                                         Joseph J. Doyle, Jr.

                                        Working Paper 13877
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13877


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2008




Josh Angrist, Janet Currie, Carlos Dobkin, Randall Ellis, Michael Greenstone, Rick Hornbeck, David
Lee, Doug Miller, Roberto Rigobon, Jon Skinner, Tom Stoker, and Tavneet Suri provided helpful
comments and discussions. We also thank Jan Morgan of the California Healthcare Information Resource
Center for helpful advice and discussions, Nicole Radmore for help with the National Hospital Discharge
Survey data, and Sammy Burfeind, whose birth inspired our empirical approach. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Douglas Almond and Joseph J. Doyle, Jr.. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       AFTER MIDNIGHT: A REGRESSION DISCONTINUITY DESIGN IN LENGTH
                     OF POSTPARTUM HOSPITAL STAYS

                                          Douglas Almond
                                         Joseph J. Doyle, Jr.

                                        Working Paper 13877
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13877


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2008




Josh Angrist, Janet Currie, Carlos Dobkin, Randall Ellis, Michael Greenstone, Rick Hornbeck, David
Lee, Doug Miller, Roberto Rigobon, Jon Skinner, Tom Stoker, and Tavneet Suri provided helpful
comments and discussions. We also thank Jan Morgan of the California Healthcare Information Resource
Center for helpful advice and discussions, Nicole Radmore for help with the National Hospital Discharge
Survey data, and Sammy Burfeind, whose birth inspired our empirical approach. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

© 2008 by Douglas Almond and Joseph J. Doyle, Jr.. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
After Midnight: A Regression Discontinuity Design in Length of Postpartum Hospital Stays
Douglas Almond and Joseph J. Doyle, Jr.
NBER Working Paper No. 13877
March 2008
JEL No. H51,I11,I12,J13

                                              ABSTRACT

Patients who receive more hospital treatment tend to have worse underlying health, confounding estimates
of the returns to such care. This paper compares the costs and benefits of extending the length of hospital
stay following delivery using a discontinuity in stay length for infants born close to midnight. Third-party
reimbursement rules in California entitle newborns to a minimum number of hospital "days," counted
as the number of midnights in care. A newborn delivered at 12:05 a.m. will have an extra night of
reimbursable care compared to an infant born minutes earlier. We use a dataset of all California births
from 1991-2002, including nearly 100,000 births within 20 minutes of midnight, and find that children
born just prior to midnight have significantly shorter lengths of stay than those born just after midnight,
despite similar observable characteristics. Furthermore, a law change in 1997 entitled newborns to
a minimum of 2 days in care. The midnight discontinuity can therefore be used to consider two distinct
treatments: increasing stay length from one to two nights (prior to the law change) and from two to
three nights (following the law change). On both margins, we find no effect of stay length on readmissions
or mortality for either the infant or the mother, and the estimates are precise. The results suggest that
for uncomplicated births, longer hospitals stays incur substantial costs without apparent health benefits.


Douglas Almond
Department of Economics
Columbia University
International Affairs Building, MC 3308
420 West 118th Street
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
da2152@columbia.edu

Joseph J. Doyle, Jr.
MIT Sloan School of Management
50 Memorial Drive
E52-447
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
jjdoyle@mit.edu
1         Introduction

The amount of time spent in hospital after childbirth has changed sub-

stantially over the last generation. Between 1970 and 1995, the average

length of stay fell from 4.1 to 2.1 days (Figure 1). Increased cesarean

deliveries over this same period masks even larger decreases in stay length

conditional on method of delivery [9]. By the early 1990s, third-party

payers routinely declined coverage of hospital stays longer than 24 hours

for uncomplicated vaginal deliveries [1].

        The shift toward shorter postpartum stays was controversial and polit-

ically unpopular. Between 1995 and 1998, 42 states passed laws requiring

insurers to cover minimum postpartum lengths of stay [11]. In January

1998, the federal government followed suit, mandating a minimum stay

of 2 days. The average length of hospital stay for mothers increased 20%

between 1995 and 1998, and newborns’ stays increased from 2.8 days to

3.2 [20]. The fraction of vaginal deliveries with stay lengths under two

days fell by half – from 47% in 1995 to 23% in 1998 (Figure 2).

        As delivery is one of the most commonly performed surgical procedure

in the U.S., secular changes in stay length have significant implications

for health care costs and health outcomes.1 Studies of the law changes

themselves, however, have yielded mixed evidence. For example, Evans

et al. [11] found that California’s law improved health outcomes for vagi-
    1
        Delivery is the most commonly performed surgical procedure in our analysis period.

Since 2002, operations involving the cardiovascular system have been more frequently

performed than obstetrical procedures (NCHS [20] and various additional years).



                                              3
nal deliveries in the Medicaid population, but not for privately-insured

patients. Implementation of the law was not immediate, and time-series

comparisons yield unbiased estimates of the health impact to the extent

that other health determinants did not happen to change over the imple-

mentation period.

   Our approach departs from previous work by comparing infants born at

nearly the same point in time. We use the fact that billing rules reimburse

hospitals based on the number of days the newborn is in the hospital.

These days are counted as the number of midnights in care. A newborn

delivered at 12:05 a.m. will have nearly a full day in care before being

“logged” as present in the hospital, whereas a newborn delivered at 11:55

p.m. will be counted as present only 5 minutes after delivery. As a result,

those born just after midnight have an extra night of reimbursable care

compared to those born just prior to midnight.

   The analysis uses hospital discharge data linked to birth and death

certificates for all births in California from 1991 to 2002. These data report

the hour and minute of birth. An additional dimension of our empirical

analysis is made possible by the 1997 Newborns’ and Mothers’ Health Act:

a law in California that mandates insurance coverage for a minimum of 2

days in hospital. This allows us to trace out the effect of an increase in stay

length using the midnight discontinuity from two different baselines. Prior

to the law, the midnight threshold primarily induced variation between 0

and 1 additional midnights (i.e. one versus two total nights in the hospital).

Following the law, the midnight threshold primarily induced patients to


                                      4
switch between 1 and 2 additional midnights (or two versus three total

nights in hospital). Thus, we can use the midnight rule to evaluate the

effect of a two-day minimum stay dictated by law (and recommended by

the American Academy of Pediatrics) compared to a further expansion in

length of stay from two to three nights.

   We find that the difference in privately-born costs associated with the

minute of birth generates a substantial difference in average stay length,

despite nearly identical observable characteristics. Infants born shortly

after midnight spend an additional 0.25 nights in the hospital – a differ-

ence similar to the change in length of stay when the California mandate

increased the minimum stay by one day.

   Despite the longer stays for infants born after midnight, we find no

effect of a post-midnight birth on health outcomes. Both visual inspec-

tions of the raw data and models that control for patient characteristics

reveal estimates close to zero for hospital readmissions and infant mor-

tality. Given that these follow-up expenses were covered by insurance

companies, the push toward shorter lengths of stay in the early 1990s

presumably reduced costs for insurers.

   The results apply to a population that is induced to have a longer

hospital stay as a result of a post-midnight birth. A priori, these are likely

uncomplicated cases where the minute of birth is plausibly exogenous and

the stays are not expected to be especially long – patients in a part of

the health distribution where the minimum stay legislation may be most

likely to bind. While these “compliers” cannot be identified in the data,


                                      5
we estimate their mean characteristics. As expected, compliers are less

likely to be low birthweight and more likely to be full term compared to

the full population. Furthermore, larger effects of a post-midnight birth

on length of stay are found for those more likely to have benefitted from

it – particularly prior to the 1997 law, when average stay lengths were

shorter. Among mothers covered by Medicaid, for example, the increase

in stay length for births after midnight was approximately 40% longer than

the post-midnight increase among non-Medicaid births. Nevertheless, no

health outcome differences were detected within this population.

        The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 considers the

background that led to early discharge laws and the role that minute of

birth plays in determining the length of stay. Section 3 describes the data.

Section 4 describes the model and estimation, describing the manner in

which we trace out the effects of length of stay from 0 to 1 and from 1 to

2 additional nights in care. Section 5 presents the results and section 6

interprets the results in comparison to the costs of an additional night in

care. Section 7 concludes.



2         Background

Between 1970 and 1995, the average length of stay for a vaginal delivery

fell from 3.9 to 1.7 days (Figure 1). For cesarean births, the corresponding

numbers are 7.8 to 3.6 days [9]. In the mid-1990s, this decrease was halted,

and if anything slight increases in average stays followed.2 For short-
    2
        NCHS [20] and various additional years.


                                            6
stays, the pattern is more stark. Figure 2 plots the share of vaginal births

with stays under 2 days from 1970-2004. There is a doubling of these

“early discharges” from 1990 to 1995, followed by a sharp and sustained

reduction.

      The practice of “drive-through delivery” formed a rallying point against

cost-saving measures imposed by third-party payers [13]. In 1995, the of-

ficial journal of the American Academy of Pediatrics ran a commentary

entitled: “Early discharge, in the end: maternal abuse, child neglect, and

physician harassment,”3 that warned inadequate screening of newborns

was the “most dangerous and potentially long-term effect of early dis-

charge.” In particular, early discharge had caused the “re-emergence” of

jaundice as a cause of hospital re-admission [6]. In 2005, the American

Academy of Pediatrics published criteria for the discharge of newborns,

noting it is“unlikely that fulfillment of these criteria and conditions can

be accomplished in 48 hours” even for healthy newborns [1].

      On August 26, 1997 the California Newborns’ and Mothers’ Health

Act came into effect in California that entitled newborns to 48 hours of

inpatient care, as well as coverage for early follow-up care if the newborn

is discharged early. A federal law would come into existence the following

year. Figure 3 shows that the fraction of vaginal births in California that

had an early discharge increased to 75% prior to the law change, and

decreased from October 1997 to February 1998 to 50%.4
  3
      As noted by Hyman [13].
  4
      The spikes seen represent December 24 each year when short stays are particularly

common.



                                           7
2.1    Minimum Length of Stay Laws

Previous work comparing newborns born just before and after such law

changes have consistently found that the laws increased stay lengths.

Findings for health impacts, however, have been mixed.

   Meara et al. [18] studied newborns covered by the Medicaid program

in Ohio from 1991-1998. Using an interrupted time-series design, they

found “modest reductions” in readmissions for jaundice and emergency

department visits following the introduction of minimum-stay legislation

in 1996. All-cause rehospitalization, as well as readmissions for dehydra-

tion and infection, were not found to be affected by the law change.

   Madden et al. [15] analyzed newborn health outcomes in a Massachusetts

HMO before and after implementation of the state’s early discharge law

in February 1996. They found longer stay lengths, but no effects on emer-

gency department visits or re-hospitalizations. However, at the end of

1994 the HMO initiated a program for deliveries that included “increased

prenatal participation” and a home visit by a nurse within 48 hours of

discharge[15]. This program was discontinued when the state discharge

law came in to effect.

   Evans et al. [11] also use a time-series design to analyze the impact of

California’s minimum stay law, passed and enacted in August 1997. The

law mandated that insurance cover at least two days in the hospital or an

early follow-up visit in a physician’s office or at home. Between August

1997 and January of 1998, when the federal early-discharge law came in to

effect, the fraction of newborns discharged “early” fell sharply (Figure 3).


                                     8
Like Meara et al. [18], Evans et al. [11] find decreases in readmission rates

for the Medicaid population with vaginal deliveries. Evans et al. [11] also

find some improvements in outcomes for privately-insured vaginal births

that exhibited some complications following the early discharge law.

       Several recent papers have emphasized the persistence of health com-

plications related to early discharge despite implementation of laws man-

dating coverage of minimum hospital stays. Noting that early discharge

is not precluded under the federal early discharge law, Galbraith et al.

[12] found that 49.4% of their sample of California births in 1999 were

discharged “early”, i.e. prior to the expiration of insurance coverage.5

Deliveries paid for by Medicaid or where the mother was Hispanic were

more likely to be discharged early. Galbraith et al. [12] concluded that:

“issuance of professional guidelines and legislation alone cannot ensure

adequate postnatal services, particularly among the groups of socioeco-

nomically vulnerable newborns.” Similarly, Paul et al. [21] argued that

“well-intentioned [early discharge] legislation and current practice may

not be sufficiently protecting the health of newborns.”

       In an attempt to buffer the presumed effects of early discharge that

occurred despite the legislation, early follow-up visits were mandated in

these cases. Previous evidence suggests that such a mandate is unlikely to

affect the take up of such services, however. Meara et al. [18] find no effect

of Ohio minimum stay-early follow-up visit legislation on the take up of
   5
       And as defined by the American College of Obstetricians: under 48 hours for

vaginal deliveries and under 96 ours for cesarian births [12].




                                           9
early follow-up care among the state’s Medicaid population, and Galbraith

et al. [12] find no difference in early follow-up care for newborns who were

discharged early versus those who were not. These results suggest that

our comparisons of effects before and the California law are unlikely to be

affected by differences in early follow-up care.

       The identifying assumption underlying the interrupted time-series ap-

proach is that the trend in length of stay and outcomes prior to the law

change describes the counterfactual length of stay and outcomes after the

law change. If other interventions happened at the same time as the law

change, then the before-after effects may reflect both the law change and

the complementary interventions. For example, if the policy change was

accompanied by warnings of the increase in jaundice in the early 1990s,

then policies that aimed to reduce jaundice infections may have happened

at the same time as the extended stays. If hospitals began responding

to public criticism prior to the enactment, or if the law imposed short-

run costs on hospitals, then the change in outcomes before and after the

law will measure the effect of the change in length of stay as well as the

response to the law.6
   6
       Our analysis of California data finds that the daily number of newborns in the

hospital increased by approximately 10% between June 1997 and August 1998 in Cal-

ifornia. Treatment choices do not appear to change at the time of the law, although

there is suggestive evidence that cesarean section rates increased beginning in January

1998; they were close to 21% for 3 years prior to the federal mandate, increased to

22% in March 1998, and continued to increase to 27% by the end of the sample period

(2002).




                                          10
2.2    Time of Birth and Stay Length

Length of stay is typically measured as the number of midnights spent in

hospital. For postpartum stays, care is generally reimbursed for a predeter-

mined number of midnights in care, with longer stays requiring physician

approval. For example, the Medicaid program in California, known as

“Medi-Cal”, issues the following guidelines regarding prior authorization

for obstetric admissions:


         Welfare and Institutions Code, Section 14132.42, mandates

      that a minimum of 48 hours of inpatient hospital care following

      a normal vaginal delivery and 96 hours following a delivery by

      cesarean section are reimbursable without prior authorization.

      For [Treatment Authorization Requests (TARs)] and claims

      processing purposes, it is necessary to use calendar days in-

      stead of hours to implement these requirements. Therefore, a

      maximum of two consecutive days following a vaginal delivery

      or four consecutive days following a delivery by cesarean sec-

      tion is reimbursable, without a Treatment Authorization Re-

      quest. The post-delivery TAR-free period begins at midnight

      after the mother delivers. [19]


   For a birth occurring at 11:59 p.m., the number of reimbursable days

in care begins one minute later, whereas births just after midnight are

afforded nearly a full 24-hour period before the number of reimbursable

days in care begin to be counted.


                                    11
   An underlying assumption is that for uncomplicated deliveries, the

actual minute of birth around midnight is effectively random. There are

ways of increasing or decreasing the speed of the delivery, however, and

physician may have some discretion over the recording of the time of the

delivery. In terms of incentives, the patient and the insurer would prefer

a post-midnight birth, as billing for time in the hospital would not begin

until one day later. The hospital would likely prefer a pre-midnight birth

to begin billing for the time in care sooner. The cost to the hospital

of supervising the child would also decline if the birth occurred before

midnight and the discharge time was sooner. To the extent that the

physician’s interest is aligned with the patient (or the insurer), there may

be a tendency to record births after midnight, whereas if the incentives

are aligned with the hospital, the tendency would be to record births just

before midnight. We will consider the frequency of births around midnight

for all births, as well as births that occur in Kaiser Hospitals–hospitals

where the insurer owns the hospital.

   If the birth occurs after midnight, the family effectively has a property

right to the hospital bed for one additional night. In a setting of costless

bargaining, this increase in the property right might not be expected to

have any impact on stay length [8]. If the insurer wanted to bargain for

shorter stay lengths, however, they would face political costs. Before the

minimum stay law, policy and practice entitled newborns to only 1 day

in the hospital. After the law change, insurers are limited to the use

the early follow-up care as an incentive for an early discharge, although


                                    12
previous evidence suggests that early follow-up visits are not determined

by length of stay.

       Previous work most closely related to our approach is Malkin et al. [16].

They used 4-hour categories in the time of birth as an instrument for length

of stay. They found significant reductions in newborn readmissions with

longer postpartum hospital stays. However, births scheduled for “business

hours” may have different baseline characteristics compared to births later

in the day (reflecting, e.g., the scheduling of high-risk deliveries). Indeed,

in California, we find that baseline health and demographic characteristics

are on average different during “business hours” compared to the overnight

hours.7 For this reason, we will restrict comparisons to births just before

and after midnight when observable characteristics are similar across the

newborns.
   7
       As in Malkin (2000) we find infants born between 8 a.m. and 12 noon have a

length of stay that is 7 hours longer than those born between 8 p.m. and 12 midnight

(discharge time was assumed to be 5 p.m. for those with same day discharges and 1

p.m. for those who stay at least one night in the hospital). We also find statistically

significant decreases in readmissions with an increase in length of stay using these 4-

hour blocks as instruments. The groups differ substantially, however, with the largest

differences found for mother’s first birth (34% for morning births vs. 44% for 8-midnight

births), induced labor (only 6% for 8 a.m. to noon vs. 12% for those occurring later

in the evening), and cesarean section (30% vs. 14% for those born between 8 a.m. and

noon vs. midnight to 4 a.m.).




                                           13
3         Data

3.1         Description

Our data include the universe of live births in California from 1991-2002,

some 6.6 million records. We focus on the 270,000 births occurring be-

tween 11 p.m. and 1 a.m. The California Office of Statewide Health Plan-

ning and Development created a research database that includes hospital

discharge records linked to birth and death certificate records. For a given

birth, discharge data are available nine months prior to delivery so as to

capture the course of antepartum and inpatient care. In addition, hos-

pital admissions up to one year after delivery are matched to the birth

record. Death certificate data provide a measure of mortality, while the

birth certificate includes a wealth of information about the parents and

the circumstances of the birth itself.

        The hospital discharge data include the patient’s age, procedure and

diagnosis codes, primary payer, day of the week, hospital ownership infor-

mation, and admission and discharge date. Beginning in 1995, whether

the birth was scheduled or unscheduled is reported as well.

        Length of stay is reported in the data as the discharge date minus the

admission date: the total number of midnights in care. The admission

date is the date of birth for the newborn.8 The main measure of resource

usage in the analysis will be the number of additional midnights in care:
    8
        Despite the potential incentive on behalf of the patient or the insurer to record the

admission date as after midnight, this does not appear to occur.




                                              14
the number of midnights in the hospital not counting the initial one that

defines the threshold. That is, our measure for those born after midnight

is the usual one; for those born before midnight, we subtract one from the

usual length of stay so as to remove the mechanical midnight that is not

related to the true length of stay in the hospital.9

       The linked birth certificate data report pregnancy and birth charac-

teristics that are not available in hospital discharge data. The pregnancy

is described by the number of prenatal visits, as well as the presence of

any complications, such as hypertension or diabetes. The use of ultra-

sound and amniocentesis is also recorded. Parents are described by their

age and educational attainment, as well as the mother’s birthplace. For

the newborn, birth weight and gestational age (in days) are reported.

When gestational age is used as a control, it is measured as the num-

ber of days not including the midnight that defines the threshold. While

Race/Ethnicity of the newborn will be considered, Hispanic births were

no longer separately identified in our data after 1995. We observe birth

complications, including measures of the use of interventions, whether the

labor was stimulated, and whether the labor was induced. The mother’s

day of admission and the precise time of birth, essential to implementing

our design, are recorded. Discharge time is not recorded, so our length of

stay measure is in days. While we would prefer a more detailed measure-

ment of stay length, in the spirit of “not biting the hand that feeds,” we
   9
       Total hospital charges are available in the data, but those born just before midnight

are billed for a night in care almost immediately and have slightly higher accounting

charges despite spending less time in the hospital.


                                             15
note that its absence is presumably what makes our discontinuity design

possible. Finally, it is possible that infants born prior to midnight may

stay later on the day of discharge compared to newborns who stay an ad-

ditional night in the hospital due to the post-midnight birth. As such, the

results below consider the effect of having an extra night in the hospital.



3.2        Analysis Sample

The main analysis will consider vaginal births within 20 minutes of mid-

night; births by cesarean section will be considered separately. Newborns

with lengths of stay of more than 28 days (5.2%) are excluded. These out-

liers are less likely to be affected by the accounting rules and may skew the

mean differences before and after midnight. To focus on patients where

the births are most likely to have random variation with regard to the

timing of the birth, unscheduled births are considered after 1995, which

excludes 15% of the remaining births. Scheduled births will be consid-

ered separately as well. 1% of births were excluded because delivery took

place outside of a hospital. Another 4% of the data have missing covariate

information; results will be shown with and without these births.10

       Figures of raw means by minute of birth and local linear regressions

will be shown using data for every minute of the day. Models are also

estimated with two samples: a 40-minute sample and a 2-hour sample,
  10
       In the pooled sample over all of the years, post-midnight births are less likely to

result from a c-section (17.5% vs.18.8%) and less likely to have stays of 28 or more days

(4.6% vs. 6.1%). Differences in home births, scheduled births, and missing covariates

are small and not statististically significant across the groups.


                                             16
which include data within those windows around midnight. Due to the

potential of measurement error (e.g. a spike in births on the hour typically

identify births that occurred at any time during that hour or attempts to

influence the reported length of stay of those born close to midnight by

recording a time of before or after midnight) the main analysis excludes

the births from 11:56 p.m. to 12:04 a.m. The 40-minute sample, then,

includes births fewer than 20 minutes from 11:55 p.m. or 12:05 a.m.11

       The final cut of the data considers infants born before and after the

law change in California. The law came into effect on August 26, 1997.

Births from January 1, 1991 to July 31, 1997 will be used to estimate

the models before the law change, and births from September 1, 1997 to

December 31, 2002 will be considered for post-law-change births. The

resulting 40-minute samples include nearly 60,000 observations prior to

the law change and over 30,000 observations after the law change.



4        Model and Estimation

We compare birth outcomes on either side of the midnight threshold. The

effect of an extra night in the hospital on these outcomes we estimate is

the ratio of the outcome difference and the length of stay difference. This

estimate measures the local average treatment effect (LAT E) for those
  11
       The sample mimics the nonparametric estimates that include births less than 20

minutes from the threshold. With the threshold at minute t = 0, this includes births

from -19 ≤ t ≤ 19. These times are 11:37 p.m. to 11:55 p.m. and 12:05 a.m. to 12:24

a.m.



                                          17
infants who receive an extra night in the hospital as a result of being

born after midnight [4]. Specifically, we are estimating effects for those

who stay an extra night at the hospital because the infant is entitled to

an extra day without charge due to the time of birth around midnight.

Presumably, those induced to stay longer are not a random draw from

the population. In particular, infants born around midnight likely differ

from those planned to be born earlier in the day. For this reason, a priori

our estimates may be expected to differ from those previously estimated

using the minimum stay-length mandates. Further, infants induced to stay

an extra night as a result of the time of birth around midnight exclude

families who wish to leave the hospital soon after birth or newborns with

serious health complications who will stay in the hospital much longer than

two nights regardless (these groups are also excluded from the time-series

estimates that consider the law changes.)

   Our exposition of the potential outcomes framework (Section 4.1), con-

ditions for LATE estimation (Section 4.2), and multi-valued treatment

(Section 4.3) follows Angrist & Imbens [3] and their example of estimat-

ing returns to schooling using the quarter of birth instrument closely.



4.1    Potential Outcomes Framework

First, we define the binary variable Z:
                       
                       
                        0 born just before midnight
                  Z=
                       
                        1 born just after midnight

   We are interested in the (multi-valued) treatment variable L, reflecting

                                    18
the length of hospital stay. For infants born close to midnight, we consider

the number of additional midnights in care. Specifically, we define L as:
                  
                  
                   0 no additional midnights
                  
                  
                  
                  
                  
                  
                   1 one additional midnight
             L=
                  
                  
                  
                   2 two additional midnights
                  
                  
                  
                  
                   J three or more additional midnights

   LZ is the number of additional midnights conditional on whether the

infant was born just prior to midnight (Z = 0) or just after midnight (Z =

1). Newborns are observed being born either before or after midnight,

however, and what we actually observe is:


                     L = LZ = Z · L1 + (1 − Z) · L0 .


   Further, we assume a set of potential health outcomes Yj (e.g. whether

a newborn is re-admitted to a hospital in first 28 days of life) exists for

each newborn for each of the possible durations of initial hospital stay j

= 0 to J.



4.2    Conditions required for estimating LAT E

Three conditions must be met in order to interpret our estimate as a local

average treatment effect. Again, this section follows Angrist & Imbens [3].


  1. There is a first stage.


                        Pr(L1 ≥ j > L0 ) > 0 for somej.



                                    19
         The probability of an additional midnight is higher for those born

         just after midnight for some length of stay j. We explore this con-

         dition empirically.


   2. Monotonicity

                                         L1 − L0 ≥ 0

         for each newborn with probability 1.12 Anyone in the population

         who would stay an additional midnight were she born before mid-

         night (a stay that would require physician approval for reimburse-

         ment) would also stay that additional midnight if she were born after

         midnight (when it is automatically reimbursed). This assumption is

         not verifiable because we only observe L0 or L1 . Monotonicity would

         seem quite plausible in our application as those who were born be-

         fore midnight and stayed an additional midnight in any event would

         receive a “free” night by being born after midnight. This condition

         serves to prohibit “defiers” (i.e. newborns who violate the mono-

         tonicity assumption by receiving extra time in the hospital due to

         being born earlier).13 Angrist & Imbens [3] demonstrate that mono-

         tonicity has the testable implication that the c.d.f. of L for those

         born just before and just after midnight should not cross. That our
  12
       Alternatively, L1 − L0 ≤ 0 for each newborn would also satisfy monotonicity, but

is not plausible in this context.
   13
      There could be a mechanical effect of a pre-midnight birth having a longer length

of stay for a fixed discharge time, where an 11:30 p.m. birth would have an extra hour

in care compared to one born at 12:30 a.m. This is one reason considering births just

before and after midnight is important.


                                           20
         data satisfy this implication is demonstrated in the results below.


   3. Independence


                   (L0 , L1 , Y0 , Y1 , Y2 , YJ ) are jointly independent of Z.


         The independence assumption is satisfied if the time of birth around

         midnight exhibits random variation. While not testable, we will

         consider the frequency of birth before and after midnight, as well

         as observable characteristics to consider whether those born after

         midnight appear different from those born before midnight.



4.3        Multi-Valued Treatment

Under the conditions above, the local average treatment effect is the ratio

of the outcome difference to the length of stay difference. As j ranges

from 0 to J, the effect for increases in the number of nights from one

to two; from two to three; and so on are averaged together to yield the

“average causal response” [3].14 The weight attached to each increment

in stay length is given by:
  14
       If a post-midnight birth induced an infant to stay two extra nights, then effects

from such increases would be included in the weighted average as well. This might be

possible if an extra night in the hospital leads to the detection of a problem that results

in even longer lengths of stay. For the most part, however, the inducement is created

by the entitlement to one more night and we consider the one-unit increases in lenght

of stay as a result.




                                            21
                                      Pr(L1 ≥ j > L0 )
                              $j =
                                     P
                                     J
                                          Pr(L1 ≥ i > L0 )
                                      i

which is proportional to:


                      Pr(L ≥ j | Z = 1) − Pr(L ≥ j | Z = 0).


       Passage of California Newborns’ and Mothers’ Act in 1997 changed

the weights used to calculate the average causal response dramatically.

Prior to the law change, the midnight threshold increased the number

of additional midnights primarily from zero to one (or one to two total

”nights” in the hospital). After the law change, stay length increased from

one to two additional midnights due to the midnight rule (see Section 5.1.2

for details). By estimating results separately for births before and after

the law change, the potential for diminishing returns to length of stay can

be examined.



4.4        Description of Compliers

The local average treatment effect is the average treatment effect for ”com-

pliers”: those who are induced to have a longer stay as a result of the

post-midnight birth. In contrast, “always takers” or “never takers” have

stay lengths that are unaffected by the minute of birth. It is not possi-

ble to identify the compliers, but it is possible to describe their average

observable characteristics, E(X|D1 = 1, D0 = 0).15
  15
       Abadie [2] showed that characterisitics of compliers can be described using his

kappa weighting scheme. It is also known that for binary characteristics and a binary


                                            22
    For example, define the binary variable D: to be an indicator for a

long stay (e.g. more than 1 night prior to the law change and more than

2 nights after the law change):
                               
                               
                                0 short stay
                          D=
                               
                                1 long stay

Also define DZ as the value D would take if Z were either 0 or 1. Z is

again assumed to be independent of D. Compliers in this context are such

that D1 = 1 and D0 = 0.

    For example, E(X|D1 = 1) = E(X|D = 1, Z = 1) represents the

characteristics of those with long stays who are born after midnight and

can be estimated by sample means. This can be written as a weighted

average of the characteristics of always takers and compliers:

    E(X|D1 = 1)
              = E(X|D1 = 1, D0 = 1)P (D0 = 1|D1 = 1)
                  + E(X|D1 = 1, D0 = 0)P (D0 = 0|D1 = 1).                             (1)

    Always takers can be described by the characteristics of individuals

who are born before midnight (Z = 0) yet have longer stays (D = 1).

That is, the E(X|D1 = 1, D0 = 1) = E(X|D0 = 1), by the monotonicity

condition (D1 − D0 ≥ 0). The last term is E(X|D = 1, Z = 0), which can

also be estimated by sample means.

    For the probability terms:



instrument, the relative likelihood that an individual in a particular group is a complier

is the ratio of the first-stage coefficient on the instrument estimated on that group’s

subsample to the first-stage coefficient for the full sample.


                                           23
   P (D0 = 1)
     = P (D0 = 1|D1 = 1)P (D1 = 1) + P (D0 = 1|D1 = 0)P (D1 = 0)
                     = P (D0 = 1|D1 = 1)P (D1 = 1)

by the monotonicity condition.

   P (D0 = 1) and P (D1 = 1) can be estimated as the sample proportion

of those born before midnight with long stays and the proportion of those

born after midnight with long stays, respectively. The first is an estimate

of the population proportion of always takers πA , by the independence of

Z. Similarly, for those born after midnight, those with short stays can be

used to estimate the population fraction who are never takers, πN . The

proportion of the population who are compliers is then πC = 1 − πA − πN ,

as “defiers” are assumed away by the monotonicity condition. Among the

group born after midnight, the fraction with longer stays, P (D1 = 1), is

πC + πA . Meanwhile, P (D0 = 1|D1 = 1) = πA /(πA + πC ), and P (D0 =

0|D1 = 1) = πC /(πA + πC ).

   (1) can then be re-arranged, and the expected characteristics of the

compliers can be written as:

   E(X|D1 = 1, D0 = 0)
                ·                                           ¸
       πC + πA                     πA
     =            E(X|D1 = 1) −         E(X|D1 = 1, D0 = 1)
          πC                    πC + πA
            ·                                               ¸
    πC + πA                          πA
  =           E(X|D = 1, Z = 1) −         E(X|D = 1, Z = 0) .           (2)
      πC                          πC + πA

Each of the terms in (2) can be estimated in the sample.




                                    24
4.5        Estimation

We begin by examining the first stage – the relationship between the time

of birth and the length of stay – and then proceed to the reduced form –

the relationship between the time of birth and the health outcomes. Local

linear regressions before and after are estimated using a triangle kernel

[17][7]. Asymptotic standard errors are also reported [22].

       In addition, we estimate parametric models that include covariates

and linear trends that vary before and after midnight. This is a simple

local linear estimator with a rectangle kernel and where the weights do

not decay as the distance from midnight increases [14]. For outcomes Y

(including length of stay, readmissions, and mortality), the models for

infant i born at minute t from a midnight (t=0) cutoff are as follows:


  Yit = β0 + β1 1(t ≥ 0) + β2 1(t ≥ 0) ∗ t + β3 1(t < 0) ∗ t + β4 Xi + εit , (3)


where X is a vector of observable birth characteristics.16

       This basic regression discontinuity model is estimated using Ordinary

Least Squares for length of stay. Additional tests of robustness with regard

to the estimation are also reported. For the binary outcomes of readmis-

sions and mortality, probit models are estimated and marginal effects at

the mean of the control variables are reported. Heteroskedasticity-robust

standard errors are reported for these models.
  16
       In practice, the analysis samples exclude births within 10 minutes of midnight.

t = −1 just prior to the cutoff (11:55 p.m.) and t = 0 at the cutoff (12:05 a.m.).




                                           25
4.5.1    Choice of Bandwidth

Across the outcomes, bandwidths of close to 10 minutes were found to

minimize the sum of squared errors between the local linear estimator and

a fourth-degree polynomial model estimated within two hours of midnight.

Local estimation at a boundary is generally thought to require a somewhat

larger bandwidth compared to interior points, and we applied a rule of

thumb used in density estimation at a boundary of two times the cross-

validation bandwidth [26], or a twenty-minute pilot bandwidth in this case.

Shorter and longer bandwidths are considered as well. Relatively wider

bandwidths appear appropriate given that we find a sustained increase

in length of stay following midnight, and if this length of stay affects

outcomes, a shift in the readmission or mortality rate should be sustained

through the first hour as well. The tradeoff is that infants born far from

midnight are more likely to differ from one another. We do not expect

infants born at 11:00 p.m. to be so very different from those born at 1:00

a.m.



5       Results

5.1     Unconditional Estimates

5.1.1    Frequency of Births Around Midnight

Do physicians systematically misreport time of birth around the midnight

threshold? As noted above, physicians may have an incentive to record



                                    26
births as occurring earlier or later than midnight. Figure 4 provides a

visual check on this behavior, plotting the number of births by minute of

the day [17]. Births are more frequent during “business hours” of 7:00

a.m. to 5:00 p.m. The frequency declines until midnight and remains

fairly stable until around 7:00 a.m. The time of birth is more likely to be

reported on the even hour and additionally at times ending in 0 or 5, due

to rounding.

      Much of the analysis will focus on births between 11 p.m. and 1 a.m.

and Figure 4B shows roughly 2500 births are recorded each minute, while

3000 births are found at the 5 minute marks. The largest spikes occur

at 11:00 p.m. and 12:01 a.m. 12:00 midnight–the only time that uses the

number 24 as the hour–has fewer observations (N=734), possibly due to

physicians making clear that the birth occurred the following day. The

spike at 12:01 is similar to the spike at 11:00 p.m., though it is slightly

larger than the spike at 1:00 a.m. These spikes likely reflect births that

occurred at any time during that hour–one reason to exclude births at

12:01 a.m. as most of these births occurred later in the hour. Other than

births reported to occur at 2400 (midnight), the number of observations is

similar in the hour before and after midnight. 153,180 births are recorded

from 11:00 p.m. to 11:59 p.m. and 147,113 are reported from 12:00-12:59,

or 4% more prior to midnight. This is similar to the 3% difference between

the 10:00 p.m. hour and the 11:00 p.m. hour, though smaller than the

midnight versus 1:00 a.m. comparison of less than 0.5 percent.17
 17
      The fraction born after midnight tends to be close to 0.5 across hospitals and




                                         27
5.1.2    Length of Stay

 Length of stay is measured as the number of midnights in care. If the

minute of birth were unrelated to the timing of discharge, newborns with a

time of birth just prior to midnight should have a length of stay recorded as

one midnight longer than newborns born just after midnight, by definition.

    Figure 5 reports the average length of stay by minute of birth, along

with local-linear regression estimates. Panel A describes the relationship

prior to the 1997 law change, and Panel B considers births after the law

came into effect. Prior to the law change, the average length of stay is close

to 1.5 days for births at noon, increasing to 2 days by midnight. After the

law change, a similar picture is seen, although the average length of stay is

shifted upwards by roughly 0.35 days in care. As expected, the number of

midnights in care is higher for those born just before midnight, although

the difference is significantly less than one. (Were just the mechanical

effect at play, this difference should be close to unity.)

    To consider the number of nights in the hospital, consider the number

of additional midnights in care. Figures 6 and 7 also show the means of

these additional midnight measures by minute of birth, as well as local-

linear regression estimates. Before the law change, the local-linear regres-
dates. One date of interest is December 31, when a pre-midnight birth is subject to a

tax deduction [10]. We find that births tend to be pushed toward January 1, reflecting

possible benefits of being a “baby new year.” In the two-hours around midnight, the

highest proportion found to be born “after midnight” was on January 1, 2000 (72%),

followed by January 1, 2001 (67%). January 1 1995, 1997, and 1998 are also in the top

100 dates in terms of the highest fraction of post-midnight births.


                                          28
sions show that 57% of those born just before midnight stay at least one

more night in the hospital compared to 72% of those born after midnight.

After the law change, 83% of those born just before midnight stay at least

one extra night. After midnight the proportion has a smaller jump to

90%. By comparison, the proportion of newborns staying at least two

more nights increases from 11% to 17% before the law change and doubles

from 16% to 32% after the law change. Once the newborn has stayed two

nights, the post-midnight birth has a smaller effect.

       To summarize Figures 5-7 and consider one of the estimation samples,

Table 1 reports means for the 40-minute sample used in the estimation

below. The increase in length of stay after the law change is evident: the

average length of stay increases from 1.99 to 2.29 for those born before

midnight, and from 1.23 to 1.58 for those born after midnight.

       Additional midnights are simply the raw length of stay minus one for

the births before midnight and equal to the raw length of stay for births

after midnight.18 When births before and after midnight are compared,

the average number of additional midnights increases from 0.99 to 1.23

before the law change and from 1.29 to 1.58 after the law change. This

change is remarkably similar to the change in average length of stay fol-

lowing the law change, i.e. leaving aside the midnight discontinuity. This

suggests that our use of the midnight accounting rule mimics the law’s

mandate that entitled newborns to 48-hour minimum stays when insur-
  18
       When the length of stay for those born in the 11:00 hour was recorded as zero

(0.6%), this likely reflects measurement error and the number of additional midnights

was set to zero.


                                          29
ance providers routinely reimbursed only 24-hours in care.

       The next three rows of Table 1 report the proportion of newborns who

stay at least one additional midnight, at least two, and at least three ad-

ditional midnights. For each category, these measures are larger for those

born after midnight, which is consistent with the monotonicity condition.

As in Figures 5-7, before the law change, the increase in the number of

additional midnights is most pronounced between 0 and 1, whereas the

jump after the law change is seen primarily for newborns staying 2 addi-

tional midnights as opposed to 1. In terms of the local average treatment

effect weights described in Section 4, prior to the law change, the weight

on treatment increases from zero to one additional night is 73%, while

after the law change the weight on increases from one to two additional

nights is 65%.19


5.1.3       Health Outcomes

In terms of health outcomes, we consider readmissions to the hospital and

mortality rates. In particular, 7-day readmissions, 28-day readmissions,

and total charges for any admission within 28 days or 1 year, as well as 28-
  19
       Table 1 shows that the change in the proportion of infants born close to midnight

who stay at least three additional midnights is smaller (on the order of 1-2 percentage

points). Excluding these differences in stays of greater than 2 nights, the weights are

proportional to the differences in proportions of children staying at least 1 vs. at least 2

additional midnights. Prior to the law change, the weight on stays increasing from zero

to one additional night is (73-57)/((73-57)+(17-11))=73%. After the law change, the

weight on stays increasing from one to two nights is (32-15)/((32-15)+(91-82))=65%.




                                            30
day and 1-year mortality are considered. The 7- and 28-day measures are

calculated from the midnight in question. For example, 28-day readmis-

sion is coded to 1 if the difference between the readmission date and the

date of birth were less than or equal to 28 for those born after midnight,

and less than or equal to 29 for those born just prior to midnight.

   Table 1 shows that health outcomes are similar for those born before

or after midnight, with statistically and economically insignificant differ-

ences. The readmission rates and associated hospital charges are slightly

larger for those born after midnight (the group with longer spells in the

hospital), although the result is statistically significant only for the 28-day

readmission rate in the time period before the law change.

   Mortality is less frequently observed, with 28-day mortality rates for

this analysis sample of 3 per 1000 and 1-year mortality rates of 4-5 per

1000. Lower mortality rates after the law change are largely due to the

exclusion of scheduled, and potentially riskier, births (these births are ex-

cluded beginning in 1995 due to data availability). The mortality rates

are similar before and after midnight, with differences that are not sta-

tistically significant. These results are perhaps better interpreted in the

context of variation in mortality rates across the day.

   Figures 8 and 9 report the local-linear regression results for readmission

rates and mortality rates. Figure 8 considers births before the law change,

whereas Figure 9 reports the results after the law change. The estimates

are based on the 24-hour sample to allow an examination of typical varia-

tion in these outcomes over the course of the day, and a bandwidth of 20


                                      31
minutes is used for the local-linear regression estimates. Little change is

found before and after midnight for these outcomes.

   For a magnified view, Appendix Figures A2 and A3 report the results

from 8 p.m. to 4 a.m., and for further comparison a bandwidth of 10 min-

utes was used. Figure A2B shows a slight increase in 28-day readmissions

following the midnight birth, and Figure A2C shows that the 1-year mor-

tality rate is close to 6 per 1000 in the minutes from 11 p.m. to 1 a.m.,

with noisier measurements at the boundary. After the law change, any

differences in mortality rates shown in Table 1 for the 40-minute sample

are not found to be sustained in the minutes after 12:20 a.m.



5.2    Including Covariates

One reason why the outcomes may not differ is that the beneficial effects

of an additional night in the hospital may be masked by a population born

after midnight that is in worse health. Table 2 reports means of selected

covariates for the 40 minute sample. This is for the pooled sample of births

from 1991-2002. Means are reported for each sub-period in the appendix.

   Mean differences are small across the covariates. For example, the av-

erage age of 26.8 is identical across the two groups. Some small differences

are found. 20.4% of women with births after midnight had fewer than 9

prenatal visits compared to 19.9% for births after midnight, whereas the

means for 9-15 prenatal visits are 68.9% and 69.5%, respectively. Edu-

cational characteristics, are nearly identical, including missing data for

fathers which can be seen as an indicator of single-parent births. An


                                    32
indicator for the mother’s first birth is slightly smaller for births after

midnight (39.4% vs. 40%), largely due to a difference in the post-1997 pe-

riod. Those born after midnight are slightly less likely to be white (53.7%

vs. 54.4%), although the differences are not statistically significant in the

two sub-periods. The use of forceps or vacuum to speed the delivery is

slightly less likely after midnight (9.5% vs. 9.9%), although other mea-

sures of labor being stimulated or induced are not different, especially in

the pre-1997 time period. Births prior to midnight are slightly higher in

for-profit hospitals (14.2% vs. 13.6%). Out of the 56 characteristics listed

in Table A1, 6 have statistically significant differences in the pre-law pe-

riod, and 5 have statistically significant differences in the post-law period.

Most of these differences do not appear economically significant (often

indistinguishable out to 2 significant digits), despite the statistical signif-

icance due to the large sample size. When the post-midnight indicator is

regressed on the observable characteristics, the F-test fails to reject that

all of the coefficients are zero (F-stats of 1.13 and 1.05 for the two time
                                            20
periods ; p-values of 0.17 and 0.35)             It appears that births just after

midnight are similar to those just before midnight.


5.2.1       Length of Stay

Table 2 suggests that controlling for observable characteristics should have

little effect on the results, and this is confirmed in Tables 3-5. Table
  20
       These tests exclude 1% of the observations with “missing admission day of the

week for the mother”: a variable that is associate with a post-midnight birth. Results

are identical when these cases were excluded from the main analysis.


                                          33
3 reports the results for the first-stage relationship between additional

midnights in care and an indicator that the birth occurred after midnight.

Column 1 reports the difference in the local linear regression estimates

separately estimated before and after midnight. A bandwidth of 20 is

used, which includes data in the 40 minute sample as described above.

The estimate before and after the law change is similar: 0.27 vs. 0.26,

although the estimates are differences from a different base: 1.00 before

the law change and 1.30 afterwards. The estimates are highly significant,

with standard errors of close to 0.04.

       Columns (2)-(5) are estimated by OLS with controls for linear trends

in minutes from the midnight cutoff, trends that are allowed to vary be-

fore and after midnight, as described above. Note that minutes from the

cutoff is positive after midnight and negative before midnight. Using the

same 40-minute window as the local linear results, but with a sample that

includes nonmissing covariates, the results are similar: 0.29 before and

0.24 after the law change. A full set of birth characteristics listed in Table

A1, as well as individual indicators for mother’s age, father’s age, year

of birth, and month of birth are included in models reported in Column

(3).21 Coefficients are similar, however (0.27 and 0.23). The robust stan-

dard errors are similar to the asymptotic standard errors calculated in

Column (1), though they are slightly smaller.

       The two-hour window includes 162,821 observations before the law
  21
       An indicator for mother’s age being less than 16, each age, and then greater than

40, as well as a missing age indicator is included. Similar indicators for father’s age are

included as well.


                                            34
change and 94,879 after the law change. The estimates based upon this

sample are 0.22 and 0.25 before and after the law change, respectively,

regardless of the use of controls. The use of the two-hour window provides

more precise estimates, at a cost of possible misspecification bias with

the inclusion of births farther from the discontinuity and linear trends

that may not adequately control for the variation in the data. Overall,

postpartum length of stay is 0.22-0.27 days longer for those born after

midnight, or close to 20% of the pre-midnight means.

   Similar estimates are found when length of stay is treated as a count

variable and a negative binomial model is estimated with full controls,

with the marginal effect of a post-midnight birth estimated to be 0.203

(s.e.= 0.015) before the law change and 0.244 (s.e.= 0.020) after the law

change. Further, the length of stay may be considered censored when a

newborn is discharged to another facility or when a newborn dies in the

hospital (1.5% of the sample). When a Cox proportional hazard model

of the additional midnights in care + 0.5 was estimated with full controls

and taking into account this possible censoring, the estimated change is

slightly smaller with the hazard ratio estimated to be 0.858 (s.e. = 0.005)

before the law change and 0.831 (s.e. = 0.007) afterwards. Similar first-

stage and reduced-form results are found when the censored observations

were excluded from the analysis as well.

   To place the estimate of 0.25 in context, Appendix Table A2 includes

the covariates for a pooled sample from 1991-2002. Similar differences in

length of stay are found for 1st births (0.23), 30-year old mothers compared


                                    35
to 20-year olds (0.28), missing father’s information (0.20), and labors that

were over 20 hours (0.26). Low birthweight babies had larger relationship

with length of stay (coefficient = 0.7) and government hospitals had longer

stays than for-profit hospitals (coefficient = 0.44).


5.2.2   Newborn Outcomes

Table 4 considers readmissions at the 7- and 28- day levels. Columns (1)

and (5) report the local-linear regression estimates using the 20 minute

bandwidth. Virtually no difference is found in 7-day readmissions in both

time periods for those born before or after midnight, with an estimated in-

crease in readmissions of 0.04% or 1.4% of the pre-midnight mean, despite

longer stays in care. Higher 28-day readmission rates are found for those

born after midnight prior to the law change (an increase by 0.5 percentage

points, compared to a mean of 4%), although the difference is not statis-

tically significant with a standard error of 0.4 percentage points. After

the 1997 law change, 28-day readmissions are found to be 0.4 percentage

points lower for those born after midnight, although the result is again

not statistically significant.

   Columns (2) and (3) consider the same 40-minute sample using the

probit model described above. The outcome differences are again small

for the 7-day readmissions and change sign to negative after the 1997 law

change. Before the law change, 28-day readmissions show slightly larger

increases for those born after midnight. After the law change the results

are similar to the local-linear estimation, and when the two-hour sample



                                     36
is considered, the coefficient is smaller in magnitude (-0.0008).

       The small magnitudes and the instability of the signs, which are con-

trary to a diminishing returns possibility given the positive point estimates

in the pre-law period and negative coefficients in the post-law period, are

consistent with Figures 8 and 9 that outcomes look similar before and

after midnight.

       In terms of precision, the two-hour sample provides somewhat smaller

standard errors, and as long as births early in the 11 p.m. hour are similar

to births in the late 12:00 a.m. hour, they should yield meaningful results.

For these samples even the lower limit of the 95% confidence interval

suggest small decreases in the likelihood of readmission for infants born

before and after midnight–generally less than 10% of the pre-midnight

mean.22 .

       Table 5 considers the mortality results. The 28-day mortality rate in

this sample is 3.5 per 1000 prior to the law change and 3.0 per 1000 after
  22
       In terms of 7-day readmissions, the lower limit of the 95% confidence interval prior

to the law change is -0.0016 and after the law change it is -0.0025, or between 6 and

9% lower than the pre-midnight mean. When a “four-hour” sample is considered,

the point estimate is 0.002, with a lower limit of the 95% confidence interval greater

than zero (0.0001). Similarly, the estimates of the 28-day readmission differences have

95% confidence interval limits as low as -0.0010 and -0.0063 before and after the law

change, respectively. These estimates represent decreases in readmissions of 2% before

the law change and 13% after the law change. Again, when a “four hour sample” is

considered, the point estimate prior the law change is 0.002, with a lower limit on the

95% confidence interval of -0.0002 (or 0.5% of the mean); after the law change the

estimates are -0.0007 and -0.004 (or 8.5% of the mean).



                                             37
the law change. The coefficients on being born after midnight are close to

zero in both time periods and are of unstable sign. In both the 40-minute

and 2-hour samples, the lower limit on the 95-percent confidence interval

is -0.0002, or 5% of the pre-midnight mean. After the law change, the

lower limits are -0.00007 and -0.00016 (or 2-5% of the mean).

   In terms of 1-year mortality, some of the coefficients found are fairly

large, but they are not robust. For example, the local-linear estimation

prior to the law change, and the probit models using the 2-hour samples

before and after the law change, yield coefficients that are essentially zero.

The results are less precisely estimated, however, and using the 2-hour

samples, the lower limit on the 95% confidence intervals is -0.0007 and -

0.0006 for the two time periods (or 13% of the pre-midnight means). While

fairly large effects are within the confidence interval for 1-year mortality,

the lack of robustness of any beneficial effect of longer stays associated

with an after-midnight birth again confirms the intuition from Figures

8 and 9 that outcomes look remarkably similar despite the difference in

length of stay for the two groups.

   To place these results in context, Table A2 includes the estimated

marginal effects of the covariates evaluated at the sample mean. In terms

of statistical significance, patients with few prenatal visits, boys, new-

borns with a low birthweight, and Medicaid patients tend to have worse

outcomes. Newborns to new mothers were more likely to have a readmis-

sion (14% higher than the mean), but little difference is found in terms of

mortality. Other covariates, such as maternal education, are found to have


                                     38
little relation to infant mortality (controlling for the other covariates).


5.2.3       Results Across Subgroups

The data were explored to test the robustness of the main results and to

consider subgroups that have been identified in previous research to benefit

from longer stays. Table A3 reports the results for 12 subgroups of patients

including scheduled births, c-section births, those with a birthweight of

less than 3000grams, mothers who are high-school dropouts, Medicaid

patients, births in for-profit hospitals and Kaiser hospitals, births following

a pregnancy or labor complication, and a comparison of births whose

observable characteristics suggested they were at high (or low) risk of 28-

day readmission.23 Results when no restrictions were placed on the sample

are reported as well.

       The first column shows that the first stage is generally robust across

the groups. Table 3 showed that for the two-hour sample, the coefficient

on a post-midnight birth is 0.22 prior to the law and 0.25 after the law.

The ratio of the first-stage coefficients for each subgroup compared to

the overall first-stage coefficient describe the relative likelihood that a

particular group is a complier. Complier characteristics are discussed in

depth below.

       Before the law change, Medicaid patients have a larger jump at mid-

night. When a model was estimated that interacted Medicaid stauts with
  23
       A probit for 28-day readmission was estimated using the full set of control variables

and the sample was divided into two groups based on the median predicted probability

of readmission.


                                             39
the post-midnight indicator, as well as the linear trend terms, the non-

Medicaid jump is estimated to be 0.175 and the jump for Medicaid recipi-

ents is found to be 0.25, or 43% larger. Larger jumps in length of stay for

post-midnight births before the law change are also found for unmarried

mothers, a variable that is often missing and only available for 2 years af-

ter the law change. Births with complications tend to have smaller jumps

at midnight.

       After the law change, for-profit hospitals have a larger jump (coefficient

of 0.31), whereas newborns with a birthweight of less than 3000 grams have

a smaller increase (0.09, compared to a mean of 2.05). Kaiser hospitals–

hospitals where the insurer owns the hospital and the billing rules may

be expected to be less salient in terms of hospital incentives to extend

the length of stay–tend to have shorter lengths of stay for everyone, by

approximately 0.1 nights on average. They also have smaller jumps at

midnight (0.19 before the law change and 0.09 after the law change).24

Last, when all data are considered, the jump is estimated to be 0.13 prior

to the law change – smaller due to the inclusion of some births with very

long lengths of stay – and 0.30 after the law change.

       In terms of outcomes, out of the 26 probit models estimated, 2 were

found to be statistically significant at an 5% level (uncorrected for the

number of tests considered), and both were in the pre-1997 time period.

Patients with a labor complication and having a longer length of stay due
  24
       In addition, the frequency of births before and after midnight do not appear to

show strategic recording of the times.




                                           40
to a post-midnight birth are found to have higher 28-day readmission rates

(coefficient of 0.005 or 13% of the pre-midnight mean). C-section patients,

who are entitled to 4 days in care, also have longer lengths of stay when

the procedure was conducted after midnight (coefficient of 0.23 compared

to a mean number of additional midnights of 2.9.). These post-midnight

births are found to have a lower 1-year mortality rate (coefficient of -0.002

or 22% of the pre-midnight mean). Given the large number of tests, these

results should be regarded with caution, however.

   In terms of patients who have a high-risk of readmission based on

the observable characteristics (with readmission rates of close to 6% and

mortality rates of 7-9 per thousand), higher readmissions and mortality

rates are found for post-midnight births in the pre-1997 period, whereas

lower readmission and mortality rates are found for those births in the

post-1997 period. Indeed, of the 13 groups, 6 had negative coefficients

on post-midnight birth when 1-year mortality was considered both before

and after the law change. For 28-day readmissions 6 had negative coeffi-

cients after the law change, while 2 had negative coefficients before the law

change. Again, the instability of the signs and the (economically) small

point estimates suggest that there is little relationship between longer

lengths of stay and readmissions or mortality.


5.2.4   Complier Characteristics

In a local average treatment effect setting such as this, the estimated

effects apply to a population of compliers: those who are induced to have



                                     41
a longer stay as a result of the post-midnight birth. Compliers are likely to

differ from a random draw from the population. In particular, the results

are most likely to apply to uncomplicated births where the minute of birth

is plausibly exogenous and the stay length is not expected to be especially

long so that the one- or two- day billing rules are more likely to bind.

   While it is not possible to identify individual compliers in the data, it

is possible to estimate their mean observable characteristics, as described

in Section 4.4. Births of at least one additional midnight before the law

change and at least 2 additional midnights after the law change were coded

as receiving the longer-stay “treatment” (D = 1). The estimated fraction

of compliers is similar in the two time periods (16% prior to the law change

and 17% after the law change). Always takers are more common prior to

the law change, when the threshold for a longer stay is lower (57% vs.

15%). Given these proportions and the average characteristics of always

takers, E(X|D = 1, Z = 0), along with the average characteristics of

patients who are either always takers or compliers, E(X|D = 1, Z = 1),

we calculated the implied means of the complier characteristics, as shown

in Appendix Table A4.

   Overall, it appears that the compliers are quite similar to the popula-

tion of births close to midnight. The main difference is that the compliers

are less likely to be low birthweight and less likely to be full term, as

expected. Across the two time periods, we also find that the complier

group is slightly less likely to be the result of a stimulated labor, and the

mother is more likely to have been admitted on a weekend. Before the law


                                     42
change, we generally find that those who are more likely to be disadvan-

taged are also more likely to be compliers (mothers who are high school

drop outs, missing father’s education, and Medicaid recipients). After the

law change, the reverse tends to be found, with compliers more likely to

be privately insured. There are exceptions in both time periods, however,

and the differences tend to be small. Compared to the full population

of births, the mean characteristics of the compliers are rarely statistically

significantly different, although the estimated differences point to less com-

plicated cases among the compliers.25 In both time periods the midnight

births are less likely to be low birthweight, more likely to be Medicaid

recipients, and the mother is more likely to be admitted on a weekend –

reflecting the fewer scheduled births around midnight. Prior to the law

change, midnight births are to parents with slightly less education and less

likely to be white After the law change, the differences tend to be smaller,

however.

       The compliers from the pre-post law change were also considered using

all data from January-August in 1997, 1998, and 1999 (excluding stays of
  25
       95% confidence intervals were constructed using a bootstrap procedure, where the

sample was re-drawn 300 times and the weights for compliers and always takers were

re-estimated each time to reflect variation in these estimates. Prior to the law change,

compliers are (statistically significantly) more likely to be Hispanic and have a mother

admtted on a weekend. Meanwhile, parents’ ages are younger, and the newborns are

less likely to be low birthweight. After the law change, there are differences in prenatal

visits (compliers are more likely to have fewer than 9), compliers are also less likely to

be a first birth or an induced birth.




                                           43
more than 28 days). Evans et al. [11] noted that some Medicaid recipients

were excluded from the law for the middle time period while all were cov-

ered from January 1999 onwards. To define compliers, the “treatment”

is a stay of 2 or more days in the hospital or 4 days for c-section births

(D=1), and the estimated proportion of compliers is 0.21 and 0.25 for the

1998 and 1999 time periods. Similar to our characteristics, this group is

also less likely to be low birthweight (constituting approximately 2.5% of

compliers vs. 6% overall). Other characteristics show larger differences:

Compliers before the law change are much less likely to be births to moth-

ers with less than a high school eduction (approximately 18% vs. 31%

overall) and more likely to be college graduates (32% vs. 19%). As ex-

pected, the compliers are less likely to receive Medicaid in the middle time

period (19% vs. 42%), but also in the period when all births are covered

(27% vs. 42%).


5.2.5       Maternal Outcomes

Table 6 considers maternal length of stay and readmissions, although ad-

verse outcomes are more rare among mothers.26 The mother’s length of

stay was calculated as the number of additional midnights after the birth

of the child. The post-midnight increase is similar to that for newborns

(0.30 and 0.23), although it is larger relative to the (smaller) mean length

of stay for mothers (both time periods). Despite the longer length of stay
  26
       The death certificate data were linked only for newborns. When in-hospital mor-

tality was considered within 1 year for mothers, that mortality rate was 8 per 100,000

and the estimates before and after midnight were much noisier.


                                           44
for mothers who give birth after midnight, little relationship is found for

readmissions. 28-day readmissions are rare (8 per thousand), and a birth

after midnight is associated with a small decline in readmissions prior to

the law change, and a small increase after the law change, although neither

difference is statistically insignificant.


5.2.6     Further Robustness Checks

Other measures of readmissions were considered as well. Little difference

in readmissions for jaundice or dehydration among newborns, or common

diagnoses such as major puerperal infection for mothers, was found. One

explanation for the slight increase in 7- and 28-day readmissions could be

due to discharges earlier in the day for those who receive an extra night

in the hospital where a problem may be discovered soon after the child

returns home and it is still “business hours.” When 3-28 day readmissions

are considered, the estimated effects are again close to zero. In addition,

total hospital charges associated with readmissions within 28-days after

the midnight in question or 1-year after birth were considered, again with

little (and statistically insignificant) differences.

   Other models included hospital fixed effects, hospital -by- date fixed ef-

fects, a difference-in-difference considering different sized jumps in length

of stay at midnight across hospitals; a triple difference strategy consider-

ing these jumps before and after the law change; the zero result remains

robust.




                                       45
6        Interpretation

Our results suggest that extending the length of stay by an additional

night provides little health benefit for uncomplicated births.27 Minimum

stay laws, in place for the last decade, have had large costs. Cost estimates

for an extra night in the hospital are generally in the range of $1000. With

4.6 million births per year, an increase of 0.25 days would be on the order

of $1.1 billion per year (or $11 billion since 1997).28

       The California dataset includes information on charges, and we con-

sider all births with a birthweight over 2500 grams born at any time of day.

Facility charges for the mother and infant were deflated by a Centers for

Medicare and Medicaid cost-to-charge ratio. Costs were then regressed on

length of stay, with full controls; this yields an estimate of approximately

$2200 (in 2008 dollars) per additional midnight.29 When the sample is
  27
       Obviously, whether a birth is “uncomplicated” is known prior to when length of

stay is generally determined.
  28
     Madden et al. [15] finds an HMO’s expenditure related to an extra night to be

on the order of $1000. Similarly, Raube & Merrell [23] find that extra charges are on

the order of $1000 in the mid 1990s. A lower estimate would come from Russell et al.

[24], who use the 2001 Nationwide Inpatient Survey and finds average (facility) costs

of $600 per delivery (for births > 2500g). Schmitt et al. [25] uses 2000 California data

and finds the average cost for mothers and newborns is $4750 ($3100 for mothers and

$1650 for infants), again for newborns > 2500g.
  29
     Estimate from a regression of deflated charges on length of stay. The cost-to-

charge ratio was substituted by the state median when it was in the extremes of the

data, as suggested by CMS. When the charges were not deflated, an additional day is

associated with approximately $3000 in charges ($1300 when stays of less than 3 days

were considered, in 1996 dollars). Charges are generally greater than measures of costs,


                                          46
restricted to patients with fewer than 3 days in care, an extra night is

associated with a cost of $1300. These costs do not include physician fees,

however. If we consider the budgetary cost of an extra night in a Califor-

nia hospital to be roughly $1500, an increased length of stay of 0.25 days

on average would cost roughly $400 per birth or $200 million per year.

    The main welfare benefit would come from reductions in mortality

attributable to longer hospital stays.30 The point estimates are generally

small, unstable in sign, and any economically significant effects are not

found to be robust (Figures 8 & 9). In fact, the point estimates tend to

suggest worse outcomes associated with post-midnight births. Even at the

lower limits of the 95% confidence interval for 28-day mortality (mortality

potentially most likely to respond to an extra night in the hospital), the

implied cost of saving a statistical life range from $2 to $6 million, which

are greater than value-of-statistical-life estimates, such as $1.9 million by

Ashenfelter & Greenstone [5].31 Overall, it appears that longer lengths
though they do not include physician fees which can constitute a similar percentage of

resource use as the markup between charges and costs.
  30
     Using our design, facility charges associated with readmissions are not found to be

related to the time of birth. Even at the lower end of the 95% confidence interval, the

readmission charges are $300 lower for post-midnight births prior to the law change

and only $40 lower after the law change.
  31
     The lower limits range from -0.0002 to -0.0007. $400/0.00002 = $2m. When 1-year

mortality is considered, the point estimates are again zero, although the confidence

intervals widen to include cost of saving a statistical life on the order of $500,000.

Similarly, when an IV model was estimated, the point estimates are zero, although

confidence intervals are wider and a $250,000 cost of saving a statistical life cannot be

rejected.


                                           47
of stay associated with minimum-stay mandates are not worth the extra

expense for uncomplicated births, at least measured by readmission and

mortality outcomes.

       These costs of saving a statistical life are relevant in terms of comparing

expenditures on this health initiative compared to others. Nevertheless,

marginal social costs of an additional night in the hospital may be low

given the availability of hospital staff regardless of the number of births on

a particular day. We considered times when the hospital had an unusually

large number of births around the midnight in question to consider the

effects of a post-midnight birth when the marginal cost of a bed is likely

higher. We found small decreases in length of stay for all of the newborns,

but the jump at midnight was not affected.32
  32
       For example, we found similar estimates when we controlled for the number of

births in the 5 days before and after the midnight used to define the threshold. The

average hospital records 5 births per day. We also considered the total number of

births two days prior and one day after the midnight in question. Again, the first

stage coefficient is unaffected by including this measure, which is slightly negatively

related to the number of additional midnights (coefficient=-0.007, s.e.=0.0007). To

consider times when the hospitals are particularly busy, we calculated the maximum

number of 3-day birth counts and considered the number of births in the 3 days around

the midnight in question as a fraction of this maximum capacity.        Busier times are

associated with slightly shorter lengths of stay in the time period before the law change,

but the change in length of stay with regard to the minute of birth is not found to be

affected.




                                           48
6.0.7   Limitations

Four main limitations should be considered when interpreting the results.

The main question concerns external validity. The results presented here

reflect the effects of longer stay lengths on outcomes for uncomplicated

births where the time of birth is plausibly exogenous. Scheduled births

generally occur in the morning and the effects of an additional night in

care for these births are beyond the scope of this research design. However,

uncomplicated births may be expected to be the ones where minimum-

stay laws are most likely to bind. Indeed, Evans et al. [11] found larger

reductions in early-discharge among uncomplicated vaginal deliveries than

either “complicated” vaginal deliveries or c-section deliveries following im-

plementation of the laws in California. In addition, the similarity of the

size of the effect of a post-midnight birth and the California law change on

length of stay suggests that the extra night of reimbursable care afforded

to post-midnight births mimics the effect of such a law change.

   Second, the outcomes considered here, while particularly costly, do not

consider other potential benefits to parents and infants. Longer stays may

provide benefits in terms of additional rest and supervision.

   Similarly, a third limitation is that outpatient care is not considered,

and this care may substitute for postpartum hospital stays. For newborns

who stay in the hospital for fewer than two days, California law mandates

that insurance must cover a follow-up visit either at a physician’s office or

at home As with length of stay accounting rules, a birth just after midnight

may be more likely eligible for such a home health visit. Previous evidence


                                     49
of nearly perfectly inelastic demand for these early follow-up visits, as

described in the background section, suggests that the lack of an outcome

difference is unlikely to be masked by a substitution toward greater use of

outpatient care.

    Fourth, as in the time-series results in the previous literature, compar-

isons of effects before and after the law change may incorporate differences

in policies and practices that may have changed during this time period

in addition to the change in baseline length of stay. As noted above, we

do not find sudden changes in procedure use that can be attributed to the

law change.



7     Conclusions

This paper makes use of a rule of thumb in patient billing which approxi-

mates the length of California hospital stays with the number of midnights

in hospital following delivery. In apparent response to the discontinuous

financial incentives, infants born just after midnight remain in the hos-

pital about 0.25 additional nights compared to infants born just prior to

midnight. These infants appear very similar in terms of observable char-

acteristics. In addition, the 1997 early discharge law in California allows

us to consider estimates that are drawn mainly from newborns induced to

stay one additional midnight prior to the law change and a second mid-

night in the post-law period. In the presence of diminishing returns to

stay length, we would expect to observe a larger health benefit of being

born shortly after midnight prior to the law.

                                     50
   We find no outcome differences associated with post-midnight birth,

even among births prior to the minimum-stay law. Our impact estimates

are fairly precise: at the endpoints of our confidence intervals, the most

“optimistic” impact estimates would not justify the cost of the longer

stays. This finding suggests that physicians can identify newborns who

require additional time in the hospital and that the technology of postpar-

tum care is such that it can be administered effectively on the first day of

life. This finding is consistent with profit-maximizing HMOs in the early

1990s driving down stay lengths, despite having to reimburse hospitals for

(relatively costly) readmissions.

   These results apply to uncomplicated births where the exact minute of

birth is plausibly exogenous; more complicated births that are planned for

the morning hours are beyond the scope of this research design. Further,

the outcomes considered here do not include benefits to parents from more

rest and supervision in the hospital. For uncomplicated births – births

where the early-discharge laws were most likely to bind – it appears that

longer hospital stays yield little in terms of health gains, at least in terms

of hospital readmissions and mortality rates.




                                     51
References

[1] A.A.P. 2004. Hospital Stay for Health Term Newborns. Pediatrics,

  113(5), 1434–1436. American Academy of Pediatrics, Committee on

  Fetus and Newborn.

[2] Abadie, Alberto. 2003. Semiparametric Instrumental Variable Esti-

  mation of Treatment Response Models. Journal of Econometrics, 113,

  231–263.

[3] Angrist, Joshua D., & Imbens, Guido W. 1995. Two-Stage Least

  Squares Estimation of Average Causal Effects in Models with Variable

  Treatment Intensity. Journal of the American Statistical Association,

  90(430), 431–442.

[4] Angrist, Joshua D., Imbens, Guido W., & Rubin, Donald B. 1996.

  Identification of Causal Effects Using Instrumental Variables. Journal

  of the American Statistical Association, 91(434), 444–455.

[5] Ashenfelter, Orley, & Greenstone, Michael. 2004. Using Mandated

  Speed Limits to Measure the Value of a Statistical Life. Journal of

  Political Economy, 112(1), S226–S267. part 2.

[6] Charles, Seymour, & Prystowsky, Barry. 1995. Early discharge, in the

  end: maternal abuse, child neglect, and physician harassment. Pedi-

  atrics, 96(4), 746–747. part 1.

[7] Cheng, Ming-Yen, Fan, Jianqing, & Marron, JS. 1997. On Automatic

  Boundary Corrections. Annals of Statistics, XXV, 1691–1708.

                                    52
[8] Coase, Ronald H. 1960. The Problem of Social Cost. Journal of Law

  and Economics, III(October), 1–44.

[9] Curtin, Sally C., & Kozak, Lola Jean. 1998. Decline in U.S. Cesarean

  Delivery Rate Appears to Stall. Birth, 25(4), 259–262.

[10] Dickert-Conlin, Stacy, & Chandra, Amitabh. 1999. Taxes and the

  Timing of Births. The Journal of Political Economy, 107(1), 161–177.

[11] Evans, William N., Garthwaite, Craig, & Wei, Heng. 2008. The Im-

  pact of Early Discharge Laws On the Health of Newborns. Journal of

  Health Economics. forthcoming.

[12] Galbraith, Alison A., Egerter, Susan A., Marchi, Kristen S., Chavez,

  Gilberto, & Braveman, Paula A. 2003. Newborn Early Discharge Re-

  visited: Are California Newborns Receiving Recommended Postnatal

  Services. Pediatrics, 111(2), 364–371.

[13] Hyman, David A. 2001. What Lessons Should We Learn From Drive-

  Through Deliveries? Pediatrics, 107(2), 406–407.

[14] Imbens, Guido, & Lemieux, Thomas. 2007. Regression Discontinuity

  Designs: A Guide to Practice. NBER Technical Working Paper No.

  337, April.

[15] Madden, JM, Soumerai, SB, Lieu, TA, Mandl, KD, Zhang, F, & Ross-

  Degnan, D. 2002. Effects of a law against early postpartum discharge

  on newborn follow-up, adverse events, and HMO expenditures. New

  Enlgand Journal of Medicine, 347(25), 2031–2038.

                                   53
[16] Malkin, Jesse D., Broder, Michael S., & Keeler, Emmett. 2000. Do

  Longer Pospartum Stays Reduce Newborn Readmissions? Analysis Us-

  ing Instrumental Variables. Health Services Research, 35(5), 1071–1091.

  Part II.


[17] McCrary, Justin. 2007. Manipulation of the Running Variable in the

  Regression Discontinuity Design: A Density Test. Journal of Econo-

  metrics. Forthcoming.


[18] Meara, Ellen, Kotagal, Uma R., Atherton, Harry D., & Lieu, Tracy A.

  2004. Impact of Early Newborn Discharge Legislation and Early Follow-

  up Visits on Infant Outcomes in a State Medicaid Population. Pedi-

  atrics, 113(6), 1619–1627.


[19] Medi-Cal. 2007. Contracted Inpatient Services for Medical Services.

  Sacramento: California DHHS.


[20] NCHS. 2000. National Hospital Discharge Summary: Annual Sum-

  mary, 1998. Vital and Health Statistics, 13(148). National Center for

  Health Statistics.


[21] Paul, Ian M., Lehman, Erik B., Hollenbeak, Christopher S., &

  Maisels, M. Jeffrey. 2006. Preventable Newborn Readmissions Since

  Passage of the Newborns and Mothers’ Health Protection Act. Pedi-

  atrics, 118(6), 2006;118;2349–2358.


[22] Porter, Jack. 2003. Estimation in the Regression Discontinuity Model.

  Working Paper.


                                   54
[23] Raube, Kristiana, & Merrell, Katie. 1999. Maternal Minimum-Stay

  Legislation: Cost and Policy Implications. American Journal of Public

  Health, 89, 922–923.


[24] Russell, Rebecca B., Green, Nancy S., Steiner, Claudia A., & et al.

  2007. Cost of Hospitalizations for Preterm and Low Birth Weight In-

  fants in the United States. Pediatrics, 120, e1–e9.


[25] Schmitt, Susan K., Sneed, LaShika, & Phibbs, Ciaran S. 2006. Costs

  of Newborn Care in California: A Population-Based Study. Pediatrics,

  117, 154–160.


[26] Zhang, S., & Karunamuni, R.J. 1998. On kernel density estimation

  near endpoints. Journal of Statistical Planning and Inference, 70, 301–

  316.




                                   55
                       Table 1: Time of Birth, Length of Stay, and Infant Outcomes: 40 Minutes Around Midnight Sample

                                                         Before 1997 Law Change                                               After 1997 Law Change
                                                Born              Born                                           Born                  Born
                                           Before Midnight   After Midnight                                 Before Midnight       After Midnight
Variable                                        Mean              Mean                    p-value                Mean                  Mean                p-value

Length of Raw Length of Stay                      1.99                 1.23              (0.000)**                 2.29                 1.58              (0.000)**
Stay      Additional Midnights                    0.99                 1.23              (0.000)**                 1.29                 1.58              (0.000)**
          >=1 Additional Midnights                0.57                 0.73              (0.000)**                 0.82                 0.91              (0.000)**
          >=2 Additional Midnights                0.11                 0.17              (0.000)**                 0.15                 0.32              (0.000)**
          >=3 Additional Midnights                0.06                 0.08              (0.000)**                 0.07                 0.09              (0.000)**

Infant   7-Day Readmission                        0.027                0.028               (0.428)                0.028                0.027               (0.690)
Outcomes 28-Day Readmission                       0.042                0.045              (0.047)*                0.047                0.046               (0.522)
         28-Day Readmission Charges                852                  938                (0.376)                1128                 1287                (0.346)
         1-year Readmission Charges               1763                 1868                (0.457)                2189                 2461                (0.246)
         28-Day Mortality                        0.0035               0.0036               (0.836)               0.0028               0.0030               (0.829)
         1-year Mortality                        0.0056               0.0053               (0.687)               0.0040               0.0042               (0.711)

            Observations                         28898                 29477                                       16637                17283
Calculations from the "40 minute" sample includes births from 11:37pm-11:55pm & 12:05am-12:24am. 28-day measures include outcomes 28 days from the midnight
considered for each birth. "Before 1997 law change" includes births from January 1, 1991 to July 31, 1997; "After 1997 law change" includes births from September 1, 1997-
December 31, 2002. ** = significant at 1%; * = significant at 5%.
    Table 2: Selected Characteristics: 40 Minutes Around Midnight Sample

                                                                          All Years
                                                             Before          After
                                                            Midnight       Midnight       p-value

Pregnancy           At least one pregnancy complication       0.585           0.589        (0.264)
 Characteristics    <9 prenatal visits                        0.199           0.204        (0.052)
                    9-15 prenatal visits                      0.695           0.689       (0.043)*
                    >15 prenatal visits                       0.088           0.089        (0.655)
                    Prenatal visits missing                   0.019           0.019        (0.850)

Mother's            Born in California                        0.390           0.391        (0.753)
 Characteristics    Born outside U.S.                         0.472           0.475        (0.411)
                    1st Birth                                 0.400           0.394       (0.047)*

                    Age                                       26.82           26.79        (0.489)
                    High school drop out                      0.355           0.356        (0.652)
                    High school                               0.287           0.288        (0.684)
                    Some College                              0.184           0.181        (0.250)
                    College+                                  0.164           0.164        (0.907)

Father's            Age                                       29.755         29.725        (0.529)
 Characteristics    High school drop out                      0.302          0.303         (0.848)
                    High school                               0.287          0.285         (0.465)
                    Some College                              0.156          0.155         (0.650)
                    College+                                  0.181          0.181         (0.898)
                    Missing education data                    0.075          0.078         (0.086)

Newborn             Boy                                       0.509           0.507        (0.530)
 Characteristics    White                                     0.544           0.537       (0.029)*
                    African American                          0.065           0.066        (0.570)
                    Hispanic                                  0.186           0.188        (0.443)
                    Asian                                     0.092           0.094        (0.198)

Birth               Birthweight < 2500 grams                  0.048           0.047        (0.506)
 Characteristics    Gestational age >= 37 weeks               0.909           0.906        (0.170)
                    Vaginal birth after C-section             0.025           0.026        (0.353)
                    Forceps or vacuum                         0.099           0.095       (0.022)*
                    Less than 3 hours                         0.018           0.019        (0.228)
                    More than 20 hours                        0.007           0.006        (0.310)
                    Labor stimulated                          0.119           0.115        (0.053)
                    Labor induced                             0.099           0.095        (0.065)

                    Admitted on a Weekend                     0.237           0.241        (0.141)

Primary Payer       Medicaid                                  0.463           0.463        (0.898)
                    Self pay/unknown                          0.041           0.039        (0.182)
                    Private                                   0.480           0.482        (0.458)

                    Government                                0.223           0.227        (0.147)
Hospital            Private nonprofit                         0.634           0.636        (0.554)
 Characteristics    Private for-profit                        0.142           0.136       (0.012)*

                    Observations                              45807         47046
Data are pooled 1991-2002. Calculations from the "40 minute" sample includes births from
11:37pm-11:55pm & 12:05am-12:24am. Race and Ethnicity is not broken out separately after
1994. Prenatal visits is missing in approx. 2% of the cases. Mother's education is missing in
approximately 1% of the cases. Full set of variables and separate time periods are listed in the
appendix. ** = significant at 1%; * = significant at 5%.
                               Table 3: Time of Birth and Length of Stay

A. Before 1997 Law Change
                        Dependent Variable:                            Additional Midnights
                                     Model: Local linear          OLS           OLS         OLS            OLS
                                                (1)                (2)           (3)          (4)            (5)
Birth After Midnight                           0.273             0.293         0.272        0.220          0.216
                                              (0.036)           (0.033)       (0.032)    (0.0201)         (0.019)
Birth After Midnight * Minute from cutoff                        -0.001        -0.001       0.001          0.001
                                                                (0.002)        (0.00)    (0.0005)        (0.0004)
Birth Prior to Midnight* Minute from cutoff                      -0.004        -0.003       0.001          0.001
                                                                (0.002)       (0.002)    (0.0004)        (0.0004)
Full Controls                                        No            No           Yes           No            Yes
Sample                                           40 minute     40 minute 40 minute         2 hour          2hour
Observations                                      60398          58375         58375      162821          162821
Mean of Dep. Variable Before Midnight               1.00          0.99          0.99         0.97           0.97

B. After 1997 Law Change
                        Dependent Variable:                               Additional Midnights
                                     Model: Local linear             OLS           OLS            OLS          OLS
                                                (1)                   (2)           (3)            (4)          (5)
Birth After Midnight                           0.255                0.238         0.230          0.252        0.246
                                              (0.045)              (0.041)       (0.039)        (0.026)      (0.025)
Birth After Midnight * Minute from cutoff                           0.006         0.006          0.001        0.001
                                                                   (0.003)       (0.002)       (0.0006)     (0.0005)
Birth Prior to Midnight* Minute from cutoff                         -0.001        -0.001         0.001        0.001
                                                                  (0.0023)       (0.003)       (0.0006)     (0.0006)
Full Controls                                          No             No           Yes             No          Yes
Sample                                            40 minute 40 minute 40 minute                  2 hour       2hour
Observations                                        35736           33920         33920          94879        94879
Mean of Dep. Variable Before Midnight                 1.30           1.29          1.29           1.28         1.28
Columns (1)-(3) consider the "40 minute" sample from 11:37pm-11:55pm & 12:05am-12:24am. Columns (4) and
(5) consider the "two hour" sample from 11:02pm-11:55pm & 12:05am to 12:59am. Column (1) reports the
difference in local linear regression estimates just above and below the discontinuity using a triangle kernel and a
bandwidth of 20 minutes. Asymptotic standard errors in parentheses. Columns (2)-(5) report OLS results using
different samples close to the midnight cutoff, along with linear trends in the time of birth before and after
midnight; robust standard errors reported in parentheses. Full controls include the controls listed in Appendix
Table A1, as well as indicators for the mother's age, the father's age, the year of birth and the month of birth.
                                                     Table 4: Time of Birth and Infant Readmissions

A. Dependent Variable: 7-Day Readmission
                                                          Before 1997 Law Change                                        After 1997 Law Change
                                    Model: Local linear      Probit      Probit     Probit               Local linear     Probit       Probit         Probit
                                               (1)             (2)         (3)        (4)                    (5)            (6)          (7)            (8)
Birth After Midnight                        0.00038         0.00188     0.00174    0.00134                0.00040       -0.00052     -0.00035        0.00142
                                            (0.0028)       (0.0028)     (0.0025)  (0.0015)                (0.0038)       (0.0036)    (0.0032)       (0.0020)
Birth After Midnight * Minute from cutoff                   0.00018     0.00018   -0.00001                               0.00002      0.00000       -0.00001
                                                           (0.0002)     (0.0002) (0.00003)                               (0.0002)    (0.0002)      (0.00004)
Birth Prior to Midnight* Minute from cutoff                -0.00026    -0.00023    0.00003                              -0.00004     -0.00004       -0.00004
                                                           (0.0002)     (0.0002) (0.00003)                               (0.0002)    (0.0002)      (0.00005)
Full Controls                                      No          No          Yes       Yes                     No             No          Yes            Yes
Sample                                          40 minute 40 minute 40 minute       2 hour                40 minute     40 minute 40 minute           2hour
Observations                                     60398       58365       58365     162791                  35736          33920        33920          94879
Mean of Dep. Variable Before Midnight             0.027      0.027        0.027     0.026                   0.028          0.028       0.028          0.029

B. Dependent Variable: 28-Day Readmission
                                                              Before 1997 Law Change                                   After 1997 Law Change
                                    Model: Local linear           Probit      Probit        Probit        Local linear    Probit      Probit         Probit
                                               (1)                  (2)         (3)          (4)                (5)         (6)         (7)            (8)
Birth After Midnight                         0.0049               0.0059      0.0053       0.0027            -0.0041     -0.0038     -0.0036        -0.0008
                                            (0.0036)            (0.0034)    (0.0033)      (0.0019)          (0.0048)    (0.0045)    (0.0043)       (0.0027)
Birth After Midnight * Minute from cutoff                         0.0000      0.0000       0.0000                         0.0002      0.0002         0.0000
                                                                (0.0002)     (0.000)     (0.00004)                      (0.0003)    (0.0003)      (0.00006)
Birth Prior to Midnight* Minute from cutoff                      -0.0003     -0.0002       0.0000                         0.0000      0.0000         0.0000
                                                                (0.0002)    (0.0002)     (0.00004)                      (0.0003)    (0.0003)      (0.00006)
Full Controls                                         No            No          Yes          Yes               No           No          Yes            Yes
Sample                                             40 minute 40 minute 40 minute           2 hour          40 minute 40 minute 40 minute             2hour
Observations                                        60398         58375       58375        162821             35736       33920       33920          94879
Mean of Dep. Variable Before Midnight                0.042         0.042       0.042        0.042             0.046        0.047       0.047          0.046
40 minute sample includes births from 11:37pm-11:55pm & 12:05am-12:24am; 2 hour sample includes births from 11:02pm-11:55pm & 12:05am to
12:59am. Columns (1) and (5) report the difference in local linear regression estimates just above and below the discontinuity using a triangle kernel and
a bandwidth of 20 minutes. Asymptotic standard errors in parentheses. Columns (2)-(4) and (6)-(8) report marginal effects evaluated at the mean of the
covariates with robust standard errors reported in parentheses. Full controls include the controls listed in Appendix Table A1, as well as indicators for the
mother's age, the father's age, the year of birth and the month of birth.
                                                   Table 5: Time of Birth and Infant Mortality

A. Dependent Variable: 28-day mortality
                                                        Before 1997 Law Change                                       After 1997 Law Change
                                    Model: Local linear    Probit      Probit    Probit                 Local linear    Probit     Probit     Probit
                                                (1)          (2)         (3)       (4)                       (5)          (6)        (7)        (8)
Birth After Midnight                        -0.00035      0.00083     0.00001   0.00005                   0.00043      0.00014    0.00003   -0.00002
                                             (0.0011) (0.001018) (0.000103) (0.000122)                    (0.0013) (0.001207) (0.000047) (0.000071)
Birth After Midnight * Minute from cutoff                -0.00004     0.00000   0.00000                               -0.00007    0.00000    0.00000
                                                        (0.000060) (0.000006) (0.000003)                             (0.000078) (0.000003) (0.000002)
Birth Prior to Midnight* Minute from cutoff              -0.00004     0.00000   0.00000                                0.00007    0.00000    0.00000
                                                        (0.000069) (0.000007) (0.000003)                             (0.000082) (0.000003) (0.000002)
Full Controls                                   No           No         Yes       Yes                        No           No        Yes        Yes
Sample                                      40 minute 40 minute 40 minute        2 hour                  40 minute 40 minute 40 minute        2hour
Observations                                  60398        58365       58365    162791                     35736        31627      31627      94761
Mean of Dep. Variable Before Midnight         0.0036       0.0035      0.0035    0.0035                    0.0030       0.0030     0.0030     0.0033

B. Dependent Variable: 1-year mortality
                                                              Before 1997 Law Change                                   After 1997 Law Change
                                        Model: Local linear      Probit       Probit        Probit        Local linear    Probit      Probit         Probit
                                                       (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)               (5)          (6)         (7)            (8)
Birth After Midnight                               0.000003     0.00127      0.00026      0.00001           0.00083      0.00077     0.00028        0.00002
                                                    (0.0013) (0.001246) (0.000465) (0.000349)               (0.0015) (0.001443) (0.000304) (0.000289)
Birth After Midnight * Minute from cutoff                      -0.00008     -0.00001      0.00000                       -0.00002    -0.00001        0.00001
                                                              (0.000076) (0.000029) (0.000008)                         (0.000087) (0.000018) (0.000007)
Birth Prior to Midnight* Minute from cutoff                    -0.00008     -0.00003      0.00000                       -0.00003    -0.00002       -0.00001
                                                              (0.000082) (0.000030) (0.000008)                         (0.000096) (0.000019) (0.000006)
Full Controls                                          No          No          Yes           Yes               No           No          Yes           Yes
Sample                                             40 minute 40 minute 40 minute           2 hour          40 minute 40 minute 40 minute             2hour
Observations                                         60398       58365        58365        162791            35736        33157       33157          94761
Mean of Dep. Variable Before Midnight                0.0058      0.0056       0.0056       0.0055            0.0043       0.0041      0.0041         0.0048
40 minute sample includes births from 11:37pm-11:55pm & 12:05am-12:24am; 2 hour sample includes births from 11:02pm-11:55pm & 12:05am to
12:59am. Columns (1) and (5) report the difference in local linear regression estimates just above and below the discontinuity using a triangle kernel and
a bandwidth of 20 minutes. Asymptotic standard errors in parentheses. Columns (2)-(4) and (6)-(8) report marginal effects evaluated at the mean of the
covariates with robust standard errors reported in parentheses. Full controls include the controls listed in Appendix Table A1, as well as indicators for the
mother's age, the father's age, the year of birth and the month of birth.
                                       Table 6: Maternal Length of Stay & Outcomes

                                                         Before 1997 Law Change                         After 1997 Law Change
                         Dependent Variable:         Additional               28-Day               Additional              28-Day
                                                     Midnights            Readmission               Midnights          Readmission
                                                         (1)                    (2)                     (3)                   (4)
Birth After Midnight                                    0.297                -0.0006                  0.229                 0.0015
                                                       (0.086)               (0.0012)                (0.045)              (0.0015)
Birth After Midnight * Minute from cutoff              0.0004               -0.00002                 -0.0005              -0.00004
                                                      (0.0077)              (0.00007)               (0.0020)              (0.0001)
Birth Prior to Midnight* Minute from cutoff           -0.0008                 0.0000                  0.0022               -0.0002
                                                      (0.0025)              (0.00008)               (0.0018)             (0.00009)
Observations                                            57599                 57597                   33560                 32869
Mean of Dep. Variable Before Midnight                   0.685                  0.008                  0.968                  0.008
Analyses uses the "40 minute" sample, which includes births from 11:37pm-11:55pm & 12:05am to 12:24am. Columns (1) and (3) are
estimated with by OLS, and Columns (2) and (4) report estimates that are marginal effects from a probit model, evaluated at the mean of
the covariates. All models include full controls. Robust standard errors reported in parentheses.
                                                                         Table A1: Table of Means
                                                                     All Years                        Before 1997 Law Change                     After 1997 Law Change
                                                          Before        After                      Before       After                        Before        After
                                                         Midnight     Midnight      p-value       Midnight     Midnight   p-value           Midnight     Midnight    p-value

Pregnancy          At least one pregnancy complication    0.585         0.589        (0.264)        0.544         0.546        (0.598)        0.657         0.661        (0.482)
 Characteristics   <9 prenatal visits                     0.199         0.204        (0.052)        0.225         0.232        (0.058)        0.153         0.156        (0.393)
                   9-15 prenatal visits                   0.695         0.689       (0.043)*        0.675         0.669        (0.105)        0.729         0.723        (0.222)
                   >15 prenatal visits                    0.088         0.089        (0.655)        0.084         0.083        (0.568)        0.095         0.099        (0.233)
                   Prenatal visits missing                0.019         0.019        (0.850)        0.017         0.018        (0.338)        0.022         0.021        (0.413)

Mother's           Born in California                     0.390         0.391        (0.753)        0.381         0.378        (0.485)        0.404         0.411        (0.175)
 Characteristics   Born outside U.S.                      0.472         0.475        (0.411)        0.469         0.475        (0.155)        0.478         0.476        (0.681)
                   1st Birth                              0.400         0.394       (0.047)*        0.396         0.394        (0.673)        0.407         0.393       (0.009)**

                   Age                                    26.817        26.789       (0.489)        26.666        26.566      (0.048)*        27.085        27.168       (0.222)
                   High school drop out                    0.355         0.356       (0.652)         0.371         0.376       (0.186)         0.325         0.321       (0.418)
                   High school                             0.287         0.288       (0.684)         0.289         0.288       (0.694)         0.283         0.287       (0.374)
                   Some College                            0.184         0.181       (0.250)         0.183          0.18       (0.303)         0.187         0.185       (0.672)
                   College+                                0.164         0.164       (0.907)         0.149         0.149       (0.949)         0.190         0.191       (0.858)
                   Missing education data

Father's           Age                                    29.755        29.725       (0.529)        29.531        29.444       (0.142)        30.155        30.202       (0.559)
 Characteristics   High school drop out                    0.302         0.303       (0.848)         0.316         0.321       (0.222)         0.277         0.271       (0.229)
                   High school                             0.287         0.285       (0.465)         0.292         0.285       (0.056)         0.278         0.284       (0.231)
                   Some College                            0.156         0.155       (0.650)         0.156         0.156       (0.993)         0.155         0.153       (0.525)
                   College+                                0.181         0.181       (0.898)         0.172         0.171       (0.774)         0.197         0.197       (0.909)
                   Missing education data                  0.075         0.078       (0.086)         0.064         0.067       (0.104)         0.093         0.095       (0.534)

Newborn            Boy                                    0.509         0.507        (0.530)        0.510         0.509        (0.767)        0.508         0.505        (0.537)
 Characteristics   White                                  0.544         0.537       (0.029)*        0.477         0.469        (0.063)        0.657         0.648        (0.071)
                   African American                       0.065         0.066        (0.570)        0.069         0.069        (0.818)        0.059         0.061        (0.445)
                   Hispanic                               0.186         0.188        (0.443)        0.295          0.3         (0.173)        0.000           0             (.)
                   Asian                                  0.092         0.094        (0.198)        0.089         0.092        (0.168)        0.098          0.1         (0.580)

Birth              Birthweight bottom quartile            0.197         0.196        (0.803)        0.199         0.197         (0.459)       0.193         0.196        (0.499)
 Characteristics   Birthweight 2nd quintile               0.212          0.22      (0.003)**        0.211         0.221       (0.004)**       0.212         0.217        (0.271)
                   Birthweight 3rd quintile               0.216         0.217        (0.740)        0.214         0.216         (0.502)       0.221         0.219        (0.685)
                   Birthweight 4th quintile               0.194          0.19        (0.166)        0.194          0.19         (0.227)       0.194         0.192        (0.641)
                   Birthweight Top quintile               0.182         0.177        (0.068)        0.183         0.177         (0.073)       0.180         0.176        (0.336)
                   Gestational age < 37 weeks             0.088          0.09        (0.190)        0.086         0.089         (0.203)       0.090         0.092        (0.570)
                   Gestational age 37 <= weeks < 40       0.424         0.434      (0.003)**        0.410         0.423       (0.001)**       0.449         0.452        (0.616)
                   Gestational age 40 <= weeks < 42       0.382         0.369      (0.000)**        0.390         0.376       (0.001)**       0.368         0.359        (0.081)
                   Gestational age weeks >=42             0.076         0.075        (0.716)        0.082         0.078         (0.087)       0.064         0.068        (0.103)
                   Gestational age missing                0.031         0.032        (0.298)        0.032         0.034         (0.217)       0.029         0.029        (0.912)
                   Vaginal birth after C-section          0.025         0.026        (0.353)        0.027         0.029         (0.124)       0.021          0.02        (0.437)
                   Forceps or vacuum                      0.099         0.095       (0.022)*        0.102         0.097        (0.027)*       0.093         0.091        (0.493)
                   Less than 3 hours                      0.018         0.019        (0.228)        0.019         0.019         (0.843)       0.015         0.018        (0.051)
                   More than 20 hours                     0.007         0.006        (0.310)        0.007         0.007         (0.550)       0.007         0.006        (0.447)
                   Labor stimulated                       0.119         0.115        (0.053)        0.106         0.104         (0.375)       0.141         0.133       (0.036)*
                   Labor induced                          0.099         0.095        (0.065)        0.092         0.089         (0.289)       0.111         0.105        (0.072)

                   Admitted on Sunday                     0.116         0.117        (0.572)        0.118         0.119        (0.772)        0.112         0.114         (0.616)
                   Admitted on Monday                     0.155         0.153        (0.346)        0.154          0.15        (0.150)        0.157         0.158         (0.705)
                   Admitted on Tuesday                    0.153         0.152        (0.648)        0.154         0.149        (0.102)        0.151         0.156         (0.188)
                   Admitted on Wednesday                  0.151         0.146       (0.023)*        0.148         0.145        (0.257)        0.155         0.146        (0.026)*
                   Admitted on Thursday                   0.152          0.15        (0.427)        0.151          0.15        (0.703)        0.152         0.149         (0.435)
                   Admitted on Friday                     0.147         0.146        (0.735)        0.147         0.147        (0.916)        0.147         0.145         (0.534)
                   Admitted on Saturday                   0.120         0.121        (0.761)        0.121         0.122        (0.717)        0.117         0.118         (0.852)
                   Missing admission day                  0.008         0.017      (0.000)**        0.007         0.019       (0.000)**       0.008         0.013       (0.000)**

Primary Payer      Medicaid                               0.463         0.463        (0.898)        0.473          0.48        (0.091)        0.445         0.432        (0.017)*
                   Self pay/unknown                       0.041         0.039        (0.182)        0.046         0.046        (0.862)        0.033         0.029         (0.056)
                   Private                                0.480         0.482        (0.458)        0.463         0.457        (0.161)        0.509         0.525       (0.004)**
                   Other                                  0.016         0.016        (0.727)        0.017         0.016        (0.387)        0.013         0.014         (0.515)

                   Government                             0.223         0.227        (0.147)        0.237         0.244        (0.062)        0.199         0.199        (0.935)
Hospital           Private nonprofit                      0.634         0.636        (0.554)        0.616         0.616        (0.936)        0.664         0.668        (0.414)
 Characteristics   Private for-profit                     0.142         0.136       (0.012)*        0.147          0.14       (0.018)*        0.135         0.131        (0.256)

                     Observations                                45807           47046                         28898          29477           16637          17283
Estimates from the 40 minute sample, which includes births from 11:37pm-11:55pm & 12:05am-12:24am. Additional variables used the main analysis (not shown) include mother age
indicators, father age indicators, year of birth indicators and month of birth indicators. ** = significant at 1%; * = significant at 5%.
                            Table A2: Selected Covariates: 40 Minute Pooled Sample, 1991-2002
                                           Dependent Variable: Additional Midnights         28-Day Readmission            1-year Mortality
                                                                         (1)                          (2)                          (3)
                   Birth After Midnight                                 0.255                       0.0023                      0.00036
                                                                    (0.025)**                     (0.0026)                    (0.00035)
                   Birth After Midnight * Minute from cutoff            0.001                       0.0001                     -0.00001
                                                                      (0.002)                     (0.0002)                    (0.00002)
                   Birth Prior to Midnight* Minute from cutoff         -0.002                      -0.0001                     -0.00003
                                                                      (0.002)                     (0.0002)                    (0.00002)
Pregnancy          At least one pregnancy complication                  0.021                      -0.0006                      0.00050
 Characterisitics                                                     (0.014)                     (0.0014)                  (0.00018)**
                   9-15 prenatal visits                                -0.073                      -0.0022                     -0.00217
 (<9 omitted)                                                       (0.020)**                     (0.0017)                  (0.00029)**
                   >15 prenatal visits                                  0.055                       0.0019                     -0.00107
                                                                      (0.029)                     (0.0027)                  (0.00018)**
                   Prenatal visits missing                              0.060                       0.0042                     -0.00014
                                                                      (0.060)                     (0.0051)                    (0.00044)
Mother's           Born in California                                   0.023                       0.0005                      0.00011
  Characteristics                                                     (0.021)                     (0.0021)                    (0.00026)
                   Born outside U.S.                                    0.028                      -0.0047                     -0.00075
                                                                      (0.023)                    (0.0024)*                   (0.00029)*
                   1st Birth                                            0.232                       0.0063                      0.00004
                                                                    (0.016)**                   (0.0016)**                    (0.00020)
 (Age<18 omitted) Age = 20                                             -0.057                       0.0028                      0.00121
                                                                      (0.046)                     (0.0047)                    (0.00090)
                   Age = 30                                             0.219                       0.0026                      0.00094
                                                                    (0.053)**                     (0.0051)                    (0.00092)
                   Age = 40                                             0.315                       0.0119                      0.00028
                                                                    (0.071)**                     (0.0075)                    (0.00091)
(College+ omitted) High school drop out                                 0.034                       0.0011                      0.00028
                                                                      (0.027)                     (0.0031)                    (0.00042)
                   High school                                          0.004                      -0.0005                     -0.00012
                                                                      (0.023)                     (0.0027)                    (0.00034)
                   Some College                                         0.009                       0.0013                      0.00018
                                                                      (0.021)                     (0.0026)                    (0.00037)
                   Missing education data                               0.147                       0.0016                      0.00220
                                                                      (0.091)                     (0.0074)                    (0.00174)
Father's           Age = 20                                             0.080                       0.0071                     -0.00043
 Characterisitcs                                                      (0.076)                     (0.0084)                    (0.00057)
                   Age = 30                                             0.083                       0.0041                     -0.00042
 (Age<18 omitted)                                                     (0.074)                     (0.0080)                    (0.00058)
                   Age = 40                                             0.183                       0.0055                     -0.00071
                                                                     (0.075)*                     (0.0080)                    (0.00046)
                   Age Missing                                          0.203                       0.0044                     -0.00021
                                                                    (0.075)**                     (0.0076)                    (0.00065)
                   High school drop out                                 0.007                      -0.0026                      0.00013
 (College+ omitted)                                                   (0.026)                     (0.0029)                    (0.00039)
                   High school                                          0.014                      -0.0030                     -0.00017
                                                                      (0.023)                     (0.0025)                    (0.00033)
                   Some College                                        -0.038                       0.0019                      0.00025
                                                                      (0.021)                     (0.0026)                    (0.00037)
                   Missing education data                               0.052                       0.0014                     -0.00037
                                                                      (0.044)                     (0.0040)                    (0.00038)

                    Mean of Dependent Variable                           1.10                       0.044                       0.0050
                    Observations                                        92853                      92853                         92802
Additional characteristics included month, year, day of the week, mother's age, and father's age indicators. ** = significant at 1%; * =
significant at 5%.
                     Table A2 (continued): Selected Covariates: 40 Minute Pooled Sample, 1991-2002
                                          Dependent Variable: Additional Midnights          28-Day Readmission            1-year Mortality
                                                                        (1)                           (2)                          (3)
Newborn            Boy                                                0.095                        0.0090                      0.00043
  Characterisitcs                                                  (0.013)**                    (0.0013)**                   (0.00017)*
                   White                                              -0.070                       -0.0018                      0.00048
                                                                   (0.022)**                      (0.0022)                    (0.00032)
                   African American                                    0.148                       -0.0061                      0.00089
                                                                   (0.038)**                     (0.0030)*                    (0.00062)
                   Hispanic                                           -0.024                       -0.0032                     -0.00024
                                                                     (0.029)                      (0.0028)                    (0.00036)
                   Asian                                              -0.058                        0.0011                     0.00060
                                                                     (0.030)                      (0.0031)                    (0.00057)
Birth              Birthweight 2nd quintile                           -0.747                       -0.0090                     -0.00167
 Characterisitics                                                  (0.023)**                    (0.0018)**                  (0.00018)**
                   Birthweight 3rd quintile                           -0.732                       -0.0115                     -0.00187
                                                                   (0.023)**                    (0.0018)**                  (0.00019)**
                   Birthweight 4th quintile                           -0.718                       -0.0108                     -0.00197
                                                                   (0.023)**                    (0.0019)**                  (0.00020)**
                   Birthweight Top quintile                           -0.636                       -0.0106                     -0.00169
                                                                   (0.024)**                    (0.0019)**                  (0.00019)**
 (Gestational      Gestational age 37 <= weeks < 40                   -1.511                       -0.0251                     -0.00366
 Age <37 weeks                                                     (0.049)**                    (0.0020)**                  (0.00035)**
 omitted)          Gestational age 40 <= weeks < 42                   -1.500                       -0.0303                     -0.00301
                                                                   (0.048)**                    (0.0020)**                  (0.00031)**
                   Gestational age weeks >=42                         -1.465                       -0.0259                     -0.00145
                                                                   (0.051)**                    (0.0018)**                  (0.00016)**
                   Gestational age missing                            -1.472                       -0.0214                     -0.00117
                                                                   (0.056)**                    (0.0025)**                  (0.00017)**
                   Vaginal birth after C-section                       0.058                        0.0068                     -0.00021
                                                                     (0.040)                      (0.0046)                    (0.00046)
                   Forceps or vacuum                                   0.109                        0.0088                     -0.00054
                                                                   (0.021)**                    (0.0025)**                   (0.00027)*
                   Less than 3 hours                                  -0.018                        0.0035                      0.00049
                                                                     (0.056)                      (0.0051)                    (0.00064)
                   More than 20 hours                                  0.262                        0.0062                      0.00199
                                                                   (0.086)**                      (0.0084)                    (0.00162)
                   Labor stimulated                                    0.003                       -0.0007                     -0.00060
                                                                     (0.020)                      (0.0021)                  (0.00022)**
                   Labor induced                                      -0.029                        0.0042                      0.00009
                                                                     (0.021)                      (0.0024)                    (0.00031)
 (Sat. omitted)    Admitted on Wednesday                               0.061                        0.0010                     -0.00049
                                                                    (0.025)*                      (0.0026)                    (0.00027)
                   Missing admission day                               0.148                        0.0045                      0.00139
                                                                    (0.067)*                      (0.0065)                    (0.00111)
Primary Payer      Medicaid                                            0.143                        0.0102                      0.00057
 (private omitted)                                                 (0.017)**                    (0.0018)**                   (0.00024)*
                   Self pay/unknown                                   -0.250                       -0.0138                      0.00016
                                                                   (0.031)**                    (0.0030)**                    (0.00047)
                   Other                                               0.315                       -0.0012                      0.00002
                                                                   (0.072)**                      (0.0055)                    (0.00076)
Hospital           Government                                          0.439                       -0.0018                      0.00035
  Characterisitcs                                                  (0.020)**                      (0.0022)                    (0.00035)
 (for-profit       Private nonprofit                                   0.080                       -0.0041                      0.00035
   omitted)                                                        (0.016)**                     (0.0020)*                    (0.00026)

                    Mean of Dependent Variable                           1.10                       0.044                       0.0050
                    Observations                                        92853                      92853                         92802
Additional characteristics included month, year, day of the week, mother's age, and father's age indicators. ** = significant at 1%; * =
significant at 5%.
                                                      Appendix Table A3: Infant Outcomes Across Patient Groups

A. Before the Law Change
                                        Additional Midnights                          28-Day Readmission                                      1-year Mortality
                                Coeff. On                    Mean of      Marginal effect of             Mean of Marginal effect of                      Mean of
                              After Midnight     S.E.       Dep. Var.      After Midnight      S.E.      Dep. Var. After Midnight            S.E.        Dep. Var.        Obs.
        Subgroup:
Medicaid Patient                 0.25831      (0.02984)**       1.10           0.00414        (0.00294)       0.047        -0.00013       (0.00054)        0.0062        77272

Unmarried                        0.25165       (0.0360)**       1.09           0.00146        (.000332)       0.044         0.00017       (0.00063)        0.0060        56440

For-Profit Hospital              0.23857      (0.03859)**       0.79          -0.00138        (0.00493)       0.044         0.00009       (0.00039)        0.0041        19765

Cesarean Section                 0.23909      (0.06236)**       2.87           0.00376        (0.00428)       0.049        -0.00208      (0.00089)*        0.0094        34442

Birthweight < 3000g              0.22649      (0.07206)**       1.71           0.00654        (0.00479)       0.060        -0.00024       (0.00148)        0.0183        34675

High P(Readmission|X)            0.21937      (0.03615)**       1.25           0.00285        (0.00318)       0.055         0.00019       (0.00060)       0.00944        77012

Low P(Readmission|X)             0.21634      (0.01584)**       0.72           0.00264        (0.00237)       0.031        -0.00022       (0.00039)       0.00191        85319

Low Maternal Education           0.18903      (0.03297)**       1.07           0.00375        (0.00317)       0.043        -0.00065       (0.00063)        0.0060        60403

Kaiser Hospital                  0.18820      (0.05150)**       0.91           0.00768        (0.00510)       0.035         0.0005        (0.00062)        0.0062        19616

Any Labor Complication           0.18372      (0.02364)**       0.97           0.00549        (0.00236)*      0.042         0.00018       (0.00039)        0.0060        108265

Scheduled Birth                  0.16825      (0.05151)**       0.75          -0.00064        (0.00608)       0.049         0.00008       (0.00021)        0.0037        15225

Any Pregnancy Complication       0.16427      (0.02678)**       0.98           0.00455        (0.00263)       0.044         0.00030       (0.00045)        0.0063        88955

All Data                         0.13561      (0.05248)**       1.81           0.00210        (0.00163)       0.043        -0.00025       (0.00033)        0.0065        229554


B. After the Law Change
                                        Additional Midnights                         28-Day Readmission                                       1-year Mortality
                                Coeff. On                    Mean of         Coeff. On                  Mean of     Coeff. On                            Mean of
                              After Midnight     S.E.       Dep. Var.      After Midnight     S.E.      Dep. Var. After Midnight             S.E.        Dep. Var.        Obs.
        Subgroup:
Medicaid Patient                 0.26693      (0.03925)**       1.35           0.00464        (0.00415)       0.049         0.00027       (0.00046)        0.0051        41412

Unmarried                        0.24456      (0.07785)**       1.28           0.00486        (0.00735)       0.050        -0.00019       (0.00032)        0.0076         6374

For-Profit Hospital              0.31748      (0.05329)**       1.07          -0.00175        (0.00661)       0.052        -0.00021       (0.00027)        0.0086         5547

Cesarean Section                 0.22570      (0.08319)**       3.14           0.00909        (0.00570)       0.052        -0.00027       (0.00083)        0.0074        20777

Birthweight < 3000g              0.09485       (0.09228)        2.05           0.00836        (0.00636)       0.063        -0.00026       (0.00129)        0.0168        19937

High P(Readmission|X)            0.26061      (0.04092)**       1.49          -0.00017        (0.00397)       0.057        -0.00026       (0.00037)       0.00756        51520

Low P(Readmission|X)             0.22471      (0.02251)**       1.01          -0.00214        (0.00332)       0.033         0.00077       (0.00052)       0.00226        27239

Low Maternal Education           0.24245      (0.04515)**       1.29           0.00656        (0.00459)       0.045         0.00061       (0.00042)        0.0044        29431

Kaiser Hospital                  0.08651       (0.05824)        1.15          -0.00559        (0.00538)       0.034        -0.000002      (0.00014)        0.0057        11176

Any Labor Complication           0.24057      (0.02893)**       1.27          -0.00004        (0.00305)       0.046         0.00010       (0.00031)        0.0050        69767

Scheduled Birth                  0.27764      (0.04104)**       1.21           0.00201        (0.00419)       0.041         0.00050       (0.00044)        0.0038        30303

Any Pregnancy Complication       0.23126      (0.03095)**       1.28          -0.00033        (0.00325)       0.048         0.00001       (0.00037)        0.0055        62285

All Data                            0.29971        (0.06152)**     2.10            0.00020       (0.00196)       0.045           0.00029       (0.00031)         0.0055      162427
Analyses use the 2 hour sample, which includes births from 11:02pm-11:55pm & 12:05am to 12:59am. The additional midnight models are estimated by OLS, and the readmission
and mortality columns report marginal effects from a probit model, evaluated at the mean of the covariates. Models for unmarried do not include missing observations and only
include 2 years in the post-law change period. Robust standard errors reported in parentheses. All models include full controls listed in Appendix Table A1, as well as mother age
indicators, father age indicators, year of birth indicators and month of birth indicators. Number of observations listed is for the mortality model, which is a lower bound on the
number of observations in that row, as some cells have zero deaths. ** = significant at 1%; * = significant at 5%.
                                              Appendix Table A4: Characteristics of Compliers
                                                                    Before Law Change                               After Law Change
                                                             40-minute Sample          24-hour               40-minute Sample         24-hour
                                                           Complier       Overall     Population           Complier       Overall    Population
                                                            Mean           Mean         Mean                Mean          Mean         Mean

Pregnancy          At least one pregnancy complication       0.546           0.545           0.565           0.683           0.659           0.664
 Characteristics   <9 prenatal visits                        0.202           0.228           0.208           0.129           0.155           0.137
                   9-15 prenatal visits                      0.699           0.672           0.685           0.696           0.726           0.734
                   >15 prenatal visits                       0.078           0.083           0.091           0.147           0.097           0.109
                   Prenatal visits missing                   0.021           0.017           0.016           0.028           0.021           0.021

Mother's           Born in California                        0.380           0.380           0.391           0.396           0.407           0.414
 Characteristics   Born outside U.S.                         0.482           0.472           0.455           0.490           0.476           0.460
                   1st Birth                                 0.385           0.395           0.391           0.414           0.400           0.387

                   Age                                       26.2            26.6            27.1            28.3            27.1            27.8
                   High school drop out                      0.387           0.374           0.346           0.297           0.323           0.298
                   High school                               0.274           0.289           0.291           0.237           0.285           0.282
                   Some College                              0.177           0.181           0.191           0.198           0.186           0.193
                   College+                                  0.156           0.149           0.165           0.252           0.191           0.213
                   Missing education data                    0.006           0.007           0.007           0.015           0.015           0.014

Father's           Age                                       28.9            29.5            29.9            31.4            30.2            30.7
 Characteristics   High school drop out                      0.312           0.319           0.299           0.232           0.274           0.256
                   High school                               0.259           0.289           0.290           0.253           0.281           0.276
                   Some College                              0.176           0.156           0.163           0.160           0.154           0.162
                   College+                                  0.169           0.171           0.187           0.254           0.198           0.220
                   Missing education data                    0.083           0.065           0.061           0.100           0.094           0.086

Newborn            Boy                                       0.496           0.509           0.510           0.482           0.506           0.510
 Characteristics   White                                     0.466           0.473           0.508           0.615           0.652           0.681
                   African American                          0.073           0.069           0.069           0.075           0.060           0.060
                   Hispanic                                  0.299           0.298           0.260              .               .
                   Asian                                     0.091           0.091           0.091           0.124           0.098           0.095

Birth              Low birthweight (<2500g)                  0.005           0.048           0.059           0.029           0.047           0.061
 Characteristics   Full Term (>=37 weeks)                    0.927           0.909           0.898           0.915           0.906           0.896
                   Vaginal birth after C-section             0.035           0.028           0.022           0.023           0.021           0.015
                   Forceps or vacuum                         0.077           0.099           0.083           0.102           0.092           0.072
                   Less than 3 hours                         0.019           0.020           0.014           0.016           0.016           0.011
                   More than 20 hours                        0.002           0.007           0.008           0.009           0.006           0.007
                   Labor stimulated                          0.085           0.105           0.097           0.124           0.137           0.116
                   Labor induced                             0.089           0.091           0.087           0.101           0.108           0.109
                   Admitted on a weekend                     0.266           0.243           0.228           0.261           0.233           0.216

Primary Payer      Medicaid                                  0.489           0.477           0.457           0.425           0.439           0.417
                   Self pay/unknown                          0.038           0.046           0.045           0.009           0.031           0.027
                   Private                                   0.459           0.460           0.481           0.550           0.517           0.540
                   Other                                     0.014           0.016           0.018           0.016           0.014           0.016

                   Government                                0.222           0.241           0.215           0.264           0.200           0.183
Hospital           Private nonprofit                         0.644           0.616           0.630           0.585           0.666           0.666
 Characteristics   Private for-profit                        0.134           0.143           0.153           0.152           0.133           0.149

Excluded           Cesarean Section                            .               .             0.215             .               .             0.240
 Characteristics
                    Observations                                      58375                  3455661                33920                  2561629
Compliers are newborns who are induced into having a longer stay due to a post-midnight births, where longer stays are defined as at least one
additional midnight prior to the law change and at least 2 additional midnights after the law change. The means are then calculated as described in the
text. The 40-minute sample is the analysis sample used in Table 3. The 24-hour population includes all births in California hospitals. The estimated
fraction of compliers in the 40-minute sample is 16% prior to the law change and 17% after the law change.
                                        Figure 1: Average Length of U.S. Hospital Stay by Type of Delivery

                   9


                   8


                   7


                   6
Days in hospital




                   5
                                                                                                                   vaginal
                                                                                                                   cesarean
                   4


                   3


                   2


                   1


                   0
                       1970 1972 1974 1976 1978 1980 1982 1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004
                                                                    Year
                                                                           Figure 2: Vaginal Births:
                                                                        Less Than 2 Days in the Hospital


                                                                                                               1995
                            0.5



                            0.4
Percent of Vaginal Births




                            0.3



                            0.2



                            0.1



                             0
                                  1970   1972   1974   1976   1978   1980   1982   1984   1986   1988   1990   1992   1994   1996   1998   2000   2002   2004
                                                                                             Year
                                        Figure 3: California Vaginal Births:
                                          Less than 2 Days in the Hospital

90%

80%

70%

60%

50%

40%

30%

20%

10%

0%
 01/01/91 12/14/91 11/25/92 11/07/93 10/20/94 10/02/95 09/13/96 08/26/97 08/08/98 07/21/99 07/02/00 06/14/01 05/27/02
                                                        Birth Date
                         Figure 4A: 24-hour Frequency by Minute of Birth:
                                            1991-2002

6000
5000
4000
3000
2000
1000
   0
    1200   1400   1600     1800    2000   2200    2400    200    400    600      800   1000


                    Figure 4B: Frequency by Minute of Birth (11pm-1am):
                                        1991-2002

4000
3500
3000
2500
2000
1500
1000
 500
   0
   2300    2310   2320     2330    2340   2350   2400     10     20         30   40    50     100
                                Figure 5A: Raw Length of Stay: Before 1997 Law Change

  2.5


    2


  1.5


    1


  0.5


    0
     1200     1400     1600      1800      2000     2200       2400        200   400       600       800      1000
                                                           Time of Birth


                                 Figure 5B: Raw Length of Stay: After 1997 Law Change

    3


  2.5


    2


  1.5


    1


  0.5
     1200     1400     1600      1800     2000      2200       2400        200   400       600      800      1000
                                                           Time of Birth

Raw length of stay is the number of midnights in care. Points represent means within 1-minute intervals from 12:00 noon to
11:59am. Lines represent local linear regressions, h=20
                               Figure 6A: Additional Midnights: Before Law Change

    2


  1.7


  1.4


  1.1


  0.8


  0.5
     1200     1400     1600      1800      2000     2200      2400         200    400      600       800      1000
                                                         Minute of Birth


                        Figure 6B: 1 or More Additional Midnights: Before Law Change

    1
  0.9
  0.8
  0.7
  0.6
  0.5
  0.4
  0.3
  0.2
  0.1
    0
    1200      1400      1600     1800      2000     2200      2400         200    400      600       800      1000
                                                         Minute of Birth


                        Figure 6C: 2 or More Additional Midnights: Before Law Change

  0.6

  0.5

  0.4

  0.3

  0.2

  0.1

    0
    1200      1400     1600      1800      2000     2200      2400      200       400      600       800      1000
                                                         Minute of Birth


Number of additional midnights is the number of midnights for those born on or after midnight and before noon, while the
number of additional midnights is measured as the number of midnights minus one for children born after noon and before
midnight. Points represent means within 1-minute intervals from 12:00 noon to 11:59am. Lines represent local linear
regressions, h=20
                               Figure 7A: Additional Midnights: After Law Change

    2


  1.7


  1.4


  1.1


  0.8


  0.5
     1200     1400     1600      1800      2000     2200      2400         200    400      600       800      1000
                                                         Minute of Birth


                         Figure 7B: 1 or More Additional Midnights: After Law Change

    1
  0.9
  0.8
  0.7
  0.6
  0.5
  0.4
  0.3
  0.2
  0.1
    0
     1200     1400     1600      1800      2000     2200      2400         200    400      600       800      1000
                                                         Minute of Birth


                        Figure 7C: 2 or More Additional Midnights: After Law Change


  0.6

  0.5

  0.4

  0.3

  0.2

  0.1

    0
    1200      1400     1600      1800      2000     2200      2400         200    400      600       800      1000
                                                         Minute of Birth


Number of additional midnights is the number of midnights for those born on or after midnight and before noon, while the
number of additional midnights is measured as the number of midnights minus one for children born after noon and before
midnight. Points represent means within 1-minute intervals from 12:00 noon to 11:59am. Lines represent local linear
regressions, h=20
            Figure 8A: 7-Day Readmission Rate: Before Law Change                                        Figure 8C: Infant Mortality Rate: Before Law Change

   0.05                                                                                      0.014
  0.045
                                                                                             0.012
   0.04
  0.035                                                                                       0.01
   0.03
                                                                                             0.008
  0.025
   0.02                                                                                      0.006
  0.015                                                                                      0.004
   0.01
                                                                                             0.002
  0.005
         0                                                                                       0
         1200 1400 1600 1800 2000 2200 2400          200    400   600    800   1000              1200 1400 1600 1800 2000 2200 2400 200                400   600    800 1000
                                          Time of Birth                                                                              Time of Birth


            Figure 8B: 28-Day Readmission Rate: Before Law Change                                      Figure 8D: 28-Day Mortality Rate: Before Law Change

  0.08                                                                                       0.012
  0.07
                                                                                              0.01
  0.06
                                                                                             0.008
  0.05

  0.04                                                                                       0.006

  0.03
                                                                                             0.004
  0.02
                                                                                             0.002
  0.01

     0                                                                                           0
     1200 1400 1600 1800 2000 2200 2400              200   400    600    800   1000               1200 1400 1600 1800 2000 2200 2400 200               400   600    800 1000
                                         Time of Birth                                                                               Time of Birth

28-day measures consider 28 days since the midnight prior to those born between midnight and noon, and 28 days since the following midnight for those born between noon and midnight.
An analogous consideration was made for 7-day readmissions. Points represent means within 1-minute intervals from 12:00 noon to 11:59am. Lines represent local linear regressions,
h=20
             Figure 9A: 7-Day Readmission Rate: After Law Change                                         Figure 9C: Infant Mortality Rate: After Law Change

   0.05                                                                                      0.014
  0.045
                                                                                             0.012
   0.04
  0.035                                                                                       0.01
   0.03                                                                                      0.008
  0.025
   0.02                                                                                      0.006

  0.015                                                                                      0.004
   0.01
                                                                                             0.002
  0.005
         0                                                                                       0
         1200 1400 1600 1800 2000 2200 2400          200    400   600    800   1000              1200 1400 1600 1800 2000 2200 2400 200                400   600    800 1000
                                          Time of Birth                                                                              Time of Birth


            Figure 9B: 28-Day Readmission Rate: After Law Change                                        Figure 9D: 28-Day Mortality Rate: After Law Change

  0.08                                                                                       0.012
  0.07
                                                                                              0.01
  0.06
                                                                                             0.008
  0.05

  0.04                                                                                       0.006

  0.03
                                                                                             0.004
  0.02
                                                                                             0.002
  0.01

     0                                                                                           0
     1200 1400 1600 1800 2000 2200 2400              200   400    600    800   1000               1200 1400 1600 1800 2000 2200 2400 200               400   600    800 1000
                                         Time of Birth                                                                               Time of Birth

28-day measures consider 28 days since the midnight prior to those born between midnight and noon, and 28 days since the following midnight for those born between noon and midnight.
An analogous consideration was made for 7-day readmissions. Points represent means within 1-minute intervals from 12:00 noon to 11:59am. Lines represent local linear regressions,
h=20
                      Figure A1A: Bandwidth of 10:
                 Additional Midnights Before Law Change

 2

1.7

1.4

1.1

0.8

0.5
   2000   2100   2200     2300        2400         100    200   300   400
                                 Minute of Birth


                      Figure A1B: Bandwidth of 10:
                  Additional Midnights After Law Change

 2

1.7

1.4

1.1

0.8

0.5
  2000    2100   2200     2300        2400         100    200   300   400
                                 Minute of Birth
                         Figure A2A: Bandwidth of 10:                                                 Figure A2C: Bandwidth of 10:
                   7-Day Readmission Rate Before Law Change                                     Infant Mortality Rate: Before Law Change

 0.05                                                                         0.014
0.045
                                                                              0.012
 0.04
0.035                                                                          0.01
 0.03                                                                         0.008
0.025
 0.02                                                                         0.006
0.015                                                                         0.004
 0.01
                                                                              0.002
0.005
   0                                                                             0
    2000   2100       2200     2300       2400        100   200   300   400       2000   2100     2200     2300      2400         100      200   300   400
                                      Time of Birth                                                               Time of Birth


                         Figure A2B: Bandwidth of 10:                                                Figure A2D: Bandwidth of 10:
                  28-Day Readmission Rate: Before Law Change                                    28-Day Mortality Rate: Before Law Change

0.08                                                                          0.012
0.07
                                                                               0.01
0.06
                                                                              0.008
0.05
0.04                                                                          0.006
0.03
                                                                              0.004
0.02
                                                                              0.002
0.01
  0                                                                              0
   2000    2100      2200     2300       2400         100   200   300   400       2000   2100     2200     2300       2400        100      200   300   400
                                      Time of Birth                                                               Time of Birth
                              Figure A3A: Bandwidth of 10:                                                                 Figure A3C: Bandwidth of 10:
                        7-Day Readmission Rate: After Law Change                                                      Infant Mortality Rate: After Law Change

   0.05                                                                                       0.014
  0.045
                                                                                              0.012
   0.04
  0.035                                                                                         0.01
   0.03                                                                                       0.008
  0.025
   0.02                                                                                       0.006
  0.015                                                                                       0.004
   0.01
                                                                                              0.002
  0.005
      0                                                                                            0
       2000      2100      2200      2300       2400        100    200       300                    2000     2100      2200      2300      2400         100     200    300
                                            Time of Birth                                                                               Time of Birth


                               Figure A3B: Bandwidth of 10:                                                               Figure A3D: Bandwidth of 10:
                        28-Day Readmission Rate: After Law Change                                                    28-Day Mortality Rate: After Law Change

  0.08                                                                                        0.012
  0.07
                                                                                                0.01
  0.06
                                                                                              0.008
  0.05

  0.04                                                                                        0.006

  0.03
                                                                                              0.004
  0.02
                                                                                              0.002
  0.01

     0                                                                                             0
      2000      2100      2200      2300       2400         100    200       300                   2000      2100      2200      2300      2400         100     200    300
                                            Time of Birth                                                                               Time of Birth

28-day measures consider 28 days since the midnight being compared. Points represent means within 1-minute intervals, lines represent local linear regressions, h=10
