                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 HEALTH CARE FINANCING, EFFICIENCY, AND EQUITY

                                          Sherry A. Glied

                                       Working Paper 13881
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w13881


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2008




I thank Courtney Ward for research assistance and participants at the conference on Exploring Social
Insurance, held in Toronto, November 2006. A version of this paper is forthcoming as a chapter in
Exploring Social Insurance: Can a Dose of Europe Cure Canadian Health Care Finance? Edited by
C. M. Flood, M. Stabile and C. Hughes Tuohy (Kingston, Montreal: Queen's School of Policy Studies,
McGill-Queen's University Press). The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Sherry A. Glied. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Health Care Financing, Efficiency, and Equity
Sherry A. Glied
NBER Working Paper No. 13881
March 2008
JEL No. H42,H51,I18

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper examines the efficiency and equity implications of alternative health care system financing
strategies. Using data across the OECD, I find that almost all financing choices are compatible with
efficiency in the delivery of health care, and that there has been no consistent and systematic relationship
between financing and cost containment. Using data on expenditures and life expectancy by income
quintile from the Canadian health care system, I find that universal, publicly-funded health insurance
is modestly redistributive. Putting $1 of tax funds into the public health insurance system effectively
channels between $0.23 and $0.26 toward the lowest income quintile people, and about $0.50 to the
bottom two income quintiles. Finally, a review of the literature across the OECD suggests that the
progressivity of financing of the health insurance system has limited implications for overall income
inequality, particularly over time.


Sherry A. Glied
Mailman School of Public Health
Columbia University
Department of Health Policy and Management
600 West 168th Street, Room 610
New York, NY 10032
and NBER
sag1@columbia.edu
       The most appropriate generalization of the financing of developed county health

care systems is that they share no general characteristic. Few systems fall squarely into

any single box and even systems that more-or-less do, have evolved in their financing

over time. In 1960, the cost of health care in the OECD countries consumed just under

4% of their collective GDP. By 2000, it consumed twice as high a share of the GDP.

This escalation in spending is nowhere accommodated without debate or modification.

       Most countries intend that their health care system -- and its several components –

be financed in a manner that is both efficient and progressive. An efficient system

minimizes the deadweight losses associated with raising and disbursing revenue. A

progressive system redistributes resources from the rich toward the poor. This paper

examines how alternative financing systems perform with respect to these two goals.

       This paper will focus on choices among general revenue, social insurance, private

insurance, and private out-of-pocket financing in all or portions of a health care system.

These choices have efficiency and equity implications both in the collection and the

disbursal of funds. These implications arise at three levels. First, financing choices

affect the efficiency with which the health care system produces and supplies health care

services. Second, these choices have redistributive implications within the health sector.

Finally, the choice of how to collect funds cannot be disentangled from the functioning of

the social service sector and the economy as a whole. They have implications for the

general efficiency and equity of society broadly.




                                                                                         1
        1.       Defining Terms

        The principal choices for financing a health care system are general revenues,

social insurance financing, private insurance financing, and out-of-pocket payments.

General revenue financing here refers to a system of revenue collection through a broad-

based tax. All or a portion of this tax may be dedicated to the health care system

(although this is generally just an accounting convention). General revenues may be

raised at the federal, provincial/state, or local levels. Although often associated with

progressive financing, general revenues can be raised through tax vehicles that are also

more or less progressive – from a progressive income tax to a relatively regressive sales

tax (or a highly regressive sin tax). General revenues are used to finance a portion of the

health care system almost everywhere. In countries that rely primarily on social

insurance, general revenue funds are often used to cover the costs of nonworkers.

General revenue financing usually refers to a pay-as-you-go arrangement, where current

revenues are used to finance current expenditures.

        There is no clear definition of social insurance financing. I use the term here to

refer to a system in which some group of people, usually workers, is mandated to make

contributions to a health care financing (or, for example, retirement) program 1 . Social

insurance contributions are usually either regressive (a flat per capita mandate) or

proportional (a flat payroll tax rate). Social insurance financing based on payroll

taxation faces the problem that the tax base, which excludes non-labor income, may be



1
  According to the United Nations System of National Accounts, 1993, Annex IV, para. 4.111 an insurance
programme is designated as a social insurance programme if at least one of the following three conditions
are met:
· participation in the programme is compulsory either by law or by the conditions of employment; or
· the programme is operated on behalf of a group and restricted to group members; or
· an employer makes a contribution to the programme on behalf of an employee.


                                                                                                   2
narrower than under broader scope general revenue financing (Amelung and Glied,

2003). Moreover, some social insurance systems cap the maximum contribution,

reducing the progressivity of this financing mechanism. Contributions collected through

the social insurance system should finance the full insured cost of the health program (or

a pre-specified proportion of that cost). Thus, the contribution level or rate is tied to the

cost of providing health insurance. Social insurance payments may vary with the choice

of plan in a multi-plan system (as in Germany) or they may be fixed (as in the US

Medicare program). Social insurance systems can employ pre-funding, building up “trust

funds” to account for future expenses, but meaningful trust funds (that cannot be readily

encroached) are rare.

       Private insurance financing may be individual (although this is rare except in

highly regulated contexts) or operate through employers or other purchasing

organizations. Except in highly regulated contexts or in employer-sponsored groups, the

price of coverage is related to expected health expenditures – older, sicker people pay

more for coverage and premiums rise as health expenditures rise. The concept of

progressivity does not have a clear analogue in the private pay case. Under private

coverage, people choose both how much to purchase and, by extension, how much to pay

as a share of their income. Even in a situation without health insurance, however, health

care utilization rises less than proportionately with income (the income elasticity of

health care utilization is, at the micro level, less than one). The premiums paid by lower

income people are only slightly lower than those charged to higher income people, a

situation that would be viewed as regressive if the premiums were taxes. A special (and

particularly regressive) complication of private financing occurs through the favorable




                                                                                         3
tax treatment of private employer-sponsored health insurance premiums, which exists in

many countries including Canada (in all provinces except Quebec), the United States, the

UK, Denmark, France, and Australia. Here, a tax subsidy is regressively distributed in

the context of otherwise privately financed health insurance. Finally, virtually all

observed private health insurance contracts are of short duration – almost always only

one year. This makes it difficult to pre-fund care, except through savings mechanisms

outside the health system.

       Out-of-pocket payments are those payments into the health care system that are

made directly at the point of service. In this category, I include full payments (as in the

case of pharmaceuticals or nursing home care for those without insurance coverage) as

well as copayments and deductibles. A system with only out-of-pocket payment would

(in a tax sense) finance health care regressively, since health service use rises less than

proportionately with income.

       Note that the revenue-raising and benefit-disbursing components of these systems

work differently over the lifecycle than they do at a point in time. At a point in time,

income taxes tend to be more progressive than social insurance taxes which, in turn, are

generally more progressive than consumption and VAT taxes. When costs and benefits

are computed over the lifecycle, however, relative progressivity can change because

higher income people generally live longer than do those with lower incomes.

Consumption taxes are paid throughout life and reflect consumption (which generally

exceeds income among older people). This means that survivors (who have higher

lifetime incomes, on average) will pay more in lifetime consumption taxes than decedents

(who have lower lifetime incomes), making this tax more progressive. Conversely,




                                                                                           4
income and particularly social insurance taxes appear less progressive in the lifecycle

context. Younger people pay relatively higher taxes, but those with lower incomes may

disproportionately fail to survive and collect benefits at older ages.

        Figure 1 illustrates the composition of health care financing across the OECD

countries. In most countries, insurance covers about 80% of health care costs, with out-

of-pocket spending accounting for the remainder. The structure of out-of-pocket

spending, however, varies substantially among countries. In the United States, which

lacks universal insurance coverage for those under 65, a small number of individuals

account for a large share of out-of-pocket costs. In some countries, certain services are

excluded from public insurance coverage and out-of-pocket spending accounts for a large

share of costs for these particular services. In other countries, a broader range of services

is included in the health insurance package, but substantial copayments are required for

all services.

        Private insurance accounts for a substantial share of health care costs only in the

United States, and even in the United States, private insurance accounts for only about

1/3 of health spending. Outside the United States, the private insurance share varies

between 0 and 16% (Canada ranks 4th at 11.5%). In some countries, private insurance

plays a large role in the health care market, even though it finances only a small

proportion of care. Indeed, the prevalence of private insurance (that is, the proportion of

the population covered by some private insurance) is greater in France, Switzerland, and

the Netherlands than in the United States (SourceOECD, 2006).

        Countries differ markedly in their use of general revenues and social insurance

funds to finance the public share of expenditures. In the English-speaking countries, as




                                                                                        5
well as in Italy, Sweden, and Denmark, general revenues finance virtually all public

health expenditures. At the other extreme, in France and the Netherlands, general

revenues play an insignificant role and social insurance pays the bulk of health

expenditures.

        Various combinations of general revenue and social insurance sources present

different efficiency and equity tradeoffs. An assessment of the overall efficiency and

progressivity of tax system usually requires complex modeling. Kessleman and Cheung

summarize evidence on the progressivity of the Canadian tax system (2004).

Unfortunately, the studies they studies are somewhat dated and do not reflect recent

changes in tax structure. Overall, Kesselman and Cheung find that in Canada, those in

the lowest income quintile pay an average tax rate of about 17% (mainly through

consumption, corporate, and payroll taxes), while those the highest income quintile pays

an average tax rate of about 43%, with personal income taxes accounting for the bulk of

these taxes. Kesselman and Cheung also report average tax rates by age group and

family status. Younger adults and single people pay much higher average taxes than do

single parents, single earner families, or older people. Thus, the Canadian tax system is

fairly progressive, but progressivity differs across groups.

        Financing systems also differ in the efficiency with which they raise funds. In

general, financing systems are more efficient the less they distort individuals’ choices

(around work, consumption, investment, etc.). In this sense, private insurance (without a

tax subsidy) and out-of-pocket payments are fully efficient. Tax-based financing systems

are less efficient, but their relative efficiency depends on the entire structure of the tax

system. For the purposes of this paper, I will focus on how financing affects efficiency in




                                                                                          6
the operation of the health care system, rather than on the efficiency of the financing

system itself.



         2.      Financing Choices and the Efficiency of the Operation of the Health Care

System

         A health system operates in an economically efficient manner if health care

resources cannot be reorganized in a way that would make all members of society better

off. Technical efficiency occurs when health care system inputs are used optimally to

address a particular health care need. As technical efficiency depends on the systems

used to pay providers, any of the insurance financing systems is compatible with a range

of provider payment mechanisms. For example, a general revenue financed system could

pay providers using salaries (as in the UK), fee-for-service rates (as in Canada), case rates

(DRGs) or capitated rates (as for primary care purchasers in the UK).

         In market competition, the invisible hand of the market determines optimal

payment rates for goods and services providers. There are many reasons that this happy

outcome may not occur in the health care system and the market may bid prices up too

high. Provider monopoly power or other related payment inefficiencies, however, do not

affect the choice of financing system. Payment rates may also, in theory, be established

independent of the form of financing, although this may be practically difficult to

achieve. For example, by using regulation, systems with decentralized revenue collection

can achieve the same monopsony payment rates that centralized payment systems can, as

was the case in the all payer rate setting systems that set uniform payment rates for all

payers and all hospitals in several US states during the 1980s and early 1990s..




                                                                                          7
Moreover, large private purchasers (as exist in the US, Germany, and the Netherlands)

may have enough market power to exert appropriate countervailing pressure in the

provider marketplace.

       System efficiency begins to tie in to financing when consumer choices enter the

health care system. The first place this occurs is in the decision to use care. The RAND

health insurance experiment results (and common sense) suggest that systems with

copayments or coinsurance will tend to reduce the use of services. As countless

commentators have argued, there is no particular reason to believe that the decisions of

uninformed consumers/patients to reduce their service utilization will be medically

appropriate. There are, however, situations where requiring the consumer to face some

cost consequences of specific decisions would improve the efficiency of the system. For

example, consumers might be asked to make choices between initiating treatment with a

less costly drug or initiating treatment with a more costly alternative. Requiring out-of-

pocket payments in this context is compatible with any of the insurance financing

arrangements. It may improve the efficiency of the system. The effects on equity depend

on protections that are put in place for lower income people.

       A connection between efficiency and financing may also arise in the context of

system fragmentation. The difficulty of defining and measuring health care services, the

complexity of services that need to be organized, and the problem of hand-offs among

services suggest that more aggregated forms of payment – including payment to health

plans or provider groups –may be preferable to provider-specific payment arrangements.

Organizing care into multiple health plans (including plans with integrated delivery) paid

risk-adjusted capitated rates may (in principle) improve the efficiency of care. Once a




                                                                                       8
system is divided into multiple distinct delivery systems, however, consumers/patients

must either be compelled or be provided with incentives to make an appropriate selection

and stick with it.

        Consumers can be induced to choose efficient plans by allowing (risk-adjusted)

premiums to vary among plans and requiring consumers to pay more for more costly plan

choices (as in the Netherlands and Germany). Even in this case, however, any source of

financing can be used to make the basic plan payment, and additional payments would be

out-of-pocket. Moreover, efficient choice of plans can also be accomplished by paying

plans risk-adjusted equivalent rates per capita, and then permitting plans to compete only

on the scope of services included in the plan.

        The options above suggest that achieving the goal of efficiency within the health

care sector is fundamentally compatible with any form of general financing. Another

element of efficiency, however, is choosing the appropriate size of the health care sector

relative to spending on other goods and services. In pure general revenue systems, this

can only be accomplished globally, through the political process. Within that process,

providers and disease interest groups are likely to exert substantial political pressure to

maintain or expand the size of the system. Moreover, since health care spending

constitutes only one of many government services, it may be difficult for ordinary

citizens to assess the efficiency of the system. The lack of transparency and political

accountability of general revenue financed systems has led some analysts to prefer social

insurance financing.




                                                                                          9
        Under social insurance financing, the cost of health care is more transparent

obvious to taxpayers, in the form of a tax rate or mandated premium payment 2 .

Moreover, social insurance financed systems increasingly organize their systems into

capitated health plans (paid risk-adjusted rates) so that consumers can adjust their

consumption of health care and other goods at the margin. The basic social insurance

payment to health plans can be set at a government-mandated minimum level and

consumers who wish to consume more health care may choose more generous plans,

paying out-of-pocket for the incremental valuation.

        Private insurance systems can also have transparent payment levels and permit

consumers to choose more or less expensive health plans. In practice, the existence of

employer-sponsored insurance, the preferential tax treatment of premiums, and the

existence of substantial risk selection between plans may make it more difficult for

private insurance systems to achieve efficiency in the delivery of services.

        In sum, almost all financing choices are compatible with efficiency in the delivery

of health care. Arrangements with transparent costs, such as social insurance models,

may reduce the ability of providers to exploit their concentration within the system.

Arrangements that require consumers to pay for more costly than average choices may, at

the margin, improve the efficiency of the mix between health care spending and other

sectors.

        Empirical assessment of the effects of financing arrangements on health care

spending is necessarily constrained by the limited number of similar countries available

for study. The OECD routinely collects data on the costs and financing of health care


2
 Note that the transparency of the system may be obscured to the extent that the health care tax or premium
payment for an individual also captures a redistributive component.


                                                                                                   10
systems (SourceOECD). Consistent data are available for about 20 health care systems in

the 1990s, and somewhat fewer in the 1980s and 1970s. There is considerable

persistence in the per capita cost of health care across countries over time (see Figure 2),

even as financing arrangements change. Thus, rather than examining the effect of

financing on health care spending at a point in time, I use this extended time series to

assess the relationship between financing arrangements and the rate of growth of health

care spending over time during each 5-year period. I estimate (separately for each of

1975, 1980, 1985, 1990, 1995, and 2000) simple equations of the form:

Total expendituret = α+ βgeneral revenue sharet-5 + χsocial insurance share t-5 + δout-of-
pocket share t-5 + φtotal expenditure t-5 + ε


       I also estimated specifications that included controls for changes in the

demographic composition of the population (aging) and repeated the analysis using

financing composition at the end rather than the beginning of the period. These

modifications did not substantively affect the results. Results of the main analysis are

reported in Table 1. I report results including and excluding the United States.

       The main finding of Table 1 is that there is no persistent and regular relationship

between the structure of system financing and the rate of growth in per capita health

expenditures in a health system. The results including the United States suggest that

during the 1990-1995 period, countries that began the period with a greater proportion of

health care expenditures funded from general revenues, social insurance, or out-of-pocket

experienced less cost escalation did those with more private payment. Conversely, over

the 1970-1980 period, countries with more private payment experienced less cost

escalation. When the United States is excluded from the analysis, countries with more




                                                                                      11
general revenue financing or more out-of-pocket financing (but not those with more

social insurance financing) experienced less cost growth than did those with more private

insurance financing over the 1990-1995 period and there are no other statistically

significant results. I also examined how the composition of public financing affected the

rate of growth of public expenditures over time. The results are similarly variable over

time, suggesting no clear pattern.

       The findings of these analyses are consistent with the theoretical discussion

above. While taxes vary in the efficiency and progressivity with which they raise funds,

the efficiency of operation of the health care system itself appears to depend much more

on how providers are paid and how the delivery of care is organized than on the method

used to raise these funds.



       3.      Financing Choices and Lifecycle Equity

       In additional to measuring financing choices in terms of their impact on the

efficiency of operation of the system, it is also important to judge these choices on how

they contribute to the equity of the system. The standard metric of progressivity used in

public finance assesses progressivity as the ratio of taxes paid to income. This makes

sense if the funds collected through taxation are used to fund public goods that are

equally available to all. In the case of cash or in-kind transfers, however, equity requires

an assessment of both revenue collection and transfers made. Equity suggests that there

should be net benefit transfers to lower income people. For any given level of national

health spending, the degree of equity in a health care system depends both on how




                                                                                       12
revenues for the system are raised and how spending in that system is disbursed among

beneficiaries 3 .

          In assessing the effect of system financing on system equity, I therefore follow

the public finance literature and examine how the difference between payments made and

benefits received from a health insurance program for higher income people compares

with the difference for lower income people. In the case of a fully private system, this

calculation is straightforward. Premiums paid each year reflect expected health care

benefits for that person in that year. Premiums each year are, after a non-income related

adjustment for loading, actuarially equal to benefits received that year. Lifetime

premiums paid are actuarially equivalent to lifetime benefits received. Although the

system generates ex post redistribution between the healthy and the sick, ex ante the

system is entirely non-redistributive.

         Social insurance and general revenue financed programs depart from this model

in two ways. First, these programs pool all beneficiaries, so payments made in any given

year reflect the average cost of all beneficiaries covered in that year, not individual

specific costs. Second, payments into the system each year are related to current income,

according to the design of the tax system. This means that lifetime premiums need not

reflect lifetime benefits.

         To see the implications of these two features, imagine that income was unrelated

to either health expenditures or health status. In a progressive financing system, this

would imply that in each year, higher income people would pay more into the system



3
  Since health care costs have been rising more rapidly than financing, there are substantial
intergenerational transfers in the health care system. I will treat these inter-cohort transfers as
progressivity-neutral.


                                                                                                      13
than they would receive (and vice versa). The same pattern would hold over people’s

lifetimes. The system would be redistributive from high to low income.

         In most universal publicly-financed health care systems, including Canada’s

however, income is related to both health expenditures at a point in time and to health

status. This relationship has three components. First, at any given age, lower income

people are usually in worse health than are higher income people. This leads them to use

more health care services, generating a progressive distribution of benefits. Second,

conditional on need, higher income people and lower income people may use care

differently, even under universal free access to care. Van Doorslaer and Masseria (2004)

find that in about ½ of OECD countries (including Canada), conditional on need, lower

income people are more likely to use hospital services than are higher income people, and

in most countries, they spend more days in hospital once hospitalized. Conversely, in all

OECD countries, conditional on need, higher income people are more likely to see any

doctor, to use specialist services, and tend to have more specialist visits, than do lower

income people (see also Roos and Mustard, 1997) 4 . On average, conditional on health

status, higher income people use the system more intensively and use more costly health

services than do lower income people.

         Third, income is closely related to mortality. In Canada, in 1996, life expectancy

at birth was about 5 years longer for men in the highest income quintile than for men in

the lowest income quintile. Life expectancy for women was about 1.6 years longer in

the highest than in the lowest income quintiles (Wilkins, Berthelot, and Ng, 2002) 5 .

Lower income people were much less likely to survive to age 75. While about 69% of

4
  These income-related patterns are partially attributable to differences in access to health facilities in
(higher income) urban and (lower income) rural areas.
5
  I am grateful to Russell Wilkins for sharing the mortality data with me.


                                                                                                         14
higher income men survived to 75, only 53% of lower income men did (see Figure 3).

Among women, 80% of higher income but only 73% of lower income survived to age 75

(see Figure 4). This pattern of differential survival, combined with similar spending at

each age and increasing spending over the lifecycle, reduces the lifetime spending

benefits of a public health insurance system for lower income people.

           This combination of factors means that the extent to which benefits under a

universal health insurance system are distributed in a progressive fashion, and the net

progressivity of the system, is an empirical question.

           A small literature examines the net progressivity of social welfare systems in

lifecycle context. Several studies have examined this question in the context of pension

systems in the US and Canada (see, for example, Brown 1998, who concludes that both

the US and Canadian pension systems remain progressive after accounting for longevity)

and in the context of the U.S. Medicare system, which provides universal health

insurance to people 65 and over. Studies of the US Medicare system, a universal, social

insurance financed health insurance program for people 65+, reach conflicting results on

progressivity. In their basic calculations (omitting the utility value of insurance),

McClellan and Skinner (2005) conclude that Medicare generates modest dollar transfers

toward higher income people. Bhattacharya and Lakdawalla (2005), using education,

rather than income as the measure of socioeconomic status, find that the hospital benefit

in Medicare is somewhat progressive.

           I examine this question in the Canadian context using data from the Canadian

Community Health Survey 2000 6 (CCHS), data on mortality rates by income quintile in

1996 from Statistics Canada, and data on expenditures from SourceOECD. I compute the
6
    Courtney Ward graciously provided these data to me.


                                                                                         15
average number of general practitioner visits, specialist visits, and hospital days by age

group and gender and by income quintiles, using household-size adjusted income

quintiles provided in the CCHS. I then assign a level of spending (intended to include

associated ancillary services, diagnostic tests, etc.) to each general practitioner visit

($75), specialist visit ($375), and hospital day ($1000), so that total spending for

physician service use and hospital use corresponds (roughly) to the OECD population

totals for Canada. I use these data to compute spending levels by quintile throughout the

life cycle. Figures 5 and 6 present these spending patterns for men and women.

        As expected, health care spending rises with age for both men and women. For

both men and women, there is a pronounced difference in health spending between the

three upper and two lower quintiles from ages 30 to about 55. After about age 55,

spending patterns of the groups begin to converge. In late life, spending for the upper

quintiles accelerates much more quickly than among the lower quintiles.

        I next combine these data with the information on survival. Using these

combined data, I compute lifetime public health care expenditures in Canada by quintile.

I calculate these expenditures at age 12, at age 25 (not shown), and at age 65. These

results are reported in Table 2. In each set of results, the first column reports results that

do not adjust for life expectancy and do not discount later spending. The second column

reports results that adjust for life expectancy but do not discount later spending. The

third column reports results adjusted for life expectancy and discounted at 5%.

        Undiscounted, unadjusted lifetime health care spending measured at age 12

ranges from about $85,000 (high income men) to $170,000 (low income women).

Adjusting for differences in life expectancy reduces lifetime spending. For high income




                                                                                            16
men, the effect of adjusting for life expectancy (without discounting) is to reduce

expected lifetime spending by about 22% for men (slightly more for lower income men)

and by about 11% for women (slightly more for higher income women). Discounting

substantially reduces lifetime spending, particularly measured at earlier ages, because

most health care costs occur in later life. Discounted lifetime health care costs are

between 12% and 65% higher for women than for men in each quintile.

       The three rows below the quintile estimates indicate the ratio of lifetime health

spending between the highest and lowest quintiles (Q1:Q5), the middle and lowest

quintile (Q3:Q5), and the highest and middle quintile (Q1:Q3). The patterns are quite

different for men and women. Using the discounted figures, among men, lifetime

expenditures are about 10% higher for men in the lowest quintile men than for men in the

middle quintile, while spending is about 50% higher for men in the middle quintile

compared to those in the highest quintile. For women, the differences are smaller.

Spending for women in the middle quintile is about 9% higher than spending in the

highest quintile, while spending in the lowest quintile is about 40% higher than spending

in the middle quintile.

       Measuring lifetime expenditures at age 25, rather than age 12, has little effect on

the patterns (not shown). Consistent with prior studies in the United States, however,

lifetime expenditures beginning at age 65 tend to be slightly higher for higher income

groups than for lower income groups.

       The final column in each of the panels describes the redistributive impact of

putting $1 of tax funds into the health care system. The modest relationship between

lifetime health care spending and income mean that a universal health insurance system




                                                                                        17
can only be slightly redistributive. Putting $1 of tax funds into the public health

insurance system effectively channels between $0.23 and $0.26 toward the lowest income

people, and about $0.50 to the bottom two income quintiles. For example, suppose all

funds for a universal health insurance system were generated from the top three income

quintiles. As these quintiles also use health care services, about ½ of the funds raised

would be returned to them. The other ½ of the funds raised would be redistributed to the

bottom two income quintiles.

       The lifecycle and cross-service patterns of health care spending also suggest that

some forms of health care spending are more progressive than others. Lower income

people are disproportionate users of hospital days, perhaps because arranging discharge is

more complicated for those with fewer resources (Van Doorslaer and Masseria, 2004). In

most health care systems, low income people are less likely to initiate specialist care than

are higher income people, despite their worse initial health status. In most countries,

lower income people use more hospital days, conditional on hospitalization, than do

higher income people. In Canada, higher income people also make disproportionate use

of elective surgical procedures, such as hip replacement and knee replacement (Roos and

Mustard, 1997). Finally, higher income people make more use of health care services at

older ages, while lower income people have disproportionately higher use in mid-life.

       These patterns suggest that focusing the marginal public health care dollar on

skilled nursing days, access to general practitioners, and care associated with conditions

that manifest in mid-life will have a more progressive effect than focusing additional tax

dollars on elective surgical procedures or specialist care. At the margin, progressive

financing sources should be devoted to progressive ends.




                                                                                      18
       4.      Health Care in the Bigger Picture

       The optimal design of health care system financing cannot be assessed in isolation

from the rest of the components of the economy and the welfare state. Public funds used

to finance health care cannot be used for other purposes. If health care spending rises,

either taxes must increase or other services must be cut. This problem is acute in the case

of health care spending because this sector is growing more rapidly than any other

element of government budgets. Moreover, the relatively modest progressive impact of

spending on health care raises the risk that rising health care spending is displacing more

progressive cash or in-kind transfer programs.

       A limited number of studies have examined the effect of in-kind transfer

programs, such as health insurance programs, on the general progressivity of the welfare

state. If non-cash benefits are very large relative to incomes, the inclusion of universal,

uniformly-distributed, non-cash benefits would significantly reduce measured inequality

in a population. If non-cash benefits are progressively distributed, their inclusion will

reduce measured inequality still further. Smeeding et al. (1993) use data from the early-

1980s to examine the impact of including non-cash benefits in the measurement of

economic inequality across countries. In that study, inclusion of non-cash in-kind

benefits (including public health insurance) had little effect on the relative rankings of

countries in terms of economic inequality.

       In a recent paper, Garfinkel, Rainwater, and Smeeding (2006) revisit this issue.

Their analysis incorporates the value of in-kind educational and health transfers

(measured at the average cost across countries), and the distributive impact of the taxes




                                                                                       19
used to finance these transfers. Note that Garfinkel, Rainwater and Smeeding conduct

their analysis at a point in time and do not incorporate the lifecycle considerations

described above. They find that the most important redistributive in-kind transfers are

those that provide education to children. Inclusion of these benefits substantially alters

the picture of relative well-being among children across countries.

         Garfinkel, Rainwater, and Smeeding isolate the effects of health spending

transfers by conducting analyses that focus only on the population 65 and over. In their

analyses, health spending levels vary by age but not by income level. Empirically, health

spending varies relatively little by income at older ages, suggesting that this assumption

probably does not affect their results very much.

         Garfinkel, Rainwater, and Smeeding report results for the population 65 and over

using average values of health benefits across country 7 . As expected, they find that

unadjusted income inequality tends to be higher in the English-speaking countries and

lowest in the Scandinavian countries. Consistent with Smeeding’s earlier study of the

1980s, however, the inclusion of the value of in-kind transfers (net of the impact on

equity of the revenue collection to finance them) has very little effect on measured

inequality, at least among older people. Inclusion of these benefits leads the inequality

ratio for the low income vs. middle income population to fall slightly in most cases (by a

maximum of 7 points, from 62 to 69 in Belgium) and actually generates a decline in

equity in a few cases (by a maximum of 8 points, from 58 to 50, in Germany). The




7
  Garfinkel, Rainwater, and Smeeding also report results using the actual value of health care benefits in
each country. Using the average value of health benefits (as I do here) has the effect of reducing the impact
of high US health care costs on the extent of inequality reduction achieved through health benefit transfers
in the US.


                                                                                                     20
effects on inequality between the high and middle income population are slightly greater

in magnitude, but equally inconsistent in direction.

       These results suggest that public financing of the health care system has

surprisingly little impact on overall economic equality. This implies that the value of

health benefits received, net of taxes paid, by income quintile is small relative to income

and other components of well-being and, consistent with our findings above, that health

spending at a point in time does not vary greatly with income.

       The final question of interest is the impact of rising health care expenditures on

equality. No studies have examined this question directly. Instead, I examine the

evolution of health care spending and tax revenue over time.

       Figure 7 shows how the tax share of GDP and the health care share of GDP have

evolved across the OECD over time. The tax shares of most economies have risen

substantially since 1975, but there is considerable variation among countries in rates of

growth of taxation. The health share of GDP has also increased since 1975 in most

countries, but in most countries, the health share of GDP has increased less than the tax

share of GDP. In these countries, increases in taxation have more than accommodated

rising health care spending. By contrast, in six countries – Canada, Germany, the

Netherlands, Switzerland, the United Kingdom, and the United States – the rise in health

care spending as a share of GDP has been greater than the rise in tax revenue. In most of

these countries, this pattern reflects a relatively slow increase in tax revenue rather than a

relatively rapid increase in health care costs. If all health care spending in these

countries were public, other types of spending would have been displaced by health care

expenditures.




                                                                                        21
        Figure 8 repeats this analysis using the public health expenditure share of GDP.

Although the six countries above differ substantially in the share of expenditures that are

public, the pattern seen in Figure 7 is repeated in Figure 8. In these countries, tax policy

has been constrained and has not accommodated increases in publicly-financed health

care expenditures. Rather, the effect of constraining taxes has been that publicly-

financed health care expenditures have displaced other forms of government spending.

Without further information, however, it is not possible to ascertain the relative efficiency

or equity of this displacement.



        5.       Implications for Financing

        The analyses presented in this paper suggest first, that the form of health care

financing has no systematic relationship to the efficiency with which the health care

system operates, at least to the extent that efficiency can be proxied by cost 8 . Second,

over the lifecycle, public expenditures on health care appear to be modestly progressive,

with the main progressive impact of this spending occurring among middle-aged people.

In Canada, $1 of tax money spent on health care generates about $0.50 worth of benefits

to the lower two income quintiles and about $0.50 worth of benefits for the upper three

income quintiles. Third, patterns of health service utilization in developed countries

suggest that the marginal dollar of health care spending – money used to purchase high

tech equipment or specialist services – is less progressively spent than the average dollar.

Depending on the form of financing, this marginal dollar may not be distributed

progressively at all. Fourth, health care spending has little impact on the general

8
  As noted above, alternative sources of revenue themselves have efficiency implications, regardless of how
the funding is used.



                                                                                                   22
distribution of well-being in society. Distributing progressively-financed public funds

through universal health insurance programs has limited impact on the distribution of

total income. Finally, rising health expenditures threaten to displace other types of

publicly-financed transfers. This outcome has already occurred in many relatively low

tax share economies, including in Canada.

       This pattern of results has two implications for the form of financing of the health

care system. In terms of public financing, the results suggest that forms of revenue

collection that tax both older adults and young people are more equitable, over the

lifecycle, than those that tax younger people and cover older people. The greatest

redistributive benefits of public health financing occur among middle-aged people who

become seriously ill or disabled. Differential mortality and relatively equal health status

among survivors make public financing of benefits to the elderly less redistributive.

       In terms of the mix of public and private financing, the potential for public health

insurance to crowd out other forms of redistributive benefits, without generating

significant redistribution themselves, suggests that a mixed financing system may be the

optimal way to balance efficiency and equity in health care. At the margin, increasing

the level of public health expenditures to address ever-improving health care technologies

will eventually – and, in some instances, may already -- reduce the overall level of equity

in society by moving scarce tax revenues from cash to less redistributive in-kind

transfers. Progressive taxes are most effectively deployed to provide progressive

benefits. Targeting these funds toward lower income groups is likely to enable the

maximum level of redistribution at the lowest efficiency cost.




                                                                                        23
References

Amelung, Volker, Sherry Glied, and Angelina Topan. 2003. “Health Insurance and the
Labor Market: The German Experience.” Journal of Health Politics, Policy and Law.
August 2003 (28:4): 693-714.

Bhattacharya, Jay; Lakdawalla, Darius 2006. Does Medicare Benefit the Poor? Journal
of Public Economics, January 2006, v. 90, iss. 1-2, pp. 277-92.

Brown, Robert. L. 1998. Social Security: Regressive or Progressive? North American
Actuarial Journal, Vol. 2, No. 2, 1-33.

Garfinkel, Irwin, Lee Rainwater, and Timothy M. Smeeding. 2006. “A Re-Examination
of Welfare States and Inequality in Rich Nations: How In-kind Transfers and Indirect
Taxes Change the Story. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management. Vol. 25, No. 4,
897-919.

Kessleman, Jonathan R. and Ron Cheung. 2004. “Tax Incidence, Progressivity, and
Inequality in Canada.” Canadian Tax Journal, v. 52, iss. 3, pp. 709-89.

McClellan, Mark; Skinner, Jonathan. 2006. The Incidence of Medicare. Journal of
Public Economics, January 2006, v. 90, iss. 1-2, pp. 257-76

Roos, Noralou P. and Cameron A. Mustard. 1997. “Variation in Health and Health Care
Use by Socioeconomic Status in Winnipeg, Canada: Does the System Work Well? Yes
and No. Milbank Quarterly, Vol, 75, No. 1, 84-110.

Smeeding, Timothy M., Peter Saunders, John Coder, Stephen Jenkins, Johan Fritzell,
Aldi J. M. Hagenaars, Richard Hauser, and Michael Wolfason. 1993. Povery,
Inequality, and Family Living Standards Impacts Across Seven Nations: The Effect of
Noncash Subsidies for Health, Education, and Housing. Review of Income and Wealth
Series 39. Number 3. September, 229-256.

SourceOECD. OECD Health Data, 2006. OECD. 2006.
http://www.ecosante.org/index2.php?base=OCDE&langh=ENG&langs=ENG

van Doorslaer, Eddy, Cristina Masseria and the OECD Health Equity Research Group
Members. 2004. Income-Related Inequality in the Use of Medical Care in 21 OECD
Countries. OECD Health Care Working Papers #14, May 11.

Wilkins R, Berthelot JM, Ng E. 2002. “Trends in mortality by neighbourhood income in
urban Canada from 1971 to 1996.” Health Reports 13(Suppl):45-72.




                                                                               24
                             Figure 1: Composition of Financing, 2000
                                       (SourceOECD, 2006)
        100%




        80%




        60%




        40%




        20%




         0%
                     ia
                     ia




                      a


                      k




                                      y




                                                          ly


                                                           n




                                                                             o




                                                                                                                           n
                                     ce




                                     nd




                                                                   ea




                                                                                        s
                                      d




                                                                                               nd




                                                                                                                         en


                                                                                                                        nd




                                                                                                                         es
                      d




                                                                                                                         m
                                   an
                  ar
                 ad




                                                                                     nd
                                                        pa




                                                                                                                        ai
                 an




                                   an




                                                                          ic
                  al


                  tr




                                                    Ita




                                                                                                                      do
                                                                 or
                                 an




                                                                                                                      at
                                                                                                                     ed
                                  la




                                                                                             la




                                                                                                                      la
                                                                         ex




                                                                                                                    Sp
              m
              us
               tr




                                m
             an




                                                      Ja
                                el




                                                                                   la
              nl




                                                                                                                   St
                              Ire




                                                                                             a




                                                                                                                   er
                                                                K




                                                                                                                    g
                              Fr
            us




                                                                                                                Sw
            en




                                                                        M
                            er




                                                                                    r
                             Ic




                                                                                          Ze
            A




           Fi




                                                                                                                 in
           C




                                                                                 he




                                                                                                               itz




                                                                                                                d
         A




                           G
          D




                                                                                                              K

                                                                                                             te
                                                                                        ew




                                                                                                          Sw
                                                                              et




                                                                                                            d

                                                                                                          ni
                                                                          N




                                                                                                         te
                                                                                    N




                                                                                                       U
                                                                                                      ni
                                                                                                    U
                            Out of pocket   Private Insurance   General Revenue              Social Insurance




Source: SourceOECD, Online. Downloaded October 2006.




                                                                                                                 25
                                  Figure 2: PPP Adjusted Health Care Spending per Capita 1960 and 1990
                                                           SourceOECD, 2006

                   5000
                                                                                                                        US
                   4500


                   4000
                                                                                                               fitted
                   3500
Spending in 2000




                   3000                                                                                        fitted
                                                                                                               excluding US
                   2500


                   2000


                   1500


                   1000


                   500


                     0
                          0       20         40          60           80           100        120        140                 160
                                                                Spending in 1960




                          Source: SourceOECD, Online. Downloaded October 2006.




                                                                                                                         26
                                     Figure 3: Cohort Survival by Quintile: Canadian Men

            100000


             90000


             80000


             70000


             60000                                                                                   Q1:Q5 survivors
                                                                                                     Q1
Survivors




                                                                                                     Q2
             50000
                                                                                                     Q3
                                                                                                     Q4
             40000                                                                                   Q5


             30000


             20000


             10000


                0
                     15   20   25   30   35   40   45   50    55   60   65    70   75      80   85
                                                        Age




                Source: Statistics Canada Life Table data, 1996. Provided by Russell Wilkins.




                                                                                                            27
                                      Figure 4: Cohort Survival by Quintile: Canadian Women

              100000


               90000


               80000


               70000


               60000                                                                                     Q1:Q5 survivors
                                                                                                         Q1
  Survivors




                                                                                                         Q2
               50000
                                                                                                         Q3
                                                                                                         Q4
               40000                                                                                     Q5


               30000


               20000


               10000


                  0
                       15   20   25   30   35   40   45   50    55   60   65    70   75   80   85
                                                          Age




Source: Statistics Canada Life Table data, 1996. Provided by Russell Wilkins.




                                                                                                    28
                                                             Figure 5: Annual Spending by Quintile, Men

                          7000



                          6000



                          5000
        Annual Spending




                          4000



                          3000



                          2000



                          1000



                            0
                                 12 TO   15 TO   20 TO   25 TO   30 TO   35 TO   40 TO   45 TO    50 TO    55 TO   60 TO    65 TO   70 TO   75 TO   80
                                   14      19      24      29      34      39      44      49       54       59      64       69      74      79  YEARS

                                                                     Highest       Q2        Q3           Q4       Lowest




Source: Author’s tabulations of the Canadian Community Health Survey, 2000
combined with 1996 life table data from Statistics Canada.




                                                                                                                                        29
                                                    Figure 6: Annual Spending by Quintile, Women

                   8000



                   7000



                   6000



                   5000
 Annual Spending




                   4000



                   3000



                   2000



                   1000



                     0
                          12 TO   15 TO   20 TO   25 TO   30 TO   35 TO   40 TO   45 TO    50 TO    55 TO   60 TO    65 TO   70 TO   75 TO   80
                            14      19      24      29      34      39      44      49       54       59      64       69      74      79  YEARS

                                                              Highest       Q2        Q3           Q4       Lowest




Source: Author’s tabulations of the Canadian Community Health Survey, 2000
combined with 1996 life table data from Statistics Canada.




                                                                                                                                           30
                                  Figure 7: Change in Tax Share and Health Share of GDP, 1975-2003

 20




 15




 10




  5




  0




                                                                                                                                            nd
                                                                             d


                                                                                        nd




                                                                                                                 d




                                                                                                                                  en




                                                                                                                                                                    s
                                                                                                                                                       om
                                   a
         lia




                                              d




                                                                                                 n


                                                                                                                  s




                                                                                                                           n
                   ria




                                                       1


                                                                 y
                                   k




                                                                                                               nd




                                                                                                                                                                 te
                                                               an




                                                                                                               an
                                 ar


                                            an




                                                                                               pa




                                                                                                                         ai
                           ad




                                                                          an
                                                      ce
       ra




                                                                                                                                            la
                                                                                                                                ed
                                                                                     la
                st




                                                                                                                                                                a
                                                                                                                      Sp




                                                                                                                                                     gd
                                m




                                                                                                           rla
                                                             m
                                         nl




                                                                        el




                                                                                             Ja




                                                                                                            al
                         an




                                                                                                                                          er
                                                                                 I re
    st




                                                                                                                                                             St
               Au




                                                    an




                                                                                                                               Sw
                              en


                                       Fi




                                                                                                        Ze
                                                                     Ic
                                                           er




                                                                                                                                                    n
 Au




                                                                                                        he




                                                                                                                                       itz
                         C




                                                  Fr




                                                                                                                                                 Ki


                                                                                                                                                             d
                                                           G
                             D




                                                                                                                                                           te
                                                                                                                                    Sw
                                                                                                     et


                                                                                                    ew




                                                                                                                                                 d


                                                                                                                                                        ni
                                                                                                 N




                                                                                                                                               te
                                                                                                  N




                                                                                                                                                        U
                                                                                                                                            ni
                                                                                                                                          U
 -5

                                                                     Change in Tax           Change in Health




Source: Health data from SourceOECD, downloaded October 2006. Tax share data from
OECD Annual revenue statistics at http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/18/23/35471773.pdf,
Table 2.




                                                                                                                                                                 31
                             Figure 8: Change in Tax Share and in Public Health Expenditure Share of GDP

 20




 15




 10




  5




  0




                                                                                                                                           nd
                                                                             d


                                                                                        nd




                                                                                                                d




                                                                                                                                 en




                                                                                                                                                                   s
                                                                                                                                                      om
                                   a
         lia




                                              d




                                                                                                 n


                                                                                                                 s




                                                                                                                          n
                   ria




                                                       1


                                                                 y
                                   k




                                                                                                              nd




                                                                                                                                                                te
                                                               an




                                                                                                              an
                                 ar


                                            an




                                                                                               pa




                                                                                                                        ai
                           ad




                                                                          an
                                                      ce
       ra




                                                                                                                                           la
                                                                                                                               ed
                                                                                     la
                st




                                                                                                                                                               a
                                                                                                                     Sp




                                                                                                                                                    gd
                                m




                                                                                                          rla
                                                             m
                                         nl




                                                                        el




                                                                                             Ja




                                                                                                           al
                         an




                                                                                                                                         er
                                                                                 I re
    st




                                                                                                                                                            St
               Au




                                                    an




                                                                                                                              Sw
                              en


                                       Fi




                                                                                                       Ze
                                                                     Ic
                                                           er




                                                                                                                                                   n
 Au




                                                                                                       he




                                                                                                                                      itz
                         C




                                                  Fr




                                                                                                                                                Ki


                                                                                                                                                            d
                                                           G
                             D




                                                                                                                                                          te
                                                                                                                                   Sw
                                                                                                    et


                                                                                                   ew




                                                                                                                                                d


                                                                                                                                                       ni
                                                                                                N




                                                                                                                                              te
                                                                                                 N




                                                                                                                                                       U
                                                                                                                                           ni
                                                                                                                                         U
 -5

                                                                 Change in Tax          Change in Public Health




Source: Health data from SourceOECD, downloaded October 2006. Tax share data from
OECD Annual revenue statistics at http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/18/23/35471773.pdf,
Table 2.




                                                                                                                                                                32
                            Table 1: Relationship between Spending Composition and Spending Growth
                         1975              1980             1985            1990             1995                      2000
Total Expenditures
          Gen Rev                +                 +                   0                  0                  -                  0
          Soc Ins                +                 +                   0                  0                  -                 0
          OOP                   NA                 +                   0                  0                  -                  0
          (N)                   (6)               (11)                (8)               (11)               (16)               (20)
Total Expenditures, No
US
          Gen Rev                0                  +                  0                  0                  -                 0
          Soc Ins                0                  +                  0                  0                  0                 0
          OOP                   NA                 NA                  0                  0                  -                 0
          (N)                   (5)                (7)                (7)                (9)               (15)               (19)
Public Expenditures
          Gen Rev                                   +                  0                  0                  -                 0
          Soc Ins                                   +                  -                  -                  -                  -
          OOP                                       +                  -                  -                  -                  -
          (N)                                      (6)                (8)               (10)               (16)               (20)
Public Expenditures,
No US
          Gen Rev                                                      0                  0                  0                 0
          Soc Ins                                                      0                  0                  0                 0
          OOP                                                          0                  0                  -                  0
          (N)                                                         (7)                (9)               (15)               (19)

Data from SourceOECD, 2006 download. Results are from regressions of spending in column heading year regressed on expenditures
(total or public, respectively) 5 years earlier, and on the composition of spending 5 years earlier. + indicates positive correlation, 0
indicates no significant correlation at 10% confidence level, - indicates negative correlation.




                                                                                                                                     1
         Table 2: Lifetime Spending by Quintile and Redistributive Effect of Health Care Spending
                                   At age 12                                         At Age 65

                                               Redistributive                              Redistributive
                 No LE           0%         5% Effect at 5%       No LE        0%       5% Effect at 5%
MALE
       Highest      84953     66449      42332         0.13        52810    35521    19185          0.18
       Q2           95603     74698      48218         0.15        57653    38430    20927          0.20
       Q3          129646     99472      64762         0.21        70187    43042    23200          0.22
       Q4          159807    129991      86414         0.28        68912    44595    24542          0.23
       Lowest      138298    105591      72194         0.23        61943    34521    18959          0.18

  Low:High            1.63      1.59       1.71                      1.17     0.97     0.99
   Low:Mid            1.07      1.06       1.11                      0.88     0.80     0.82
  Mid:High            1.53      1.50       1.53                      1.33     1.21     1.21
FEMALE
      Highest      127961    108881      69488         0.17        78174    60134    32276          0.27
      Q2           104700     92895      63603         0.16        45956    35450    19132          0.16
      Q3           124467    110567      75552         0.18        52484    40296    21766          0.18
      Q4           155599    139694      96697         0.24        57302    44085    23977           0.2
      Lowest       170540    151924     104844         0.26        53090    39145    21331          0.18

  Low:High            1.33      1.40       1.51                      0.68     0.65     0.66
  Low:Mid             1.37      1.37       1.39                      1.01     0.97     0.98
  Mid:High            0.97      1.02       1.09                      0.67     0.67     0.67


         Source: Author’s tabulations of the Canadian Community Health Survey, 2000
         combined with 1996 life table data from Statistics Canada and SourceOECD October
         2006. Spending computed as general practitioner visits @$75, specialist visits @$375,
         hospital days @$1000. Redistributive effect describes share received by group from $1
         of health care spending, by gender.




                                                                                           2
