NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TAXES AND MUTUAL FUND INFLOWS AROUND DISTRIBUTION DATES
Woodrow T. Johnson
James M. Poterba
Working Paper 13884
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13884

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2008

We are grateful to Raj Chetty, Joel Dickson, Bill Gentry, Dan Halperin, Jiekun Huang, and seminar
participants at the American Economic Association meetings in Chicago, Boston College, the NBER,
the University of Chicago, and the Securities and Exchange Commission for comments. We thank
the fund family that provided data to make this project possible, and the National Science Foundation
(Poterba) and a Keller Research Award (Johnson) for research support. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Woodrow T. Johnson and James M. Poterba. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Taxes and Mutual Fund Inflows Around Distribution Dates
Woodrow T. Johnson and James M. Poterba
NBER Working Paper No. 13884
March 2008
JEL No. G11,G23,H24
ABSTRACT
Capital gain distributions by mutual funds generate tax liability for taxable shareholders, thereby reducing
their after-tax returns. Taxable investors who are considering purchasing fund shares around distribution
dates have an incentive to delay their purchase until after the distribution, since this will reduce the
present value of their tax liability. Non-taxable shareholders, such as those who invest through IRAs
and other tax-deferred accounts, face no such incentive for delaying purchase. This paper compares
daily shareholder transactions by taxable and non-taxable investors in the mutual funds of a single
no-load fund complex around distribution dates. Gross inflows to taxable accounts are significantly
lower in the weeks preceding distribution dates than in the weeks following them, but gross inflows
to tax-deferred accounts do not change around these dates. This finding suggests that some taxable
shareholders time their purchase of mutual fund shares to avoid the tax acceleration associated with
distributions. Taxable shareholders who purchase shares just before distribution dates also have shorter
holding periods, on average, than those who buy after a distribution. The cost of the distribution-related
tax acceleration for pre-distribution buyers is therefore somewhat less than that for those who buy
after the distribution.

Woodrow T. Johnson
Department of Finance
University of Oregon
385 Lillis
1208 University of Oregon
Eugene, OR 94703
wtj@uoregon.edu
James M. Poterba
Department of Economics
MIT, E52-373A
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
poterba@mit.edu

11

How capital income taxes affect financial market equilibrium depends on whether investors alter
their behavior in response to tax incentives. A voluminous literature has examined the impact of dividend
taxes and capital gains taxes on the behavior of common stock investors, with particular emphasis on how
these taxes affect portfolio composition and asset trading decisions. In contrast, even though data from
the Investment Company Institute (2007) suggest that more than 22 million U.S. households – 19 percent
of all households – own mutual funds outside a tax-deferred retirement account, relatively little is known
about how taxes affect the behavior of investors in intermediated investment vehicles such as mutual
funds. Lipper Associates (2007) estimates that in 2006, open end mutual funds distributed $234 billion in
long-term capital gains, $31 billion in short-term gains, and $154 in taxable dividends, thereby generating
at least $24 billion in investor tax liability. Taxes on capital gain distributions accounted for nearly $14
billion of this total.
Mutual fund investors are taxed under a specialized set of tax rules. All fund shareholders as of a
given date share in a fund distribution in proportion to their fund ownership, regardless of their holding
period or whether the fund’s share price has increased or decreased since their date of purchase. This tax
provision raises the possibility that a fund investor who purchases fund shares just before a taxable
distribution will be liable for capital gains taxes even though the value of her fund shares may have fallen
since her date of purchase. Financial advisors caution taxable investors against buying mutual fund
shares just before distribution dates. This advice is widely reported in the popular press, particularly as
the year-end distribution season approaches.
Several legislative proposals, for example Saxton (2004), have called for modifying the tax rules
governing mutual fund distributions to allow deferral of the tax liability on distributed gains until the
investor sells her fund shares. Assessing how these proposals would affect investor behavior requires
information on several aspects of the mutual fund market, including the current effect of distribution taxes
on the purchase and sale decisions of fund investors.
Tax return data leave little doubt that taxable investors report and pay taxes on billions of dollars
in mutual fund distributions, but there have been relatively few studies of how taxes affect the behavior of
mutual fund investors. Barclay, Pearson, and Weisbach (1998) were among the first to focus on capital
1

22

gains “overhang” in open end mutual funds. They found that funds with substantial embedded unrealized
capital gains, which place investors at greatest risk for future capital gain distributions, attract smaller net
inflows than comparable funds without a capital gains overhang. Bergstresser and Poterba (2002)
examined gross inflows and gross outflows from equity mutual funds in an effort to understand whether
investors consider the tax burden on fund returns in making their investment decisions. They found that
open-end funds with high historical tax burdens on taxable shareholders attract smaller inflows than funds
with comparable before-tax return experiences but lower shareholder tax burdens. Ivković and
Weisbenner (2006) analyzed the sale of mutual fund shares and found that fund investors, unlike common
stock investors, harvest losses and defer gains. It is unclear whether this reflects a focus on tax concerns
or an extrapolation of past returns to prospective performance.
Several studies have suggested that fund managers consider the implications of their asset
management decisions for taxable investors. Plancich (2003) found that that the mix of distributions
shifted toward long-term gains after the Taxpayer Relief Act of 1997 reduced the tax burden on these
gains relative to short-term gains. Khorana and Servaes (1999) found that fund management companies
responded to the accumulation of capital gains “overhang” in a fund by creating new funds that mimic
existing funds, but lack the embedded capital gains that may discourage taxable investors from buying the
fund’s shares. Christoffersen, Geczy, Musto, and Reed (2005) observed that the investing public displays
substantial tax rate heterogeneity, which complicates the challenge facing managers who try to consider
their investors’ tax burdens.
This paper investigates the impact of taxes on the timing of mutual fund purchases. We test
whether shareholders follow the advice of financial advisors who warn about the tax consequences of
buying mutual fund shares prior to a distribution date. We exploit a proprietary six-year panel database
that includes all trades within and across all funds in one actively managed no-load mutual fund family.
We compare trades made through tax-deferred accounts, primarily traditional and Roth IRAs, with trades
made through taxable accounts. While we cannot be certain of the marginal tax rate that applies to
distributions received by the funds’ taxable shareholders, we know that distributions paid to tax-deferred
accounts are untaxed. We find that taxable shareholder inflow is 27 percent lower in the four weeks

33

before a distribution date than afterward, which suggests that at least some taxable shareholders are aware
of impending distributions and time their purchases to reduce their tax impact. By comparison, we find
no evidence of inflow deferral by tax-deferred investors. These findings offer new evidence on the broad
questions of whether and how taxes affect shareholder behavior, as well as on the specific issue of how
the specialized income tax rules for mutual funds affect open-end fund shareholders.
Although we observe a modest decline in fund inflows just before the distribution date, we still
find many taxable investors purchasing fund shares before distributions. These investors may regard the
potential near-term change in the fund’s net asset value (NAV) as large enough to warrant purchasing the
fund, and the associated tax payment acceleration, before the distribution. While we cannot observe what
investors believe about the NAV, we can measure another aspect of investor heterogeneity: holding
period. We find that fund investors who purchase shares just prior to distribution dates on average
liquidate their accounts sooner than those who purchase just after distribution dates. Because the cost of
tax acceleration is increasing in the investor’s holding period, this finding suggests that pre-distribution
buyers may have a smaller incentive than post-distribution buyers to defer purchase.
Our study is similar in spirit to Graham and Kumar’s (2006) analysis of how individual investor
characteristics are correlated with trading decisions around ex-dividend days for common stocks. They
found that older and lower income investors are more likely to purchase stocks before ex-dividend days
than afterward, and they suggested that this could potentially be explained by tax considerations. Their
data set, however, did not include any information on investors’ tax circumstances. Our study offers a
more powerful test of how tax status affects trading around the dates of record that determine tax liability.
Our paper is divided into five sections. The first describes the tax treatment of mutual fund
shareholders and explains how a mutual fund capital gain distribution accelerates capital gains tax
liability. Section two describes the data set that we analyze and presents summary statistics. The third
section presents our findings on the differences between gross inflows before and after fund distributions.
It reports results for both taxable and tax-deferred households; it contrasts patterns before and after the
enactment of the Taxpayer Relief Act of 1997, which altered the marginal tax rates on capital gains.
Section three also presents some tests for turn-of-year effects. The fourth section fits proportional hazard
3

44

models for the risk that a shareholder decides to close her account, thereby comparing shareholders who
open accounts prior to distribution dates with those who open accounts afterward. The last section
summarizes our findings and outlines directions for future work.

1. Tax Treatment of Capital Gains on Mutual Fund Holdings
Investments in open-end mutual funds are taxed under a specialized set of income tax rules. One
of the most important is the requirement that in order to avoid taxation as corporations, funds must “pass
through” dividends and capital gains to their shareholders. Dickson, Shoven, and Sialm (2000) describe
how the regulations affecting pass-through of realized capital gains from funds to their shareholders can
accelerate capital gains tax liabilities for buy-and-hold fund shareholders. They also illustrate how the
current tax rules create “externalities” by making the capital gains tax liability of each fund shareholder
dependent on the redemption decisions of all other shareholders. When a fund manager realizes capital
gains by selling portfolio holdings, the fund must make a taxable capital gain distribution which creates
an immediate capital gains tax liability even for buy-and-hold investors. Such distributions do not
increase the shareholders’ nominal capital gains tax liability over their entire holding period, but they
increase the present value of this liability by accelerating the tax payments relative to what they would
have been if the fund investment had been taxed like a common stock. Investors in mutual funds more
generally lose the opportunity to apply tax-timing strategies of the type described by Constantinides
(2004) in his analysis of portfolios consisting of directly-held common stock.
To quantify the tax consequences of deferring a mutual fund investment until after a taxable
capital gain distribution, consider a shareholder who is planning to hold mutual fund shares for exactly
twenty years. Assume that the nominal annual twenty-year interest rate is 100*r percent, that the
impending distribution equals 100*d percent of the fund’s net assets, and that the current and future tax
rate on realized capital gains is τcg. Set the fund’s pre-distribution share price to unity. If the shareholder
invests one dollar immediately prior to the capital gain distribution, she purchases one share of the fund,
receives a capital gain distribution of d, and pays tax of τcg*d.

55

On the distribution date, the fund’s share price drops from 1 to 1-d. If the shareholder reinvests
the distribution of d and draws on other resources to pay her capital gains tax bill, her tax basis in the fund
will be 1+d. She will own 1+d/(1-d) = 1/(1-d) shares of the fund. Since shares cost 1-d dollars, the
shareholder once again has one dollar invested in the fund. If the fund’s assets appreciate at an annual
rate of g, then after twenty years the shareholder’s position will be worth (1+g)20. Her capital gains tax
due at the time of sale will equal τcg*[(1+g)20 – (1+d)]. The present value of the tax due on the mutual
fund purchase and sale, combining the tax due on the initial distribution and that due when the shares are
sold, and computed using an appropriate after-tax discount rate r, is:
(1)

TAXbuy before distribution = τcg*d + (1+r)-20*τcg*[(1+g)20 – (1+d)].
In contrast, if the shareholder invests one dollar in the same mutual fund immediately after the

distribution, she would also have a fund position in twenty years worth (1+g)20, but her tax basis would be
1, so her capital gains tax liability at the time of sale would be τcg*[(1+g)20 – 1]. The present value of her
tax payment is:
(2)

TAXbuy after distribution = (1+r)-20*τcg*[(1+g)20 – 1].

The difference between these two present value tax measures, τcg*d*[1-(1+r)-20], is the cost of
accelerating capital gain realizations. A shareholder who purchases a fund just prior to a distribution date
extends an interest-free loan of τcg*d to the government. If a fund distributes eight percent of its net
assets, the nominal twenty-year interest rate is five percent, and the capital gains tax rate is 20 percent, the
cost of acceleration equals 0.0099, or just under one percent of the fund investment. Buying the fund
before the distribution is equivalent to paying a 100 basis point load. In some fund-years, the capital
gains distribution can be as large as twenty percent of NAV. The median fund distribution for all equity
mutual funds in our 1994-2000 sample period was approximately 3.5 percent of NAV. Some funds made
much larger distributions in some years, thereby generating larger investor tax burdens.
The expected tax cost of purchasing fund shares prior to a taxable distribution is a declining
function of the shareholder’s expected holding period. If a fund shareholder who has not yet sold her
shares has a constant probability p of selling her shares each year, then the expected present discounted
value of the difference between the tax burden from buying just before and just after a distribution d is:
5

66

(3)

EPDV(p, r, d, τcg)tax differential from distribution = τcg*d - Σj=1 p*(1-p)j-1*τcg*d*(1+r)-j = τcg*d*[r/(r+p)].

Note that when p = 1, so that the mutual fund position will be sold with certainty one year after it is
purchased, this expression reduces to τcg*d*[r/(1+r)]. This is cost of loaning the government τcg*d for one
year without interest.
Table 1 reports the value of EPDV/d, the increased tax burden from buying before a distribution
as a fraction of the distribution. The table considers a variety of discount rates, turnover probabilities, and
capital gains tax rates. The results illustrate that the incremental tax burden as a fraction of the
distribution can be substantial when the probability of sale is low and the nominal discount rate is high.
When the sale probability is two percent per year, for example, the nominal interest rate is nine percent,
and the tax rate on long-term gains is 15 percent, the present value of the tax acceleration cost is 12.3
percent of the current tax burden associated with buying a fund share. With lower discount rates, lower
tax rates, or higher trading probabilities, the tax burden associated with acceleration is much smaller. The
effective cost of buying mutual fund shares before the distribution date is likely to vary across taxpayers,
with the expected holding period playing an important role in generating this variation.
Funds generally announce their planned distributions several weeks before the record date,
which permits potential shareholders to respond to impending distributions. To avoid accelerating their
capital gains tax liabilities, taxable shareholders might shift their intended purchase from a fund that is
about to make a distribution to a different fund, or they might defer their purchase until after the
distribution date. Our empirical work explores the extent of these responses by studying fund inflows
before and after distribution dates.

2. Account-Level Data on Mutual Fund Shareholders
We examine data on the daily trading behavior of all mutual fund shareholders at a no-load openend mutual fund complex. The anonymous fund family that provided the data operates with fees and
policies that are comparable to industry standards. It includes approximately ten funds, including both
equity and fixed-income portfolios, but we focus our analysis on the equity funds. Data from this fund
family are the basis for Johnson’s (2004, 2006) studies of heterogeneity in shareholder trading patterns.

77

The transfer agent for the mutual fund family provided a database consisting of over 50,000 shareholders
and nearly one million transactions in the family of funds between late 1994 and mid 2000. The database
includes information on the registration information for each account, as well as on daily net asset values
(NAVs) and distributions for each fund.
Shareholders have traditionally purchased no-load mutual fund shares directly from the fund.
These are "direct" shareholders. However, many shareholders now purchase shares through an
intermediary, such as a mutual fund supermarket, that collects the transactions of its customers and passes
them through to the fund. These are "indirect" shareholders. The distinction between direct and indirect
shareholders is important because the tax status of the former but not the latter can be determined reliably
at the account level. Our strategy for identifying the effects of taxes, therefore, requires that we exclude
the indirect shareholders from some of the analysis. Moreover, we generally further restrict our analysis
to households in order to avoid confounding tax effects with other clientele effects than might arise in a
broader sample of account types. “Non-household” shareholders include trusts, college endowments, and
corporate treasury accounts.
We investigate whether shareholders reduce their purchases of fund shares just before the fund
pays a distribution. Although distributions could also affect shareholder redemptions under certain
assumptions, the effect of taxes on redemption decisions are less clear than those on inflows and we
therefore focus on this margin of investor behavior. In work not reported here, we studied gross outflows
and found no unusual patterns around distribution dates.
We aggregate individual purchases to create daily gross inflows for each fund. Following
previous studies such as Bergstresser and Poterba (2002), we scale daily gross inflows by the fund's
lagged net assets. In all cases, we exclude fund distributions from the inflows whether or not the
shareholder reinvests them. Most shareholders reinvest dividends. In our sample, 97.1 percent of
accounts, and 95.9 percent of the dollar-weighted accounts, reinvest dividends. These reinvestment rates
are similar to those found in the mutual fund industry as a whole.
Table 2 presents sample summary statistics on gross inflows. The first row presents results for
aggregate inflows, while the last two focus only on gross inflows from households who are direct
7

88

shareholders. The average daily gross inflow is 0.0053 times fund assets, or just over one-half of one
percent. There is substantial variation in daily gross inflows, which is indicated by the disparity between
the mean and median as well as the large standard deviation. Table 2 also shows that gross inflows to
taxable direct household accounts represent roughly one-seventh of the aggregate gross inflows, while
inflows to tax-deferred direct household accounts represent about one-eleventh of all gross inflows.
Some of our analysis focuses on inflows from subsets of accounts, and in such cases, the total dollar value
impact of proximity to a distribution date is smaller than when we consider total inflows.
The mean return on the equity funds in our sample is 0.084 percent per day. Multiplying by an
average of 252 trading days per year, this translates to an average annual return of 21.2 percent. The
standard deviation of returns is 1.24 percent per day, or 19.7 percent per year. The corresponding
benchmark returns for the equity funds in our sample average 16.6 percent, and the annual standard
deviation is also 16.6 percent. Thus, the average return on the sample funds exceeded the average
benchmark returns, but the sample funds were also substantially more volatile than the benchmark.
Each of the funds in our sample usually makes distributions in December, although there are
several years in which some funds made two distributions, the first in the second half of the year but
before December, and the second in December. The sample fund family is somewhat unusual in not
making a distribution in the first half of the calendar year. For the entire universe of U.S. equity mutual
funds making distributions in 2000, 38.3 percent of the distributions occurred in December, 11.4 percent
occurred in June, 10.2 percent in March, and 9.8 percent in September. The median fund distribution in
our sample is 3.6 percent of NAV while the mean is approximately five percent. The average annual
distribution at the funds in our sample is very close to the average of all funds for our sample period.

3. Gross Inflows before and after Distribution Dates
Many previous studies of mutual fund flows, including Warther (1995) and Sirri and Tufano
(1998), suggest that fund flows are sensitive to lagged returns. Johnson (2006) confirms this relationship
for our sample funds. We develop a simple empirical model for gross inflows and use it to consider
inflow patterns around distribution dates. We refine our analysis by examining differences in

99

distribution-related effects before and after the Taxpayer Relief Act of 1997, which changed relevant
shareholder tax rates, and by distinguishing between large and small transactions.
3.1 Specification Issues
We focus on empirical models that relate gross inflows at fund i to the lagged return on fund i,
denoted Ri,t as well as lagged returns on either the aggregate equity market or on the benchmark index
identified in the fund's prospectus. We denote these returns by Rm,t and Rb,t, respectively. With respect to
the lag structure for returns, even with daily flows data, a long and unrestricted lag structure would absorb
many degrees of freedom. To allow lagged returns to affect fund inflows for periods as long as a year,
but to reduce the number of parameters that we estimate, we allow separate coefficients for the inflow
effect of returns on each of the previous five days, but we constrain all returns in the previous three weeks
to have an identical effect by including the average return over that period (trading days t-6 to t-21). We
also include the average return in each of the previous five months, and the average return over the period
between seven and twelve months earlier. In this way, returns for the entire previous year enter the
specification but we do not lose many degrees of freedom. Thus, we would include twelve lagged return
variables when explaining the inflow to a fund on the first trading day in January. These variables would
be five distinct daily returns for the last five trading days in December, the average daily return over days
t-21 through t-6, five variables corresponding to lagged monthly returns between July and November, and
one variable measuring the average return over the period between the roughly six month interval that is
t-252 through t-127. Our findings were not substantively affected when we included longer lags.
The basic equation that we estimate throughout our analysis is
(4)

INFLOWi,t = α1 + ∑j β1j*Ri,t-j + ∑j γ1j*Rb,t-j + ∑k=-1,1 λ1k*WINDOWi,k,t + ε1i,t.

The variable capturing patterns around distribution dates, WINDOWi,k,t, is set equal to 1 if day t occurs in
the 30- or 15-day window before or after (k equals -1 or 1, respectively) a distribution date for fund i. We
are primarily concerned with the {λk} coefficients. We often estimate two inflow equations, such as one
for taxable accounts and one for non-taxable accounts, and we are interested in testing cross-equation
coefficient restrictions. To simplify such testing, we estimate the two equations using a Seemingly

9

10
10

Unrelated Regression (SUR) procedure, and we calculate test statistics using the resulting variancecovariance matrix for all estimated parameters.
Table 3 reports return and WINDOW coefficients from estimates of (4) for all equity funds in our
sample. The table shows estimates with robust and heteroscedastic-consistent standard errors in
parentheses. The first model uses a 30-calendar-day window on each side of the distribution while the
second uses a 15-calendar-day window. The first two rows present evidence on gross inflow patterns in
the periods just before and just after fund distributions, and the third row reports p-values for the
hypothesis test of equality between the estimates in the first two rows. The estimates imply that for each
of the 30 days before a distribution, gross inflows average 24 basis points lower per day than the average
at other times. In the 30 days after the distribution date, inflow averages 11 basis points per day below
their average other times. Thus, we estimate a “distribution effect” of -13 basis points per day, which
cumulates over 21 trading days in the 30 calendar days before a distribution to a reduction in net fund
inflows of 2.73 percent (21*0.0013) of fund net assets. We reject the null hypothesis that the coefficients
for the pre- and post-distribution periods are identical. The difference between the before-distribution and
after-distribution inflows is even more pronounced when we use a 15-day window. In that case the
difference is 16 basis points per day, and we once again reject the null hypothesis that gross inflows
before and after the distribution date are the same.
The coefficient estimates below the first three rows of Table 3 show that lagged fund returns have
a positive effect on shareholder inflows, with the largest estimated coefficients in the previous few trading
days. There is relatively little decay in the effect of returns as the lag length increases. In the 30-day
window specification, a one percentage point increase in the fund return on a given day increases the
gross inflows to the fund by 22 basis points in the next five days.
The coefficients on the benchmark portfolio returns are always of the opposite sign of the lagged
fund returns. In many cases, the individual coefficients on daily or monthly benchmark returns are not
statistically significantly different from zero, but we reject the null hypothesis that all of the benchmark
return coefficients are jointly zero. The coefficient patterns suggest that some shareholders base their
fund purchase decisions on relative performance.

11
11

Before comparing shareholder behavior in taxable and non-taxable accounts, we consider the
sensitivity of the gross inflow model to the choice of alternative specifications of lagged returns. Table 4
presents the coefficients on the 30-day indicator variables {λk} from five different specifications of (4)
that differ only in the included set of lagged return measures. The specification with the highest
explanatory power is the one that includes both fund returns and market returns, measured as the CRSP
value-weighted index return. The specification that includes both fund and fund benchmark index returns
has the second highest explanatory power. Constraining the coefficients by including either (fund return
– market return) or (fund return – benchmark return) reduces explanatory power, as does excluding both
market and benchmark returns. While the fit of the various models differs, the estimated differences in
both inflows in the 30-day window before and after the distribution date are remarkably stable across
specifications. The change is approximately 13 basis points in every specification except for the third
one, in which it is 7 basis points. Our conclusions about flow patterns do not appear to depend
substantively on our return specification choices.
3.2 Taxable and Non-Taxable Accounts
We follow in the tradition of Barber and Odean (2004), Ivković and Weisbenner (2006), and
Ivković, Poterba, and Weisbenner (2005) by using differences between the behavior of household
shareholders in taxable and tax-deferred settings to estimate the impact of taxes on fund purchases. We
focus on households to avoid confounding tax effects with other clientele effects than might arise in a
broader sample of account types. Data limitations prevent us from reliably identifying households in the
indirect distribution channel. Thus, our household sample is drawn solely from the direct distribution
channel. To understand how this selection rule might affect our findings, we compare gross inflows
around distribution dates from direct household accounts with gross inflows around distribution dates
from all other accounts. The second group includes all shareholders in the indirect channel, as well as all
non-households in the direct channel.
Table 5 presents the results, which suggest that gross inflows increase after distribution dates for
both direct household accounts and for all other accounts. The change in gross inflows is statistically
significant at the 10 percent confidence level for both the 30-day window and the 15-day window.
11

12
12

Focusing on the 30-day inflow results for the direct household sample, the pre- and post-distribution
coefficients are -4.37 and -2.15, respectively. For the other sample, the corresponding coefficients are 19.31 and -8.81. Note that the absolute values of the WINDOW coefficients in Table 5 are smaller than
those in Tables 3 and 4, reflecting our focus on only subsets of inflows.
Table 6 presents our central results on the differences in gross inflow patterns around distribution
dates between taxable and tax-deferred direct household accounts. The results suggest that some taxable
shareholders alter their fund trades around distribution dates while tax-deferred shareholders ignore
distribution dates. For taxable shareholders, gross inflows increase after distribution dates by a
statistically significant 2.22 basis points in the case of the 30-day window and a statistically significant
2.65 basis points in the case of the 15-day window. For tax-deferred shareholders, we cannot reject the
null hypothesis that inflows are the same before and after distribution dates. This is true for both the 30day and 15-day windows. To place the results in perspective, recall that in Table 2 the average daily
gross inflow from taxable households is 8.23 basis points. Thus, taxable household inflows decline about
27 percent (2.22 / 8.23) in the period prior to fund distributions.
3.3 The Taxpayer Relief Act of 1997 and the Composition of Fund Distributions
The tax code changed during our sample period. The Taxpayer Relief Act of 1997 (TRA97)
reduced the top marginal tax rate on realized long-term capital gains from 28 percent to 20 percent for
taxpayers in the highest income tax brackets. The transition from one tax regime to another was complex,
because the legislation changed both the definition of the long-term holding period and the rates that
applied to long-term gains. Prior to TRA97, gains were defined as long-term if the underlying asset had
been held for at least twelve months. TRA97 redefined long-term gains as gains on assets held for at least
18 months, effective July 29, 1997.
TRA97 also retroactively reduced long-term capital gains tax rates from 28 to 20 percent with an
effective date of May 6, 1997. Gains on assets held for at least 18 months and sold after that date faced a
maximum tax rate of 20 percent. Gains on assets held for less than 12 months were taxed as ordinary
income throughout the year. Gains on assets held for between 12 and 18 months, however, faced a top
marginal tax rate of 28 prior to May 6, when they were long-term gains taxed under the old top marginal

13
13

tax rate, 20 percent between May 6 and July 28, when they were long-term gains taxed under the new but
retroactive rate, and 28 percent after July 29, when they were defined as a new category of “mid-term”
capital gains that were subject to a new rate. The Internal Revenue Service Restructuring and Reform
Act of 1998 eliminated the category of mid-term gains, and effective January 1, 1998, gains on assets held
for more than 12 months qualified as long-term and were taxed at a maximum tax rate of 20 percent.
TRA97 also changed other tax rules that may affect inflow patterns to tax-deferred accounts. The
legislation introduced Roth IRAs, Education IRAs, and 529 plans. Contributions to Education IRAs and
529 plans must be made by the end of the calendar year, rather than by April 15 of the following year as
with traditional and Roth IRAs. While this could affect gross inflows, neither Education IRAs nor 529
plans account for substantial gross fund inflows at our sample of funds.
The 1997 and 1998 tax reforms reduced mutual fund shareholders’ tax penalty from the
acceleration of capital gains tax liability. We test whether the inflow difference around distribution dates
was larger before the TRA97 than afterward by interacting an indicator variable for observations in our
sample after July 29, 1997 (POSTTRA97) with the WINDOW variables. We do not attempt to capture
the effects of the brief mid-term holding period because it applies for only five months. We also control
for other potential changes in the level of gross inflows before and after TRA97 by also adding an
indicator variable that equals one in the post-TRA97 regime to our specifications. The new inflow
specification is
(5)

INFLOWi,t = α1 + α2*POSTTRA97i,t + ∑j β1j*Ri,t-j + ∑j γ1j*Rb,t-j
+ ∑k=-1,1 (λ1k+λ2k*POSTTRA97i,t)*WINDOWi,k,t + ε1i,t.
Table 7 presents estimates using the 30-day window. Findings from the unreported 15-day

specification are similar. The first specification in Table 7 shows that the decline in taxable inflows
before a distribution date was larger for taxable direct household accounts before TRA97, at 4.89 (0.14 (-4.75)) basis points per day, than afterwards, when it was 0.67 basis points per day (-0.66 - (-1.33)).
Additionally, the pre-1997 decline is statistically significantly different from zero while the post-1997
decline is not. The post-1997 indicator variable, included without an interaction with distribution date
variables, shows that gross inflows were lower in the later part of our sample than they were earlier. The
13

14
14

differences between gross inflows in tax-deferred accounts before and after distribution dates are never
statistically significantly different from zero.
We have not yet considered differences in the tax burden on different distributions for taxable
investors, even though Plancich (2003) explains that the mix of long-term gains and ordinary income in
fund distributions varies across distributions. The acceleration of capital gains tax liability is greater
when a distribution contains short-term gains than when it contains only long-term gains. If shareholders
have information on the composition of distributions prior to the distribution date, there may be larger
changes in trading patterns around distributions that generate large tax penalties than around those with
smaller penalties.
We measure each distribution’s relative tax burden, IMPACT, as:
(6)

IMPACTi,k,j = [τordinary*(1- μlt,i,k,j) + τlong-term cg*μlt,i,k,j]/ τlong-term cg.

In this expression, μlt,i,k,j is the fraction of the distribution that is taxed as a long-term gain. If μlt,i,k,j equals
one, then IMPACT for a distribution equals one. If μlt,i,k,j equals zero, so that the entire distribution is
taxed as ordinary income, the tax impact factor equals τordinary/τlong-term cg,, which is greater than one. In the
pre-1997 period, this ratio could be as large as 39.6/28 = 1.41. In the post-1997 period, the ratio could be
as high as 1.98 (= 39.6/20). Thus, it is potentially more important to distinguish long-term and short-term
gains after the TRA97 than before. In our sample, the average value of μlt,i,k,j is roughly two-thirds. We
aggregate distributions of ordinary income, which are rare, with short-term capital gains when
constructing this variable.
We test for the importance of tax status variation across distributions by interacting IMPACT
with WINDOW and estimating the following model
(7)

INFLOWi,t = α1 + α2*POSTTRA97i,t + ∑j β1j*Ri,t-j + ∑j γ1j*Rb,t-j
+ ∑k=-1,1 (λ1k+λ2k*POSTTRA97i,t)*WINDOWi,k,t*IMPACTi,k,t + ε1i,t.

The second and fourth columns of Table 7 present estimates of this specification. The coefficient patterns
are very similar to those in equations that do not allow for variation in the tax burden across distributions.
One potential explanation for the similarity of the results is that shareholders may not be aware of the
subtle tax consequences that come from differences in the composition of different distributions.

15
15

The cost of tax acceleration is proportional to the size of the distribution, so tax-sensitive
shareholders should respond more strongly to large distributions than to small ones. In an unreported
specification patterned after equation (7), we consider this possibility by interacting WINDOW with the
size of the distribution, measured as a percentage of NAV. The results are qualitatively similar to the first
specification in Table 7. We were not able to reject the null hypothesis that the change in inflows around
a distribution is unrelated to the size of the distribution.
3.4 Controlling for Turn-of-the-Year Effects
The funds in our sample often have distributions in late December. Therefore, the predistribution period may overlap with the last few weeks of the calendar year and the post-distribution
period may correspond to the first few weeks of the New Year. Thus, differential trading around the turn
of the year might be inappropriately identified in the prior specifications as a distribution effect. We test
for this possibility by adding indicator variables for each of the first four and last four weeks in the
calendar year to equation (7). We estimate the gross inflow equation for both taxable and tax-deferred
direct household accounts.
Table 8 shows that turn-of-the-year effects are not driving our distribution results. For taxable
shareholders, we continue to find a statistically significantly lower rate of gross inflows in the 30 days
before a distribution than in the 30 days afterward, with a more pronounced effect prior to the enactment
of TRA97 than afterward. Tax-deferred accounts remain insensitive to distribution dates in the new
specification. For both types of accounts, we cannot reject the null hypothesis that the eight indicator
variables for weeks around the turn of the year are jointly equal to zero.

4. Holding Periods before and after Distribution Dates
Our findings suggest that at least some taxable shareholders reduce their mutual fund purchases in
the weeks before distributions. Yet it is still evident that many taxable investors purchase fund shares in
the weeks and days prior to distribution dates. These buyers may not be aware that a distribution is about
to be paid, or they may have specialized tax circumstances, such as capital loss carryforwards, that
eliminate their tax liability on the distribution. It is also possible that these buyers believe that the fund’s
15

16
16

NAV will rise enough by the distribution date to offset the cost of capital gains tax acceleration. Buyers
with such beliefs would expect a higher after-tax return from purchasing fund shares before, rather than
after, the distribution date.
Our data set does not contain any information that enables us to measure a fund buyer’s expected
NAV appreciation, or that identifies the buyer’s detailed tax positions. We do, however, observe one
investor attribute that is correlated with the cost of tax acceleration: the investor’s holding period for fund
shares. The cost of buying shares before rather than after a distribution is smaller for an investor with a
short holding period than for one who expects to hold the fund shares for many years. We can study
whether investors who buy fund shares before distribution dates sell them sooner, on average, than postdistribution buyers.
We test this possibility by fitting a Cox (1975) proportional hazards model to the shareholder's
risk of account closure. This is an appropriate measure of how long shareholders hold fund shares
because shareholders do not generally trade between account opening and account closing. The risk of
closure is inversely related to the shareholder’s holding period. We measure time in calendar days since
the account opening, and we model the probability of closure as a function of the same explanatory
variables that we used in the last section.
Table 9 reports our estimates of hazard ratios, which are easier to interpret than the coefficients
from the proportional hazards model, along with robust standard errors. Estimated hazard ratios that are
smaller than one are associated with low closure risk and long holding periods while ratios larger than one
are associated with high closure risk and short holding periods. The first and third specifications, which
only include indicator variables for account openings in the 30 days before and after a distribution date
and fund-specific intercepts, do not suggest any differences between the investment horizon of
shareholders who open their accounts before and after distribution dates. The results in the second and
fourth columns, however, which control for turn-of-the-year effects, TRA97, “tax impact”, and returns,
suggest some differences between pre- and post-distribution buyers. The hazard ratios indicate that
taxable shareholders who open accounts after a distribution are approximately 25 percent less likely each

17
17

day to close their accounts than those who open accounts before a distribution. Tax-deferred shareholders
have a similar tendency, but it is economically smaller and statistically insignificant.
The hazard ratio differences translate into substantial differences in expected holding periods for
taxable shareholders. In the pre-TRA97 period, shareholders who invested in the 30 days before a
distribution had a 27 percent chance of liquidating their position within one year while those who invested
in the 30 days after a distribution had a 19 percent chance of liquidation. In the post-TRA97 period, the
corresponding numbers are 28 percent and 15 percent. Thus, the evidence indicates that the differences in
one-year closing rates between those who buy before distributions versus those who buy after
distributions are 8 and 13 percent. For tax-deferred shareholders, expected holding periods do vary
around distribution dates; however, the differences are much smaller. In both the pre- and post-TRA97
regimes, the difference is four percent.
This evidence suggests that there are differences in holding periods between investors who open
accounts before and after distributions. We reject the null hypothesis of equal liquidation hazard rates for
these two groups of account openers in taxable accounts, but cannot reject the null hypothesis of equal
closure rates for tax-deferred accounts. If investors know their closure probabilities when they open their
accounts, then the anticipated tax acceleration penalty for the pre-distribution account openers is smaller
than that for the post-distribution account openers. Together, these results offer some evidence that
investors may consider their own investment and tax circumstances when they make trading decisions.

5. Conclusion
Our analysis of account-level mutual fund purchases suggests that a substantial group of
shareholders heed the advice of financial advisors who warn about the tax penalty associated with buying
mutual fund shares prior to a distribution date. At the fund family we study, gross inflows from taxable
investors decline by approximately one quarter in the four weeks before a distribution, and on average a
fund’s net assets are 2.7 percent lower by the distribution date than they would have been in the absence
of a distribution. We attribute this decline in inflows to the tax-avoidance behavior of individual
investors whose capital gains tax liability would be accelerated, and increased in present value, if they
17

18
18

purchased fund shares before rather than after the distribution date. The decline in pre-distribution fund
inflows is more pronounced in the period prior to the enactment of the Taxpayer Relief Act of 1997 than
afterward. This legislation reduced the long-term capital gains tax rate from 28 to 20 percent, thereby
reducing the income tax penalty for receiving a capital gains distribution. We also find that taxable
shareholders who open accounts just before fund distribution dates are more likely to close their accounts
within a year than taxable shareholders who open accounts just after fund distribution dates. We find no
such difference for investors in tax-deferred accounts. This is consistent with investors who face the
greatest tax cost from tax acceleration deferring purchase decisions.
One important question about our findings is the extent to which they generalize to the broader
universe of mutual fund shareholders. Since the results are based on data from only one mutual fund
family, they may not be representative. Johnson (2006) suggests that the observed pattern of flows at the
fund family we study is similar to that at other fund families. One risk is that because our tests focus on
the behavior of households who invest through the direct distribution channel, they may not generalize to
other shareholders who trade through brokers or fund supermarkets. It is impossible to resolve this
question definitively using our data, but it warrants study with information from other fund families.
A second issue, which we have not been able to address with any precision in our data set,
concerns investor heterogeneity. We found, but do not report, some evidence that investors who make
large transactions are more sensitive to distribution dates than their smaller-transaction counterparts, but
the pattern varied within our sample period. Data collected from mutual fund accounts offer very limited
information on investor attributes, but future work could usefully explore ways to either collect additional
information, perhaps with a follow-on survey of shareholders, or to impute additional data, perhaps using
geographical identifiers. Our evidence on holding period differences between pre- and post-distribution
fund buyers suggests that investor heterogeneity may be reflected in trading and portfolio choices.
Our results relate to a number of issues that are broader than the behavior of mutual fund
investors. One is the ongoing public policy discussion about the tax treatment of mutual fund
distributions and mutual fund shareholders more generally. Our evidence on the difference between fund
inflows before and after distribution dates suggests that changing the tax law to allow deferral of tax

19
19

liability on realized gains within funds, as suggested by Saxton (2004) and others, would change fund
inflow patterns. Our results do not address the important question of whether such a policy change would
increase the assets held in open-end mutual funds relative to other financial products. The potential
substitution between traditional open-end mutual funds and exchange-traded funds (ETFs) is particularly
intriguing. Most ETFs avoid taxation of realized capital gains by using redemption-in-kind distributions
as described in Poterba and Shoven (2002). Fama and French (2006) suggest that this difference between
ETFs and traditional mutual funds “gives ETFs a substantial advantage over traditional open-end funds in
the competition for customers.” Our results support Bergstresser and Poterba’s (2002) finding that
mutual fund investors consider after-tax returns in their investment decisions. This body of work broadly
suggests the potential importance of taxation in affecting investment in intermediated financial products.
Second, our findings also bear on a broad issue involving asset market equilibrium in the
presence of taxes. They underscore the possibility, documented in Graham and Kumar’s (2006) work as
well, that the clientele of shareholders holding a security may vary around significant events, such as a
fund distribution date or an ex-dividend date. They provide some evidence that investors view the
involuntary realization of capital gains as costly, as Chay, Choi, and Pontiff (2006) suggest based on
security price movements. The unresolved but central empirical question in this field is whether clientele
variation is large enough to induce changes in asset prices and the associated signals that asset markets
send to managers.
Finally, while our findings suggest that shareholder behavior is affected by taxes, they do not
provide any guidance on the efficiency costs of tax-induced distortions. If shareholders simply delay the
purchase of a particular mutual fund by a few days or weeks, the efficiency cost can be evaluated by the
cost of holding an alternative portfolio that is not the desired one for a modest period of time. If
shareholders respond to the unusual tax treatment of mutual funds by choosing to hold other asset classes,
then the efficiency calculation must recognize the cost of such portfolio changes. Analysis of the
efficiency costs of these behavioral changes is an important direction for future work.

19

20
20

References
Barber, Brad M. and Terrance Odean, 2004, "Are Individual Investors Tax Savvy? Asset Location
Evidence from Retail and Discount Brokerage Accounts,” Journal of Public Economics 88, 419442.
Barclay, Michael J., Neal D. Pearson, and Michael S. Weisbach, 1998, “Open End Mutual Funds and
Capital Gains Taxes,” Journal of Financial Economics 49, 3-43.
Bergstresser, Daniel and James Poterba, 2002, “Do After-Tax Returns Affect Mutual Fund Inflows?,”
Journal of Financial Economics 63, 381-414.
Chay, J. B., Dosoung Choi, and Jeffrey Pontiff, 2006, “Market Valuation of Tax-Timing Options:
Evidence from Capital Gains Distributions,” Journal of Finance 61, 837-865.
Christoffersen, Susan, Christopher Geczy, David Musto, and Adam Reed, 2005, “Cross-border Dividend
Taxation and the Preferences of Taxable and Non-taxable Investors: Evidence from Canada,”
Journal of Financial Economics 78, 121-144.
Constantinides, George, 1984, “Optimal Stock Trading with Personal Taxes: Implications for Prices and
the Abnormal January Returns,” Journal of Financial Economics 13, 65-89.
Cox, D. R., 1975, "Partial likelihood," Biometrika 62, 269-276.
Dickson, Joel M., John B. Shoven, and Clemens Sialm, 2000, “Tax Externalities of Equity Mutual
Funds,” National Tax Journal 53, 607-628.
Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French, 2006, “Keep It Simple,” Wall Street Journal February 25, A10.
Graham, John R., and Alok Kumar, 2006, “Do Dividend Clienteles Exist? Evidence on Dividend
Preferences of Retail Investors,” Journal of Finance 61, 1305-1336.
Investment Company Institute, 2007, “Trends in the Ownership of Mutual Funds in the United States,
2007,” ICI Research Fundamentals 16 (November 2007). Washington: Investment Company
Institute.
Ivković, Zoran and Scott Weisbenner, 2006, “Old Money Matters: The Sensitivity of Mutual Fund
Redemption Decisions to Past Performance,” mimeo, University of Illinois.

21
21

Ivković, Zoran, James Poterba, and Scott Weisbenner, 2005, “Tax Loss Trading by Individual Investors,”
American Economic Review 95, 1605-1630.
Johnson, Woodrow T., 2004, “Predictable Investment Horizons and Wealth Transfers among Mutual
Fund Shareholders,” Journal of Finance 59, 1979-2012.
Johnson, Woodrow T., 2006, “Who Monitors the Mutual Fund Manager: New or Old Shareholders?”
mimeo, University of Oregon.
Khorana, A. and H. Servaes, 1999, “The Determinants of Mutual Fund Starts,” Review of Financial
Studies 12, 1043-1074.
Lipper Associates, 2007. Taxes in the Mutual Fund Industry – 2007: Assessing the Impact of Taxes on
Shareholder Returns. New York: Lipper Associates.
Plancich, Stephanie, 2003, “Mutual Fund Capital Gain Distributions and the Tax Reform Act of 1997,”
National Tax Journal 56 (March), 271-296.
Poterba, James and John Shoven, 2002, “Exchange Traded Funds: A New Investment Option for Taxable
Investors,” American Economic Review 92 (May), 422-427.
Saxton, Representative Jim, 2004, Providing Tax Equity for Mutual Fund Investors: Changing the Tax
Treatment of Capital Gain Distributions. Washington: U.S. Congress, Joint Economic
Committee.
Sirri, Erik R. and Peter Tufano, 1998, “Costly Search and Mutual Fund Flows,” Journal of Finance 53,
1589-1622.
Warther, Vincent A., 1995, “Aggregate Mutual Fund Flows and Security Returns,” Journal of Financial
Economics 39, 209-235.

21

22
22

Table 1: Present Discounted Value of Tax Saving from Trading after vs. before Taxable Distribution
Annual Turnover Rate = 0.02 Annual Turnover Rate = 0.05 Annual Turnover Rate = 0.25
Nominal
Discount
τcg = 0.28
τcg = 0.15
τcg = 0.28
τcg = 0.15
τcg = 0.28
τcg = 0.15
Rate
0.03/year
0.090
0.168
0.056
0.105
0.016
0.030
0.06/year
0.113
0.210
0.082
0.153
0.029
0.054
0.09/year
0.123
0.229
0.096
0.180
0.040
0.074
Source: Authors’ calculations as described in the text.

Table 2: Summary Statistics on Daily Gross Inflows
Mean Median Standard Deviation
All Accounts
53.02 14.17
295.02
Taxable Direct Household Accounts
8.23
0.70
89.52
Tax-Deferred Direct Household Accounts 4.78
0.21
119.19
Source: Authors’ calculations as described in the text. Daily shareholder transactions are aggregated to
the fund level and scaled by the fund's total net assets on the prior day. The resulting ratio is multiplied
by 10,000. Thus, an entry of 53.02 implies inflow of 0.0053, or just over one half of one percent of assets.

23

Table 3: Gross Inflows around Fund Distribution Dates
Independent Variables:
30-Day Window
15-Day Window
Indicator
for
Pre- -23.68
-16.05
Distribution Period
(4.33)
(5.68)
Indicator
for
Post- -10.97
-0.27
Distribution Period
(4.42)
(6.03)
p-value (equality test)
0.020
0.040
Lagged Returns (x 10-2)
Lagged Returns (x 10-2)
Fund Return
Benchmark
Fund Return Benchmark
Day t-1
6.59
-3.20
6.57
-3.21
(1.53)
(1.74)
(1.53)
(1.74)
Day t-2
2.93
-1.71
2.86
-1.64
(1.53)
(1.75)
(1.53)
(1.75)
Day t-3
4.17
-1.81
4.09
-1.72
(1.53)
(1.75)
(1.53)
(1.75)
Day t-4
4.90
-3.84
4.84
-3.82
(1.53)
(1.75)
(1.54)
(1.75)
Day t-5
3.57
-1.82
3.58
-1.77
(1.53)
(1.74)
(1.54)
(1.75)
Days t-6 through t-21
2.90
-1.99
2.99
-1.91
(0.37)
(0.43)
(0.37)
(0.43)
Month t-2
2.95
-2.30
3.03
-2.20
(0.32)
(0.36)
(0.32)
(0.36)
Month t-3
2.74
-3.09
2.62
-2.82
(0.32)
(0.37)
(0.32)
(0.36)
Month t-4
3.68
-3.76
3.58
-3.48
(0.34)
(0.40)
(0.34)
(0.39)
Month t-5
3.23
-3.80
3.02
-3.36
(0.36)
(0.40)
(0.36)
(0.43)
Month t-6
3.64
-3.50
3.51
-3.27
(0.39)
(0.48)
(0.39)
(0.47)
Months t-7 through t-12 2.05
-2.28
2.04
-3.34
(0.18)
(0.22)
(0.18)
(0.22)
R2
0.112
0.109
Notes: The dependent variable is the sum of daily shareholder transactions, divided by the fund's total net assets
on the prior day and multiplied by 10,000. The first coefficient therefore translates into a 24 basis point decline
in fund inflow in each of the 30 days immediately prior to a fund distribution. Robust standard errors are shown
in parentheses. See text for further discussion.

24

Table 4: Robustness of Estimates to Return Specification
Independent Variables: Fund
Fund &
Fund &
Fund –
Fund –
Returns
Benchmark
Market
Benchmark Market
Returns
Returns
Returns
Returns
Indicator for 30 Days -9.84
-23.68
-16.70
-25.01
-16.05
Prior to Distribution
(4.20)
(4.33)
(4.37)
(4.07)
(4.08)
Indicator for 30 Days 2.96
-10.97
-9.92
-9.93
-3.08
Following Distribution (4.28)
(4.42)
(4.44)
(4.15)
(4.16)
p-value (equality test)
0.020
0.020
0.213
0.005
0.016
R2
0.061
0.112
0.120
0.103
0.089
Note: Equations are estimated by SUR using daily observations from late 1994 through mid 2000. All
equations include fund-specific intercepts as well as the indicated returns for the previous five days, the
next 15 days, and then months t-2, t-3, t-4, t-5, and t-6, and the previous six months. Robust standard
errors are shown in parentheses. See text for further discussion.

Table 5: Direct Household Accounts vs. All Other Accounts
Independent Variables: Direct Household Accounts
All Other Accounts
30-Day
15-Day Window 30-Day
15-Day Window
Window
Window
Indicator for Pre- -4.37
-4.46
-19.31
-11.60
Distribution Period
(0.72)
(0.94)
(4.16)
(5.45)
Indicator for Post- -2.15
-1.15
-8.81
0.88
Distribution Period
(0.73)
(1.00)
(4.24)
(5.79)
p-value (equality test)
0.015
0.009
0.046
0.090
R2
0.153
0.150
0.085
0.082
Note: Equations are estimated by SUR using daily observations from late 1994 through mid 2000. All
equations include fund-specific intercepts as well as fund and benchmark returns for the previous five
days, the next 15 days, and then months t-2, t-3, t-4, t-5, and t-6, and the previous six months. Robust
standard errors are shown in parentheses. See text for further discussion.

Table 6: Taxable vs. Tax-Deferred Direct Household Accounts
Independent Variables: Taxable Direct Household Accounts Tax-Deferred Direct Household Accounts
30-Day Window
15-Day Window 30-Day Window
15-Day Window
Indicator for Pre- -3.60
-3.50
-0.76
-0.94
Distribution Period
(0.60)
(0.79)
(0.27)
(0.35)
Indicator for Post- -1.38
-0.85
-0.78
-0.38
Distribution Period
(0.61)
(0.84)
(0.28)
(0.38)
p-value (equality test)
0.004
0.013
0.960
0.244
R2
0.133
0.130
0.068
0.067
Note: Equations are estimated by SUR using daily observations from late 1994 through mid 2000. All
equations include fund-specific intercepts as well as fund and benchmark returns for the previous five
days, the next 15 days, and then months t-2, t-3, t-4, t-5, and t-6, and the previous six months. Robust
standard errors are shown in parentheses. See text for further discussion.

25

Table 7: The Taxpayer Relief Act of 1997 and the Composition of the Fund Distribution
Independent Variables: Taxable Direct Household Accounts Tax-Deferred Direct Household Accounts
TRA97
Tax Impact
TRA97
Tax Impact
Pre-1997
-4.75
-3.52
-0.02
0.12
Pre-Distribution
(1.00)
(0.82)
(0.46)
(0.37)
Pre-1997
0.14
0.55
-0.48
-0.42
Post-Distribution
(0.96)
(0.78)
(0.44)
(0.36)
p-value (equality test)
0.000
0.000
0.448
0.271
Post-1997
-1.33
-1.01
-0.48
-0.41
Pre-Distribution
(0.72)
(0.55)
(0.33)
(0.25)
Post-1997
-0.66
-0.31
-0.39
-0.31
Post-Distribution
(0.76)
(0.57)
(0.35)
(0.26)
p-value (equality test)
0.459
0.311
0.833
0.764
Post-1997
Indicator -7.59
-7.56
-2.68
-2.67
Variable
(0.42)
(0.41)
(0.19)
(0.19)
R2
0.191
0.191
0.110
0.110
Note: Equations are estimated by SUR using daily observations from late 1994 through mid 2000. All
equations include fund-specific intercepts as well as fund and benchmark returns for the previous five
days, the next 15 days, and then months t-2, t-3, t-4, t-5, and t-6, and the previous six months. Robust
standard errors are shown in parentheses. See text for further discussion.

26

Table 8: Turn-of-the-Year Effects
Independent Variables:

Taxable Direct
Tax-Deferred Direct
Household Accounts
Household Accounts
Pre-1997
-2.20
-0.13
Pre-Distribution
(1.07)
(0.49)
Pre-1997
1.48
-0.63
Post-Distribution
(1.10)
(0.50)
p-value (equality test)
0.009
0.433
Post-1997
-0.44
-0.54
Pre-Distribution
(0.64)
(0.29)
Post-1997
0.22
-0.50
Post-Distribution
(0.71)
(0.32)
p-value (equality test)
0.421
0.914
Post-1997 Indicator Variable
-7.52
-2.66
(0.42)
(0.19)
Week 49
-1.45
1.27
(1.44)
(0.66)
Week 50
-2.12
-0.12
(1.46)
(0.66)
Week 51
-1.70
-0.22
(1.43)
(0.65)
Week 52
-2.49
0.45
(1.36)
(0.62)
Week 1
-1.36
1.58
(1.52)
(0.70)
Week 2
-0.74
-0.11
(1.46)
(0.67)
Week 3
-0.23
-0.02
(1.50)
(0.68)
Week 4
-1.84
-0.43
(1.27)
(.58)
p-value (eight weeks jointly equal to zero)
0.541
0.125
R2
0.192
0.112
Note: Equations are estimated by SUR using daily observations from late 1994 through mid 2000. All
equations include fund-specific intercepts, fund and benchmark returns, and controls for "tax impact."
Robust standard errors are shown in parentheses. See text for further discussion.

27

Table 9: Cox Proportional Hazards Models for Account Closings
Taxable Direct Household Tax-Deferred
Direct
Household
Independent Variables:
Accounts
Accounts
Model 1
Model 2
Model 1
Model 2
Pre-Distribution
0.980
1.111
(0.042)
(0.061)
Post-Distribution
0.975
1.085
(0.025)
(0.051)
p-value (equality test)
0.911
0.727
Pre-1997
0.995
1.408
Pre-Distribution
(0.095)
(0.179)
Pre-1997
0.749
1.248
Post-Distribution
(0.074)
(0.196)
p-value (equality test)
0.012
0.479
Post-1997
1.008
1.274
Pre-Distribution
(0.131)
(0.176)
Post-1997
0.720
1.165
Post-Distribution
(0.077)
(0.180)
p-value (equality test)
0.027
0.614
Post-1997 Indicator Variable
1.001
1.087
(0.050)
(0.081)
Week 49
1.033
1.012
(0.146)
(0.178)
Week 50
0.701
0.750
(0.109)
(0.146)
Week 51
0.689
0.686
(0.111)
(0.131)
Week 52
1.338
0.756
(0.171)
(0.129)
Week 1
1.296
0.915
(0.171)
(0.194)
Week 2
1.207
0.830
(0.158)
(0.177)
Week 3
1.266
0.886
(0.161)
(0.185)
Week 4
1.235
0.904
(0.140)
(0.162)
Note: Entries are hazard ratios from Cox proportional hazards models estimated by maximum likelihood.
The equations are estimated on daily data from late 1994 through mid 2000 and are adjusted for "tax
impact." The equations in columns one and three include fund-specific intercepts. The equations in
columns two and four include fund-specific intercepts as well as fund and benchmark returns. Robust
standard errors for the hazard ratios are shown in parentheses. See text for further discussion.

