                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      DECONSTRUCTING LIFECYCLE EXPENDITURE

                                            Mark Aguiar
                                             Erik Hurst

                                        Working Paper 13893
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13893


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2008




We thank Jesse Shapiro for early conversations which encouraged us to write this paper, as well as
Eric French, Emi Nakamura and Randy Wright for detailed comments. We also thank seminar participants
at the University of Rochester, the NBER Macro Perspectives Summer Institute Session, the Federal
Reserve Board of Governors, Wisconsin, Harvard, Yale, Chicago, CREI, Stanford, UCLA, and the
PIER/IGIER conference on inequality in macroeconomics. The research reported herein was performed
pursuant to a grant from the U.S. Social Security Administration (SSA) funded as part of the Retirement
Research Consortium. The opinions and conclusions expressed are solely those of the authors and
do not represent the opinions or policy of SSA or any agency, the Federal Government, or the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Mark Aguiar and Erik Hurst. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Deconstructing Lifecycle Expenditure
Mark Aguiar and Erik Hurst
NBER Working Paper No. 13893
March 2008
JEL No. D13,E21

                                             ABSTRACT

In this paper we revisit two well-known facts regarding lifecycle expenditures. The first is the familiar
"hump" shaped lifecycle profile of nondurable expenditures. We document that the behavior of total
nondurables masks surprising heterogeneity in the lifecycle profile of individual sub-components.
We find, for example, that while food expenditures decline after middle age, expenditures on entertainment
continue to increase throughout the lifecycle. These patterns pose a challenge to models that emphasize
inter-temporal substitution or movements in income, including standard models of precautionary savings,
myopia, and limited commitment, to explain the lifecycle profile of expenditures. Second, we document
that the increase in the cross-sectional dispersion of expenditure over the lifecycle is not greater for
luxuries. In particular, the dispersion in entertainment expenditure declines relative to food expenditures
as households become older, casting further doubt on theories that emphasize (exclusively) shocks
to permanent income to explain the rising cross sectional expenditure dispersion over the lifecycle.
We propose and test a Beckerian model that emphasizes intra-temporal substitution between time
and expenditures as the opportunity cost of time varies over the lifecycle. We find this alternative
model successfully explains the joint behavior of food and entertainment expenditures in the latter
half of the lifecycle. The model, however, is less successful in explaining expenditure patterns early
in the lifecycle.


Mark Aguiar
Department of Economics
University of Rochester
Rochester, NY 14627
maguiar@troi.cc.rochester.edu

Erik Hurst
Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago
Hyde Park Center
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
erik.hurst@gsb.uchicago.edu
1. Introduction

         The well known hump-shaped profile of lifecycle expenditures has been

extensively studied within economics.1 Specifically, after accounting for changes in

family size, consumption expenditure increases through middle age and then declines

sharply thereafter. This holds for nondurable expenditure as well as total expenditure.

For example, conditional on family size and cohort fixed effects, non-durable expenditure

excluding education and health increases by roughly 30 percent between the ages of 25

and 45 and then falls by nearly the same amount between 45 and 70.2

         In this paper, we revisit this familiar fact by decomposing nondurable

expenditures into more detailed consumption categories. In doing so, we show that there

is a tremendous amount of heterogeneity across the lifecycle profiles of individual

consumption categories. Essentially the entire decline in nondurable expenditure late in

the lifecycle is driven by three categories – food, nondurable transportation, and

clothing/personal care. Expenditure on these categories is positively correlated with

market work. Food is amenable to home production (see Aguiar and Hurst 2005, 2007)

while transportation and clothing are inputs into market work.3 The remaining categories

of nondurable expenditures, constituting roughly half of total nondurable expenditures,

do not decline over the second half of the lifecycle.                              These categories include

entertainment, housing services, charitable giving, and utilities. Moreover, expenditures

on several of these categories, most notably entertainment, increase over the latter half of



1
  This literature extends back nearly 40 years. See Thurow (1969).
2
  Authors’ calculation (Figure 1 below). These results are consistent with the findings in the literature. See, for
example, Heckman (1974), Carroll and Summers (1991), Attanasio and Weber (1995), Attanasio et al (1999),
Angeletos et al (2001), Gourinchas and Parker (2002), and Fernandez-Villaverde and Krueger (2007).
3
   See Banks et al (1998) and Battistin et al (2006) for papers that classify clothing and nondurable transportation as
work related expenses.


                                                          1
the lifecycle. Any explanation of the lifecycle profile of expenditures needs to match the

fact that food expenditures (a necessity) falls during the second half of the lifecycle while

expenditure on entertainment (a luxury) increases.

          In addition, we revisit the stylized facts about the increasing cross sectional

dispersion in expenditures over the lifecycle, as documented by Deaton and Paxson

(1994).     While the cross sectional dispersion for composite nondurable expenditures

increases over the lifecycle, we also show the increase in dispersion is limited to

primarily three categories: clothing, alcohol/tobacco, and a residual category which we

call “other non-durables”. A composite measure of non-durables that excludes these

categories shows little increase in cross sectional dispersion over the lifecycle. In fact,

the cross-sectional dispersion of entertainment expenditures actually declines over the

lifecycle, undermining the notion that dispersion is driven by idiosyncratic permanent

income shocks.

          The facts documented in this paper suggest that standard models driven

exclusively by movements in income (whether permanent or transitory) are mis-

specified. The patterns suggest that lifecycle movements in the opportunity cost of time

may play an important role in understanding expenditure. In this sense, interpreting

consumption expenditures exclusively through income shocks is analogous to explaining

the hump in lifecycle labor supply without appealing to the predictable lifecycle hump in

wage rates. To formalize this notion, we propose a Beckerian model of consumption

commodities that emphasizes the intra-temporal substitution between time and

expenditures in consumption as the opportunity cost of time varies over the lifecycle

(Becker 1965). It is well known that such a model can qualitatively generate a hump in




                                             2
lifecycle expenditures (see, for example, Ghez and Becker 1975 and Aguiar and Hurst

2007). The model has other testable implications as well, particularly regarding the joint

allocation of time and expenditures over the lifecycle.

       In the final part of the paper, we calibrate the model and assess its quantitative

ability to match the joint behavior of food and entertainment expenditures over the

lifecycle. To do so, we use data on both expenditures and time allocation. We show that

entertainment expenditures and time allocated to entertainment are positively correlated

over the lifecycle, suggesting complementarity between time and goods. Conversely,

food expenditures and time allocated to food preparation are negatively correlated,

suggesting substitutability between time and goods. To empirically pin down these intra-

temporal elasticities, we use changes in behavior of both time and expenditures around

retirement.   We then predict the lifecycle behavior of entertainment expenditures

conditional on the observed lifecycle behavior of food expenditures as well as the

observed time allocated to food and entertainment.

       The model suggests that entertainment expenditures should be relatively stable

between ages of 40 and 60. Specifically, the model predicts a decrease in entertainment

expenditure of 1 percent between ages 43 and 52 and a further decline of 2 percent

between ages 52 and 60. The data imply respective changes of +3 and -3 percent. The

fact that the model matches the divergence of food and entertainment expenditures in the

latter half of the lifecycle suggests that this striking feature of the data is consistent with

the Beckerian model of consumption commodities.

       The Beckerian model is less successful in explaining the first half of the lifecycle.

In particular, the model predicts that entertainment expenditure should decrease by 1




                                              3
percent between age 25 and 34 and decrease 2 percent between age 34 and 43. In the

data, the respective changes are increases of 47 and 35 percent. One way to interpret this

failure is through the data on time allocation. The model suggests that agents should

delay time spent on entertainment until the complementary expenditure is high, that is

delay entertainment time until after middle age. The time freed up should instead be

allocated to home production, where the margin of substitution between time and goods

is high. This is not the pattern observed in the data. Relative to their 30s and 40s (and to

expenditures on entertainment), agents in their 20s allocate an abundance of time to

entertainment. Note that the low level of expenditure while young may be due to

liquidity constraints and/or precautionary savings. However, these forces cannot explain

why the young allocate so much time to entertainment rather than food production – there

is no equivalent constraint on time allocation. This allocation of time may instead reflect

the high returns to building social capital for the young and the low returns to home

production before the accumulation of a stock of home durables. We return to these

extensions in the concluding section.

       The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 documents the

lifecycle profiles for composite nondurable expenditure and its key sub-components.

Section 3 introduces the Beckerian model. Section 4 calibrates the model and tests its

ability to match the joint lifecycle profile of food and entertainment expenditures.

Section 5 reviews the related literature, focusing on the canonical explanations for the

lifecycle profile of nondurable expenditures. Section 6 concludes.




                                             4
2.       Lifecycle Expenditure

2A:      Total Nondurable Expenditure Over the Lifecycle

         In this section we document that the familiar “hump” shaped profile of

nondurable expenditure over the lifecycle reflects the aggregation of heterogeneous

profiles for different types of goods.4              To begin, we review the facts about total

nondurable expenditure over the lifecycle, and then disaggregate total nondurables into

various sub-components.

         Our data is from the Consumer Expenditure Survey (CEX). We use the NBER

CEX extracts, which includes all waves from 1980 through 2003. We restrict the sample

to households that report expenditures in all four quarters of the survey and sum the four

responses to calculate an annual expenditure measure. We also restrict the sample to

households that record a non-zero annual expenditure on six key sub-components of the

consumption basket: food, entertainment, transportation, clothing and personal care,

utilities, and housing/rent. This latter condition is not overly restrictive, resulting in the

exclusion of less than ten percent of the households. Lastly, we focus our analysis on

households where the head is between the ages of 25 and 75 (inclusive). After imposing

these restrictions, our analysis sample contains 53,412 households. Appendix A contains

additional details about the construction of the dataset and sample selection.

         We adjust all expenditures for cohort and family size effects. The CEX is a cross-

sectional survey and therefore age variation within a single wave represents a mixture of

lifecycle and cohort effects. Moreover, expenditures are measured at the household level


4
 Studies that document a humped shape profile for nondurables conditional on family size include, among others,
Attanasio et al .(1999) and Fernandez-Villaverde and Krueger (2007).


                                                      5
and not the individual level. Household size has a hump shape over the lifecycle,

primarily resulting from the fact that children enter and then leave the household.

Additionally, marriage and death probabilities change over the lifecycle. We identify

lifecycle from cohort variation by using the multiple cross-sections in our sample, and

use cross-sectional differences in family size to identify family size effects. Specifically,

we estimate the following regression:


                     ln(Citk ) = β 0 + β age Ageit + β cCohortit + β fs Familyit + ε itk                          (1)


where Citk is expenditure of household i during year t on consumption category k, Ageit is

a vector of 50 one-year age dummies (for ages 26-75), Cohortit is a vector including

eleven five-year age of birth cohort dummies, and Familyit is a vector of family structure

dummies that include a marital-status dummy and 10 household size dummies. The

coefficients on the age dummies, βage, represent the impact of the lifecycle conditional on

cohort and family size fixed effects, both of which we allow to vary across expenditure

categories. The fact that family size effects are allowed to differ across expenditure

categories accommodates varying degrees of returns to scale across goods.5                                              All

expenditures are adjusted for family size in this manner.



5
  An alternative approach is to use “adult equivalence” scales, such as those developed by the OECD (see for example
http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/61/52/35411111.pdf). The difficulty with these scales is they are designed for total
expenditure, and the same scale may not be suitable for all sub-components. For example, food and housing services
likely have different returns to scale and therefore should have different normalizations. Our approach allows
household size adjustments to vary across goods. One drawback of our methodology is that household size may be
correlated with omitted variables such as permanent income, as well as with the included age dummies. Depending on
the sign of this correlation, we may be over or under adjusting expenditure for household size. However, we have
verified that our results are robust to alternative controls for family size. Specifically, our results are robust to using a
common adult equivalence scale across categories, as well as to constructing demographic cells based on age, cohort,
and family status, and using within-cell variation to estimate lifecycle patterns. As a final check, we compare our
preferred specification using data on food expenditure from the PSID to specifications that include household fixed
effects as well as specifications that include controls for the age of children in the household. Using the PSID data, we


                                                             6
         As is well known, co-linearity prevents the inclusion of a vector of time dummies

in our estimation of (1). To account for changes in the relative price of each consumption

category, we deflate all categories into constant dollars using the relevant CPI product-

level deflator, if available.            Otherwise, we use the relevant PCE deflator from the

National Income Accounts.6 All data in the paper are expressed in 2000 dollars. Any

movements in expenditure patterns over time that are not captured by the five-year cohort

dummies or by the price deflators will be interpreted as variation over the lifecycle.

However, we do not think that time effects are driving the results, as the patterns depicted

below are relatively stable across all cohorts in the sample.7

         Figure 1 plots the familiar lifecycle profile of core nondurable expenditures and

total nondurable expenditures. Core nondurables consist of expenditure on food (both

home and away), alcohol, tobacco, clothes and personal care, utilities, domestic services,

nondurable transportation (including air fare), nondurable entertainment, gambling,

contributions to non-profits, business services and expenses related to life insurance,

publications, and lodging away from home. Total nondurables are core nondurables plus

housing services, calculated as either rent paid or the self-reported rental equivalent of the

respondent’s house. We exclude expenditures on education and health care from the

analysis, as the utility (or returns) from consuming these goods vary significantly over the

lifecycle.



find that for food expenditures, the individual fixed effect regressions with family size controls (but excluding cohort
fixed effects) are nearly identical to the regressions including cohort fixed effects with family size controls (but
excluding       individual    fixed      effects).     See     the    robustness    appendix      posted     online   at
www.markaguiar.com/aguiarhurst/lifecycle/robustness_appendix.pdf for details. In summary, our results are robust to
all of these alternative specifications.
6
  We have verified our results are robust to using a common aggregate deflator (CPI-U) for all categories. See
www.markaguiar.com/aguiarhurst/lifecycle/robustness_appendix.pdf for details.
7
  See www.markaguiar.com/aguiarhurst/lifecycle/robustness_appendix.pdf for a cohort-by-cohort analysis as well as an
analysis comparing results from 1980—1991 (earlier period) and 1992—2003 (later period) sub samples.


                                                           7
       The figure represents log-deviations from households whose head is 25 years old.

The dots represent individual data points and the lines represent the 3 period moving

average of the respective series. Figure 1 replicates the well-documented profile of non-

durable expenditures over the lifecycle, with core nondurable expenditure peaking in

middle age at roughly 30 percent (that is, 0.3 log points) higher than the level of 25 year

old expenditure, and then declining by nearly the same amount over the latter half of the

lifecycle. Total nondurable expenditure rises faster early in the lifecycle, but then does

not decline as significantly later in the lifecycle.   The gap between the two series

represents the lifecycle behavior in housing services, which we will discuss on its own in

the next sub-section.



2B. Disaggregating Nondurable Expenditure Over the Lifecycle

       The lifecycle profile of nondurable expenditures depicted in Figure 1 has been the

subject of numerous studies. The standard approach to lifecycle consumption follows the

canonical models of Modigliani and Brumberg (1954) and Friedman (1957). These

permanent income or “consumption smoothing” models imply that marginal utility of

consumption is a martingale (up to a discounting term). Almost all studies equate

consumption with expenditures, making the lifecycle “hump” at first glance a challenge

to the canonical models.     Perhaps the two explanations that have gained the most

advocates are the precautionary savings model (with labor income risk and impatient

consumers) and poor planning models, where the latter includes models in which agents

do not plan or cannot commit to a plan. These popular models are discussed in section 5.




                                            8
         If the observed pattern of expenditure is due to inter-temporal substitution or

movements in financial resources, then luxury goods should respond more than

necessities.      To gain insight into the validity of such mechanism, we highlight the

lifecycle expenditure on food and nondurable entertainment. We highlight these two

categories for a reason. Food is the canonical necessary good. Entertainment, on the

other hand, has a relatively high income elasticity, and therefore a relatively high inter-

temporal elasticity of substitution as well.8 If the declines in expenditure in the second

half of the lifecycle are due to poor planning, time inconsistency, or impatience,

entertainment spending will decline more than food expenditure. Indeed, as we show

next, the opposite occurs.

           Figure 2a plots the lifecycle profile of these two expenditure categories, adjusted

for family size and cohort effects, as described by equation (1). Food consists of food

purchased for consumption at home plus food consumed away from home. Non-durable

entertainment consists of such expenditures as cable subscriptions, movie and theatre

tickets, country club dues, pet services, etc. It does not include durable expenditures such

as television sets and does not include reading material and magazine subscriptions. The

average annual expenditure on food is $5,850 in year 2000 dollars, while entertainment

totals $1,260. Food and entertainment account for roughly 30 and 6 percent of core non-

durable expenditure, respectively (Table 1).




8
  We take as a premise that food has a lower income elasticity than nondurable entertainment expenditure. In our
sample, regressions of food expenditure on household income (or total expenditure instrumented with household
income) yield an estimated income elasticity less than one, while the elasticity for entertainment expenditure is
consistently much greater than one across various specifications. However, as discussed below, these types of
regression mix income effects and substitution (“price of time”) effects, and therefore do not accurately isolate the
income elasticity.


                                                         9
       Figure 2a indicates that food follows the general shape of aggregated nondurable

expenditures – expenditures increase in the first half of the lifecycle, peak in the early 40s

at 22 percent above age 25, and then steadily decline in the latter half of the lifecycle.

Entertainment expenditures exhibit a different pattern.          Like food, entertainment

increases until the early 40s. However, expenditures on entertainment do not fall over the

lifecycle. Instead, spending on entertainment increases 70 percent by age 45, and then

increases another 10 percent through the early 70s.

       These patterns are at odds with the predictions of most standard theories put forth

to explain the lifecycle profile of expenditures. Moreover, plausible models of poor

planning or extreme impatience would not predict an increasing profile of entertainment

expenditures over the latter half of the lifecycle. As a result, an alternative framework is

needed to explain these patterns, a point we revisit more formally in the next section.

       Figure 2b breaks food into food consumed at home and food consumed away

from home (“food out”). Both categories follow a hump shape, with food out following a

steeper trajectory on both sides of middle age. Specifically, food out increases by 34

percent between ages 25 and 45, and then declines by roughly 80 percent over the

remainder of the lifecycle. Food at home increases by 23 percent between 25 and 45, and

then declines by nearly 40 percent thereafter.

       One may be tempted to interpret food out as a luxury relative to home-cooked

meals and conclude that Figure 2b suggests older households are being forced to

economize. However, such a conclusion does not necessarily follow. Food out includes

such items as fast food and other “quick meals” that are common features of the work

day, but are easily reproduced at home if time permits. In fact, in Aguiar and Hurst




                                             10
(2005), we document that retirees, compared to their working counterparts, are just as

likely to frequent restaurants with table service but much less likely to purchase food at

fast food establishments.    This fact suggests that the sharp decline in “food out”

expenditures observed during retirement calls for a model of home production

emphasizing the price of time rather than a model in which retirees lack financial

resources.

       The various panels of Figure 3 plot the lifecycle profile of other components of

nondurable expenditure. We group the goods by their expenditure profile over the

lifecycle. Panel A depicts nondurable transportation expenditures, such as car

maintenance, gas, tolls, air fare, etc. Aside from food, nondurable transportation is the

only other category of non durable expenditure that displays a prominent “hump” in

expenditure like that found in total nondurable expenditures. As we will show later, the

decline in expenditures on non-durable transportation correlates strongly with the

measures of time spent working, consistent with the premise that transportation is a

complement to market work.

       Panel B depicts alcohol and tobacco, clothing and personal care, and a residual

non-durable expenditure category that includes business services, expenses related to life

insurance, publications, and lodging away from home (including spending on children’s

school lodging). These categories start out at a high level of expenditure and then fall

steadily throughout the lifecycle. The decline in expenditure starting in middle age is

particularly pronounced for these categories. Specifically, the log deviation between 45

year olds and 68 year olds is -1.4 for alcohol and tobacco expenditures, -0.8 for other

non-durable expenditures, and -0.6 for clothing and personal care expenditures. These




                                           11
categories decline over the second half of the lifecycle at a much greater rate than the

composite non-durable consumption measure.

       Panel C collects categories that, like entertainment, do not decline over the latter

half of the lifecycle.   These categories are utilities, housing services, and domestic

services. The latter category does decline slightly in the middle of the lifecycle, perhaps

reflecting lifecycle child care needs, before increasing late in life, which likely represents

health-care related assistance.

       Figures 2 and 3, taken together, document substantial heterogeneity in the

lifecycle profile of expenditure of various goods. We collect the key patterns in Table 1.

We break the goods into two categories, corresponding to those that fall over the latter

half of the lifecycle and those that do not fall. Each category totals roughly half of our

measure of total non-durable expenditures.

       There are two additional facts that can be discerned from Table 1. First, the

categories that experience the most marked declines in expenditure between the ages of

45 and 60 are also the same goods that experience the most marked decline in

expenditures during the retirement years.         The literature studying the decline in

expenditure associated with retirement, the so-called “retirement consumption puzzle”,

has typically been pursued independently of the literature on lifecycle consumption. (See

Hurst (2007) for a survey of the retirement consumption literature). Nevertheless, the

standard explanations for the fall in spending at the time of retirement overlap with those

proposed for the lifecycle, including poor planning (see, for example, Bernheim et al.

(2001)), time inconsistent preferences (see, for example, Angeletos et al. (2001)), and




                                             12
non-separability in utility between consumption and leisure (see, for example, Laitner

and Silverman (2005)).

         During the retirement years, food expenditures decline while entertainment

expenditures increase. This is inconsistent with plausible stories of poor planning and

time inconsistent preferences. More generally, half of the components of total non

durable expenditures actually rise during the retirement years. The results in this paper

cast doubt on the existence of a retirement consumption “puzzle.”9 As we show below,

these patterns at the time of retirement are consistent with some goods being

complements with time (like entertainment) and others being substitutes with time (like

food via home production or clothing and transportation via work related expenses).

         The second fact that Table 1 highlights is that the timing of the declines for the

“falling” categories is closely tied to the lifecycle profile of market work hours. For

household heads, employment rates and market work hours begin to decline in the mid

40s and begin to fall off sharply starting in the early 50s. For reference, Figure A1 in the

appendix plots the lifecycle profile of employment rates for household heads (solid line)

and the hours per week spent working (unconditional on employment) household heads

(dashed line) for our cross sectional sample of CEX respondents. Given the lack of panel

data for almost all consumption categories and the fact that work hours are strongly

correlated with permanent income in the cross section, it is hard to identify the

correlation between work hours and spending conditional on income at the household




9
   The fact that declines in expenditures at the time of retirement are limited to food, clothing, and non-durable
transportation has also been emphasized by Battistin et al (2006) and Hurst (2007).


                                                       13
level using cross sectional data.10 To isolate the effect of variation in work hours, we

therefore look at the correlation of average market work hours at each age with average

expenditures on a category. The lifecycle profiles of non-durable transportation, food,

and clothing/personal care have a correlation with the lifecycle profile of work hours of

0.84, 0.84, and 0.92, respectively. The corresponding correlations for entertainment and

utilities are -0.51 and -0.62.             These results are consistent with the hypothesis that

transportation and clothing are complements to market work, while food expenditures are

substitutes for time spent in home production. Conversely, the evidence suggests that

expenditures on entertainment and utilities complement time spent away from work, a

claim we revisit below.


2C.      Cross Sectional Dispersion in Expenditure over the Lifecycle

         Along with the “hump” in mean expenditure over the lifecycle, a second

influential finding concerns the evolution of cross-sectional expenditure inequality over

the lifecycle. The influential paper of Deaton and Paxson (1994) documented that the

cross sectional variance of log consumption expenditures increases over the lifecycle. In

the standard model, this is a violation of insurance and implies uninsurable shocks to

permanent income that accumulate over the lifecycle (see also Storesletten et al (2004b),

Heathcote et al (2005), and Guvenen (2007)).

         A related issue is whether the shape of lifecycle expenditure profile varies by

income and education. Several papers have argued that less educated households are



10
   We have performed a panel analysis of the role of market work in food expenditure using data from the PSID. We
find that restricting the sample to households in which both spouses work eliminates the decline in food expenditures
between age 45 and age 65. More generally, the lifecycle shape of food expenditure is sensitive to the employment
status     of      the    household    members,      controlling   for    household     fixed     effects.       See
www.markaguiar.com/aguiarhust/lifecycle/robustness_appendix.pdf for details.


                                                        14
more likely to be poor planners or to exhibit time inconsistent preferences (see, for

example, Lusardi and Mitchell (2007) and Laibson et al. (2007)). Moreover, a prominent

result of Carroll and Summers (1995) is that lifecycle expenditure tracks income profiles

across educational attainment.            Lastly, Bernheim et al (2004) document that food

expenditures drop relatively more at retirement for low wealth and low income

households.

         In this section we revisit the evolution of expenditure dispersion over the

lifecycle. We first characterize the changing cross-sectional distribution of expenditures

over the lifecycle, and then explore mean expenditures conditional on educational

attainment. Our first measure of dispersion is the standard deviation of log expenditure at

each age after controlling for cohort and family status. To be precise, we analyze the

residuals from the regression of log expenditure on age, cohort, and family status

dummies (equation (1)). We compute the sample standard deviation of the residuals at

each age for each cohort. We then regress the standard deviations on age and cohort

dummies in order to remove any cross-cohort variation in dispersion. As with mean

expenditures, collinearity prevents the identification of time trends separate from age and

cohort effects.11

         In Figure 4a we plot the cross sectional standard deviation of log expenditure for

core nondurables, food, and entertainment. The pattern for core nondurables is roughly

similar to that in Deaton and Paxson’s study. In particular, dispersion is relatively stable

until age 40, and then increases steadily over the remainder of the lifecycle. If the

dispersion represents shocks to income, then entertainment expenditures should show a


11
  See Heathcote et al (2005) for a detailed sensitivity analysis regarding cohort versus time fixed effects in
identifying the evolution of inequality over the life cycle.


                                                     15
greater increase in dispersion than do food expenditures. However, this is not the case.

In fact, the cross sectional dispersion in entertainment declines over the lifecycle, while

the dispersion of food expenditures is relatively stable.

          The relative stability of food and the declines in entertainment expenditure

dispersion over the lifecycle begs the question of the source of the increasing dispersion

for total nondurables shown in Figure 4a and documented in Deaton and Paxson (1994).

One source is that there are several categories of nondurable expenditures for which

dispersion increases sharply over the lifecycle.                        We summarize the dispersion in

expenditures for the main sub-components of total non-durables in Table 2. Three

categories stand out as exhibiting sharp increases in dispersion later in the lifecycle –

clothing and personal care items, alcohol and tobacco, and the residual “other non-

durable” category (which includes books and publications, lodging away from home, and

business services).          Recall from Table 1 and Figure 3b that these three categories

experience the sharpest declines over the second half of the lifecycle. Figure 4b plots the

cross sectional dispersion of log expenditures on clothing and personal care, alcohol and

tobacco, other nondurables, and core nondurables excluding these three categories. We

see that differences across households in spending on clothing/personal care, other non

durables, and alcohol/tobacco increase by 0.4, 0.6 and 0.6 log points between age 25 and

age 68, respectively. Excluding these categories from nondurables reduces the increase

in lifecycle dispersion to below 0.15 log points – with almost all of the increasing

dispersion occurring over the front half of the lifecycle.12




12
  In Appendix Figure A2 we plot the standard deviation of work hours over the lifecycle (relative to 25 year olds).
Notice that the dispersion in work hours increase dramatically between the ages of 50 and 65. As a result, it should not


                                                          16
          To provide a more complete picture of expenditure inequality over the lifecycle,

we document the evolution of key percentiles of the cross sectional distribution for food

and entertainment.             Specifically, we estimate quantile regressions using the same

covariates as in equation (1). We do this for the 10th, 50th, and 90th percentiles. We then

plot the coefficients on the age dummies (with age 25 the omitted group) in figure 5 for

food (panel A) and entertainment (panel B).13 Note that this normalization allows us to

depict the change in each percentile over the lifecycle. For context, the notes to the

figures report the respective percentiles for 25 year olds, pooling the sample across

cohorts.

          Figure 5 reinforces the conclusions of figure 4a. Specifically, in panel A we see

that the percentiles of the food expenditure distribution all move in lock step over the

lifecycle, with each percentile following the same hump shaped profile. That is, there is

no narrowing or widening of the food expenditure distribution. This holds as well for the

25th and 75th percentiles, which we omit from the figure for clarity. On the other hand, in

panel B the 10th percentile of the entertainment expenditure distribution experiences the

fastest relative growth over the lifecycle. Similarly, the (omitted) 25th percentile is

increasing relative to the median, but not as much as the 10th percentile. That is, the

bottom of the entertainment expenditure is catching up to the middle of the distribution,

indicating a narrowing of the entertainment expenditure distribution over the lifecycle.




be surprising that the dispersion in work related expenses (such as clothing and non durable transportation) increase
sharply between the ages of 50 and 65.
13
    Note that this exercise is not equivalent to tracking a particular household (say, the 10th percentile household in total
lifetime expenditures) over the lifecycle. Rather, it characterizes the distribution of expenditure on food and
entertainment at each age (after conditioning on cohort and household size), regardless of whether, say, the 10th
percentile household in food or entertainment expenditure at age 25 is the same as the 10th percentile household at age
45.


                                                            17
       The fact that the bottom of the expenditure distribution for entertainment is

increasing relative to the rest of the sample raises questions regarding the hypothesis that

poorer households are particularly unprepared for declines in income later in the

lifecycle. We shed more light on this question by exploring whether less educated

households reduce their entertainment expenditures during the latter half of the lifecycle.

       Figures 6a and 6b document the lifecycle pattern of food and entertainment

expenditure for more and less educated households, respectively. Less educated refers to

households whose head has completed 12 years or less of education. More educated

households have heads with at least some college education. Figures 6a and 6b document

that the profile of food expenditure does not rise as sharply early in the lifecycle for less

educated households, consistent with the fact that income does not rise as steeply for

these households, and falls more sharply later in the lifecycle, consistent with the

evidence of Bernheim et al (2001). However, the profile of entertainment expenditures

by educational attainment contradicts claims that the sharp drop in food and total

nondurable expenditures for less educated households is due to poor planning or declines

in current income. In fact, entertainment rises relatively more later in the lifecycle for

less educated households than it does for more educated households, consistent with our

previous results on the narrowing of the cross-sectional gap in entertainment expenditures

over the lifecycle.



3.     A Beckerian Model of Consumption

       In this section, we introduce a simple lifecycle model of consumption that builds

on Becker (1965) in its emphasis on time as an input into consumption. We propose this




                                             18
model as an alternative to the standard models that emphasize income fluctuations and

inter-temporal substitution as an explanation for the lifecycle profile of expenditures.

Such a model seems plausible ex-ante given that the primary categories that have

expenditures declining over the lifecycle are either amenable to home production (food)

or are work related (clothing and non-durable transportation). In this section, we provide

additional structure that will allow us to asses whether the movements in expenditure we

observe are quantatively consistent with the Beckerian model.

        The model gives a prominent role to intra-temporal substitution between time and

expenditures.      The model yields several testable implications beyond a qualitative

“hump” in lifecycle expenditures. In the next section, we assess the model’s ability to

quantitatively match the joint behavior of different consumption categories over the

lifecycle.

        Agents consume a number of commodities indexed by n=1, 2,…, N. Period

utility is given by u(c1,…,cN), which is additively separable across time but not restricted

to be separable across commodities within a period. Agents live for T periods and

maximize the expected discounted sum of life time utility, with a discount factor β.

        We follow Becker (1965) by representing the consumption commodities that enter

utility as the outputs of production functions that take time and market goods as inputs.

Specifically, each commodity n is formed by combining time inputs hn and market goods

xn using a technology characterized by a production function fn. That is, cn = fn (hn, xn).14

To give concrete examples, a commodity may be watching a television show, which



14
  We assume these production functions satisfy the Inada conditions. We also rule out “joint production.”
That is, a time or market good used to produce commodity n cannot be simultaneously used to produce
commodity n' ≠ n.


                                                   19
combines a durable (the television), a cable subscription, and time. Similarly, another

commodity may be a meal that takes groceries and time spent cooking as inputs. Note

that in the former example time and market goods are complements, while in the latter

example time and market goods may be substitutes (given the option to purchase food

prepared by others). As we shall see, the degree of substitutability between time and

market inputs in production is a key feature that distinguishes various commodities.

       For our purposes, the remainder of the agents’ environment is not crucial. We

therefore follow the canonical partial-equilibrium models and assume that agents self

insure by borrowing and lending at a constant interest rate r. Assets must be greater than

some lower bound, a. Agents face a competitive labor market with a spot wage w, which

follows a Markov process whose transition probabilities may vary over the lifecycle.

Time spent in market work is denoted L, and the total time endowment for a period is

normalized to one. The price of market input bundle n is given by pn, which we take to

be constant over the lifecycle.

       The problem of an agent of age t, with assets a and facing a wage rate w, can be

expressed in recursive form as:

                    V (a, w, t ) = max u (c1 ,K , c N ) + β E tV (a ', w ', t + 1) ,

subject to
                                  c n = f n (h n , x n ), n = 1,..., N
                                  ∑h
                                   n
                                        n
                                            + L =1

                                  a ' = (1 + r )a + wL − ∑ p n x n
                                                             n

                                  L ≥ 0, a ' ≥ a.

       Let μ be the multiplier on the time budget constraint, λ the multiplier on the

income budget constraint, θ the multiplier on non-negativity of labor time, and γ the



                                                  20
multiplier on the borrowing constraint.              The home technology constraints can be

substituted directly into the agent’s utility function. Note that the optimal solution is the

same as that of the relaxed problem in which all the constraints are expressed as

inequality constraints. Therefore, we can write the Lagrangian in such a way that all

multipliers are non-negative. The first order necessary conditions are (where subscripts

denote the corresponding partial derivatives):

                                x n : un f xn = λ p n , ∀n
                                h n : un f hn = μ , ∀n
                                L : λw +θ = μ
                                a ' : β E tVa ' (a ', w ', t + 1) = λ − γ .

The envelope condition implies Va (a, w, t ) = λ (1 + r ) .

        Note that if agents supply non-zero market labor, then the ratio μ/λ equals the

market wage, w. More generally, the ratio μ/λ represents the price of time (in units of the

numeraire). To simplify future expressions, we define ω≡μ/λ. Given that empirically

many respondents are not actively working, and the fact that a spot labor market in which

agents face linear wage schedules may not be the best characterization of empirical labor

markets, we do not emphasize the market wage as the relevant price of time. We shall

describe below an alternative estimate of ω.

        We focus on the intra-period tradeoff between time and goods. Specifically,

divide the first order condition for hn by that of xn to obtain:

                                               f hn ω
                                                   =    .                                (2)
                                               f xn p n

This condition states that the marginal rate of technical substitution between time and

goods in the production of commodity n will be equated to the relative price of time.



                                                   21
This condition is a static first order condition that holds regardless of the nature of the

utility function, the completeness of asset markets, and the nature of risk facing the

agents.

          A key element of our analysis is the response of expenditures relative to time


inputs as the price of time varies,
                                            ( h ) . Let σ denote the elasticity of substitution
                                        d ln x
                                               n
                                                   n
                                                          n
                                         d ln (ω )

between time and market inputs into the production of commodity n, which we assume to

differ across commodities but remain constant as we vary inputs for a given commodity.


That is, σ n =
                      ( h).
                  d ln x
                         n
                             n
                                     Taking logs and differentiating equation (2), we have
                      ⎛ n ⎞
                 d ln ⎜ f h n ⎟
                      ⎝     fx ⎠


    ( h ) =σ .
d ln x
       n
            n
                  n
                      The greater σn, the more expenditures will respond (relative to time
  d ln (ω )

inputs) to changes in the price of time over the lifecycle, given permanent income.

          Given a price of time, the static first order condition pins down expenditures

relative to time inputs. For our simulation exercises this is sufficient, given that we bring

in independent observations on time allocation over the lifecycle. We delay discussion of

this data until the next section. Nevertheless, to provide intuition we discuss how the

level of expenditure inputs for different commodities varies with the price of time and

with financial resources.          For clarity, we make additional simplifying assumptions.

Specifically, we assume u is additively separable across commodities and fn are constant

returns to scale. To repeat, we make these additional assumptions to gain intuition for the




                                                   22
profile of lifecycle expenditures. We do not use them when calibrating and testing the

model in the next section.

        We start by differentiating the first order condition for xn with respect to ω,

holding λ constant:

                                                             n n
                        c n unn d ln c n x n f xxn d ln x n h f xh d ln h n
                                        + n                + n              = 0, .
                          un d ln ω        f x d ln ω        f x d ln ω

were all derivatives are taken holding λ fixed. Here we appeal to separability in utility by

assuming unn'=0 for n'≠n.         Using the constant returns relations f xxn x n = − f hxn h n and

       f hn f xn                            d ln h n                    d ln x n
σn =             , along with the fact that                         =                       − σ n , we have a result of
       f xhn c n                            d ln ω         d λ =0
                                                                        d ln ω     d λ =0


Ghez and Becker (1975):

                                  d ln x n                  ⎛       u          ⎞
                                                      = shn ⎜ σ n − n n        ⎟,                                  (3)
                                  d ln ω     d λ =0         ⎝      c unn       ⎠

where the notation dλ=0 reminds the reader we are holding resources constant and

varying the price of time.        We denote the cost share of time in the production of

                    h n f hn
consumption good n,     n
                             , as shn .
                      c

        The expression states that expenditures for commodity n increase with the price of

time if the intra-temporal elasticity of substitution between time and goods is greater than

the inter-temporal elasticity of substitution in consumption. The size of the increase (or

decrease) depends as well on the share of time in production. In particular, if the share of

time in consumption is zero, then the movements in the price of time have no effect on

expenditures. This is the implicit assumption of the vast majority of the literature on

consumption.


                                                        23
       The intuition of equation (3) is as follows. As the price of time increases, agents

will substitute away from time and toward market inputs to achieve a given level of

consumption. This is movement along a production isoquant and is parameterized by σn.

However, the fact that time is costlier in the current period relative to other periods

suggests shifting consumption to a period in which the total cost of consumption (time

plus market goods) is less. The willingness to do this is given by the inter-temporal

elasticity of substitution in consumption. For a fixed ratio of inputs, this reduces market

expenditures. This is a parallel movement across isoquants (or levels of consumption).

       In general, the net effect is theoretically ambiguous. However, consider food

consumption.      This commodity has a relatively low inter-temporal elasticity of

substitution and a relatively high intra-temporal elasticity of substitution.     It should

therefore be more likely to covary positively with the price of time. Given that the price

of time peaks in middle age and then declines through retirement, this is consistent with

the results of food expenditure shown in Figure 2. Similarly, time and market goods are

difficult to substitute in the production of entertainment (low σ) and entertainment has a

relatively high inter-temporal elasticity of substitution, we should expect expenditures on

entertainment to rise as the price of time falls. Again, this is consistent with the data

assuming a reduction in the price of time later in the lifecycle. We shall return to these

insights in the next section.

       Now consider the response of expenditures as financial resources vary and the

price of time is held constant. Differentiating the same first order condition while

holding ω constant, we have:

                                                            n n
                       c n unn d ln c n x n f xxn d ln x n h f xh d ln h n
                                       + n                + n              = 1.
                         un d ln λ        f x d ln λ        f x d ln λ


                                                 24
The fact that ω is fixed implies that d ln h n = d ln x n , and together with the CRS fact that

                             d ln c n                      un
xf xx = − hf xh , we have                             =         . Viewed in this light, a negative income shock
                             d ln λ          dω = 0
                                                           n
                                                          c unn

(an increase in λ) results in reduced consumption, where commodities that have the

largest inter-temporal elasticity of substitution experience the largest declines. That is, if

agents find themselves short of resources, food and other necessities should be the

expenditure category that declines the least, while entertainment should decline the most.

        The canonical model focuses on the fact that expenditures respond to movements

in life time resources, abstracting from movements in the price of time. This is not an

issue if time is a small share of consumption inputs. However, if the Beckerian forces are

empirically prominent, such analyses conflate price and income effects. There is a

parallel to the analysis of labor supply, where it has long been recognized that

movements in wages yield both income and substitution effects on individual decisions to

allocate time to the market. The key insight that we wish to emphasize is that the same

identification problem arises with consumption expenditures in the Beckerian framework.

        Additionally, the model provides a useful context to revisit the Deaton and

Paxson dispersion plots presented in Figure 4. If dispersion is driven by income shocks

(that is, relative movements in the multiplier on resources, λ), then goods with the largest

                                          ⎛ −u ⎞
inter-temporal elasticity of substitution ⎜ n n ⎟ will display the greatest dispersion. This
                                          ⎝ c unn ⎠

                d ln c n                 un
follows from                        =         . This is the sense in which the cross-sectional standard
                d ln λ     dω = 0
                                         n
                                        c unn

deviation of entertainment expenditures should demonstrate a larger increase over the




                                                                 25
lifecycle if the dispersion is driven by relative movements in income. The fact that this is

not the case provides strong evidence against the standard interpretation.

       However, there are also large movements in the price of time over the lifecycle

that may differ across households. Without taking a stand on several parameters for

which we do not have strong priors, the model does not have clear empirical implications

for the increase in food dispersion relative to entertainment in response to price of time

shocks. The response of expenditure to movements in the price of time depends on the

share of time in the production of the commodity as well as the difference between the

intra-temporal and the inter-temporal elasticities of substitution (equation 3). It is safe to

assume that the share of time is higher for entertainment. However, while the difference

between the elasticities is likely to be positive for food and negative for entertainment,

there is no clear prior on the relative magnitudes of the difference. Nevertheless, it is

possible that food expenditures are relatively sensitive (in absolute value) to movements

in the price of time. If this is the case, then the fact that the dispersion of food increases

as much (or more) than the dispersion in entertainment expenditures over the lifecycle

suggests that cross-sectional movements in the price of time are at least as important (if

not the dominant factor) as movements in permanent income. In any event, the data

make clear that there must be a countervailing force that offsets movements in income,

and the cross-sectional difference in the opportunity cost of time is a promising

candidate.


4. Rationalizing Food and Entertainment Expenditures

       The preceding analysis demonstrates that models of poor planning or the standard

permanent income model that abstracts from time as an input into consumption cannot



                                             26
rationalize a decline in food expenditure that occurs simultaneously with an increase in

entertainment.    That is, a drop in available resources should generate a fall in

entertainment expenditures that exceeds the fall in food expenditures, given plausible

income elasticities. Such behavior, however, is potentially consistent with a Beckerian

model that allows for time and market inputs to have different degrees of substitutability

across commodities and large movements in the price of time over the lifecycle. We now

turn to the question of whether an appropriately calibrated Beckerian model can

quantitatively rationalize the joint lifecycle behavior of food and entertainment

expenditures.

        The calibration exercises focuses on food and entertainment for two reasons. The

first is, as mentioned above, that these two goods are particularly informative regarding

whether expenditure is responding to a shock to resources or a shock to the cost of time.

The second reason is that the time input into food and entertainment can be readily

measured. The time input into other consumption categories, such as clothing or tobacco,

is more difficult to delineate.



4A: Calibration

        The Beckerian approach places the intra-temporal elasticity of substitution, and

lifecycle movements in the price of time, at the forefront of the analysis. We therefore

need to obtain empirical measures of these elasticities. We do so by exploiting equation

(2), which equates the marginal rate of transformation between time and market inputs to

the relative price of time.




                                           27
       More precisely, we use the implication that
                                                         ( h ) = σ . Given an elasticity
                                                     d ln x
                                                            n
                                                                n
                                                                    n

                                                       d ln (ω )

of substitution, the model has a tight prediction for the response of market expenditures

relative to time inputs to a movement in the price of time.

       Empirical testing of this prediction requires data on both market inputs and time

inputs. The data on market inputs is from the CEX, as presented in Section 2. The data

on time inputs is from the American Time Use Survey (ATUS). This survey collects

time diaries from a large, nationally representative sample of individuals each year,

beginning in 2003. Each diary records every activity (as coded into over 400 categories)

in a 24 hour period. Appendix B contains additional details on the ATUS.

       Figure 7 plots the time allocated to food production (cooking and clean-up), total

non-market production (cleaning, maintenance, shopping, etc. plus food production), and

time allocated to entertainment (watching television, watching movies, socializing,

exercise and sporting events, hobbies, etc.). Both series are conditional on household

size and marital status (keep in mind, however, that time diaries are collected for

individuals and not for households). Given the single cross-section, we do not control for

cohort effects. Specifically, we regress time allocated to each task in levels on age and

family status controls. We construct the conditional mean time allocated at each age by

adding the coefficient on the relevant age dummy to the unconditional mean for

respondents aged 25. The figure depicts the log difference of this constructed conditional

mean at each age minus the log mean time allocated at age 25.

       The figure indicates that time spent on total home production and time devoted to

food production both increase by roughly 30 percent between the age of 25 and the



                                            28
middle 40s, and then increase by another 40 and 30 percent respectively, as individuals

reach the retirement years. Time spent on entertainment does not increase substantially

early in the lifecycle, but then increases by roughly 35 percent between age 50 and age

70.

           To test the model’s predictions, we need estimates of the elasticities of

substitution. In previous work (Aguiar and Hurst 2007), we have estimated the elasticity

for food production to be between 1.5 and 2.2. In that paper, we also discuss how these

estimates are consistent with other studies.15 For the following analysis we take σ to be

1.5 for food consumption. We clarify below which results are sensitive to this choice.

           Given this elasticity, we can calculate the movement in the opportunity cost of

time implied by observed movements in food expenditures and time allocated to food

production. Table 3 reports the relevant calculations. The first row reports the changes

in food expenditure (using the CEX data and the methodology of Section 2) for various

sub-sections of the lifecycle, while the second row reports the corresponding changes in

the time allocated to food preparation and clean up (“food production” using the time use

data). As in previous tables, the column headings indicate the respective age span, with

the end points representing three-year averages. For example, row 1, column 1 of Table

3 reports that the average food expenditure for those aged 34 is 13 percent higher than

those aged 25. The corresponding increase in time allocated to food production is also 13

percent (second row).




15
     See, for example, the estimates discussed in Rupert, Rogerson, and Wright (1995).


                                                           29
         Taking σ for food to be 1.5, the implied change in the price of time can be


calculated from the model’s prediction that Δ ln (ω ) ≈
                                                                              ( h)
                                                                         Δ ln x
                                                                                n
                                                                                     n
                                                                                              . For example, the
                                                                                         σn

ratio of expenditure to time devoted to food is constant between the ages of 25 and 34,

implying no change in the price of time. The ratio of expenditure to time decreases by 4

percent between age 34 and 43, implying a decline in the price of time of 4/1.5=3

percent. The remaining columns of row three report the implied price of time for the

remainder of the lifecycle. As one would expect, the opportunity cost of time declines

after middle age. Peak retirement years (age 60 through 68) involve a decline in the price

of time of roughly 12 percent.16

         Note that we do not use wages as the price of time. The model relates wages to

the price of time for those who supply non-zero market labor. However, this is not the

case for retirees and others who are not employed. More generally, and as pointed out in

the previous section, it is not robust to alternative models of labor markets. We therefore

do not advocate the use wages as the price of time.

         While we have an established literature on the elasticity of substitution between

time and goods for food production, no comparable estimates exist for entertainment.

We calibrate this parameter from the behavior during peak retirement years, and then

assess the model’s ability to match entertainment expenditure for the remainder of the

lifecycle. Specifically, as discussed above, the behavior of time and market inputs into

food production suggest a decline in the price of time of 12 percent between the ages 60



16
  For comparison, the implied price of time based on shopping intensity (Aguiar and Hurst 2007, Figure 4), increases
by a little more than 5 percent between age 25 and 34, and declines by a little more than 10 percent between age 60 and
age 74. The price of time in our earlier study also peaked before the age of 40 and declined roughly 30 percent from
the peak in the mid 30s through age 74.


                                                         30
and 68. Over this period of the lifecycle, the average person increases time allocated to

entertainment by 20 percent (row 4 of table 3). The last row of table 3 reports that

market inputs into entertainment increase by 11 percent between age 60 and 68. That is,

the ratio of market to time inputs into entertainment falls by 9 percent. The implied

elasticity of substitution is therefore 9/12 or 0.8.

        As one would expect, the elasticity of substitution between time and goods in

entertainment is less than that for food. Indeed, from the extension of the previous

section, the model predicts that entertainment expenditure increases during retirement

assuming that the inter-temporal elasticity of substation for entertainment is greater than

0.8, a plausible parameterization.


4B: Predictions for the Lifecycle

        With this elasticity in hand, we predict entertainment expenditures over the

lifecycle. Moving back through the lifecycle, the price of time declines by 17 percent

between the ages of 52 and 60. Time allocated to entertainment increases by 11 percent

over this period. The intra-temporal first order condition then predicts a decrease in

expenditure of 2 percent, which is close to the observed decrease in expenditure of 3

percent. Similarly, the model predicts a decrease in entertainment expenditures of 1

percent between age 43 and 52. The actual change is an increase of 3 percent. Overall,

the model performs relatively well for this part of the lifecycle. That is, the observed

pattern of food expenditure and time allocated to food and entertainment suggests

movements in entertainment expenditure that are essentially those seen in the data.

        However, the model’s predictions are strongly at odds with observed

entertainment expenditures early in the lifecycle. The decline of 3 percent in the price of



                                               31
time between ages 34 and 43, combined with no change in the time allocated to

entertainment suggest a decline of 2 percent in entertainment expenditures. Instead, the

data show that entertainment expenditures increase by 35 percent during this age span.

Similarly, the model suggests a small decrease in entertainment expenditures of 1 percent

between the ages of 25 and 34. However, actual expenditures increase by 47 percent.

             Therefore, while the model rationalizes the decline in food expenditures

combined with increasing entertainment expenditures in the latter half of the lifecycle, it

fails to predict the sharp increase in entertainment expenditures early in the lifecycle.

Note that this failure is not due to the presence of liquidity constraints, myopia, or

precautionary savings. We are exploiting a static first order condition that abstracts from

the inter-temporal allocation of consumption.

             This failure is also not due to our choice of 1.5 for the elasticity of substitution in

food production. A higher elasticity would scale down the movements in the price of

time proportionally. However, to match entertainment expenditures at retirement, the

calibration would scale up the entertainment elasticity proportionally. Therefore, while a

different elasticity would lead to a different magnitude for the movement in the price of

time, it would generate no change in the predicted lifecycle pattern for entertainment

expenditures.17




17
     More formally, note that         ωˆ t = ( xˆ f ,t − hˆ f ,t ) / σ f   , where a “hat” indicates percentage change. We calibrate σe

such that    σ e = ( xˆe ,T − hˆe,T ) / ωˆT , where T is the last period.             Predicted expenditures are obtained from the relation

                                                                                                                           ( xˆe,T − hˆe,T )
     ( xˆe,t − hˆe ,t ) = σ eωˆ t .    Substituting in, we have               ( xˆe,t − hˆe ,t ) = ( xˆ f ,t − hˆ f ,t )                     ,   which is
                                                                                                                           ( xˆ − hˆ )
                                                                                                                              f ,T     f ,T
independent of our choice of σf.


                                                                            32
       Where the model fails is in its prediction that a small increase in the ratio of food

expenditures to time spent on food production should be accompanied by an even smaller

increase (or even a decrease) in the ratio of entertainment expenditures to time spent on

entertainment. Instead, consumers dramatically increase their entertainment expenditures

relative to entertainment time early in the lifecycle.

       One way to view this phenomenon is that the model suggests agents should delay

entertainment time until entertainment expenditures are high. The time allocated to

entertainment absent complementary market inputs would be more profitably spent on

home production, an activity which has a greater degree of substitution. Instead, agents

maintain a fairly stable level of time allocated to entertainment until late in the lifecycle,

despite the large movements in expenditures.

       There are at least two plausible forces that may be at work, both relating to our

maintained assumption that production functions are stable over the lifecycle. The first is

that home production of food and entertainment both require household durables. By

calibrating based on allocations late in the lifecycle, we are capturing trade offs after the

stock of durables has been built up. Younger individuals have a different stock of

household durables and therefore possess different technologies for translating time and

inputs into consumption. This is consistent with the fact that the model performs well

after age 40.

       A second issue is that young individuals may have a larger incentive to

accumulate social capital, both for personal and professional reasons. This may raise the

return to time spent on entertainment relative to expenditures on entertainment early in

the lifecycle. The sharp increase in expenditures relative to time inputs between ages 25




                                              33
and 43 may then reflect expenditures “catching up” with the time inputs as well as a

decline in the marginal return to time spent networking as agents approach middle age.

Moreover, the nature of entertainment time may be changing. For example, the young

may be socializing with friends while the old may be watching TV. Friends may be a

substitute to market expenditures on entertainment, rather than a complement. Therefore,

the substitutability of time and market inputs into entertainment may vary over the

lifecycle.



5.      Related Literature

        There is a large body of work that tries to explain the lifecycle profile of

composite nondurable expenditures, without addressing the heterogeneity found in

disaggregated consumption categories. For example, some authors have argued that the

lifecycle profile represents evidence against the forward-looking consumption

“smoothing” behavior implied by permanent income models, particularly since the hump

in expenditures tracks the hump in labor income (as documented by Carroll and Summers

(1991)). This view interprets expenditure declines in the latter half of the lifecycle as

evidence of poor planning. A related literature has developed which also emphasizes

imperfect household planning based on the sharp decline in expenditures at the onset of

retirement (see, for example, Bernheim, Skinner, and Weinberg 2001). Models of limited

commitment to plans (such as Angeletos et al 2001) share the implication that the decline

in expenditures late in life is due to insufficient resources. Standard models of poor

planning or dynamic inconsistency, however, do not predict that households late in the




                                           34
life cycle reduce food expenditures while simultaneously increasing entertainment

expenditures, given that food has a lower income elasticity than entertainment.

       Another literature has combined rational, forward looking agents with incomplete

markets. In particular, the hump shaped profile in expenditure reflects optimal behavior

if households face liquidity constraints combined with a need to self-insure against

idiosyncratic income risks (see, for example, Zeldes 1989, Deaton 1991, Carroll 1997,

Gourinchas and Parker 2002). Households build up a buffer stock of assets early in the

lifecycle, generating the increasing expenditure profile found during the first half of the

lifecycle. The decline in the latter half of the lifecycle is then attributed to impatience

coming to the fore, once households accumulate a sufficient stock of precautionary

savings.

       Such precautionary savings models have been extremely influential, in part due to

their ability to explain the prominent shape of lifecycle expenditure in a rational agent,

incomplete markets framework. Indeed, several important studies have used expenditure

profiles to “back out” or verify measures of labor income risk over the lifecycle (see, for

example, Deaton and Paxson (1994) as well as more recent papers by Storesletten et al

(2004a, 2004b) and Guevenen (2007)).             A related literature uses movements in

consumption to infer movements in permanent income (see, for example, Blundell and

Preston (1998) and Aguiar and Gopinath (2007)).          Of course, the quality of these

measures of income risk depends crucially on the validity of the underlying model of

consumption.

       Precautionary savings models also have strong predictions for the lifecycle

behavior of goods with different income elasticities. The standard precautionary savings




                                            35
model works off the tension between the need to accumulate assets for insurance versus

impatience relative to the market interest rate. A fairly high degree of impatience is

necessary to explain the sharp decline in expenditures in the latter half of the lifecycle.18

However, if impatience is the predominant force driving the decline in expenditures over

the second half of the lifecycle, then categories of consumption for which there is a high

degree of inter-temporal elasticity should decline faster than those with a low degree of

substitutability. Given the equivalence between inter-temporal elasticity and income

elasticity (see Browning and Crossley 2000), this implies that luxury goods (such as

entertainment) should decline more in the latter half of the lifecycle than necessities (such

as food).

          Note that both the precautionary saving models and the poor planning models

place an emphasis on income fluctuations.                          The poor planning models emphasize

deterministic trends in lifecycle labor income.                         The precautionary savings models

emphasize income uncertainty. In particularly, the high degree of impatience in the

precautionary savings model needed to explain the sharp decline in expenditures late in

life must be matched with a commensurately high degree of income uncertainty early in

the lifecycle. This latter component is necessary to explain why agents save and exhibit

an upward profile of expenditure early in the lifecycle, despite the high subjective

discount rate. The tight link between income risk and impatience relative to the interest

rate is also a familiar feature in incomplete market models with infinitely lived agents

(see for example, Huggett 1993 and Aiyagari 1994).



18
   The important role impatience plays in these models is highlighted by the fact that Gourinchas and Parker (2002) are
able to obtain a very precise estimate of time preference. As discussed in that paper (p. 73), this reflects that fact that
the precautionary savings model’s predictions are extremely sensitive to the discount rate.


                                                           36
       By focusing on the disaggregated data, we documented that the primary

movements of expenditures later in the lifecycle are inconsistent with the models that rely

exclusively on precautionary savings, myopia, or limited commitment. We should stress,

however, that our work does not imply these forces are not at work at all. For example,

our model emphasizes a static first order condition, without placing strong restrictions on

the inter-temporal allocation of consumption. However, the tests of the model validate

that intra-temporal substitution between time and goods is quantitatively important. At a

minimum, our goal is to show that inferences about income risk, impatience, and

planning, that exploit the lifecycle profile of expenditure while ignoring this margin of

substitution will therefore be incorrect. Expenditures respond to both changes in the

price of time given permanent income as well as shifts in permanent income. The large

class of papers that map observed lifecycle (or, for that matter, business cycle)

movements in consumption into movements into life time resources without controlling

for movements in the price of time are conflating the two effects. This is not a problem if

time is not an important input into consumption (or if the price of time is not moving).

But, as we show in this paper, such an assumption is empirically invalid.



6. Conclusion

       This paper documented that the hump in lifecycle expenditures on nondurables

masks informative heterogeneity across individual expenditure categories. In particular,

we highlight that food, a necessary good, declines relative to entertainment (and several

other categories) in the second half of the lifecycle. Moreover, the increase in the cross-

sectional dispersion of expenditure does not vary systematically across goods with




                                            37
different income elasticities.      This poses a challenge to theories that exclusively

emphasize movements in income or inter-temporal substitution to explain lifecycle

consumption patterns. However, the qualitative pattern is consistent with a Beckerian

model in which time and good are substitutes for food, but complements in

entertainment. Quantitatively, such a model does well in matching the joint allocation of

expenditures and time on food and entertainment in the latter half of the lifecycle.

However, the model fails to account for the patterns observed early in the lifecycle,

potentially suggesting extensions that emphasize the accumulation of home durables and

social capital early in the lifecycle.

        The facts documented in the paper have important implications for linking

consumption movements to income shocks. In particular, it is important to separate

shocks to resources from movements in the price of time. The former will have a

relatively small impact on necessities such as food, while the latter will have a larger

impact on goods, like food, for which time and market inputs are substitutes. We have

documented the relevance of this point for both average expenditures over the lifecycle as

well as the cross sectional dispersion of expenditures. While this paper focuses on

lifecycle movements, the same issue arises in studies of the business cycle (see, for

example, Greenwood, Rogerson, and Wright (1995)). Recessions are periods in which

both income and the price of time fall.        Analyses that ignore the latter will draw

misleading conclusions about the importance of income uncertainty.




                                             38
Data Appendix


A. CEX Data

          This paper uses data from the Consumer Expenditure Survey’s quarterly interview

survey.      The survey unit is a household (consumer unit).                        Each consumer unit is

interviewed once per quarter for five consecutive quarters. The first interview collects

demographic data and inventories major durables. The subsequent four interviews collect

recall data on expenditures over the preceding three months. We collapse the four

interviews into a single annual observation per household, summing over the quarterly

expenditures. In particular, we do not use the panel dimension of the four quarterly

intervies.

          While expenditure is reported at the household level, demographics are reported

for individuals. We use demographic characteristics reported by the household head. A

head is defined as the member who identifies himself or herself as the “head of

household” in the survey. If there are multiple heads, we identify the head as the male (if

one is present) and resolve any remaining ties by employment (employed over

nonemployed), age (eldest), and marital status (married over non-married).19

          We use the extracts compiled by Ed Harris and John Sabelhaus and provided by

the NBER (http://www.nber.org/data/ces_cbo.html).                             All data, programs, and

documentation         for     this     paper      can     be     found      on     the     authors’       website

(www.markaguiar.com/aguiarhurst/lifecycle/datapage.html).                           Harris and Sabelhaus

aggregate expenditures into 47 categories, which are listed in the documentation posted


19
   There are a handful of households with multiple heads who share the same sex, age, employment status, and marital
status (as well as household size). However, as these are the only demographic variables used in this paper, this
duplication is immaterial to identifying the demographic characteristics of the household.


                                                        39
on the authors’ website. The Harris and Sabelhaus dataset includes households whose

first interview was conducted between the first quarter of 1980 and the second quarter of

2003. Due to changes in the survey methodology, data from the last two quarters of 1985

and 1995 are omitted.20 The data set contains a total of 167,133 households.

        We restrict the Harris and Sabelhaus sample in the following ways. First, we

keep households whose heads are between age 25 and 75. To obtain reliable estimates of

cohort effects, we restrict attention to cohorts with at least 10 years of data. In particular,

we restrict the sample to households whose head is at most 65 in 1980Q1 and at least 35

in 2003Q2.       This leaves 122,962 households.               Second, the household must have

completed all four expenditure surveys, providing a complete picture of annual

expenditures. There are 75,883 such households in the sample, or roughly 62 percent.

Harris and Sabelhaus provide adjusted weights to use with the restricted sample.

However, the restricted sample of Harris and Sabelhaus also excludes households with

incomplete income reports and students. Usage of their adjusted weights necessitates

excluding these households as well, leaving 58,305 households.

        Our final sample restriction is that households must have strictly positive

expenditure on six major expenditure categories:                  food, housing services, utilities,

clothing and personal care, nondurable transportation, and nondurable entertainment.

Roughly 92 percent of the sample satisfied this last criterion, resulting in a sample of

53,412 households. This is our main sample for analysis.




20
  Prior to 1984, only urban consumers were surveyed. Exclusion of these years does not significantly alter
the results reported in the paper.


                                                   40
B. Time Use Data

       We use the 2003, 2004, and 2005 waves of the American Time Use Survey

(ATUS) conducted by the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). Participants in ATUS,

which includes children over the age of 15, are drawn from the existing sample of the

Current Population Survey (CPS). The individual is sampled approximately 3 months

after completion of the final CPS survey. At the time of the ATUS survey, the BLS

updated the respondent’s employment and demographic information. The ATUS waves

totaled 20,720, 13,973, and 13,038 respondents in 2003, 2004, and 2005, respectively.

We restrict our sample to respondents aged 25 through 75, resulting in sample sizes of

16,860, 11,436, and 10,580, respectively. We pool these 38,876 respondents into a single

cross section.

       The survey uses a 24-hour recall of the previous day’s activities to record time

diary information. The unit of analysis is an individual, and only one individual per

household is surveyed. We control for effects of marriage and family size by regressing

the amount of time (in levels) for a specific activity on one-year age dummies, a dummy

for marital status, and ten family size dummy variables, and report the coefficients on the

age dummies.

       The ATUS reports time allocation using over 400 detailed activity codes. For our

analysis we focus on three aggregates. Food production includes time spent on cooking,

meal preparation, and meal clean up.        Total non-market production includes food

production plus time spent on housekeeping, indoor and outdoor home maintenance,

vehicle maintenance, and obtaining goods and services. Entertainment consists of time




                                            41
spent socializing, watching television, enjoying non-tv entertainment, and pursuing

hobbies.




                                        42
References

 Aguair, Mark and Erik Hurst (2007). "Lifecycle Prices and Production", American
     Economic Review, 97(5).

 Aguiar, Mark and Erik Hurst (2005). "Consumption vs. Expenditure", Journal of
      Political Economy,

 Aguiar, Mark and Erik Hurst (2004). "Consumption vs. Expenditure", NBER Working
      Paper 10307.

 Aiyagari, S Rao, 1994. "Uninsured Idiosyncratic Risk and Aggregate Saving," The
      Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109(3), 659-84.

 Angeletos, George-Marios, David Laibson, Andrea Repetto, Jeremy Tobacman, and
     Stephen Weinberg (2001), "The Hyperbolic Consumption Model: Calibration,
     Simulation, and Empirical Evaluation", Journal of Economic Perspectives, 15(3),
     47-68.

 Attanasio, Orazio, James Banks, Costas Meghir, and Guglielmo Weber (1999). “Humps
      and Bumps in Lifetime Consumption.” Journal of Business and Economic
      Statistics, January 1999, 17, 1, 22-35.

 Attanasio, Orazio, and Guglielmo Weber (1995), "Is Consumption Growth Consistent
      with Intertemporal Optimization? Evidence from the Consumer Expenditure
      Survey", Journal of Political Economy, 103(6), 1121 – 1157.

 Banks, James, Richard Blundell, and Sarah Tanner (1998). “Is There a Retirement
     Savings Puzzle?” American Economic Review, 88(4), 769 – 788.

 Browning, Martin and Thomas F. Crossley, 2000. "Luxuries Are Easier to Postpone: A
     Proof," Journal of Political Economy, University of Chicago Press, vol. 108(5),
     pages 1022-1026, October

 Battistin, Erich, Agar Brugiavini, Enrico Rettore, and Guglielmo Weber (2006). “How
       Large is the Retirement Consumption Drop in Italy?”, mimeo.

 Becker, Gary (1965). “A Theory of The Allocation of Time.” The Economic Journal,
     75 (September), 493 – 517.

 Bernheim, Douglas, Jonathan Skinner, and Steven Weinberg (2001). “What Accounts
      for the Variation in Retirement Wealth Among U.S. Households?” American
      Economic Review, 91(4), 832 – 857.




                                        43
Blundell, Richard, Martin Browning, and Costas Meghir (1994), “Consumer Demand
     and the Life-Cycle Allocation of Household Expenditures,” Review of Economic
     Studies, 61, 57-80.

Carroll, Christopher (1997). “Buffer Stock Saving and the Life Cycle/Permanent
     Income Hypothesis.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 112(1): 1-56.

Carroll, Christopher and Lawrence Summers (1991). "Consumption Growth Parrells
     Income Growth: Some New Evidence" In National Saving and Economic
     Performance, edited by B. Douglas Bernheim and John Shoven. Chicago:
     University of Chicago Press.

Charles, Kerwin and Mel Stephens (2006). "The Level and Composition of
     Consumption Over the Business Cycle: The Role of 'Quasi-Fixed' Expenditures",
     in Working and Poor: How Economic and Policy Changes Are Affecting Low-
     Wage Workers, ed. Rebecca Blank, Sheldon Danzinger, and Robert Schoeni,
     Russell Sage Foundation.

Deaton, Angus, and Christina Paxson (1994), "Intertemporal Choice and Inequality,"
     Journal of Political Economy, 102, 437-67.

Friedman, Milton (1957). A Theory of the Consumption Function.             Princeton:
     Princeton University Press.

Ghez, Gilbert and Gary Becker (1975). The Allocation of Time and Goods over the
     Life Cycle, Columbia University Press, New York.

Greenwood, Jeremy, Richard Rogerson, and Randall Wright (1995). “Household
     Production in Real Business Cycle Theory.” In Frontiers of Business Cycle
     Research, ed. Thomas Cooley. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier and Jonathan Parker (2002), “Consumption over the Life
     Cycle,” Econometrica, January 2002, 70, 1, 47-89.

Guvenen, Fatih (2007), "An Empirical Investigation of Labor Income Processes",
    NBER Working Paper 13394.

Heathcote, Jonathan, Khetil Storelsletten, and Giovanni Violante (2005), “Two Views
     of Inequality over the Life Cycle,” Journal of the European Economic
     Association, April-May 2005, 3, 2–3, 765–775

Heckman, James (1974). “Life Cycle Consumption and Labor Supply: An Explanation
    of the Relationship Between Income and Consumption Over the Life Cycle”.
    American Economic Review, 64(1), 188-94.




                                        44
Hurst, Erik (2007). "The Retirement of a Consumption Puzzle", NBER Working Paper
     13789.

Krueger, Dirk, and Jesus Fernandex-Villaverde (forthcoming), “Consumption over the
    Life Cycle: Some Facts from CEX Data,” Review of Economics and Statistics.

Laibson, David, Andrea Repetto, and Jeremy Tobacman (2007). "Estimating Discount
     Functions with Consumption Choices over the Lifecycle". NBER Working Paper
     13314.

Laitner, John and Dan Silverman (2005). “Estimating Life-Cycle Parameters from
     Consumption Behavior at Retirement”, NBER Working Paper 11163.

Lusardi, Annamaria and Olivia Mitchell (2007). "Baby Boomer Retirement Security:
     The Roles of Planning, Financial Literacy, and Housing Wealth", Journal of
     Monetary Economics, forthcoming.

Modigliani, Franco and Richard Brumberg (1954). “Utility Analysis and the
    Consumption Function: An Interpretation of the Cross Section Data,” in Post-
    Keynesian Economics, Eds.: Kenneth Kurihara. New Brunswick, NJ, Rutgers
    University Press, pp 388-436.

Storelsletten, Kjetil, Chris Telmer, and Amir Yaron (2004a), "Cyclical Dynamics in
     Indiosyncratic Labor-Market Risk," Journal of Political Economy, 112(3), 695-
     717.

Storelsletten, Kjetil, Chris Telmer, and Amir Yaron (2004b), "Consumption and Risk
     Sharing Over the Lifecycle," Journal of Monetary Economics, 51(3), 609-633.

Thurow, Lester (1969). "The Optimum Lifetime Distribution of Consumption
     Expenditures", American Economic Review, 59(3), 282-97.

Zeldes, Stephen (1989). “Consumption and Liquidity Constraints:     An Empirical
     Investigation.” Journal of Political Economy 97(2): 305-346.




                                      45
                Table 1: Summary of Change in Expenditure over the Lifecycle by Consumption Category
                                                  Share of Non
                                  Share of Core     Durable           Log Change      Log Change                                                            Log Change
                                  Non Durable Expenditure with          Between         Between                                                               Between
Disaggregated Consumption Group    Expenditure      Housing            25 and 45       45 and 60                                                             60 and 68

Group 1
  Food                                                      0.31                    0.21                       0.30                    -0.11                     -0.07
  Transportation                                            0.19                    0.13                       0.35                    -0.13                     -0.15
  Clothing and Personal Care                                0.10                    0.07                       0.26                    -0.30                     -0.18
  Alcohol and Tobacco                                       0.04                    0.03                      -0.62                    -0.78                     -0.55
  Other Non-Durable                                         0.09                    0.06                       0.16                    -0.40                     -0.26

    Group 1 Total/Weighted Mean                             0.73                    0.50                      0.24                     -0.21                     -0.15

Group 2
  Entertainment                                             0.06                    0.04                      0.82                      0.04                     0.05
  Housing Services                                                                  0.31                      0.62                      0.15                     0.07
  Utilities                                                 0.16                    0.11                      0.73                      0.25                     0.05
  Domestic Services                                         0.03                    0.02                      0.81                      0.27                     0.14
  Charitable Giving                                         0.03                    0.02                      0.77                      0.18                     0.04

    Group 2 Total/Weighted Mean                             0.27                    0.50                      0.67                      0.17                     0.06

Core Non Durable Expenditure                                1.00                    0.69                      0.33                     -0.10                     -0.09
Non Durable Expenditure w/Housing                                                   1.00                      0.42                     -0.03                     -0.05

Note: See text for definition of each category and the appendix for data sources. Total/Weighted Mean refers to sum for shares and the weighted mean for the other columns,
using the share of nondurable expenditure with (column II) and without housing (column I) as weights. For each category, we regress log expenditures in 2000 dollars on four-
year cohort dummies, marital status and family size dummies, as well as one year age dummies. The log changes are the difference in the coefficients on the age dummies at the
respective ages in each column. For each age, we average over three years centered on the age indicated in the column head (e.g., the change between 45 and 60 is the average of
59-61 minus the average of 44-46). The exceptions are age 25, which represents the average of 25 through 27, and age 68, which is the average of 66 through 68.




                                                                                      46
                   Table 2: Dispersion of Expenditure over the Lifecycle by Consumption Category

                                                      Cross-sectional
                                                    Standard Deviation            Change            Change Between            Change Between
                                                    of log Expenditure           Between 25           45 and 68                 25 and 68
Disaggregated Consumption Group                            at 25                   and 45

Other Non-Durable                                             1.01                   0.21                    0.35                     0.56
Alcohol and Tobacco                                           1.32                   0.21                    0.35                     0.56
Clothing and Personal Care                                    0.79                   0.07                    0.32                     0.39
Charitable Giving and Gambling                                1.71                   0.00                    0.11                     0.11
Transportation                                                0.83                   -0.11                   0.10                    -0.02
Food                                                          0.43                   -0.01                   0.06                     0.05
Housing Services                                              0.62                   -0.05                  -0.11                    -0.17
Domestic Services                                             1.46                   -0.20                   0.01                    -0.20
Entertainment                                                 1.12                   -0.12                  -0.13                    -0.25
Utilities                                                     0.88                   -0.50                  -0.13                    -0.63

Weighted Mean                                                 0.75                   -0.07                   0.03                    -0.04

Core Non Durable Expenditure                                  0.40                    0.07                   0.10                     0.16
Non Durable Expenditure w/Housing                             0.38                    0.07                   0.09                     0.16

Note: See text for definition of each category and the appendix for data sources. Weighted mean uses the share of nondurable expenditure with housing
from Table 1 as weights. For each category, we regress log expenditures in 2000 dollars on four-year cohort dummies, marital status and family size
dummies, as well as one year age dummies. At each age and for each cohort, we compute the standard deviation of the residuals from this regression. The
first column is the average standard deviation for age 25, pooling all cohorts. For the remaining columns, we regress the standard deviation on age and
cohort dummies, and use the age dummies to report the lifecycle profile. For each age, we average over three years, with 25 representing ages 25-27, 45
representing ages 44-46, and 68 representing ages 66-68.




                                                                        47
                                                         Table 3: Predictions of the Beckerian Model

                                                          Percent Change Percent Change Percent Change Percent Change Percent Change
                                                             Between        Between        Between        Between        Between
Category                                                    25 and 34      34 and 43      43 and 52      52 and 60      60 and 68

Expenditures on Food                                              0.13                      0.09                  -0.04                    -0.13                   -0.10
Time Spent on Food Production                                     0.13                      0.13                  0.05                      0.13                    0.08

Predicted Opportunity Cost of Time                                0.00                    -0.03                   -0.06                    -0.17                   -0.12

Time Spent on Entertainment                                      -0.02                      0.00                   0.04                    0.11                     0.20

Predicted Expenditures on Entertainment                          -0.01                    -0.02                   -0.01                    -0.02                    0.11
Actual Expenditures on Entertainment                             0.47                      0.35                    0.03                    -0.03                    0.11



Note: See text for definition of each category and the appendix for data sources. For each category (food and entertainment), we regress log expenditures in 2000 dollars on four-
year cohort dummies, marital status and family size dummies, as well as one year age dummies. The log changes are the difference in the coefficients on the age dummies at the
respective ages in each column. For each age, we average over three years centered on the age indicated in the column head (e.g., the change between 43 and 52 is the average of
51-53 minus the average of 42-44). The exceptions are age 25, which represents the average of 25 through 27, and age 68, which is the average of 66 through 68. The first row
reports the empirical lifecycle expenditure on food, while the last row reports the empirical expenditure on entertainment. For time allocation, we regress average time spent on
each category on age dummies plus family size controls. We average the time allocated for each three-year end point, take logs, and then difference to compute the number
reported in the table. The predicted opportunity cost of time is computed as the log change in food expenditure minus the log change in time allocated to food, this quantity
divided by the assumed elasticity of substitution in food production of 1.5. The calibrated elasticity of production of entertainment is computed to match the predicted change in
expenditures between age 60 and 68 to the observed change in expenditures between age 60 and 68. This elasticity is 0.8. The remaining rows of predicted expenditure on
entertainment are computed by multiplying this elasticity times the predicted cost of time and then subtracting the change in time allocation.




                                                                                       48
                                     Figure 1: Core and Total Nondurable Expenditures over the Lifecycle
                                                      Log Deviation from 25 Year Olds
                              0.45

                              0.40

                              0.35

                              0.30
  Log Deviation from Age 25




                              0.25

                              0.20

                              0.15

                              0.10

                              0.05

                              0.00

                              -0.05

                              -0.10
                                          25    30        35     40     45          50   55   60    65    70        75
                                                                                   Age




Notes: This figure plots mean expenditure by age conditional on cohort and family status. More specifically, each
point represents the coefficient on the corresponding age dummy from the estimation of equation 1, with age 25 the
omitted group. The solid lines depict three year moving averages. The bottom series (squares) is core nondurable
expenditures and the top series (diamonds) is core nondurables plus housing services. See text for definitions of core
nondurables and housing services.

                                                    Figure 2a: Entertainment vs Food over the Lifecycle
                                                             Log Deviation from 25 Year Olds
                              0.9


                              0.8


                              0.7


                              0.6

                                                                                                    Entertainment
  LogDeviationfromAge25




                              0.5


                              0.4


                              0.3

                                                                             Food
                              0.2


                              0.1


                              0.0


                              -0.1


                              -0.2
                                     25        30        35     40      45          50   55   60     65     70           75
                                                                                   Age




Notes: This figure plots mean expenditure on food and nondurable entertainment by age conditional on cohort and
family status. More specifically, each point represents the coefficient on the corresponding age dummy from the
estimation of equation 1, with age 25 the omitted group. The solid lines depict three year moving averages. The
diamonds (blue) depict food expenditures, and the squares (red) depict nondurable entertainment expenditures.




                                                                              49
                                           Figure 2b: Food, Food Out, and Food at Home over the Lifecycle

                              0.4


                                                                                               Food at home
                              0.3


                              0.2


                              0.1

                                                                                                          All food
  Log Deviation from Age 25




                              0.0

                                                                          Food out
                              -0.1


                              -0.2


                              -0.3


                              -0.4


                              -0.5


                              -0.6
                                     25        30     35     40     45         50    55   60         65         70   75
                                                                               Age


Notes: This figure plots mean log expenditure on food consumed away from (food out), food consume at home (food
home), and the sum of the two (all food), by age conditional on cohort and family status. More specifically, each point
represents the coefficient on the corresponding age dummy from the estimation of equation 1, with age 25 the omitted
group. The solid lines depict three year moving averages. The diamonds (blue) depict total food expenditures, the
squares (red) depict food consumed at home, and the triangles (green) depict food consumed away from home.


                                     Figure 3a: Nondurable Transportation Expenditures over the Lifecycle
                                                      Log Deviation from 25 Year Olds
                               0.3


                               0.2


                               0.1
  Log Deviation fromAge 25




                               0.0


                              -0.1


                              -0.2


                              -0.3


                              -0.4


                              -0.5
                                      25        30     35     40     45         50   55   60         65         70   75
                                                                               Age




Notes: This figure plots mean expenditure on nondurable transportation by age conditional on cohort and family status.
More specifically, each point represents the coefficient on the corresponding age dummy from the estimation of
equation 1, with age 25 the omitted group. The solid lines depict three year moving averages.




                                                                          50
                                               Figure 3b: Declining Categories over the Lifecycle
                                                       Log Deviation from 25 Year Olds
                             0.5
                                                                                                           Clothing and
                                                                                                           Personal Care
                             0.0


                             -0.5
  Log Deviation fromAge 25




                             -1.0
                                                                                                     Other Nondurable
                             -1.5
                                                                              Alcohol and Tobacco
                             -2.0


                             -2.5


                             -3.0


                             -3.5
                                    25        30    35      40     45         50          55   60   65         70       75
                                                                             Age




Notes: This figure plots mean expenditure on clothing and personal care, alcohol and tobacco, and other nondurable
expenditures. More specifically, each point represents the coefficient on the corresponding age dummy from the
estimation of equation 1, with age 25 the omitted group. The solid lines depict three year moving averages. The circles
depict clothing and personal care, the triangles depict other nondurables, and the diamonds depict alcohol and tobacco.
See text for definition of categories.


                                               Figure 3c: Increasing Categories over the Lifecycle
                                                        Log Deviation from 25 Year Olds

          1.4


          1.2
                                                                             Utilities

          1.0


          0.8
                                    Domestic Services

          0.6

                                                                                                         Housing Services
          0.4


          0.2


          0.0


  -0.2
                               25        30        35     40      45         50          55    60   65         70       75
                                                                         Age


Notes: This figure plots mean expenditure on domestic services, utilities, and housing services. More specifically,
each point represents the coefficient on the corresponding age dummy from the estimation of equation 1, with age 25
the omitted group. The solid lines depict three year moving averages. The squares depict domestic services, the
diamonds depict utilities, and the triangles depict housing services (rent or rental equivalence). See text for definition
of categories.




                                                                        51
                                   Figure 4: Dispersion in Log Expenditure over the Lifecycle
                             Panel A: Standard Deviation of Core Nondurable, Food, and Entertainment
                          0.3


                          0.2
                                                  Core Nondurable
                          0.1
                                                                          Food
  Deviation from Age 25




                          0.0


                          -0.1
                                                                                                                        Food at Home
                                                            Entertainment
                          -0.2


                          -0.3


                          -0.4
                                 25   30    35      40          45        50         55           60            65           70           75
                                                                          Age


Panel B: Standard Deviation of Alcohol and Tobacco, Clothing and Personal Care, Other
             Nondurables, and Core Nondurables minus these Categories
                          0.9

                          0.8

                          0.7

                          0.6
                                                                           Alcohol and Tobacco

                          0.5
  Deviation from Age 25




                          0.4
                                                  Other Nondurable

                          0.3
                                                                                                                Clothing and Personal Care
                          0.2

                          0.1

                          0.0
                                                                                                 Nondurable less the other 3 Categories
                          -0.1

                          -0.2
                                 25   30    35      40          45        50         55           60            65           70           75
                                                                          Age


Notes: Panel of A of this figure depicts the standard deviation of log expenditure on core nondurables, food, and
entertainment, conditional on cohort and family status. Specifically, we compute the standard deviation of the residuals
at each age and cohort from the regression of log expenditures on age, cohort, and family status dummies (equation 1),
and then remove cohort fixed effects from the age-specific standard deviations. The figure plots the 3-year moving
average of the difference between the standard deviation at each respective age and the standard deviation at age 25.
Panel B replicates panel A for alcohol and tobacco, clothing and personal care items, other nondurables, and core
nondurables minus these latter three categories.




                                                                     52
                                                            Figure 5: Lifecycle Evolution of Expenditure Distribution
                                                                           Panel A: Food Expenditure
                                                0.5




                                                0.4
                   Log Deviation from Age 25




                                                0.3


                                                                                                                                   90th Pctile
                                                0.2



                                                                                                      10th Pctile
                                                0.1

                                                                                                                     50th Pctile


                                                0.0
                                                       25     30     35        40     45         50   55       60          65        70          75
                                                                                                Age



                                                                          Panel B: Entertainment Expenditure

                                               2.0

                                                                                                                     10th Pctile

                                               1.5
  Log Deviation from Age 25




                                               1.0
                                                                                                                    90th Pctile


                                               0.5
                                                                                                                            50th Pctile


                                               0.0




                                               -0.5
                                                      25     30     35        40     45         50    55      60          65        70           75
                                                                                                Age




Notes: This figure depicts the coefficient on age dummies for quanitile regressions of log expenditures on age, cohort,
and family status dummies, with age 25 the omitted age group. The quantile regressions were performed for the 10th,
50th, and 90th percentiles for food (panel A) and entertainment (panel B) expenditures. For reference, the 10th, 50th, and
90th, percentiles at age 25 (pooling all cohorts) are 7.5, 8.2, and 8.8 for log food expenditure and 4.9, 6.5, and 7.5 for
log entertainment expenditure.




                                                                                           53
                                                                Figure 6: Entertainment vs Food by Educational Attainment
                                                                          Panel A: Less Educated Household Heads
                                                    0.3



                                                    0.2


                                                                                                                             Entertainment
                                                    0.1
                        Log Deviation from Age 25




                                                    0.0

                                                                                                    Food
                                                    -0.1



                                                    -0.2



                                                    -0.3



                                                    -0.4
                                                           25     30     35     40     45        50         55        60          65    70    75
                                                                                                 Age


                                                                         Panel B: More Educated Household Heads
                                              1.0
                                                                                                                 Entertainment
                                              0.9


                                              0.8


                                              0.7
 Log Deviation from Age 25




                                              0.6


                                              0.5


                                              0.4

                                                                                            Food
                                              0.3


                                              0.2


                                              0.1


                                              0.0
                                                       25        30     35     40     45      50           55        60          65    70    75
                                                                                              Age




Notes: Panels A and B of Figure 6 replicate figure 2b for household heads with a high school education or less (panel
A) and for household heads with more than a high school education (panel B). The triangles(red) depict food
expenditures, and the squares (red) depict nondurable entertainment expenditures.




                                                                                            54
                                Figure 7: Time Spent on Non-Market Production, Food Production and
                                                  Entertainment over the Lifecycle

                              0.9

                              0.8

                              0.7

                              0.6
  Log Deviation fromAge 25




                              0.5
                                                                        Food Production                                      Entertainment
                              0.4                                                                                            (narrow)
                              0.3
                                         Non-Market Production
                              0.2
                                                                                                                       Entertainment
                              0.1
                                                                                                                       (total)
                              0.0

                             -0.1

                             -0.2
                                    25        30         35        40        45         50         55        60        65        70              75
                                                                                        Age


Notes: Source: American Time Use Survey 2003-2005. Food production time consists of time spent preparing and
cleaning up after meals; non-market production time consists of all housework (excluding child care), including food
production, cleaning house, and home maintenance; entertainment time consists of such activities as watching tv, going
to movies, socializing, and sporting events. The figure depicts the percentage change between average time spent on
each activity for respondents of the age corresponding to the horizontal axis and the average time spent by 25 year old
respondents. In computing averages by age, we control for family size and marital status as in specification (1)
excluding cohort dummies given the single cross section. Note that this figure depicts the log difference of the
averages (which include respondents who reported zero time on the activity), and not the difference in average log
time.

                                    Figure A1: Fraction Employed and Hours Worked over the Lifecycle
                             1.00                                                                                                          50


                             0.90                                                                                                          45


                             0.80                                                                                                          40


                             0.70                                                                                                          35
  FractionEmployed




                             0.60                                                                                                          30
                                                                                                                                                HoursPer Week




                             0.50                                                                                                          25


                             0.40                                                                                                          20


                             0.30                                                                                                          15


                             0.20                                                                                                          10


                             0.10                                                                                                          5


                             0.00                                                                                                          0
                                    25       30     35        40        45        50          55        60        65        70        75
                                                                                  Age


Note: This figure depicts the fraction of our CEX sample who are employed (squares and solid line, left axis) and the
average number of market work hours per week performed by household heads (triangles and dashed line, right axis),
both in deviations from the average for heads aged 25 years. Hours per week is computed unconditional on
employment (i.e., includes zeros), but conditional on cohort and family status.




                                                                                  55
                                  Figure A2: Dispersion of Market Work Hours over the Lifecycle
                          12.0



                          10.0



                           8.0
  Deviation from Age 25




                           6.0



                           4.0



                           2.0



                           0.0

                                 25    30     35     40    45        50    55   60        65        70        75
                          -2.0
                                                                     Age


Notes: This figure depicts the cohort-adjusted standard deviation of hours of market work per week conditional on
cohort and family status, using the methodology of Figure 4. Specifically, we compute the standard deviation of the
residuals at each age and cohort from the regression of hours per week (including zeros) on age, cohort, and family
status dummies. We then remove cohort fixed effects from the age-specific standard deviations. The figure depicts
deviations from age 25. Hours per week are from the CEX sample.




                                                                56
