                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    CONDITIONAL CASH TRANSFERS IN EDUCATION DESIGN FEATURES, PEER
     AND SIBLING EFFECTS EVIDENCE FROM A RANDOMIZED EXPERIMENT
                             IN COLOMBIA

                                     Felipe Barrera-Osorio
                                      Marianne Bertrand
                                        Leigh L. Linden
                                     Francisco Perez-Calle

                                     Working Paper 13890
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w13890


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2008

An undertaking of this magnitude requires the assistance of many individuals. We are most
indebted to the Secretary of Education of Bogota for cooperating with us in this novel
experiment, putting up with the constraints created by the research effort, and, of course,
financially supporting the entire project. Fedesarrollo, the think tank for which Barrera-Osorio
and Perez were working at the execution of the project, provided financial support as well and
helped the SED in the design and implementation of the program. While everyone at the SED has
been extremely helpful we are particularly indebted to Abel Rodriguez, Catalina Velasco and
Margarita Vega. We are indebted to Silvia Restrepo of Fedesarrollo for the logistical assistance
and for the data collection. Camilo Dominguez has done an excellent job as a research assistant
during the entire project, and we thank Carlos Ospino and Lucas Higuera for their help at key
points in the effort. We thank Sendhil Mullainathan and Mario Sanchez for their comments and
assistance, and thank the seminar participants at the World Bank's Human Development Network,
Columbia University’s Department of Economics, NBER Summer Education Meeting, Rutgers
University's Department of Economics, New York University’s Robert F. Wagner School of
Public Service, the LACEA Impact Evaluation Network and the CIPREE/BREAD Conference
for their helpful question and comments. All errors are of course (and unfortunately) our
responsibility. Please send correspondence to Leigh Linden at leigh.linden@columbia.edu. The
opinions expressed in this document reflect only the views of the authors and in no way reflect
the opinions of the World Bank, the Colombian Ministry of Education, or the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2008 by Felipe Barrera-Osorio, Marianne Bertrand, Leigh L. Linden, and Francisco Perez-
Calle. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Conditional Cash Transfers in Education: Design Features, Peer and Sibling Effects: Evidence
from a Randomized Experiment in Colombia
Felipe Barrera-Osorio, Marianne Bertrand, Leigh L. Linden, and Francisco Perez-Calle
NBER Working Paper No. 13890
March 2008
JEL No. I2,I38

                                               ABSTRACT

We evaluate multiple variants of a commonly used intervention to boost education in developing countries
-- the conditional cash transfer (CCT) -- with a student level randomization that allows us to generate
intra-family and peer-network variation. We test three treatments: a basic CCT treatment based on
school attendance, a savings treatment that postpones a bulk of the cash transfer due to good attendance
to just before children have to reenroll, and a tertiary treatment where some of the transfers are conditional
on students' graduation and tertiary enrollment rather than attendance. On average, the combined incentives
increase attendance, pass rates, enrollment, graduation rates, and matriculation to tertiary institutions.
Changing the timing of the payments does not change attendance rates relative to the basic treatment
but does significantly increase enrollment rates at both the secondary and tertiary levels. Incentives
for graduation and matriculation are particularly effective, increasing attendance and enrollment at
secondary and tertiary levels more than the basic treatment. We find some evidence that the subsidies
can cause a reallocation of responsibilities within the household. Siblings (particularly sisters) of treated
students work more and attend school less than students in families that received no treatment. We
also find that indirect peer influences are relatively strong in attendance decisions with the average
magnitude similar to that of the direct effect.


Felipe Barrera-Osorio                                 Leigh L. Linden
Human Development Network                             1306 International Affairs Building
The World Bank                                        420 West 118th Street, Mail Code 3323
1818 H Street, NW, MSN G-8-800                        New York, NY 10027
Washington, DC 20433                                  ll2240@columbia.edu
fbarrera@worldbank.org
                                                      Francisco Perez-Calle
Marianne Bertrand                                     Associate of Corpovisionarios
Graduate School of Business                           Carrera 11A No. 112-06
University of Chicago                                 Bogotá, Colombia
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue                            fperezcalle@msn.com
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
marianne.bertrand@gsb.uchicago.edu
I.      Introduction


Education plays an important role in the development process. At both the macro (for example,
Krueger and Lindahl, 2001) and micro level (Angrist and Krueger, 1991; Duflo, 2001, among
others), there is strong evidence that education generates higher levels of both income and
growth. As a result, developing countries could contribute substantially to future income growth
by increasing school attendance and graduation rates. The challenge, however, is getting the
kids in school. For example, the net enrollment rate in primary education in 2004 in Sub-
Saharan Africa, Oceania and Western Asia was 64, 80 and 83 percent respectively. Problems are
more pronounced with girls, low income families and older children (United Nations, 2006).
        Despite the importance of education, we are still far from understanding what determines
whether or for how long children are educated.                The classic model postulates a simple
comparison of the future returns of additional schooling to the short-term direct costs of
enrollment and the opportunity costs of the time required to attend. And while it is clear that
even this simple relationship is difficult to estimate rigorously, more recent models suggest that
liquidity constraints, family dynamics, peer influences, or even commitment issues, can also
influence the education decision process among children and their parents.
        A large and growing literature has begun to empirically evaluate the various determinants
of the schooling decision. For example, one would expect that students should respond to the
quality of education, especially in lower income countries where average quality is often quite
poor (Pritchett, 2004). However, in the short-term at least, improving quality does not seem to
be a major inducement: interventions proven to improve the quality of education generate few
changes in participation levels (Banerjee, Cole, Duflo, and Linden, 2007; He, Linden, MacLeod,
2007; Muralidharan and Sundararaman, 2006). On the other hand, interventions that directly
change the cost of attending school do seem to work. Families respond to direct reductions in
the cost of education either through subsidies to attend private schools (Angrist et al 2002, 2006),
reduced user-fees (Barrera, Linden, Urquiola, 2007) or scholarships (Kremer, Miguel, and
Thornton, 2007).2 Families also respond to direct inducements to attend such as school meals
and, our focus in this paper, direct cash incentives (Vermeersch and Kremer, 2005; Schultz 2004;


2
 Health is also a major factor in determining school attendance (Miguel and Kremer, 2006; Bobonis, Miguel, and
Sharma, 2006).


                                                    -2-
Glewwe and Olinto, 2004; Schady and Araujo, 2006; Schultz, 2004; Attanasio et al, 2006 among
others).
       While direct cash incentive programs have been proven effective, there is much still to
learn about best ways to design these programs as well as about their possible indirect effects on
siblings and peers. To date, most programs follow a design that is similar to that used in the
popular Mexican Conditional Cash Transfer (CCT) program previously known as PROGRESSA
and now OPPORTUNIDADES. Under this program, students are paid on a monthly or bi-
monthly basis for meeting a specified attendance (usually 80 percent per month) or enrollment
target. In this research, we first consider a variant of that program that aims to relax families’
possible savings constraints, such as those due to commitment problems (see for example,
Ashraf, Karlan, and Yin, 2006) or imperfect saving institutions. Such savings constraints might
be especially relevant in the education context because of the large expenses families face at the
beginning of a new school year. We also consider a second variant of the CCT program that
proposes to incentivize directly students’ and their families’ decisions regarding graduation and
tertiary enrollment rather than just attendance.
       Because our research design generates exogenous variation in exposure to the CCT
programs within family and friendship networks, it also allows us to assess whether one child’s
exposure to the cash incentives has any indirect effects on his (or her) siblings and peers. Even if
not eligible for the CCT program, both siblings and peers might indirectly benefit and increase
their demand for schooling because of social network effects. Siblings might also indirectly
benefit because of the additional resources the CCT program is bringing in their household.
However, if resources are not equally allocated within the household (see for example, Blundell,
Chiappori, and Meghir, 2005 or Oster, 2007), the benefits to ineligible siblings might be limited;
worse, parents may decide to concentrate most their educational investments in the children that
are eligible for the cash incentives, possibly leading to adverse outcomes for those that are not
eligible. We view the study of such indirect effects as especially relevant in light of the financial
constraints many developing countries face when considering implementing CCT programs, and
the likely need to limit eligibility to certain age groups or most at-risk (to drop out) groups.
       Specifically, we evaluate 3 conditional cash transfer treatments in a large municipality:
Bogota, Colombia. We first use the basic treatment implemented in a manner very similar to
PROGRESSA. The second treatment, called the “savings treatment,” varies the timing with



                                                   -3-
which the funds are distributed to families, distributing 2/3 of the funds immediately and the
remaining funds at the time the students enroll in school. The third treatment, called the “tertiary
treatment,” provides children with the same lower monthly subsidy as the savings treatment, but
also pays a large subsidy that incentives both graduation and matriculation to an institution of
higher education.
         To allocate these treatments, we use an over-subscription model rather than the basic
geographic allocation strategy used in most previous studies.3 We staged a large recruitment
drive and randomly allocated about 10,000 treatments to about 17,000 registered children. This
model allows us to randomize at the child-level, generating variation within schools, families,
and networks of friends. By pairing this randomization with detailed information on children’s
siblings and friends, we are able to disentangle how these opportunities change the allocation of
work in the household and the activities of the recipients’ peers.
         Our research further makes two methodological improvements to previous studies of
education-based CCTs. First, we collect attendance data through a series of school visits in order
to avoid the self-reporting bias associated with the survey data used in most other studies of CCT
models. Concerns about self-reporting biases are particularly important in this context. While
subjects’ responses on these surveys have no implications for their participation or standing in
the program, the subjects have been conditioned to value attendance and understand that their
receipt of the transfers is determined by their rates of attendance. This could lead to a general
upward bias in the reporting of attendance and could also lead to a differential bias by those most
involved with the program – the treatment families.                     Second, we directly map students’
friendship networks, allowing us to assess directly the influences of peers on students’
attendance rates. Both of these methodological improvements prove to be important for our
empirical analysis.
         Our main findings are as follows. Taken together, all of the cash incentive treatments
generate significant changes in the behavior of students directly treated by the program.
Students are more likely to attend school (2.8 percentage points), more likely to remain enrolled
(2.6 percentage points), more likely to matriculate to the next grade (1.6 percentage points), more

3
  One exception is the system that the national Colombian government used to allocate school vouchers in the
Program de Ampliacion de Cobertura de la Educacion Secunderia (PACES) program (see Angrist et al, 2002 and
Angrist et al 2006). While our use of this allocation strategy was a practical solution for conducting a student-level
randomization, the intra-family and intra-friendship network variation enabled by this strategy have direct policy
implications for this and other allocation mechanisms that partially families or groups of friends.


                                                        -4-
likely to graduate (4.0 percentage points), and more likely to matriculate to a tertiary institution
(23 percentage points). For daily attendance, the effect is much stronger for students who would
not have met the attendance target without the program.
       However, the form of the incentive matters significantly. Simply changing the timing of
the transfer with the savings incentive increases enrollment in both secondary and tertiary
institutions over the basic treatment (by 3.6 and 3.3 percentage points respectively) while not
reducing the daily attendance rates of students despite the lower monthly transfers. Compared to
the basic treatment, the tertiary treatment encourages higher levels of daily attendance (3.5
percentage points more for students least likely to attend) and higher levels of enrollment at the
secondary (3.3 percentage points) and tertiary levels (46 percentage points).
       We also observe important spillover effects of the program within families and peer
networks. Within families, the receipt of a subsidy causes a reallocation of academic
opportunities and labor market responsibilities across family members, and this effect seems to
interact with the families’ decision about which children to enroll in the lottery. Our findings are
consistent with negative spillovers of the program on the education of children that were
registered but not selected for treatment by the lottery. For example, comparing households that
registered two children, we find evidence of lower school attendance and more labor market
work for an untreated child with a treated sibling compared to an untreated child with a similarly
untreated sibling.   This effect is particularly strong for unregistered girls. The results for
unregistered children are more mixed.
       In contrast, we find that the treatments generate strong positive externalities across peer
groups. Treating friends encourages higher attendance at a similar magnitude as the direct effect.
However, the gains in attendance decline sharply in the fraction of friends treated – one treated
friend has significant benefits, but an additional friend has almost no additional effect.
       The paper is organized as follows. First, we describe the educational system in Bogota,
Colombia (Section 2). In Section 3, we describe the research design, including the design of the
individual treatments, the allocation process, the various data sets, and the statistical models
involved in the process. Section 4 presents verification for external validity, balance of the
baseline and measures of attrition. We present the results of the analytical models in Section 5.
Finally, we conclude in Section 6.




                                                -5-
II.    Education in Bogota


Colombia is a relatively typical middle income, Latin American country. Child mortality is
relatively low at 21 per 1000 births and individuals can expect to live long lives -- life
expectance at birth is 72.6 years. The per capita income of Colombia is US$ 2,020, with only
17.8 percent of the population living on less than two dollars per day (World Bank, 2006).
       While the central government maintains control of curriculum as well as of the allocation
of teachers and their wages, municipalities are primarily responsible for the administration of
public education using national funds.         The central government provides resources to
municipalities, primarily from income and VAT taxes, and close to 90 percent of these funds are
required by law to go toward health and education. With these funds, municipalities must
develop, maintain, and run the facilities in their jurisdictions. Municipalities that have greater
capacity to collect and administer taxes supplement central resources with local funds, usually
from property taxes.
       The academic year runs from the end of January until the middle of November. The
system is divided into three categories: basic primary (grades one through five), basic secondary
(grades six through nine) and middle secondary (grades ten and eleven). After finishing the
eleventh grade, children can matriculate to either traditional universities or one of many
vocational schools. Students usually start school at five to seven years of age, and children are
legally required to attend school through the ninth grade, a period referred to as basic education.
       Like in most urban areas in middle-income countries, school attendance is highest for
younger children. The enrollment rate for students of age between 5 and 13 are close to 100
percent. After 13 years old, the attendance rate starts to decline. The average attendance rate for
individuals aged 15 is 92 percent, 16 is 90 percent and 17 is 80 percent. The drop is faster for
low-income individuals. For individuals falling into the bottom two categories of the Colombian
poverty index (the SISBEN), the attendance rate for 15 year olds is 84 percent, for 16 year olds is
80 percent and for 17 years olds is 65 percent (Fedesarrollo, 2005). Overall, there were 89,000
between 5 and 18 years of age who were not attending school in 2003. Seventy-four percent of
these were classified in the bottom two categories of the SISBEN (Fedesarrollo, 2005).
       When surveyed, students claim that the major reason for dropping out is the cost of
education. Students have to pay to enroll each year; they also have to pay for required items like



                                                -6-
uniforms, books, and supplies. In fact, 64 percent of dropouts claim that the high cost of
education is the main reason for leaving school (Fedesarrollo, 2005). Enrollment fees, uniforms,
and school materials make up 90 percent of the costs for low-income individuals, and these
monthly costs fluctuates between 24,000 and 50,000 pesos depending on the school and grade
(US$ 13 to US$ 22), a relatively large expense considering that the poorest families in Bogota
earn less than US$ 750 a year.


III.   Research Design


In 2005, the city of Bogota established the Conditional Subsidies for School Attendance
(“Subsidios Condicionados a la Asistencia Escolar”) program in an effort to improve student
retention, lower drop-out rates and reduce child labor. In an effort to improve the program over
the basic conditional cash transfer model, the Secretary of Education of the City (Secretaria de
Educacion del Distrito, SED) decided to implement a pilot study in two of the twelve localities in
the city. The pilot was to run for a year, and then the results would be used to inform the design
of the final program that would operate city-wide.


       A. Design of Treatments


Ultimately, three interventions were chosen for the pilot. First, operating as a reference is a basic
intervention similar to that used in PROGRESSA/OPPORTUNIDADES. In this basic model,
participants would receive 30,000 pesos (approximately US$ 15) as long as the child attended at
least 80 percent of the days that month. Based on the responses to our surveys, the total annual
value of the transfer (300,000 pesos) is three times more than what students report earning on
average and is slightly more than the average 250,000 pesos that families report spending each
year on educational expenses. The payments would be made bi-monthly through a dedicated
debit card run by one of the major banks in Colombia. Students would be removed from the
program if they failed to matriculate to the next grade twice, failed to reach the attendance target
in two successive bi-monthly periods, or were expelled from school. Finally, all payments were
based on reports provided to the Secretary of Education by the students’ principals.




                                                -7-
        The two additional treatments were experimental variants of this basic intervention
aiming to better reach the goals of the program while keeping the cost of each intervention
roughly equivalent to the basic intervention.4 Based on research that suggests that families may
face difficulties saving money for students’ education (either because of intra-household
bargaining, personal discounting issues, or simply high costs of savings), the second treatment
(savings treatment) varied the timing of the distributions to students’ families.                      Instead of
receiving 30,000 pesos a month for reaching the attendance target, students were paid two thirds
of this amount on a bi-monthly basis (20,000 pesos or US$10) and the remaining third was held
in account. The accumulated funds were then made available to students families during the
period in which students enroll and prepare for the next school year. If students reached the
attendance target every month, this treatment would make 100,000 pesos (US$ 50) available to
them in December.
        Keeping the overall cost of the intervention roughly constant, this treatment differs from
the basic intervention with respect to both short-term liquidity constraints and technology to save
for longer-term goals. First, because the monthly transfer is reduced, children may attend less
often if they face very immediate constraints on school participation (trading off time spent in
school with time spent at work, for example). Second, it supplies the accrued funds to families
just before they enroll in the next academic year. So, if families’ long-term savings constraints
are more significant for children’s academic participation than the more short-term liquidity
constraints, the savings treatment could generate both higher attendance and higher re-enrollment
rates when compared to the basic treatment.5
        Rather than manipulate the timing of payments, the third treatment (tertiary treatment)
changes the outcome students are being incentivized upon. Instead of providing an incentive to
attend school, this treatment provides an incentive to graduate and then to matriculate to a higher
education institution. Like in the savings treatment, in the short term, the monthly subsidy is
reduced from 30,000 pesos per month to 20,000 pesos. However, upon graduating the students
earn the right to receive a transfer of 600,000 pesos ($US 300), amounting to 73 percent of the
4
  The amounts, of course, are not the same because the treatments do not account for inflation. Making adjustments
to account for inflation probably would have been too complicated to explain to potential registrants. However, the
inflation rate in 2005 was only 4.85%, and the net effect of this difference is to reduce the value of the savings
treatment which, we will show, is more effective than the basic treatment despite the slightly lower value.
5
  This effect would be similar to the effect observed in Duflo, Kremer, and Robinson (2006) in which simply
offering farmers the option to buy fertilizer at harvest time, when money was available, significantly increased the
purchase of fertilizer.


                                                       -8-
average cost of the first year at a vocational school (823,000 pesos or $US 412). If the student
graduates and enrolls in a tertiary institution, they receive the transfer immediately; if they fail to
enroll, they can only request the transfer after a year has passed. It is important to note, however,
that unlike the savings treatment, the tertiary treatment does more than just change the timing of
the payments to families; the total value of the tertiary treatment for students in each grade is
greater than the equivalent value of the basic treatment.
        Compared to the basic treatment, this tertiary treatment could reduce attendance rate if
students’ short-term liquidity constraints are important (because of the lower monthly transfer –
as in the savings treatment). However, if short-term liquidity constraints are not binding, the
tertiary treatment could stimulate higher graduation rates and possibly attendance rates (if
attendance is viewed as a relevant input into graduation), and could also result in higher levels of
matriculation to tertiary institutions.


        B. Structure of Randomization


As required by the SED, the assessment of the treatments was divided into two separate
experiments located in two very similar localities in Bogota, San Cristobal and Suba. Eligible
registrants in San Cristobal were randomly assigned between a control group, the basic
treatment, and the savings treatment. Eligible registrants in Suba would be assigned either to a
control group or to receive only one of the subsidies, with those who had last completed grades
six through eight receiving the basic treatment and those who had last completed grades nine
through eleven receiving the tertiary treatment. This research design allows us to directly assess
the causal impact of each treatment; it also allows us to directly compare the savings and basic
treatments. But it requires us to be careful and ensure the comparability of the localities before
comparing the effects of the tertiary treatment to the other treatments.
        Both experiments were based on an over-subscription model.                         The city guaranteed
enough funds to provide 9,732 students with the subsidies, 6,875 in San Cristobal and 2,857 in
Suba, for three years.6 To participate, a publicly advertised registration process would be held



6
  Originally, 10,000 subsidies were proposed, but 268 subsidies were used as part of a separate program design to
facilitate the reenrollment of students who had previously dropped out of school.


                                                       -9-
and if there were more interested children than subsidies, then the subsidies would be allocated
to children based on a lottery in each locality.7
        During January and the beginning of February, the program was advertised in the two
localities through posters, newspapers ads, radio spots, loudspeakers in cars, churches, and
community leaders, including principals of schools and priests. Potential candidates for the
subsidy were registered during 15 days between the end of February and the beginning of March
2005. The registration was conducted in various schools of the two localities. In order to be
included in the program, at least one parent / guardian was required to be present at the
registration.
        In order to be eligible for the program, children had to meet several criteria. First, the
potential candidate had to have finished grade 5 and not yet graduated from grade 11. To focus
on lower income families, all children’s families had to have been classified into the bottom two
categories on Colombia’s poverty index, the SISBEN. 8 To verify the classification, the student
had to present an identification card (which the vast majority of students have). The SISBEN
categorization of the household was confirmed online by the SED at the time of registration. In
order to eliminate the possibility that families would move to take advantage of the program,
only those households that had been classified by the SISBEN system as living in San Cristobal
or Suba prior to 2004 were eligible to participate in the program. In total, 17,309 eligible
students were registered for the two experiments: 10, 947 in San Cristobal and 6,362 in Suba.
        The randomization was publicly conducted on April 4 in each locality. The research team
conducted the actual lottery, but in order to ensure transparency of the process, the code was
inspected prior the exercise by researchers from the National University. The randomizations
were done publicly (projecting the code onto a screen), with representatives of the community,
school and local authorities present. The lists of beneficiaries were immediately printed, signed
by local officials, and made available to the communities so that parents were able to determine
if their children were included.
        The randomization was stratified on locality, type of school (public / private), gender, and
grade level. Panel A of Table 1 shows the distribution of registrants. In all, 6,875 students from

7
  The over subscription and recruitment process are similar to the techniques used in the assignment of school
vouchers in the PACES program implemented nationally in Colombia. This process is described in Angrist et al.
(2002).
8
  See Vélez et al (1999) for details for the description of SISBEN. The SISBEN classified households according to
6 levels, 1 being assigned to the poorest. Most of the families in these areas were surveyed in 2003 and 2004.


                                                     - 10 -
San Cristobal and 2,857 from Suba received one of the treatments. This left 4,072 control
students in San Cristobal and 3,505 in Suba, and the students are evenly distributed within grade-
gender categories.


         C. Data


The richness of the available data is one of the major strengths of our study. The data come from
six sources. These include general survey data on all eligible families, data collected specifically
for the study, and administrative data collected by the SED.
         First, we have the data from the original SISBEN surveys from 2003 and 2004 that
contain information on all families eligible to register for the lottery. These surveys were
conducted as part of the SISBEN national poverty index – in fact, these are subsets of the actual
surveys that were used to create the index itself. We have access to all individuals placed into
the bottom two SISBEN categories, providing a rich baseline description of all of the eligible
families. It also allows us to verify the representativeness of our results by checking that those
families who registered for the study were not significantly different from those that did not
register.    The SISBEN data provide us with several variables at the family level such as
schooling level of the household head, physical characteristics of the dwelling, employment
status of adults, and family income. It also provides us with individual level variables such as
enrollment status at the time of the survey, age, income, and marriage status.9
         The second source of data comes from the program registration process itself. During
this process families had to provide some basic information on the students to ensure eligibility.
These data include birth date, gender, last grade completed and year in which that grade was
completed. Most of this information was verified through the actual SISBEN database and when
possible, the SED’s official records.
         After the randomization, it became clear that students were spread across a large number
of schools, but the density was heavily skewed with the majority of students in a smaller number

9
  The obvious challenge of using this data is that families knew that they were being surveyed for the purpose of
scoring them on a poverty index. As result, measures of assets and income are probably underestimates of the true
values. However, this bias is almost certainly not correlated with the differences investigated in this paper given the
timing and purpose of the survey. We use this information for two primary purposes. First we use it to compare
registrants to non-registrants, and second we use it as a source of information on the households to which the
children in the study belong.


                                                        - 11 -
of schools. Based on the available budget, we chose to collect baseline data and the subsequent
attendance data in only the 68 schools with the largest number of registered children. This
included a total possible sample of 9,768 students. These individuals were chosen from a list of
students and the names of the schools that they provided to the SED.
       The baseline was conducted between May and July, 2005 and comprised a simple self-
administered survey that the students filled out in class. Of the 9,768 students selected for
surveying we were able to locate 9,239 students at the time of the baseline survey in the schools
that they claimed to attend. The distribution of these students is provided in Panel B of Table 1.
Reassuringly, they have a similar distribution to original registrants and again, are equally
distributed within grade-gender categories.
       Because the baseline was conducted after the randomization, we were unable to use
information on any variables that might have changed immediately as a result of the treatments.
The baseline instead allows us to narrow down the sample to those children whose provided
information was correct and that we could feasibly track down at the end of the study. From the
baseline, we use the following: basic demographic variables, a list of friends the students have of
the same grade in school, and most importantly, contact information for tracking students during
the follow-up survey.
       As a fourth source of data, the research team collected during the last quarter of 2005
data on students’ attendance through direct observation. For this purpose, the team assembled a
group of assistants who randomly visited schools and classes. The assistants directly called the
roll of all students and students were marked absent if they were not physically present in the
classroom. They visited a total of 1,069 classes in the 68 selected schools for 13 weeks,
targeting the same 9,768 students originally chosen for the baseline survey. Because we were
able to continue looking for all children selected from the 68 schools, this data set is broader than
that used for the detailed survey questionnaires as it includes both those students who were found
in the baseline and students who, for whatever reason, were not available to be surveyed.
       During February and March of 2006 a follow-up survey was conducted. To ensure that
the survey did not preferentially treat students still enrolled in school, we conducted the survey at
the household level. For the follow up, the research team located the families of 98.14 percent of
the baseline individuals – a total of 8,736 students. The survey is a rich source of information,
containing data on the participating students (including academic participation, academic effort;



                                               - 12 -
consumption, and labor activities) but also the other children in the household, thereby allowing
us to study how the treatments may have affected the allocation of work and resources within
families.
        Finally, we obtained administrative records from the Secretary of Education that includes
the enrollment records of every child in a public school and many private schools in the two
localities. This data allows us to assess the effect of the treatments using every student that
registered for the randomization, including those not claiming to attend one of the 68 schools
selected for attendance data collection and surveying.            Combined with the other outcome
variables, this provides us with three concentric groups of students: all of the students who
registered for the randomization (for which we only have administrative enrollment data), all of
the students registered at the 68 schools selected for surveying (for which we have both
administrative enrollment data and verified attendance data), and those students at the 68 schools
who completed baseline and follow-up surveys (for whom we have administrative enrollment
data, verified attendance data, and the information collected in the surveys).


        D. Analytic Models


We use three basic models to analyze the data. First, we use a simple difference estimator.
Second, we also use a difference estimator that includes controls for individual and family
characteristics. Third, we use an instrumental variables model to estimate externalities generated
by the treatments within families and students friendship networks.
        First, in order to validate the randomization, we use a simple difference model to make
simple comparisons between different subsets of the sample without controlling for any
covariates. These comparisons are intended to assess the comparability of different groups such
as the research groups, registrants and non-registrants, etc. When used to compare a given
treatment and the respective control group, for example, the specification takes the following
form:
                                   xij = β o + β1Treat i + ε ij                        (1)

To perform this estimate, the data sets containing the treatment group of interest and the
respective control group are pooled. The variable xij represents a particular characteristic of




                                                 - 13 -
interest for child i in school j . This is regressed on the variable Treat i which is an indicator

variable for whether or not the individual child is in the respective treatment group. The error
variable ε ij is indexed with both student and school identifiers because the error terms are

allowed to co-vary up to the school level. Finally, the variable β 1 is the estimated difference.
       To estimate the effects of the various treatments we use a difference estimator as well,
but also include controls for demographic and school characteristics. This model is specified as
follows for San Cristobal:
                    y ij = β o + β1Treat1i + β 2Treat 2 i + δX ijk + φ j + ε ij                 (2)

The variables from Equation 1 are defined as before. The variable y ij is the outcome variable of

interest. Next, we include two treatment variables that are indicator variables for the specified
child receiving the basic and savings treatments, respectively.                   The coefficients on these
indicator variables are the estimates of the effects of the respective treatment.                The main
difference between this specification and Equation 1 is that this includes as control variables
demographic characteristics X ijk at the child and family ( k ) level as well as fixed effects for

each school, φ j . We again allow the error terms to co-vary up to the school level. For Suba, we

use a similar equation that contains only one treatment dummy and estimate the model for grades
6-8 and 9-11 separately.
       In addition to the direct estimates of the programs, we also estimate the external effects of
the treatment on students’ family members and peers. For these specifications we are interested
in the relationship between the individuals’ behavior and either the fraction of peers treated or
the fraction of school-aged family members treated. To do this, we have to account for the fact
that the fraction of registered peers or family members is possibly endogenous. As a result, we
use an instrumental regression model in which the fraction of treated peers or school-aged family
members is instrumented with the fraction of registered peers or family members who receive the
treatment. For the friendship networks, the specification takes the following form:
          y ij = β o + β1 Frac _ Treat + β 2 Frac _ Treat 2 + β 3Treat + δX ijk + φ j + ε ij    (3)

All of the variables are defined as before and β1 and β 2 are the estimated effects of the fraction
of friends treated by the program. For non-treated members of the family, we use a similar




                                                    - 14 -
specification except that we omit the school fixed-effects and cluster the standard errors at the
family level.
        Finally, we use one last specification to estimate what the attendance and enrollment rates
of students who received the treatment would have been without the treatment.10 We estimate
these counterfactuals by modeling the behavior or students in our control groups using only the
available baseline demographic characteristics.                 For treated students, we use their baseline
characteristics and the coefficients from our regressions on the control group to project what
these students’ would have done had they not been treated.
        Specifically, we estimate the following model using only the registered children that did
not receive the treatment:
                                     y ijk = β o + δX ijk + ε ij                                    (4)

The model is estimated using ordinary least squares, and the coefficients and variables are the
same as in Equation 2. The only exception, of course, is the omission of the treatment dummies.
This equation highlights the fact that this proxy measure is only a linear combination of
demographic variables, and it contains no new information.


IV.     External validity, baseline balance and attrition


We proceed as follows in this section. First, we use the available data from the SISBEN survey
to compare the individuals that registered for the program to those who did not and to check
comparability between the two localities. Second, for those individuals found at baseline, we
compare the students assigned to each research group to ensure that the research groups are
balanced at baseline. To make sure that the groups did not become unbalanced due to attrition,
we then compare the distribution of students who failed to provide a follow-up survey in each
research group. Once we have verified that the groups are indeed still balanced, we then
estimate the results of the treatments on the various outcome variables in Section 5.




10
  Ideally, we would have collected attendance rates of children prior to the randomization. However, we could not
have collected this information ourselves because, until the registration process was complete, we had no way of
knowing which of the 515,885 eligible students would register. We tried to collect historical attendance rates
through the teachers’ records, but these records were too often incomplete and when complete, inconsistently kept.


                                                       - 15 -
   A. External Validity


One of the major problems of randomized evaluations is that, because they often focus on
specific group of individuals, it remains unclear whether the results can be extrapolated to other
populations. In our case, this is a particular concern given that students self-select into the
registration for the program.    However, through the SISBEN surveys, we have access to
information on all eligible students living in the two localities, and we can directly compare
students whose families registered them for the program to those that did not.
       This comparison is presented in Table 2. Each row contains estimates for the indicated
demographic variable. Columns 1 and 3 provide the average value for all registered children,
and columns 2 and 4 provide the simple difference between registrants and non-registrants using
Equation 1. While the size of the sample (515,885 children) is sufficiently large that most
differences are statistically significant, they are all very small in magnitude except for those
concerning school participation. Families have similar numbers of assets, similar household
characteristics, and similar scores on the poverty indexes. Figure 1 shows the entire distribution
for our income estimate and similar to the mean, the entire distributions of registrants and non-
registrants are comparable.
       The main difference is school participation. On average, those registered for the program
were more likely to have been attending school when the study was administered (19 and 20
percentage points). There are two reasons for this. First, this particular program targeted
students who were already attending school.        Second, a primary means of disseminating
information about the program was through school principals. This is also born out in Figure 2
where we compare the families using our proxy attendance estimate.                Registrants are
significantly less likely to be children with similar characteristics to low attending children and
much more likely to be similar to those with attendance rates close to 80 percent. The primary
implication is that these results are most applicable to the students for which the interventions
were targeted through the eligibility requirements: students who are currently enrolled in school
and who have completed at least the fifth grade.
       Finally, because students are eligible for the tertiary treatment only in Suba, we need to
make sure that the students in Suba are similar to those in San Cristobal in order to compare
properly the magnitudes of the treatment effects. This is done in columns 5 and 6. Column 5



                                              - 16 -
provides a comparison of all eligible children and column 6 provides a comparison of just those
children who registered for the lottery. In all cases, these children are very similar, making it
reasonable to perform comparisons across localities.


     B. Comparison at Baseline


Given that the students who registered for the lottery are representative of all eligible children in
the communities, we turn to checking whether or not the randomization succeeded in creating
comparable treatment and control groups. This initial comparability is essential for us to be able
to attribute future differences between the research groups to the respective treatments.
         The comparisons for students who provided a baseline survey are presented in Table 3.11
As in Table 2, each row displays the comparisons for the indicated demographic variable.
Columns 1-4 compare students in San Cristobal and columns 5-8 compare students in Suba. In
both localities, the differences are negligible. For San Cristobal, columns 2-4 display the simple
differences (using Equation 1) between the basic treatment and the Control Group, the
differences between the savings treatment and the Control Group, and finally, the difference
between the two treatments, respectively.                Almost all of the differences are statistically
insignificant and those that are statistically significant (such as the fact that the basic treatment
has 3 percent more girls than the savings treatment) are economically small.
         The same is true for Suba. Columns 5 and 7 respectively show the average control group
characteristics for the younger (grades 6-8) and older (grades 9-11) children, respectively. The
younger children received the basic treatment, and those selected for the basic treatment are very
similar to those in the control group (column 6). Similarly, the older children who received the
tertiary treatment are similar to the older students who constitute the control group (column 8).
         To check for differences in the distribution of children rather than just the mean, we also
plotted the distributions. An example is shown in Figure 3. The figure contains a plot of the
distribution of household income in the treatment and control groups – as shown in the plot, the
distributions are very similar.



11
  In un-presented results, we also make the same comparison for all students in the sample and for all students
claiming to be registered at the 68 schools that were selected for the surveying and attendance collection. The
results for these samples are the same as for the data set of only the students providing a baseline survey.


                                                       - 17 -
    C. Attrition from Baseline


Comparability at baseline is critical, but even if the two groups are comparable at baseline, it is
possible that the treatments might cause different types of students to drop out of the study,
making the groups of students that answer our one-year follow up survey incomparable. To
check for this, we perform two exercises. First, we check the overall attrition rates in each
group. If these are sufficiently low, then compositions of the groups cannot significantly change
from baseline to treatment even if significantly different types of students attrit. Second, to asses
how different the attritors are, we compare the kinds of students attriting in each group using the
baseline characteristics of all of the students.
        The first two rows of Table 4 provide the exact number of attritors and their percentage in
the research group. Column 1 shows the values for the control group and columns 2-4 show the
difference from this value and between the two treatment groups for San Cristobal. Columns 5-8
do the same for Suba. Overall, the attrition rate is very low at just less than 2 percent, and the
differences in the number of children who dropped out are mostly in the single digits. Given this
extremely low rate of attrition, only very large differences could generate changes in the
comparability of the research groups.
        Panels B through E then estimate these relative comparisons of background
characteristics. The control columns (columns 1, 5, and 7) show the difference in characteristics
between those students that attrit and those that remain in the sample at follow-up.            The
difference columns (columns 2-4, 6, and 8) then display the results of a slight modification of
Equation 2 to show the difference between the research groups of the relative differences
between attritors and stayers.
        Again, these differences are all minor. The vast majority of the differences are extremely
small – for example, the differences in the families’ poverty measures are negligible both in
economic and statistical terms. The largest differences occur in the age of the head of the
household for San Cristobal (3 to 7 years difference), the age of children in San Cristobal (2-3
years), and the years of education of students in Suba grades 9-11 (1.25 years). Overall the
distributions are very similar, and especially given the underlying low rates of attrition, the few
differences that do exist are arguably too small to generate confounding changes in the measured
outcomes.



                                                   - 18 -
V.      Results


        A. Academic Participation


The fact that the research groups are ultimately comparable allows us to causally attribute any
changes in the groups at follow-up to the individual treatments. This allows us to assess
families’ responses to the various programs by comparing directly the students’ who receive the
treatments to the control group and to compare directly the different treatment groups. It is
important to note, however, that within secondary school, different aspects of the treatments
create separate incentives for attendance and enrollment.                    Within the academic year, the
attendance targets encourage students to attend school regularly. Between academic years,
however, the anticipated value of the transfers in the following year, encourage families to re-
enroll children in school.
        Because the program started during the 2005 academic year and required that all students
already be enrolled, we first consider attendance rates as measured by our team of attendance
monitors during the last few months of the 2005 academic year (Figures 4 and 5 and Table 5).
Since all of the treatments incentivize students to achieve the 80 percent attendance target, we
first consider the aggregate effects of combined incentive schemes. The overall average effects
of the treatments combined was to increase verified attendance at school by 2.8 percentage
points which is statistically significant at the one percent level. The pooled effects of the
treatment are graphically depicted in Figure 4 which contains a plot of a kernel density estimate
of verified attendance for the treatment and control groups. Based on this graph, the treatment
effect seems to operate by reducing the number of students who attend none12 of the time or
between 40 and 70 percent of the time and increasing the number of students who attend over 80
percent of the time.
        Another way to look at the data is to plot actual attendance rates for each group verse our
proxy baseline attendance rates, which is presented in Figure 5. Using a kernel weighted local
polynomial estimator, we plot the relationship of actual measured attendance (on the vertical

12
  It is important to note that students with a verified attendance rate of zero may have actually attended school at
some point, but just not frequently enough to be caught during one of the visits (up to 13) conducted during the 2007
academic year.


                                                       - 19 -
axis) against the proxy attendance measure (on the horizontal axis).            The effect is fairly
uniformly distributed across families. Families who would have met the 80 percent target
without the intervention seem to respond slightly less strongly than those who would not have
met the target, but interestingly the program seems to make a difference even for students who
would not seem to have a strong incentive to increase their attendance rates.
       We can perform the same exercise using our administrative enrollment rates in 2006.
Figure 6 depicts the results. Unlike the results for attendance rates, here the effect of the
program seems to be largest for families least likely to have their children re-enroll in school.
Students who would have been likely to re-enroll show no effect from the program while those
with a probability of re-enrolling of less than 80 percent show an effect that is fairly evenly
distributed across students.
       Dividing up these effects to test separately for the individual effects of each treatment, we
turn to Table 5 in which we investigate the effects of the individual programs on students’
attendance during the end of the 2005 academic year. Panel A contains the results for our
primary outcome variable – verified attendance for all students in the 68 schools selected for
surveying during the end of 2005. Panel B contains the same verified attendance measure but
just for those students who were found in the baseline survey. Columns 1-3 provide the results
for the first experiment in San Cristobal with column 1 providing the average for control students
and columns 2 and 3 providing the results for the basic and savings treatments. Columns 4-7
provide the results for Suba. Columns 4 and 6 contain the results for the basic (grades 6-8) and
tertiary (grades 9-11) treatments while columns 5 and 7 contain the respective controls. Finally,
the last column contains the overall average effects by pooling the effects of the individual
treatments.
       Turning to Panel A, the individual treatments did cause changes in the verified attendance
rates. The first row contains the average results for all students. The second row contains
students in grades 6-8 and the third row contains grades 9-11. Overall the basic and savings
treatments increase attendance in San Cristobal by 3.3 and 2.8 percentage points respectively.
The results are evenly distributed across grades. For grades 6-8 in San Cristobal, the savings
treatment increases attendance by a similar amount as the basic treatment (3.5 and 2.6 percentage
points respectively), despite the lower monthly transfer. Interestingly, the basic transfer has no
effect on attendance in Suba, though if we pool the sample the estimated effect is a statistically



                                              - 20 -
significant 2.7 percentage points (p-value < 0.001). And although the point estimate is then
lower than the estimated effect of the savings treatment, the difference is not statistically
significant. For grades 9-11, the results are different. The results for the basic and savings
treatments in San Cristobal are similar, but the results for the Suba experiment (the tertiary
treatment) are an increase in attendance by 5.0 percentage points.
         The next two rows divide students based on the predicted attendance measure estimated
from Equation 3. (In other words, we divide the sample based on whether students’ baseline
characteristics are similar to those characteristics of control group students who either met the
attendance target or did not.) As shown in Figure 5, the treatment was slightly more effective for
students whose projected baseline attendance was below the attendance target – the difference
varies by treatment, although the difference is not statistically significant at conventional
significance levels for any of the treatments. Only the basic treatment in Suba does not follow
this trend, revealing a higher attendance effect for students likely to attend without receiving the
treatment.
         In Panel B, we move from all of the students in the 68 schools to just focus on those
individuals who were found at school in the baseline survey. In the baseline, we attempted to
survey every child who was registered as attending one of the 68 schools, and we were able to
locate and survey 90 percent of those students at the time. Not surprisingly, the students who
took the survey were, on average, higher attending students. In fact, as shown in Panel B, even
those students who were projected to attend less than 80 percent of the time based on their
household characteristics (the fifth row) would have met the attendance target on average
without the subsidies.
         As would be expected from the higher average attendance rates, the estimated treatment
effects are slightly smaller for this sample of survey participants. Most of the point estimates are
still statistically significant at conventional levels, but the average effects are around one percent
rather than three percent for the entire sample.13 The pattern of results, however, is similar to the
pattern obtained when all of the students are included. The results are evenly distributed across
grades, and those that are projected to attend less than 80 percent of the time show a stronger


13
   Given the relatively small sample of students who did not give the baseline survey, we have not been able to
estimate treatment effects for this sample consistently. The estimates are very sensitive to the specification used, but
the difference in treatment effects between students that did and those that did not give a baseline survey are never
statistically significant at conventional levels.


                                                        - 21 -
treatment effect than students projected to attend more often. In this sample, the differences
between students with high and low baseline projected attendance are statistically significant for
the basic and savings treatments (p-value of 0.013).
        Table 6 contains the estimated treatment effects for enrollment and school participation in
2006, the subsequent academic year. The first three panels contain estimates of students’
continued enrollment using administrative enrollment data provided by the Secretary of
Education. Panel D and E contain self-reported enrollment and attendance data from our follow-
up survey. To keep the outcome measures consistent, we only consider students who were in
grades 6-10 in 2005 in Panels A through E. Panel F then contains self-reported enrollment and
graduation data for students who were in the 11th grade in 2005 and should have matriculated to
tertiary institutions in 2006. The columns are organized in the same format as in Table 5.
        Panel A contains the estimated treatments effects, using our administrative enrollment
measure, for all of the students who participated in the lottery (rather than just the 68 schools
selected for surveying). The first row contains estimates for all of the students in the study.
Overall, 70 percent of students in the lottery had paid their enrollment fees and enrolled in school
in 2006.14     However, the students who received the savings and tertiary treatments were
significantly more likely to have re-enrolled in school than those who did not receive a treatment
by 3.6 and 3.3 percent respectively. In contrast to the effects on attendance, only students
receiving the basic treatment in grades 6-8 in Suba show a statistically significant effect while
those in San Cristobal show no effect. And in San Cristobal where the comparison between the
basic and savings treatments is the cleanest, the difference between the treatments is statistically
significant at the 5 percent level (p-value 0.024). Thus, shifting the timing of payments does
seem to significantly increase the fraction of students that re-enroll in school over the basic
conditional cash transfer design.
        The distribution of the result by sub-sample is similar to those of the verified attendance
results, except that the difference between students projected to be likely or unlikely to reenroll is
starker. Rows 2 and 3 show the effects by grade levels, and the effects are evenly distributed.
The last two rows then divide the sample based on our estimated probability of re-enrollment.


14
   This is likely an under-estimate of the number of students who continue to be enrolled both because of matching
errors and because the data provided by the SED for some schools (mostly private) were reportedly incomplete.
However, given our within school variation in treatment assignment, none of the research groups should be
disproportionately affected by these issues.


                                                     - 22 -
As graphically exhibited in Figure 6, students with household characteristics correlated with low
re-enrollment probabilities are much more likely to enroll due to the treatments. The savings
treatment causes a 5.6 percentage point increase in reenrollment and the tertiary treatment causes
an 8 percent increase. Those students most likely to re-enroll show no effect at all. This
difference is statistically significant at the five percent level (p-value of 0.045) for the savings
treatment and the ten percent level (p-value 0.06) for the tertiary treatment.
        Because we have data for all of the students in our sample, we can assess the
comparability of our sample of 68 schools by re-estimating the treatment effect just on those 68
schools and comparing the estimates to those obtained from the entire sample. The estimates
from the students initially enrolled in the 68 schools are provided in Panel B. While the baseline
re-enrollment rates are higher in these schools,15 the estimated treatment effects are very similar
to those in Panel A.
        Panel C contains the estimated treatment effects for students in the 68 schools who gave a
baseline survey, repeating the exercise from Panel B of Table 5 using the enrollment data. While
the point estimates for the savings, tertiary, and basic treatments in Suba all have positive point
estimates, the magnitudes are again smaller than for the full sample, but not statistically
significantly so.     Those students least likely to reenroll show the largest response to the
treatments. For these students, the savings treatment causes an increase in enrollment of 4.3
percentage points and the tertiary treatment causes an increase of 4.8 percentage points,
statistically significant at the five and ten percent levels respectively.
        Unlike the previous panels, Panel D contains the same estimates, but with our self-
reported enrollment measure from the follow-up survey. The results demonstrate the importance
of not relying solely on self-reported data to assess incentive programs. Comparing these
estimates to those in Panel C, it seems that families significantly over estimate the enrollment
rates of these students relative the administrative measure. This over-estimate is significant
enough that almost all of the students report attending school. This then seems to create a ceiling
effect that prevents us from detecting a treatment effect using the self-reported data.
        Panel E also contains estimates using self-reported data but using the self-reported
attendance measure for students’ attendance in 2006. Again, families seem to dramatically


15
  These schools are all public schools. As a result, the difference in reenrollment levels may due to the relative
completeness of the data than to actual student behavior.


                                                     - 23 -
overestimate their children’s attendance rates. Even though some students have dropped out of
school, the attendance rates (even the control students) are higher than the observed attendance
rates in Panel B of Table 5. As with the self-reported enrollment data, we find no treatment
effects.      Had we relied on this self-reported measure, we would have significantly
underestimated the effects of the program.
           The cause of these inflated self-reported measures of enrollment and attendance is
unclear. The other self-reported information we collected seems to conform much more closely
to estimates obtained through our other data sources. They cannot be due to the incentives
provided by the subsidy since these estimates are similarly high for treatment and control
students. These results do, however, highlight the caution required when interpreting findings
based on self-reported data. They also belie the argument that the exaggeration inherent in self-
reported attendance data differences out when comparing treatment and control groups, at least
when the reported rates are close to one.
           Finally, in Panel F, we present our final academic participation estimates – graduation
and tertiary enrollment estimates for students who where in grade 11 in 2005. Given the results
in Panel D and E, it is important to exercise caution in interpreting these results. However,
unlike the data presented in those panels, the self-reported graduation and tertiary enrollment
levels seem much more reasonable. Looking at the control averages for the graduation rates, for
example, 88 to 90 percent of eleventh graders report graduating – a rate that is slightly higher
than the 85 and 96 percent average reenrollment rates presented in Panel C for students in grades
nine and ten. It is also consistent with our estimates for the average number of students reporting
that they passed in 2005 (Table 7, Panel A). Finally, the estimates are also consistent with the
students reported activities, school fees, and labor market activities presented below in Table 8.
           Turning to the estimated treatment effects, all of the estimated treatment effects are
positive. However, not all of them are significant, most likely because the sample is much
smaller than that used in the other panels. All treatments have positive point estimates for
graduation, but only the estimated treatment effect in the pooled regression is statistically
significant (10 percent level). For tertiary enrollment, the basic treatment generates a statistically
insignificant increase of 4 percentage points, while the savings and tertiary treatments cause
increases of 8.8 percentage points and 49.7 percentage points respectively, both of which are
statistically significant at the 1 percent level even with the smaller sample.



                                                - 24 -
        Despite the numerous studies of programs designed to keep students enrolled in school,
comparisons to other research is complicated by differences in methodology and the target
populations of the programs. For example, most conditional cash transfer programs provide non-
education forms of assistance along with educational incentives (usually for nutrition or health
care) and are targeted at more rural populations of students in primary and lower secondary
school (usually grades 1-8). In addition, the majority of studies employs non-experimental
evaluation strategies and focuses exclusively on primary and secondary enrollment. We know of
no other study that measures the impact of incentive on matriculation to tertiary institutions or
that is able to directly verify students’ attendance patterns.
        Despite these differences, our estimates of the impact of the savings and tertiary
treatments on secondary enrollment are a bit larger but of the same order of magnitude as those
measured in other contexts. For example, within the context of the experimental evaluations, our
estimates are comparable to those in Honduras (rural students aged 6-13, 1-2 percentage point
increase in enrollment, Glewwe and Olinto, 2004), Ecuador (rural students aged 6-17, 3.5
percentage point increase, Schady and Araujo, 2006), and Mexico (rural students grades 1-9,
boys 2.5 percentage points, and girls 3.5 percentage points, Schultz 2004). Attanasio et al (2006)
assess, with propensity score matching, a similar program to ours (but one that also includes a
nutrition component) run by the national Colombian government and find an increase in self-
reported enrollment of 4.8 percentage points for urban children aged 14-17. However, these
areas are much less developed than Bogota, and students have a baseline enrollment rate of only
65 percent.
        The closest study to ours both in methodology and target population is the evaluation of
the PACES program that provided vouchers to students entering the sixth grade. Over three
years, Angrist et al (2002) find an increase in the percentage of students who completed the
eighth grade of 10 percentage points (self-reported data) and over six years (Angrist et al, 2006),
an increase in students completing secondary school of 15-20 percentage points (administrative
data). Compounded over the relevant time-frame, these results are very close to our one-year
enrollment effects for the savings and tertiary treatments assuming that the treatment effects do
not decline over time.16 While a more direct comparison will be possible as the students within


16
  Unlike the PACES study, we are not yet able to assess the effects of continued enrollment on students’ learning
levels.


                                                      - 25 -
our cohort age, this similarity is intriguing because at a cost of US$43 per student per year, the
savings and tertiary treatments are less than a quarter of the cost of the PACES vouchers
(US$190 per student per year).


         B. Academic Effort, Consumption, and Labor Outcomes


From students who completed both the baseline and follow-up surveys, we collected other
outcome variables which are presented in Table 7. Because the results were relatively similar
across grades, we pooled all of the grades, breaking out grade 11 when appropriate. Panel A
displays the results for our measures of academic effort. Panel B contains the results for
consumption outcomes. And finally, Panel C contains information on labor market activities for
students in grades 6-10 and Panel D contains the same estimates for students in grade 11. The
columns are defined as in Tables 5 and 6, and all estimates are again made using Equation 2.
         In general, the treatments have little effect on our measures of academic effort in Panel
A, except for the rate at which students pass. First, the tertiary treatment increases the time spent
on homework by a half an hour a week. The other two treatments do not have any affect.
Second, the savings treatment causes a 2 percentage point increase in the number of children
passing in the last year. The other treatments have a similar effect (1-2 percentage points), but
none of them are statistically significant individually. Again, however, when we pool the results,
the overall average effect of the treatments is 1.6 percentage points which is statistically
significant at the five percent level. Looking at the remaining outcome variables, students’
grades, none of the treatments cause a significant change, and the point estimates are
inconsistent. 17 Compared to the pass rates, it may be that grades are a noisier outcome or that
teachers consider more than grades when determining who will pass at the end of the year.
         Panel B shows our findings for consumption and is divided into food and school
expenses. First, we report effects on food consumption (first two rows). All the treatments,
except the basic treatment in Suba, increase the number of meals children have eaten over the
last three days by about 0.17 to 0.24 of a meal. Similarly for the same treatments, the number of


17
  It is interesting to note the relative similarity of the effects estimated through self-reported and verified grades.
Despite the significant overestimates for enrollment and attendance, students’ reports of their grades are remarkably
similar to those that we were able to verify. Self-reported grades are slightly higher, but measured treatment effects
are very similar.


                                                        - 26 -
meals with a common source of protein increases by 0.16 to 0.18 meals over 3 days. These
effects suggest that the program has a small effect on non-educational household consumption.
       The second two rows of Panel B contain the results for school expenses. This variable is
the sum of questions that require the family to provide details (in thousands of Colombian pesos)
of their educational expenses for the entire year, including administrative fees, school supplies,
transportation, and ancillary expenses. The basic, savings, and tertiary treatments seem to have
little effect on spending in grades 6-10. However, the tertiary treatment seems to have a large
effect on educational expenditures for individuals who are of age to attend a tertiary institution.
Not all of the 600,000 pesos are spent on academic activities. Looking at row 4, families would
have spent 142,000 pesos anyway on average, but the treatment causes families to spend an extra
246,000 pesos. In total, it seems that 64.7 percent of the subsidy is spent on academic expenses.
       Finally, we turn to the labor market outcomes. Panel C contains the results for labor
market activities for students in grades 6-10 in 2005, who should all still be in secondary school
in 2006. The first three rows show the average for an indicator variable listing the primary
activity of the child (studying, work, or taking care of the household); the last two rows show the
number of hours worked in the last week that the child worked and the amount of money earned
during that week (in 1,000’s of pesos). Generally, there is not much of a change in self-reported
primary activities, but there is a relatively large, consistent change in the number of hours
worked with treated children working less as a result of the treatments. The basic and savings
treatments reduce amount worked by about a third while the tertiary treatment has a much larger
effect of reducing time spent at work by more than a half, or 0.8 hours in the last week worked.
Earnings are less precisely estimated, but show the same pattern of results.
       Panel D has the same format as Panel C and contains the results for only students who
were in grade 11 at the time of registration. These students should have graduated and moved
onto job or tertiary institutions in 2006. On all outcomes, the basic and savings treatments have
almost no effect on students’ labor market activities while, consistent with the academic
participation results from Panel F of Table 6, the tertiary treatment has a large effect, shifting
students away from work and towards educational institutions.           Forty-three percent more
students report that their primary activity is studying, and these students seem equally drawn
from those who would have otherwise been working or helping around the house. On average,




                                              - 27 -
students work 7 hours less a week and earn 11,000 pesos less, reducing their average level of
work and earnings to that of students in grades 6 through 10.


       C. Heterogeneity in the Treatment Effects


Another important dimension of these incentive programs is their relative impact on different
types of students and families which we investigate in Table 8. We study possible heterogeneity
in the effect on treated students by estimating Equation 2 for different subsets of the sample for
six outcomes: verified attendance, administrative enrollment, pass rates, meals, protein
consumption, and hours worked.         We estimate heterogeneity across three dimensions: our
projected baseline attendance measure, gender and household income. In order to maintain
sufficient sample size within subsets of the data, we pool the data and estimate the average
effects across all three treatments, though the pattern of results is generally consistent within
treatments as well.
       Within these divisions, three general patterns emerge. First, while all of the differences
suggest that those families whose children would be projected to attend less than 80 percent of
the time respond more strongly to the program than those families who would have already met
the attendance target on average, the magnitude of the differences are small and statistically
insignificant at conventional levels. Students with low projected attendance who also receive the
treatment attend school 1.1 percentage points more often, have a 2.6 percentage point higher
enrollment rate, are 1.3 percentage points more likely to pass, eat more, eat more protein, and
work a tenth of an hour less a week.
       Second, boys seem to respond to the treatment more strongly than girls in their
attendance rates and work patterns, though again the differences are not statistically significant.
The treatment effect for boys is 4.3 percentage points compared with 1.6 percentage points for
girls; however, there is no difference in the enrollment rates. Similarly, boys respond to the
treatment by working 0.6 hours less a week while girls work 0.38 hours less a week. This result
is consistent with the fact that boys seem to engage in paid work more than girls do. It is
possible, for example, that girls reduce the number of hours spent helping in the home by a
similar amount, but this outcome was not measured.




                                              - 28 -
       Finally, we also divide the sample by income level, revealing that the poorest families
show the weakest response to the intervention. Across all interventions, those households at the
bottom of the income distribution show almost no response to the treatment (only the 1.8
percentage point increase in attendance is statistically significant), while wealthier families show
much stronger responses. All of the households in the sample, of course, are poor. The results
suggest, however, that the transfer may just be too small to make a difference in the lives of the
poorest families, reporting a total income of less than 3 USD a day. This differential effect
highlights the importance of targeting interventions towards individual families.


       D. Effect on other Household Members


If families redistribute academic opportunities and labor market responsibilities to reflect
available resources and the relative costs of a child’s education, then the receipt of the treatment
by one child may affect the activities of other children. How this happens depends on the
method of distributing resources and educational opportunities within the family. For example,
families may redistribute resources between children so that children have equal opportunities,
or, if some children are preferred, families may allocate resources less equally than before.
While we do not have sufficient detail to fully unpack the decision process within the family, the
intra-family variation in treatment assignment does provide an opportunity test in reduced form
whether or not the receipt of the transfers changes the allocation of opportunities within the
household.
       The first decision that families within our data faced is whether or not they chose to
enroll a child in the randomization lottery. Surprisingly, not all children were enrolled. On
average, the 6,619 families who completed a follow-up survey had 2.5 kids in the appropriate
age range to enroll in the lottery, but only enrolled 1.3 children. This decision already seems to
reflect the allocation of activities within the household. In families that received no subsidies, 93
percent of registered children reportedly attend school while only 75 percent of unregistered
children attend. Similarly, registered children work 3.1 hours less a week (1.4 hours versus 4.6
hours in the last week worked) than non-registered children.
       The most direct test allowed by our research design is to directly compare families who
registered more than one child in the lottery.          Unfortunately, most families (5,132) only



                                               - 29 -
registered one child, and very few registered more than two (158). Focusing on the 1,329
families who registered two children, however, allows us to conduct three comparisons. First,
we can directly test whether the receipt of a subsidy changes the allocation of opportunities in the
household by comparing children who received subsidies to those who did not. If families re-
allocate resources to equalize (unbalance) the allocation of opportunities, then the resulting
treatment effect will be smaller (larger) than the overall treatment effect. Second, we can
compare treated children in families that receive one treatment to treated children in families that
receive two treatments.    If resources are shared between children, then treated children in
families that only receive one subsidy may experience smaller educational gains than children in
families in which both children are treated. Finally, we can also compare the untreated children
in a family that receives one treatment to the registered children of families that receive no
treatment. If families shared resources between treated children, then we would expect untreated
children in households receiving one treatment to be more engaged in school than registered
children in households with no treatment. However, if the receipt of a treatment causes families
to allocate additional resources to a treated child, then untreated children in households that
receive one treatment may in fact be less engaged in school.
       The results from these comparisons are contained in Table 9. Because of the smaller
sample size, we pool the treatments and then only break out the estimates by locality and then
gender. For each comparison, we estimate differences along three variables. First, we estimate
the effects on all children using our verified attendance measure. Second, for children who were
not in grade 11 in 2005, we estimate the effects using the administrative enrollment data.
Finally, we also estimate differences using our measure of labor market hours.
       Panel A, for reference, contains a simple estimate of the overall treatment effects by
comparing students who received a treatment to those who did not within all families who
registered two children. While the sample size is substantially smaller than in Tables 5 and 6,
the estimates in families with two registered children are slightly stronger but consistent.
Overall, the receipt of a treatment increases attendance by 1.6 percentage points, reenrollment by
2.1 percentage points, and reduces hours worked by 0.9 hours. The results are also distributed as
we would expect from the previous results. The increase in attendance is consistent across all
groups. The increase in enrollment and reduction in working hours is concentrated in Suba, but
evenly distributed by gender.



                                               - 30 -
        To test the direct intra-family effects of the program, Panel B directly compares students
who received a treatment against those that did not in families who registered two children and
received only one treatment.       The results suggest that receiving a subsidy did change the
allocation of educational opportunities within the family. First, treated students have much
higher levels of academic participation than non-treated students. Overall, students attended
school 2.9 percentage points more if they received a treatment and worked 1.2 hours less. They
were also re-enrolled in school 2.9 percentage points more often, but while this result is
consistent with the others, it is not statistically significant at conventional significance levels.
Turning to the sub-samples, the effect on attendance is consistent across all groups while the
work and enrollment effects are consistent across gender but concentrated in Suba. In fact, the
re-enrollment effect of 5.5 percentage points is statistically significant at the 10 percent level in
Suba. Second, however, the estimated treatment effects within these families is larger than the
overall effects, suggesting that families may allocate resources away from untreated siblings
towards treated siblings.
        This widening of the gap between treated and untreated students within families that
receive one treatment could be the result of additional participation among treated students or
lower levels of participation among non-treated students. Panel C compares treated students in
households that received one treatment to treated students in households that received two
treatments.   Within this context, we refer to children within partially treated families as
“treatment” students and students from families that receive complete treatment as “control”
students. The academic participation of the two samples is remarkably similar. The estimated
differences are all very close to zero, even in the sub-samples. The only difference is the re-
enrollment rates for boys and girls, but this difference is not statistically significant.
        Finally, Panel D makes the opposite comparison – comparing the engagement of
untreated, registered students in households with one treatment to registered students in
households that receive no treatments. As in Panel C, the partially treated households are
considered the “treatment” households and the untreated households are considered the “control”
households. Unlike Panel C, however, there is some evidence that these students are less
engaged than children in untreated households. The results are not as strong as the difference
between students within the same household, but in general, students attend less often (1.7
percentage points), are less likely to enroll in school (4.3 percentage points) and work on average



                                                 - 31 -
0.7 hours more a week. The difference in enrollment rates is statistically significant at the five
percent level. Looking at the subsamples, the signs of the point estimates are consistent with the
overall averages, but the magnitude of the effect is stronger in San Cristobal as well as for girls.
In fact, the differences in attendance and enrollment rates are statistically significant for both
subgroups at the five percent level. These differences may reflect that families have reallocated
resources between registered children (and away from girls in particular) due to the treatment.
        Estimating the effects on non-registered siblings is more difficult because families can
vary both in the number of students they register and the number of children in the household. It
is possible, for example, that receiving a subsidy may generate a larger change in a smaller
household because educational resources are divided over fewer children. At the same time, it
would be incorrect to simply estimate the relationship between the outcomes of unregistered
siblings on the number of treated children because the differences between registered and
unregistered children suggest that the selection of which children families register is endogenous.
To account for both of these possibilities, we estimate a variation of the instrumental variables
model provided by Equation 3 in which we model the outcomes of unregistered children as a
function of the fraction of treated children in the household and use the fraction of registered
children receiving a treatment as an instrument.18 In total, we include 24,552 school aged
siblings in our data set between the ages of 7 and 22. 19 On average, each family has 2.5 school
aged children and receives 1.15 subsidies. Thus, the average percentage of treatment in a family
is 46 percent, and since the vast majority of families receive only 1 treatment, the variation in
treatment density is driven primarily by differences in family size.
        The results of these estimates are presented in Table 10. Given the large sample, we use
the same format as Tables 5, 6, and 7, estimating the effects of each treatment individually. We
also provide the average outcomes for unregistered siblings in families receiving no treatment
under the heading “control average” for reference.                  To facilitate interpretation, the point
estimates are also rescaled based on the average treatment density in each sub-sample so the
presented results provide the effect experienced by the average household.



18
   We have also estimated the simple treatment effect on siblings by comparing families that received and did not
receive a treatment while registering only one child. The estimates are similar to those presented in Table 10.
19
   We chose the age range for school-aged children by using the range of ages for children who report being enrolled
in school in the SISBEN survey. The results are consistent for other choices of the age range.


                                                      - 32 -
        Panel A contains the results for all unregistered siblings in our sample first using the self-
reported enrollment variable and then the measure of labor market engagement. For no outcome
variable or any of the subsamples, is there an effect in San Cristobal. However, in Suba, the two
treatments seem to have opposite effects. The basic treatment generally increases the probability
that siblings are attending school and reduces the number of hours worked – an effect that is
decreasing in the size of the family. There seem to be some gender variation in the size of the
effect with boys experiencing the bulk of the reduction in work hours and girls the increase in
school enrollment.
        The tertiary treatment, however, which sharply reduced the work effort of treated
children, seems to increase the work effort of unregistered siblings – primarily boys. The
estimates are consistent with point estimates for the enrollment measure, but none of the
estimates of the effects on enrollment are statistically significant at conventional levels – though
the 4.2 percentage point reduction for boys has a p-value of 0.12. This suggests that the tertiary
treatment may be inducing a reallocation of work responsibilities within the household with
work being shifted from treated to untreated children.
        To check the consistency of our results with the direct estimates of the effects of the
treatments on treated children, we break the sample up by income tercile. The treatment effects
for the highest two income terciles are presented in Panel B while those for the lowest are
presented in Panel C. The results are, in fact, generally consistent with those of Table 8 with
families in the highest two income terciles experiencing the largest effects, and those in the
lowest tercile experiencing no effect. The only variable that shows a different pattern is the
enrollment measure for the tertiary treatment. While the point estimates for the highest two
terciles are negative (and statistically significant for boys at the five percent level), the point
estimates for the lowest tercile are positive and large but statistically insignificant.


        E. Peer Effects


Because our randomization strategy induces intra-school variation in the treatments, we are also
able to measure directly the peer effects associated with the program through our explicit




                                                 - 33 -
mapping of friendship networks collected in the baseline survey.20 Our design provides both an
explicit mapping of children’s friendship networks and random assignment of the fraction of a
student’s friends who are treated. This allows us to compare directly students who have more
treated friends to those who have less, using Equation 3. As in the family regressions, the
possible endogeneity arising from the fact that registration is likely to have followed friendship
ties is controlled by instrumenting for the faction of registered friends actually receiving the
treatment.
         The friendship question in the baseline survey asked the children to name up to five of
their closest friends who were in the same school and grade. All of the children provided at least
1 friend and three quarters provided five. The names of these friends were then matched with the
results of the random assignment lottery to determine which friends were treated by the program.
Half of the students had no treated friends and about 92 percent had up to 40 percent of their
friends treated. On average 15 percent of a students’ friends were treated (about 1 friend). This
provides significant variation in treatment density, but also means that our results cannot be
generalized to conditions in which more than 40 percent of a child’s friends are treated. All of
the results are presented in Table 11.
         Column 1 contains the OLS regression between our verified attendance measure and the
fraction of a students’ friends that are treated. Already the positive but declining contribution of
treated friends is apparent with the coefficient on the linear term of 0.03 and the quadratic term
of -0.04. However, both point estimates are statistically insignificant.
         The first stage regression is presented in Column 2. The estimates confirm that the
outcome of the random assignment process (the fraction of registered friends who are treated)
does, in fact, generate significant variance in the overall fraction of a student’s friends who are
treated. It in fact, explains 70 percent of the variance in the fraction of the friends treated.



20
   Such externalities have been previously estimated for conditional cash transfers by exploiting the fact that the
original PROGRESSA program only provided subsidies for the poorest families in a village. Both Bobonis and
Finan (2006) and Lalive and Cattaneo (2006) compare the school attendance patterns of children whose families
were too rich to receive the subsidy between treated and untreated villages. This comparison allows them to
experimentally identify the effects of the externality by looking for changes in the children who would not have
been directly treated in both treatment and control villages. However, the relative percentage of treated and
untreated children in each village (the treatment density) is determined by the distribution of wealth in each village,
making it difficult to causally associate the magnitude of the effect with the density of treatment in a village. In
unpublished results, we estimate a similar measure (the fraction of treated children within a students’ school-grade-
gender cohort) and find no effects suggesting that this indirect measure may underestimate the effects of peers.


                                                        - 34 -
         The IV model (column 3) shows that the OLS measure seems to be biased downwards as
the instrumental variable regressions has larger and more statistically significant coefficients on
the density of treatment within a child’s friends. At the average treatment density, the overall
magnitude of this effect is 1.4 percentage points, which is of the same magnitude as the direct
effect. Adding the direct and indirect effects, the total change in attendance, on average, in this
sample of students is 2.5 percentage points.                 It is important to note, however, that while
meaningful at the average treatment density, the indirect effects decline as additional friends are
treated. So, there is a large gain to having a single friend treated (roughly the size of the average
treatment density), but an additional friend contributes almost nothing.21
                  Finally, in column 6, we re-estimate the peer effects model but instead of the
density of treatment within a child’s peer group, we use the number of other students treated
within a child’s school-grade-gender cohort. While the direct effect is still precisely estimated,
this measure of indirect effects does not detect the peer effects that we were able to measure with
the explicit friendship mapping. The coefficients are very small in magnitude and statistically
insignificant. These results suggest that indirect measure of peer effects may significantly
underestimate the magnitude of such effects.


VI.      Conclusion


This project demonstrates both that the design of educational incentive programs matter and that
experiments can be used to understand how variation in the structure of these programs may
affect educational and related outcomes for targeted children and their families. Overall, we find
that students that are offered cash incentives more likely to attend school, more likely to remain
enrolled, more likely to matriculate to the next grade, more likely to graduate, and more likely to
matriculate to a tertiary institution. But we also find that the structure of the cash incentive
programs matters. Simply postponing some of the cash transfers to a large lump-sum, at the time
of the re-enrollment decision, increases enrollment in both secondary and tertiary institutions
without reducing daily attendance. This suggests that there is much to gain in designing CCTs

21
   In regressions not presented in this draft, we also estimated the effect of peer networks on enrollment using the
samples in which we observed direct effects of the subsidies. In none of these regressions did we find a statistically
significant effect of peers on the decision to enroll. However, our inability to observe an effect may be due low
statistical power as well as the fact that peers do not influence the decision to enroll in same way that they influence
the decision to attend.


                                                        - 35 -
that better take into account the savings constraints (such as a lack of formal savings institutions
or commitment problems) many families face. Also, incentivizing on graduation rather than just
attendance is shown to be particularly effective, leading to higher levels of daily attendance and
higher levels of enrollment at the secondary and tertiary levels. While keeping in mind an
important caveat about the larger magnitude of the transfers in this last treatment, this does
indicate that more thought should go into selecting the specific behaviors the cash transfers
should be conditioned upon.
       Our finding of large positive spillover effects through friendship networks offers an
optimistic perspective on the likely efficacy of CCTs even in environments where local or
national authorities are financially constrained and would have to limit eligibility to targeted
subgroups of the population. Treating friends encourages higher attendance at a similar
magnitude as the direct effect, and this effect appears to be independent of students’ direct
receipt of the incentives, benefiting treated and untreated students equally.
       In contrast though, the intriguing within-family dynamics we observe suggest that the
CCT spillovers may not all be positive. In particular, we find that children that registered for the
program but were not selected for treatment end up attending school less and being more
engaged in labor market work if one of their siblings was treated than if that sibling was also
untreated. This suggests the possibility that families might redirect some of their prior
educational investments towards the program-eligible children, leading to increased inequalities
in educational attainment within the household. Of course, the treatments increase the overall
resources available to families and we cannot rule out future transfers from educated to non-
educated siblings that would more equally distribute the welfare gains. However, these results,
particularly those for girls, unambiguously suggest that the ways in which families mediate the
allocation of educational opportunities should be an important area for continued research.




                                               - 36 -
References


Angrist, J. D., E. Bettinger, E. Bloom, E. M. King and M. Kremer. (2002) “Vouchers for Private
       Schooling in Colombia: Evidence from a Randomized Natural Experiment,” American
       Economic Review 92: 1535-59
Angrist, Joshua D., Eric Bettinger, and Michael Kremer. (2006) “Long-Term Educational
       Consequences of Secondary School Vouchers: Evidence from Administrative Records in
       Colombia.” American Economic Review 96:847-862.
Angrist, Joshua and Alan Krueger (1991) “Does Compulsory School Attendance Affect
       Schooling and Earnings?” Quarterly Journal of Economics. 106(4): 979-1014.
Ashraf, Nava, Dean Karlan, and Wesley Yin (2006) “Tying Odysseus to the Mast: Evidence
       from a Commitment Savings Product in the Phillipines,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
       121(2): 635-672.
Attanasio, Orazio, Erich Battistin, Emla Fitzsimons, Alice Mesnard and Marcos Vera-Hernández
       (2005). “How Effective are Conditional Cash Transfers?: Evidence from Colombia.” The
       Institute of Fiscal Studies Briefing Note No. 54.
Attanasio, Orazio, Emla Fitzsimmons and Ana Gomez (2005). “The Impact of a Conditional
       Education Subsidy on School Enrollment in Colombia.” The Institute of Fiscal Studies,
       Report Summary Familias 01.
Banerjee, A., S. Cole, E. Duflo and L. Linden (2007) "Remedying Education: Evidence from
       Two Randomized Experiments in India," Forthcoming Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Behrman, Jere R., Pilali Sengupta and Petra Todd (2005). "Progressing Through PROGRESA:
       An Impact Assessment of a School Subsidy Experiment in Mexico." Economic
       Development and Cultural Change. 54(1): 237-275.
Barrera-Osorio, Felipe, Leigh L. Linden, Miguel Urquiola (2007) “The Effects of User Fee
       Reductions on Enrollment: Evidence form a Quasi-Experiment,” Columbia University
       Department of Economics Mimeo.
Blundell, Richard, Pierre-Andre Chiappori, and Costas Meghir (2005) "Collective Labor Supply
       With Children," Journal of Political Economy, 113(6): 1277-1306
Bobonis, Gustavo and Frederico Finan (2007). “Endogenous Peer Effects in School
       Participation” Manuscript. University of Toronto Department of Economics.



                                              - 37 -
Bobonis, Gustavo, Edward Miguel, and Charu Sharma (2006) “Iron Deficiency Anemia and
       School Participation,” Journal of Human Resources.41(4), 692-721.
Cardoso, Eliana and André Portela Souza (2004). “The Impact of Cash Transfers on Child Labor
       and School Attendance in Brazil.” Vanderbilt University Working Paper No. 04-W07.
Chaudhury, Nazmul and Dilip Parajuli (2006). “Conditional Cash Transfer and Female
       Schooling: Impact of the Female School Stipend Program on Public School Enrollments
       in Punjab, Pakistan.” Work Bank Policy Research Working Paper 4102.
Duflo, Esther (2001) “Schooling and Labor Market Consequences of School Construction in
       Indonesia: Evidence from and Unusual Policy Experiment,” American Economic Review.
       91(4): 795-813.
Duflo, Esther, Michael Kremer, and Jonathan Robinson (2006), “Why don’t Farmers Use
       Fertilizers? Evidence from Field Experiments in Western Kenya.” Mimeo, MIT,
       Department of Economics.
Fedesarrollo (2005) “Projecto Piloto, Subsidios Condicionados a Asistencia Escolar en Bogota:
       Diseño del Piloto y la Evaluación de Impacto (Informe Final)” Mimeo, Fedesarrollo,
       Bogota, Colombia.
Filmer, Deon and Norbert Schady (2006). “Getting Girls into School: Evidence from a
       Scholarship Program in Cambodia.” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 3910.
Glewwe, Paul and Pedro Olinto (2004). “Evaluating the Impact of Conditional Cash Transfers on
       Schooling: An Experimental Analysis of Honduras PRAF Program. Final Report for
       USAID.” International Food Policy Research Institute.
He, F., L. Linden and M. MacLeod (2007) "Teaching What Teachers Don't Know: An
       Assessment of the Pratham English Language Program" Columbia University
       Department of Economics Mimeo.
Kremer, Michael, Edward Miguel and Rebecca Thornton (2007) “Incentives to Learn,”
       Manuscript. University of California at Berkeley, Department of Economics.
Krueger, A. and M. Lindahl (2001). “Education for Growth: Why and For Whom?” Journal of
       Economic Literature, Vol. 39, No. 4, 1101-1136.
Lalive R, and A. Cattaneo (2006). “Social Interactions and Schooling Decisions,” IZA
       Discussion Papers 2250, Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA).




                                             - 38 -
Levy, Dan and Jim Ohls (2006). “Evaluation of Jamaica’s Path Program: Final Report.”
       Mathematica.
Maluccio, John A. and Rafael Flores (2005). Impact Evaluation of a Conditional Cash Transfer
       Program: The Nicaraguan Red de Protección Social.” Washington, D.C.: International
       Food Policy Research Institute.
Miguel, Edward and Michael Kremer (2004) “Worms: Identifying Impacts on Education and
       Health in the Presence of Treatment Externalities,” Econometrica. 72(1): 159-217.
Muralidharan, Kartik and Venkatesh Sundararaman (2006) “Teacher Incentives in Developing
       Countries: Experimental Evidence from India,” Working Paper. Harvard University
       Department of Economics.
Oster, Emily (2007) “Does Increased Access Increase Equality? Gender and Child Health
       Investments in India.” Working Paper. University of Chicago, Department of
       Economics.
Pitt, Mark, Shahidur Khandker and Nubuhiko Fuwa (2003). “Subsidy to Promote Girls’
       Education: The Female Stipend Program in Bangladesh.” Mimeo.
Pritchett, L. (2004) “Towards A New Consensus for Addressing the Global Challenge of the
       Lack of Education” Copenhagen Consensus Challenge Paper in Education.
Schady, Norbert and Maria Caridad Araujo (2006). “Cash Transfers, Conditions, School
       Enrollment, and Child Work: Evidence from a Randomized Experiment in Ecuador.”
       World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 3930.
Schultz, T. Paul (2004) “School Subsidies for the Poor: Evaluating the Mexican Progresa
       Poverty Program”, Journal of Development Economics, 74(1):199-250
United Nations (2006) Deevelopment Goals Report 2006, United Nations, New York.
Vélez, C.E., E. Castaño and R. Deutch (1999) “An Economic Interpretation of Colombia’s
       SISBEN: A Composite Welfare Index Derived from the Optimal Scaling Algorithm”
       Mimeo, Poverty and Inequality Advisory Unit, Inter American Development Bank,
       Washington D.C.
Vermeersch, Christel and Michael Kremer, “School Meals, Educational Achievement, and
       School Competition: Evidence from a Randomized Evaluation” World Bank Policy Re-
       search Working Paper: No. 3523, 2005.




                                            - 39 -
Villatoro, Pablo (2005). “Conditional Cash Transfer Programs: Experiences from Latin
        America.” CEPAL Review 86: 83-96.
World Bank (2006). World Development Indicators 200, The World Bank, Washington.




                                           - 40 -
- 41 -
- 42 -
- 43 -
Table 1: Distribution of Subjects by Research Groups

                                  San Cristobal                     Suba
Grade                 Control        Treat 1      Treat 2   Control        Treat   Total
Panel A: All Registrants
Six       Male             430        362          362       374           306     1834
          Female           475        402          402       386           315     1980
Seven     Male             402        341          341       350           286     1720
          Female           401        340          340       335           274     1690
Eight     Male             380        319          319       346           283     1647
          Female           360        305          305       310           253     1533
Nine      Male             342        289          290       300           244     1465
          Female           329        277          277       262           214     1359
Ten       Male             310        261          261       269           218     1319
          Female           266        226          226       223           181     1122
Eleven    Male             213        178          178       212           172      953
          Female           164        137          137       138           111      687
Total                      4072       3437         3438      3505          2857    17309
Panel B: Students Found at Baseline
Six       Male             211        201          200       195           178     985
          Female           201        237          208       187           170     1003
Seven     Male             218        217          207       188           174     1004
          Female           199        204          196       160           154      913
Eight     Male             183        171          174       188           164      880
          Female           179        187          186       148           141      841
Nine      Male             176        174          164       142           121      777
          Female           155        174          147       100           101      677
Ten       Male             167        152          152       124           122     717
          Female           147        135          125        89            86     582
Eleven    Male             95         109          108        99            95     506
          Female           87          80           70        63            54     354
Total                      2018       2041         1937      1683          1560    9239
Table 2: Comparison of Registered and Eligible Students
                               San Cristobal                 Suba                        San Cristobal - Suba
                            Eligible Registrants - Eligible Registrants -                Eligible  Registered
Demographic Variable       Children     Eligible     Children    Eligible                Children   Children

Panel A: Indexes of Household Assets
  Posessions                 1.91                0.02*          1.83          0.03**      0.08***     0.08***
                            (1.09)              (0.01)         (1.00)         (0.01)      (0.01)      (0.02)
  Utilities                  4.77              -0.09***         4.85         -0.09***    -0.08***    -0.08***
                            (1.40)              (0.01)         (1.35)         (0.02)      (0.01)      (0.02)
  Durable Goods               1.5              -0.13***         1.67         -0.10***    -0.18***    -0.20***
                            (0.94)              (0.01)         (0.92)         (0.01)      (0.01)      (0.01)
  Physical Infrastructure    11.9              -0.25***         12.23        -0.24***    -0.34***    -0.33***
                            (1.79)              (0.02)         (1.58)         (0.02)      (0.01)      (0.03)

Panel B: Individual Characteristics
  Age                          15.16           -1.53***         15.08       -1.49***       -0.01       0.04
                              (3.33)            (0.03)         (3.33)        (0.04)       (0.02)      (0.03)
  Gender                        0.5              0.01            0.5         -0.01*          0        0.02**
                              (0.50)            (0.01)         (0.50)        (0.01)       (0.00)      (0.01)
  Married                       4.84            0.15***          4.84        0.15***      0.01**         0
                              (0.77)            (0.01)         (0.77)        (0.01)       (0.00)      (0.00)
  Attending School             75.61           20.08***         76.15       18.93***      0.80***      0.61*
                             (42.95)            (0.43)        (42.62)        (0.55)       (0.24)      (0.33)
  Years of Education           6.33            -0.71***          6.5        -0.69***     -0.22***    -0.19***
                              (3.08)            (0.03)         (3.08)        (0.04)       (0.02)      (0.03)

Panel C: Household Characteristics
  Single Head                0.33              -0.03***         0.31         -0.03***     0.02***     0.03***
                            (0.47)              (0.01)         (0.46)         (0.01)      (0.00)      (0.01)
  Age of Head                45.97               0.01           44.77         0.43***     1.15***     0.78***
                           (11.05)              (0.12)        (10.03)         (0.13)      (0.06)      (0.16)
  Years of Ed, Head           5.91             -0.35***         6.33         -0.46***    -0.43***    -0.30***
                            (3.09)              (0.03)         (3.16)         (0.04)      (0.02)      (0.05)
  People in Household         5.27              0.13***          5.07         0.12***     0.22***     0.23***
                            (2.06)              (0.02)         (1.89)         (0.03)      (0.01)      (0.03)
  Member under 18             2.14              0.44***          2.03         0.48***     0.13***     0.07***
                            (1.49)              (0.02)         (1.39)         (0.02)      (0.01)      (0.02)

Panel D: Poverty Measures
  Estrato                            1.49        -0.04***         1.61         -0.02**    -0.13***    -0.14***
                                   (0.82)         (0.01)         (0.78)         (0.01)     (0.00)      (0.01)
    SISBEN Score                    12.89        -1.16***         14.28       -1.10***    -1.47***    -1.45***
                                   (5.01)         (0.05)         (4.74)         (0.06)     (0.03)      (0.07)
    Household Income               437.04       -71.19***        482.96      -84.85***   -48.39***   -32.26***
      (1,000 Pesos)               (282.34)        (2.95)        (295.62)        (3.91)     (1.66)      (3.82)
* significant at 10 percent level, ** at 5 percent level, and *** at 1 percent level
Standard errors are clustered at the school level.
Table 3: Baseline Comparison of Students
                                       San Cristobal                              Suba (Grade 6-8)    Suba (Grade 9-11)
                           Control   Basic- Savings- Basic-                      Control   Basic-     Control Tertiary-
Demographic Variable      Average Control Control Savings                        Average Control      Average Control

Panel A: Indexes of Household Assets
  Posessions                 1.94             0.06*         0          0.06*        1.84      -0.02      1.93     0.03
                           (1.11)            (0.03)      (0.03)      (0.04)       (1.00)     (0.05)    (1.01)    (0.06)
  Utilities                  4.67             -0.03       0.04         -0.06        4.68       0.06      4.86     0.08
                           (1.42)            (0.05)      (0.05)      (0.04)       (1.40)     (0.06)    (1.31)    (0.06)
  Durable Goods              1.37             -0.03       0.02       -0.05**        1.54       0.01      1.62     0.07
                           (0.88)            (0.03)      (0.03)      (0.02)       (0.86)     (0.04)    (0.84)    (0.05)
  Physical Infrastructure   11.64            -0.10**      0.01        -0.11*       11.92        0       12.12     0.01
                           (1.72)            (0.05)      (0.04)      (0.06)       (1.45)     (0.04)    (1.38)    (0.08)

Panel B: Individual Characteristics
  Age                         14.36            0.01       -0.22        0.23        12.65       0.05     15.54      0.25
                             (5.51)          (0.12)      (0.21)      (0.19)       (3.89)     (0.16)    (4.18)    (0.31)
  Gender                      0.49             0.02       -0.01      0.03**        0.48        0.01     0.42        0
                             (0.50)          (0.01)      (0.01)      (0.01)       (0.50)     (0.02)    (0.49)    (0.04)
  Married                     4.92            -0.01        0.01       -0.02        4.98       -0.02     4.96      -0.02
                             (0.53)          (0.01)      (0.02)      (0.02)       (0.30)     (0.01)    (0.38)    (0.03)
  Years of Education           5.6           -0.10**      -0.06       -0.04         4.66       0.04      7.45     -0.07
                             (1.88)          (0.04)      (0.06)      (0.05)       (1.26)     (0.06)    (1.24)    (0.07)

Panel C: Household Characteristics
  Single Head               0.29                 0           0         0.01        0.27         0       0.25      0.03
                           (0.46)            (0.01)      (0.01)      (0.02)       (0.44)     (0.01)    (0.43)    (0.02)
  Age of Head               45.76              -0.1        0.09       -0.18        44.69      -0.22     45.75    0.79**
                          (10.33)            (0.27)      (0.36)      (0.30)       (9.11)     (0.41)    (8.54)    (0.32)
  Years of Ed, Head         5.59              -0.07       -0.07          0         5.69        0.03     5.79      -0.1
                           (2.90)            (0.10)      (0.08)      (0.10)       (2.79)     (0.09)    (2.97)    (0.13)
  People in Household       5.39               0.03        0.02        0.01        5.26       -0.02     5.13       0.1
                           (1.91)            (0.06)      (0.06)      (0.05)       (1.75)     (0.09)    (1.62)    (0.08)
  Member under 18           2.59               0.06        0.03        0.03         2.7         0        2.36     0.03
                           (1.32)            (0.04)      (0.04)      (0.04)       (1.29)     (0.06)    (1.18)    (0.09)

Panel D: Poverty Measures
  Estrato                          1.45         -0.01          0        -0.01        1.57       0       1.65         0
                                  (0.82)      (0.03)       (0.03)      (0.02)      (0.82)    (0.03)    (0.75)     (0.04)
    SISBEN Score                   11.75       -0.24*       -0.15       -0.09       13.11     -0.03     13.51      0.24
                                  (4.63)      (0.14)       (0.15)      (0.13)      (4.37)    (0.12)    (4.24)     (0.27)
    Household Income              364.27        -2.48        5.26       -7.74       390.2      1.19    396.13      4.18
      (1,000 Pesos)             (235.66)      (7.49)       (8.66)      (7.07)     (223.22)   (9.62)   (228.19)   (12.43)
* significant at 10 percent level, ** at 5 percent level, and *** at 1 percent level
Standard errors are clustered at the school level.
Table 4: Attrition from Baseline Survey
                                       San Cristobal                          Suba (Grade 6-8)       Suba (Grade 9-11)
                           Control    Basic- Savings- Basic-                 Control   Basic-        Control Tertiary-
Demographic Variable       Average Control Control Savings                   Average Control         Average Control

Panel A: Attrition Rate
  Number Attritors              44          -3          -17                     18           0          8         1
  Percentage of Baseline       0.02          0         -0.01      0.01         0.02          0        0.01        0
                              (0.15)      (0.01)      (0.00)     (0.01)       (0.13)      (0.00)     (0.11)    (0.01)

Panel B: Indexes of Household Assets
  Posessions               -0.31*    -0.1              -0.17      0.07        -0.49**      -0.01      -0.31       0.36
                           (0.17)  (0.17)             (0.23)     (0.17)       (0.24)      (0.19)     (0.36)     (0.47)
  Utilities               -0.75***   0.43               0.38      0.05         -0.63*      -0.54       0.14    -1.44***
                           (0.22)  (0.30)             (0.25)     (0.30)       (0.34)      (0.42)     (0.47)     (0.51)
  Durable Goods             -0.21   -0.01              -0.11       0.1       -0.55***       0.18     -0.50*      -0.08
                           (0.13)  (0.22)             (0.21)     (0.21)       (0.21)      (0.25)     (0.30)     (0.33)
  Physical Infrastructure -0.31     -0.25              -0.45       0.2          -0.16      -0.44       0.13     -1.61**
                           (0.26)  (0.37)             (0.43)     (0.47)       (0.35)      (0.48)     (0.49)     (0.70)

Panel C: Individual Characteristics
  Age                     2.63***          -2.39      -2.87*       0.48        -0.13        0.51      0.47      -1.15*
                           (0.84)         (2.11)      (1.60)     (1.29)       (0.95)       (0.44)    (1.49)    (0.64)
  Gender                     0.11          -0.15       -0.13      -0.02        0.23*      -0.27***   -0.30*       0.1
                           (0.08)         (0.11)      (0.13)     (0.12)       (0.12)       (0.09)    (0.18)    (0.20)
  Married                   -0.06           0.03        0.12      -0.09         0.02        0.02      0.04       0.01
                           (0.08)         (0.15)      (0.09)     (0.10)       (0.07)       (0.02)    (0.14)    (0.03)
  Years of Education        -0.28           0.32        0.28       0.04         0.04        0.53     1.32***   -1.25**
                           (0.29)         (0.45)      (0.68)     (0.53)       (0.31)       (0.39)    (0.44)    (0.57)

Panel D: Household Characteristics
  Single Head             -0.09            0.19**       0.19         0          0.09        0.15       0.12      0.03
                         (0.07)           (0.09)      (0.12)      (0.15)      (0.11)      (0.13)     (0.15)    (0.17)
  Age of Head             -1.45           -3.77**       2.97     -6.74***      -3.63        2.07        0      -6.18*
                         (1.57)           (1.75)      (2.27)      (2.52)      (2.23)      (2.21)     (3.04)    (3.38)
  Years of Ed, Head      0.89**            -0.82       -0.81       -0.01        0.55      -1.72*       0.6      -0.57
                         (0.44)           (0.64)      (0.65)      (0.82)      (0.68)      (0.98)     (1.06)    (1.28)
  People in Household      0.06             -0.4       -0.21       -0.19       -0.26       -0.65      -0.38     -0.41
                         (0.29)           (0.34)      (0.38)      (0.33)      (0.43)      (0.52)     (0.58)    (0.81)
  Member under 18         -0.09             0.29        0.24        0.05        0.25       -0.48       0.14     -0.34
                         (0.20)           (0.38)      (0.39)      (0.25)      (0.32)      (0.38)     (0.42)    (0.75)

Panel E: Poverty Measures
   Estrato                     -0.34***      0.17        0.24        -0.07       -0.04       -0.5       0.1    -0.99***
                                (0.12)      (0.19)     (0.22)       (0.20)      (0.20)     (0.31)     (0.27)    (0.31)
   SISBEN Score                 -1.56**      0.97        1.01        -0.04       -1.09      -1.81      -0.82    -2.85*
                                (0.71)      (0.99)     (1.06)       (1.31)      (1.07)     (1.36)     (1.51)    (1.52)
   Household Income              -0.86      -46.84     -35.24       -11.61    -104.63**     82.87     -87.77     78.28
     (1,000 Pesos)             (35.93)     (49.74)    (55.87)      (46.03)     (52.99)    (66.61)    (81.20)   (65.00)
* significant at 10 percent level, ** at 5 percent level, and *** at 1 percent level
Standard errors are clustered at the school level.
Table 5: Verified Attendance, 2005
                                      San Cristobal                  Suba, Grades 6-8       Suba, Grades 9-11      All
                              Control    Basic - Savings -          Control   Basic -       Control Tertiary -    Treat-
Outcome Variable              Average Control Control               Average Control         Average Control      Control

Panel A: All Students in Selected Schools
   All                          0.794       0.033*** 0.028***           0.782      0.009     0.793    0.050***   0.028***
                               (0.006)      (0.006)      (0.006)       (0.009)    (0.012)   (0.011)   (0.015)    (0.005)
   Grades 6-8                   0.792       0.035*** 0.026***           0.782      0.009                         0.023***
                               (0.008)      (0.009)      (0.009)       (0.009)    (0.012)                        (0.007)
   Grades 9-11                  0.797       0.030***     0.030**                             0.793    0.050***   0.037***
                               (0.009)      (0.010)      (0.012)                            (0.011)   (0.015)    (0.008)
   Baseline Att >= 0.8          0.857       0.024**     0.022***        0.878      0.021*    0.86     0.032**    0.025***
                               (0.007)      (0.010)      (0.007)       (0.009)    (0.012)   (0.012)   (0.014)    (0.006)
   Baseline Att < 0.8           0.728       0.043*** 0.033***            0.63      -0.009    0.688    0.078**    0.035***
                               (0.009)      (0.014)      (0.011)       (0.016)    (0.017)   (0.019)   (0.034)    (0.010)
Panel B: Students Completing Baseline Survey
   All                          0.872       0.011**      0.013**        0.841      0.007     0.857     0.016     0.011**
                               (0.004)      (0.005)      (0.006)       (0.007)    (0.008)   (0.008)   (0.013)    (0.004)
   Grades 6-8                   0.874        0.012*       0.011*        0.841      0.007                          0.008*
                               (0.005)      (0.007)      (0.006)       (0.007)    (0.008)                        (0.005)
   Grades 9-11                  0.869        0.011        0.016*                             0.857     0.016      0.014*
                               (0.006)      (0.008)      (0.010)                            (0.008)   (0.013)    (0.007)
   Baseline Att >= 0.8          0.912        0.005        0.005         0.921      0.015     0.91      0.009     0.007**
                               (0.004)      (0.004)      (0.006)       (0.005)    (0.009)   (0.007)   (0.011)    (0.004)
   Baseline Att < 0.8           0.825        0.018*      0.022**         0.7       -0.001    0.766     0.028      0.015*
                               (0.006)      (0.010)      (0.010)       (0.014)    (0.011)   (0.015)   (0.026)    (0.008)
* significant at 10 percent level, ** at 5 percent level, and *** at 1 percent level
Standard errors are clustered at the school level.
Table 6: Enrollment Outcomes in 2006
                                 San Cristobal                     Suba, Grades 6-8        Suba, Grades 9-11           All
                         Control    Basic - Savings -             Control   Basic -        Control Tertiary -         Treat-
Outcome Variable         Average Control Control                  Average Control          Average Control           Control

Panel A: All Students
 All                            0.698         0.009    0.036***        0.704      0.027*      0.741       0.033*      0.026***
                               (0.008)      (0.010)     (0.011)       (0.010)    (0.014)     (0.014)     (0.019)      (0.006)
   Grades 6-8                   0.683         0.016    0.044***        0.704      0.027*                              0.030***
                               (0.010)      (0.012)     (0.014)       (0.010)    (0.014)                              (0.009)
   Grades 9-10                  0.728        -0.003      0.027*                               0.741       0.033*      0.022**
                               (0.013)      (0.016)     (0.016)                              (0.014)     (0.019)      (0.010)
   Prob Enroll >= 0.8           0.847        -0.005      -0.008        0.853      -0.021      0.886       -0.009        -0.01
                               (0.012)      (0.020)     (0.017)       (0.014)    (0.019)     (0.015)     (0.021)      (0.011)
   Prob Enroll < 0.8            0.639         0.016    0.056***         0.63     0.049***      0.61      0.080***     0.043***
                               (0.010)      (0.014)     (0.011)       (0.014)    (0.017)     (0.022)     (0.027)      (0.008)
Panel B: Selected for Survey
   All                          0.767         0.015      0.026*         0.78       0.017      0.792       0.042*      0.024***
                               (0.010)      (0.011)     (0.014)       (0.013)    (0.018)     (0.019)     (0.023)      (0.009)
   Grades 6-8                   0.758         0.012       0.023         0.78       0.017                               0.020*
                               (0.012)      (0.015)     (0.018)       (0.013)    (0.018)                              (0.011)
   Grades 9-10                  0.782         0.023       0.034                               0.792       0.042*      0.036**
                               (0.016)      (0.020)     (0.023)                              (0.019)     (0.023)      (0.015)
   Prob Enroll >= 0.8           0.845        -0.011      -0.011        0.834       0.003      0.872       -0.002       -0.007
                               (0.014)      (0.021)     (0.020)       (0.019)    (0.020)     (0.021)     (0.027)      (0.012)
   Prob Enroll < 0.8            0.723        0.028*    0.045***        0.749       0.032      0.707      0.104***     0.041***
                               (0.013)      (0.015)     (0.018)       (0.017)    (0.023)     (0.030)     (0.029)      (0.011)
Panel C: Students Completing Baseline Survey
   All                          0.834        -0.002       0.008        0.827       0.024      0.857        0.024        0.011
                               (0.009)      (0.012)     (0.014)       (0.012)    (0.016)     (0.017)     (0.017)      (0.008)
   Grades 6-8                   0.825        -0.001       0.008        0.827       0.024                                0.013
                               (0.012)      (0.014)     (0.018)       (0.012)    (0.016)                              (0.010)
   Grades 9-10                   0.85         0.001       0.015                               0.857        0.024        0.014
                               (0.015)      (0.017)     (0.023)                              (0.017)     (0.017)      (0.013)
   Prob Enroll >= 0.8           0.895        -0.021      -0.022        0.863       0.007      0.904        0.012       -0.012
                               (0.012)      (0.022)     (0.018)       (0.018)    (0.019)     (0.020)     (0.022)      (0.012)
   Prob Enroll < 0.8            0.797          0.01       0.028        0.805      0.043**     0.802       0.048*      0.026**
                               (0.013)      (0.013)     (0.018)       (0.016)    (0.019)     (0.029)     (0.026)      (0.010)
Panel D: Self Reported Enrollment
   All Students                 0.982           0         0.001        0.994      -0.003      0.988        0.008        0.001
                               (0.003)      (0.003)     (0.004)       (0.003)    (0.004)     (0.005)     (0.005)      (0.002)
   All, Pred Enroll >= 0.8      0.992         0.001       0.001        0.998      -0.003      0.992        0.005        0.001
                               (0.003)      (0.005)     (0.005)       (0.002)    (0.006)     (0.006)     (0.010)      (0.004)
   All, Pred Enroll < 0.8       0.974         0.001       0.002        0.991      -0.003      0.983        0.005        0.001
                               (0.005)      (0.007)     (0.008)       (0.004)    (0.005)     (0.010)     (0.007)      (0.004)
Panel E: Self Reported Attendance, 2006
   All                          0.958         0.005       0.006        0.962      0.010**     0.955       0.016*      0.008**
                               (0.003)      (0.004)     (0.004)       (0.003)    (0.004)     (0.005)     (0.009)      (0.003)
   Baseline Att >= 0.8          0.964         0.004       0.004        0.964       0.007      0.968         0.01       0.006*
                               (0.003)      (0.004)     (0.004)       (0.003)    (0.005)     (0.005)     (0.006)      (0.003)
   Baseline Att < 0.8            0.95         0.005       0.008        0.957      0.014**     0.932        0.022      0.010**
                               (0.004)      (0.006)     (0.005)       (0.005)    (0.005)     (0.011)     (0.020)      (0.005)
Panel F: Students in Final Year of Secondary School in 2005
   Graduated, 2005              0.876         0.029       0.043                               0.903        0.054       0.040*
                               (0.025)      (0.044)     (0.032)                              (0.024)     (0.040)      (0.023)
   Higher Ed, 2006              0.227          0.04    0.088***                               0.193      0.497***     0.225***
                               (0.032)      (0.034)     (0.033)                              (0.032)     (0.044)      (0.052)
* significant at 10 percent level, ** at 5 percent level, and *** at 1 percent level. Standard errors are clustered at the
school level. Panels A-E contain only students who were registered in grades 6-10 in 2005 while Panel F contains
students who were enrolled in grade 11 in 2005. Students in grade 11 should have finished secondary school in 2005.
Table 7: Effects of Transfers on Academic Effort, Consumption, and Labor Activities
                                      San Cristobal         Suba, Grades 6-8      Suba, Grades 9-11                                     All
                                Control Basic - Savings - Control Basic -         Control Tertiary -                                   Treat-
Outcome Variable                Average Control Control Average Control Average Control                                               Control

Panel A: Academic Effort, Grades 6-11
  Hours of Homework            2.697                   0.02        0.035         2.961        0.022         2.609      0.540***       0.098***
                              (0.033)                (0.043)      (0.048)       (0.040)      (0.044)       (0.072)     (0.110)        (0.036)
  Total Grades, Self Reported    0                   0.060*         0.05         0.024        -0.04         -0.041      -0.046         0.021
                              (0.024)                (0.034)      (0.036)       (0.034)      (0.062)       (0.040)     (0.052)        (0.025)
  Total Grades, Verified         0                    0.083        0.048         0.049        0.02          -0.097      -0.059         0.037
                              (0.034)                (0.054)      (0.046)       (0.048)      (0.061)       (0.056)     (0.081)        (0.033)
  Passed in 2005               0.889                   0.01       0.019**        0.906        0.015         0.903       0.022         0.016**
                              (0.007)                (0.009)      (0.010)       (0.009)      (0.014)       (0.012)     (0.017)        (0.006)

Panel B: Consumption, Grades 6-11
  Meals Over Last 3 Days      8.018                  0.191** 0.239***           8.197         0.065         8.199   0.166**            0.177***
                             (0.051)                 (0.076)  (0.073)          (0.059)       (0.092)       (0.075)  (0.076)            (0.049)
  Meals with Eggs or Meat     5.069                  0.164** 0.182***           5.24           0.05         5.278   0.172*             0.144***
                             (0.042)                 (0.074)  (0.053)          (0.050)       (0.070)       (0.063)  (0.092)            (0.043)
  School Expenses           231.419                   9.997 20.972***          236.285       -13.348      269.817 -20.706               4.228
    Grades 6-10              (5.090)                 (7.105)  (6.311)          (6.815)      (10.182)      (11.440) (12.656)            (5.471)
 School Expenses            171.559                   8.584   19.878                                      142.329 246.038***          95.729***
   Grade 11                 (31.640)                (37.512) (44.919)                                     (30.014) (47.523)           (33.638)

Panel C: Labor Activities, Grades 6-10
  Primary Activity, Studying†    0.936                -0.003       0.003         0.913        -0.002        0.905        0.013          0.001
                                (0.006)              (0.006)      (0.008)       (0.009)      (0.013)       (0.014)      (0.018)        (0.005)
  Primary Activity, Work         0.008                -0.002       -0.001        0.005        0.002         0.009       -0.008*         -0.001
                                (0.002)              (0.003)      (0.003)       (0.002)      (0.003)       (0.004)      (0.004)        (0.002)
  Primary Activity, Home         0.007                0.001        0.003         0.005        0.002           0          0.003          0.002
                                (0.002)              (0.004)      (0.004)       (0.002)      (0.004)       (0.000)      (0.003)        (0.002)
 Hours Worked                    0.92               -0.375**      -0.263*        0.626        -0.178        1.586       -0.793*       -0.330***
    Last Work Week              (0.130)              (0.152)      (0.140)       (0.117)      (0.138)       (0.318)      (0.419)        (0.097)
  Earnings                       1.26                  -0.3       -0.373*        0.793         0.17         2.061        -0.627          -0.23
    Last Work Week              (0.212)              (0.285)      (0.211)       (0.146)      (0.441)       (0.385)      (0.700)        (0.208)

Panel D: Labor Activities, Grade 11
  Primary Activity, Studying†    0.305                0.034        0.037                                    0.232       0.430***      0.189***
                                (0.035)              (0.060)      (0.048)                                  (0.034)      (0.047)       (0.061)
  Primary Activity, Work         0.153                0.004        0.032                                    0.252      -0.149***       -0.038
                                (0.027)              (0.029)      (0.057)                                  (0.035)      (0.052)       (0.030)
  Primary Activity, Home         0.175                0.003        0.011                                    0.219      -0.193***      -0.067*
                                (0.029)              (0.039)      (0.053)                                  (0.033)      (0.032)       (0.036)
  Hours Worked                   6.932                1.008        0.18                                     8.548      -7.045***      -2.024*
    Last Work Week              (1.273)              (1.887)      (1.676)                                  (1.470)      (1.325)       (1.183)
  Earnings                       9.87                 1.833        2.369                                    16.39      -11.250**       -2.414
    Last Work Week              (1.918)              (3.316)      (2.765)                                  (3.346)      (5.103)       (2.638)
†
 Percentages for each primary activity do not add to 100 percent because two categories are omitted (incapacitated, and
other activities). Standard errors are clustered at the family level. * significant at 10 percent level, ** at 5 percent level, and
*** at 1 percent level.
Table 8: Heterogeneity of Treatment Effects

                                  Control        Treatment -           Control        Treatment -           Control        Treatment -
Characteristic                    Average          Control             Average          Control             Average          Control

                                   Verified Attendance                   Admin Enrollment                       Passed in 2005
All Students                         0.79       0.029***                 0.774     0.024***                   0.896       0.016**
                                   (0.018)       (0.005)                (0.010)     (0.009)                  (0.006)      (0.006)
Baseline Attendance
   Attendance > 0.8                 0.864            0.025***            0.812            0.012               0.907             0.01
                                   (0.006)           (0.006)            (0.008)          (0.009)             (0.008)          (0.009)
    Attendance ≤ 0.8                0.696            0.036***            0.728           0.038**              0.882           0.023**
                                   (0.023)           (0.010)            (0.020)          (0.015)             (0.010)          (0.009)
Gender
   Female                           0.801            0.016**             0.791           0.024**              0.921           0.016**
                                   (0.020)           (0.006)            (0.010)          (0.011)             (0.007)          (0.007)
    Male                            0.778            0.043***            0.756           0.027**               0.87            0.017
                                   (0.016)           (0.008)            (0.013)          (0.014)             (0.010)          (0.013)
Income
    Upper Tercile                   0.778            0.046***            0.778           0.033**              0.902           0.018*
                                   (0.022)           (0.009)            (0.011)          (0.015)             (0.010)         (0.010)
    Middle Tercile                  0.802            0.023***            0.773           0.034**              0.898          0.029***
                                   (0.017)           (0.008)            (0.013)          (0.016)             (0.008)         (0.010)
    Low Tercile                      0.79            0.018**             0.771             0.01               0.889           0.003
                                   (0.017)           (0.009)            (0.016)          (0.015)             (0.010)         (0.011)

                                             Meals                       Meals with Protein                 Hours Worked (Week)
All Students                         8.1             0.178***            5.153       0.143***                 1.618    -0.508***
                                   (0.055)           (0.049)            (0.047)      (0.043)                 (0.153)    (0.150)
Baseline Attendance
   Attendance > 0.8                 8.154            0.168***            5.222           0.099**              1.433          -0.461***
                                   (0.048)           (0.049)            (0.045)          (0.050)             (0.198)          (0.168)
    Attendance ≤ 0.8                8.024            0.194***            5.058           0.206***             1.873           -0.553**
                                   (0.092)           (0.073)            (0.072)          (0.054)             (0.288)          (0.244)
Gender
   Female                           8.044            0.165***            5.135           0.108**              1.233          -0.378**
                                   (0.064)           (0.063)            (0.054)          (0.054)             (0.177)         (0.164)
    Male                            8.161            0.202***             5.17           0.189***             2.038          -0.619**
                                   (0.064)           (0.060)            (0.054)          (0.053)             (0.193)         (0.258)
Income
    Upper Tercile                    8.12            0.249***            5.163           0.215***             1.602           -0.683**
                                   (0.080)           (0.085)            (0.062)          (0.065)             (0.288)          (0.321)
    Middle Tercile                  8.159            0.189***            5.218           0.125**              1.566          -0.680***
                                   (0.063)           (0.070)            (0.053)          (0.062)             (0.214)          (0.201)
    Low Tercile                     8.015             0.104              5.073            0.093               1.694            -0.377
                                   (0.081)           (0.087)            (0.072)          (0.080)             (0.256)          (0.242)
Standard errors are clustered at the family level. * significant at 10 percent level, ** at 5 percent level, and *** at 1 percent level.
Table 9: Effects of Treatment in Households with Two Registered Children
                                      All Locations       San Cristobal                               Suba                       Male                      Female
                                    Control    Treat-  Control     Treat-                       Control   Treat-           Control    Treat-          Control   Treat-
Outcome Variable                   Average Control     Average Control                          Average Control            Average Control            Average Control

Panel A: Treatment Effect in Households with Two Registered Children
   Verified Attendance              0.882    0.016**    0.877     0.012                           0.849       0.023*         0.859        0.015         0.868         0.013
                                   (0.004)   (0.007)   (0.007)   (0.009)                         (0.010)     (0.014)        (0.009)      (0.010)       (0.008)       (0.009)
   Administrative Enrollment        0.831     0.021     0.834     0.003                           0.828      0.051**         0.814        0.037         0.846         0.024
                                   (0.012)   (0.017)   (0.017)   (0.022)                         (0.018)     (0.025)        (0.019)      (0.025)       (0.016)       (0.022)
   Hours Worked                     1.776   -0.870***   1.615    -0.674*                          1.968     -1.228***        2.168       -0.834*        1.438       -0.841***
                                   (0.245)   (0.264)   (0.331)   (0.354)                         (0.366)     (0.364)        (0.410)      (0.454)       (0.289)       (0.294)

Panel B: Treatment Effect in Households with One Treated Child
   Verified Attendance              0.873    0.019**    0.867                       0.020*        0.833       0.017          0.852        0.015         0.857        0.019
                                   (0.007)   (0.009)   (0.009)                     (0.011)       (0.015)     (0.018)        (0.012)      (0.015)       (0.010)      (0.014)
   Administrative Enrollment        0.821     0.029     0.822                       0.019          0.82       0.055*         0.818       0.044**        0.824        0.049
                                   (0.017)   (0.020)   (0.021)                     (0.026)       (0.028)     (0.029)        (0.025)      (0.021)       (0.023)      (0.032)
   Hours Worked                       2     -1.150***   1.716                      -0.891*         2.5       -1.631**        2.375       -1.198*        1.679       -1.274**
                                   (0.360)   (0.397)   (0.432)                     (0.517)       (0.639)     (0.663)        (0.597)      (0.625)       (0.430)      (0.542)

Panel C: Treated Students in Single Treated (Treat) vs Twice Treated (Control) Households
   Verified Attendance               0.887     -0.005      0.888    -0.005      0.883    -0.006                              0.882        -0.002        0.892        -0.012
                                    (0.005)   (0.008)     (0.005)  (0.008)     (0.015)  (0.017)                             (0.008)      (0.013)       (0.006)      (0.012)
   Administrative Enrollment         0.843     -0.001       0.83     0.007      0.891     0.008                              0.814         0.043        0.869        -0.033
                                    (0.013)   (0.020)     (0.015)  (0.026)     (0.024)  (0.029)                             (0.020)      (0.029)       (0.017)      (0.035)
   Hours Worked                      1.186     -0.315      1.372    -0.381      0.464    -0.131                              1.723        -0.492        0.697         0.208
                                    (0.227)   (0.374)     (0.281)  (0.543)     (0.208)  (0.226)                             (0.409)      (0.498)       (0.221)      (0.442)

Panel D: Untreated Students in Single Treated (Treat) vs. Untreated (Control) Households
   Verified Attendance              0.876     -0.017       0.896    -0.029**     0.862       0                               0.868        -0.011        0.882       -0.031**
                                   (0.009)   (0.012)      (0.009)   (0.015)     (0.014)  (0.017)                            (0.014)      (0.022)       (0.011)      (0.013)
   Administrative Enrollment        0.844    -0.043**      0.857    -0.064**     0.834    -0.026                             0.808        -0.036        0.873       -0.074**
                                   (0.018)   (0.022)      (0.027)   (0.025)     (0.024)  (0.038)                            (0.029)      (0.040)       (0.022)      (0.029)
   Hours Worked                     1.483      0.666       1.414     0.233       1.533    1.266*                             1.899         0.661        1.123        0.873
                                   (0.315)   (0.452)      (0.492)   (0.653)     (0.411)  (0.749)                            (0.538)      (0.796)       (0.359)      (0.671)
Standard errors are clustered at the family level. * significant at 10 percent level, ** at 5 percent level, and *** at 1 percent level. Note: Regression compares registered
but non-treated children in households in which two children were regestered.
Table 10: Effects on Non-Registered Siblings by Percent of School-Aged Children Treated
                                           San Cristobal           Suba, Grades 6-8    Suba, Grades 9-11
                                    Control Basic - Savings - Control Basic -          Control Tertiary -
Outcome Variable                    Average Control Control        Average Control     Average Control

Panel A: All Siblings, 7-22 yrs
Enrollment
      All                                       0.719        -0.004       0.001         0.727      0.026**         0.679       -0.011
                                               (0.012)      (0.007)      (0.007)       (0.014)     (0.012)        (0.024)     (0.020)
        Male Students                           0.702        -0.001       0.003         0.737        0.01          0.688       -0.042
                                               (0.016)      (0.010)      (0.010)       (0.020)     (0.016)        (0.032)     (0.026)
        Female Students                         0.738        -0.006         0           0.717      0.045***        0.669       0.016
                                               (0.017)      (0.011)      (0.010)       (0.021)     (0.016)        (0.036)     (0.029)
Hours Worked
     All                             7.168      -0.023     0.179                        7.525      -1.166**        6.714       1.232*
                                    (0.467) (0.278)      (0.297)                       (0.588)     (0.490)        (0.858)     (0.736)
      Male Students                  8.188       0.205     0.632                        9.308      -1.495**        7.722      2.758**
                                    (0.684) (0.414)      (0.457)                       (0.909)     (0.740)        (1.255)     (1.092)
      Female Students                5.993      -0.325    -0.249                        5.694       -0.806         5.491       -0.122
                                    (0.620) (0.371)      (0.365)                       (0.731)     (0.624)        (1.132)     (0.946)
Panel B: High and Mid Income Families Siblings, 7-22 yrs
Enrollment
      All                            0.705      -0.008    -0.003                        0.711      0.031**         0.673       -0.028
                                    (0.015) (0.009)      (0.009)                       (0.017)     (0.014)        (0.027)     (0.022)
      Male Students                  0.677       0.002     0.001                        0.726       0.006          0.677      -0.058**
                                    (0.021) (0.013)      (0.013)                       (0.024)     (0.020)        (0.037)     (0.029)
      Female Students                0.738      -0.021    -0.009                        0.697      0.056***        0.669       -0.004
                                    (0.021) (0.014)      (0.013)                       (0.024)     (0.018)        (0.040)     (0.035)
Hours Worked
      All                            7.357       0.427      0.38                        7.932      -1.314**        6.452       1.484*
                                    (0.581) (0.358)      (0.380)                       (0.698)     (0.564)        (0.935)     (0.851)
      Male Students                  8.733       0.558     0.852                        9.813        -1.386        7.399      3.158**
                                    (0.860) (0.534)      (0.590)                       (1.100)     (0.898)        (1.383)     (1.235)
      Female Students                5.727       0.349     -0.07                        6.201       -1.282*        5.353       -0.468
                                    (0.751) (0.497)      (0.469)                       (0.871)     (0.688)        (1.225)     (1.091)
Panel C: Low Income Families Siblings, 7-22 yrs
Enrollment
      All                            0.744       0.005     0.008                        0.773        -0.003         0.7        0.051
                                    (0.019) (0.012)      (0.012)                       (0.026)      (0.022)       (0.052)     (0.048)
      Male Students                   0.75      -0.009       0                          0.762        0.009         0.723       0.075
                                    (0.026) (0.016)      (0.017)                       (0.035)      (0.028)       (0.066)     (0.065)
      Female Students                0.738      0.023     0.021                         0.788        -0.002        0.667       0.003
                                    (0.028) (0.017)      (0.017)                       (0.040)      (0.031)       (0.083)     (0.071)
Hours Worked
      All                            6.821      -0.706    -0.141                        6.367        -0.145        7.675       -1.337
                                    (0.785) (0.448)      (0.477)                       (1.075)      (0.988)       (2.079)     (1.706)
      Male Students                  7.147      -0.277    0.224                         8.129        -0.918        8.809       -0.446
                                    (1.126) (0.683)      (0.730)                       (1.614)      (1.407)       (2.913)     (2.843)
      Female Students                6.464    -1.304**    -0.476                        3.875         1.238        6.061        -0.31
                                    (1.090) (0.538)      (0.617)                       (1.206)      (1.339)       (2.893)     (3.169)
Standard errors are clustered at the family level. * significant at 10 percent level, ** at 5 percent level, and *** at 1 percent level.
Note: Measure of percentage family treated is re-scaled to provide effect at mean treatment density (40 percent)
Table 11: Effects of Peer Networks on Verified Attendance Measure
                                    (1)             (2)           (3)                              (4)               (5)               (6)
Dependent Variable               Verified      Fraction of     Verified                         Verified          Verified          Verified
                               Attendance Treated Friends Attendance                           Attendance        Attendance        Attendance
Model                              OLS             OLS            IV                               IV                IV                IV


Observations Used                           All                 All                All           Treatment          Control              All
Treatment                               0.0109**             0.0006             0.0110**                                             0.0106**
                                         (0.004)             (0.002)             (0.004)                                              (0.004)
Fraction of Friends Treated              0.0301                                 0.1457**         0.1682***          0.1264
                                         (0.022)                                 (0.057)          (0.056)           (0.110)
Fraction of Friends Treated              -0.0406                               -0.3318**         -0.4112***         -0.2487
    Squared                              (0.037)                                 (0.138)          (0.134)           (0.271)
Fraction of Registered Friends                              0.7626***
    Treated                                                  (0.014)
Fraction of Registered Friends                             -0.4265***
    Treated Squared                                          (0.016)
Number of Students Treated                                                                                                            -0.0011
    by Grade-Gender Cohort                                                                                                            (0.010)
Number of Treated Squared                                                                                                             0.0001
    by Grade-Gender Cohort                                                                                                            (0.001)
Student-Family Controls                      √                  √                   √                 √                 √                 √
School Fixed Effects                        √                   √                  √                 √                 √                 √
Constant                                 0.0196              0.1038              0.041            -0.0262          1.1507***          0.0305
                                         (0.103)             (0.067)            (0.103)           (0.126)           (0.160)           (0.132)
Sample Size                               8651                8651               8651              5039              3612              8651
R-squared                                  0.26                0.7                0.25              0.24              0.27              0.26
†
 Treatment density for friendship network measure is the percentage of friends treated. For Grade-Gender Groups, treatment desnity is the
number of students treated. Standard errors are clustered at the school level. * significant at 10 percent level, ** at 5 percent level, and *** at
1 percent level
