NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

REGULATION AND SUPERVISION:
AN ETHICAL PERSPECTIVE
Edward J. Kane
Working Paper 13895
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13895

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2008

The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Edward J. Kane. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Regulation and Supervision: An Ethical Perspective
Edward J. Kane
NBER Working Paper No. 13895
March 2008
JEL No. G28
ABSTRACT
This essay shows that government credit-allocation schemes generate incentive conflicts that undermine
the quality of bank supervision and eventually produce banking crisis. For political reasons, most
countries establish a regulatory culture that embraces three economically contradictory elements: politically
directed subsidies to selected bank borrowers; subsidized provision of explicit or implicit repayment
guarantees for the creditors of banks that participate in the credit-allocation scheme; and defective
government monitoring and control of the subsidies to leveraged risk-taking that the other two elements
produce. In 2007-2008, technological change and regulatory competition simultaneously encouraged
incentive-conflicted supervisors to outsource much of their due discipline to credit-rating firms and
encouraged banks to securitize their loans in ways that pushed credit risks on poorly underwritten
loans into corners of the universe where supervisors and credit-ratings firms would not see them.

Edward J. Kane
Department of Finance
Boston College
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
and NBER
edward.kane@bc.edu

Conference on Principles v. Rules in Financial Regulation
University of Cambridge
Judge Business School
April 11, 2008
REGULATION AND SUPERVISION: AN ETHICAL PERSPECTIVE*
Edward J. Kane
Boston College
Love and Marriage, love and marriage,
Go together like a horse and carriage.
This I tell ya, brother,
Ya can’t have one without the other.
Jimmy Van Heusen, Our Town (TV, 1955)
Although the yoke between “love and marriage” is markedly more flexible than it
was in 1955, regulation and supervision remain tightly conjoined. Regulation focuses on
rules; supervision looks to their enforcement. Etymologically, regulation is a
grammatical extension of regula: the Latin word for “rules.” In every country,
governments make rules that define formally what a bank is, what different kinds of
things banking organizations may and may not do, how and where bankers may and may
not do permissible things, and what reciprocal rights and duties bankers and regulators
owe to one another. Moreover, for compelling historical, cultural, economic, and political
reasons, these definitions vary across countries—often greatly (Barth, Caprio, and
Levine, 2006).
Differences in rules and enforcement support what has become a worldwide
market for regulatory services. Just as bank managers might explore the market for any
other support service that they plan to outsource, they sort through alternative regulatory
schemes to ascertain the particular jurisdiction that offers them the best mix of costs and
benefits for the various pieces of their product lines. In the absence of switching costs,
each bank would design a series of substitute asset, liability, and hedging instruments and
negotiate with (i.e., “lobby”) would-be suppliers so that each deal they write could be
booked in the most favorable jurisdiction.
To sort out cross-country and cross-product differences in the quality and offering
prices of different regulatory entities, this paper develops the concept of an incentive-

conflicted regulatory culture. In each country, the broad outline of this culture is
determined by inherited ethical norms for individual, industry, and government behavior.
However, the institutional details that constitute a particular regulatory scheme and go on
to shape its particular policy instruments and their operative costs and benefits are
developed cooperatively in response to the push and pull of lobbying pressures. The
conflict between a top regulator’s duties and outside political forces incorporates into
every real-world system of bank regulation contradictory controls and subsidies that,
when left unchallenged through time, tempt client banks to expose themselves to a
growing chance of economic insolvency.
Many countries have experienced a banking crisis in recent years (Caprio and
Klingebiel, 1996; Honohan and Klingebiel, 2003). Of these crises, a high proportion was
triggered by losses generated by government efforts to allocate bank credit to wellconnected firms in politically influential sectors. The upside of these crises is that, in
exposing inefficient, contradictory, and antiegalitarian elements of regulatory policies in
particular countries, they generate pressure for effective reform.
I. Ethics of Supervision
Economic theory presumes that, subject to external constraints, individuals
choose a series of behaviors that maximize through time a personal objective function.
Rules come into existence in situations where people fear that gaps in other individuals’
ethical standards might allow them to behave in ways that would jeopardize the goals of a
rule-making community to which they belong.
To constrain the choices that targeted parties make, rules must be backed up by
supervision. Supervision entails surveillance and enforcement. Regulated parties
(“regulatees”) must be supervised when—and to the extent that—their objective
functions tempt them to make themselves better off by disobeying either the spirit or the
letter of particular rules.
A bank’s incentive to circumvent or violate a given rule increases with the weight
of the burdens that full compliance threatens to impose on its efforts to create value and
manage risk. Dutiful enforcement revises bank incentives by rewarding compliance,
punishing evasion, and searching out and closing loopholes that regulatees might use to
skirt the rules.

2

Rulemakers spell out the behaviors that they wish either to avoid or to promote in
capital letters and usually in language almost anyone can understand. However, most
rules contain a set of loopholes that is communicated either in very small print or in
coded language that only the lobbyists that sponsored them can immediately see or
understand. To quantify the economic burden of any rule, one must study not only the
costs and benefits of compliance, but the opportunity costs of circumvention as well.
Loopholes sustain gaps in supervisory enforcement that generate a second set of
rules. These secondary rules are designed to discourage appeals to higher authority and
are at least partially conjectural. For example, although the formal speed limit on a given
highway might be posted at (say) 55 miles per hour, drivers confidently expect the limit
that police actually enforce to be higher than the posted one and to adapt predictably to
exceptional circumstances (such as personal emergencies) as these unfold.
Common law and the Commonsense School of ethical theory maintain that,
across any contract in which one party delegates authority to one or more others, agents
and principals owe one another duties of loyalty, competence, and care. On this
hypothesis, supervisors owe four key duties to the community that employs them:
1. A duty of vision: They should continually adapt their surveillance systems to
counter regulatee efforts to disguise their rulebreaking;
2. A duty of prompt corrective action: They should stand ready to discipline
rulebreakers whenever a violation is observed;
3. A duty of efficient operation: They should produce their services at minimum
cost;
4. A duty of conscientious representation: They should be prepared to put the
interest of the community they serve ahead of their own.
In principle, supervisors committed to the fourth duty would bond themselves to disclose
enough information about their decisionmaking to allow the community to make them
accountable for neglecting or abusing these responsibilities. In practice, institutional
arrangements do not hold supervisors strongly accountable for the distributional effects
of how they resolve incentive conflicts. To the contrary and in country after country,
politicians require bank lending to favor designated sectors of the economy. To obtain a

3

quid pro quo, bank stakeholders expect these loans to be supervised with a lighter hand,
especially in times of banking turmoil (Kane, 1989).
Traditionally, supervisory duties have been exercised locally and—in a narrow
and formal sense—schemes for regulating and supervising banks are still shaped and
administered on a nation-by-nation basis. Changes in rules and duties respond to the
interplay of economic events with changing governmental goals and with the waxing and
waning of industry pressure to relax burdensome rules or to control disruptive behaviors.
Kane (1977, 1981, and 1988) describes a dialectical process in which regulation-induced
innovation engenders regulatory adjustments and regulatory adjustments (termed reregulation) engender new sources of regulatee avoidance.
Today, national schemes and resulting regulatee burdens are increasingly being
influenced by competition from foreign regulatory systems. In world markets,
movements of financial capital and changing asset values overlay onto the domestic
policy scene a series of unfamiliar political, economic, and reputational pressures that
individual-country regulatory decisionmakers must take into account. Arguably, these
pressures have persuaded authorities in financial-center countries to acquiesce in
loophole-ridden agreements for coordinating cross-country supervision (Basel I and II).
This paper introduces the concept of a regulation-induced financial crisis and uses
it to explain how offshore regulatory competition can either reinforce or attenuate
inefficient or antiegalitarian elements of incentive-conflicted banking regulation in
individual countries. Regulatory competition does this mainly by inducing increases and
decreases in the banking business a country’s banks can capture. With technological
change intensifying the influence of offshore regulators, mis-steps promise to come to a
boil sooner, but may still have severe and long-lasting effects on ordinary taxpayers.
This chapter exemplifies the process by analyzing how regulatory competition
simultaneously encouraged incentive-conflicted supervisors to outsource much of their
due discipline to credit-rating firms and encouraged banks to securitize their loans in
ways that pushed credit risks into corners of the universe where supervisors and creditratings firms could not see them.
II. The Market for Regulatory Services and Its Imperfections

4

Although a large literature treats banking regulation as if it were simply a tax on
bank income, bankers understand that banking regulation is better conceived as a backoffice financial service that, for participants in banking markets, generates benefits as
well as costs. Its benefits lie in three realms: improving customer confidence, improving
customer convenience, and supporting or resisting bank efforts to accumulate and
exercise market power. Because banking regulation requires resources to produce,
authorities can both produce it more or less efficiently and finance it more or less fairly.
Whether or not the costs of producing regulation are minimized, political activity
determines its level and allocates its production costs across society. Any firm or
individual implicitly pays an endogenously determined price for regulatory services. This
price corresponds to the difference between the benefits that firm or household receives
from bank regulation and the costs that banking regulation imposes on it. We conceive of
this variable as a given taxpayer’s “net regulatory benefit (or burden) from banking
regulation,” or NRB.
Parties that feel a stake in banking regulation routinely join together into political
coalitions and lobby collectively for improvements in their NRBs. In principle, each
sector’s lobbyists compete self-interestedly with lobbyists from other sectors to generate
regulatory benefits for their members and to shift the costs of financing their production
toward parties located in other sectors.
In a world in which banking markets are globalized, services that provide
regulatory benefits are available from foreign as well as domestic suppliers. Hence, the
struggle by citizens and firms of any one country to maximize net benefits spills across
its borders into what has become a worldwide market for financial regulation.
The market for regulatory services comprises a body of persons that carry on
extensive transactions in the specific activity of promulgating, enforcing, and accepting
regulatory restrictions. Regulation is supplied competitively and accepted voluntarily to
the extent that entry and exit opportunities exist for banks willing to incur the transaction
costs of switching all or part of their regulatory business to another supplier. Hence,
although a regulator’s clientele is fixed in the very short run, the jurisdictions in which a
regulatee operates are voluntary over longer periods. Geographic overlaps in the global
market for financial regulatory services have expanded as entry and exit costs for foreign

5

financial institutions have declined around the world. Ongoing downward trends in costs
of entering and exiting offshore financial markets render the margin of regulatory
competition—even in developing countries—increasingly global.
Rules and enforcement systems are continually tested and reshaped by changes in
the net regulatory benefits that other jurisdictions offer. Nevertheless, jurisdictional
competition for most financial products is inherently imperfect. An incumbent regulator
may be said to have market power in any line in which it can lower the NRB it offers
clients without completely surrendering its clientele to another regulator. Alternatively,
we might say that the leaders of a regulatory agency have market power whenever the
various labor, capital, and political markets from which they draw economic resources
cannot hold them (and the elected politicians that appoint and sustain them) accountable
for policy decisions that simultaneously lower net regulatory burdens for their clientele of
lenders and borrowers and increase them for other important economic sectors.
The vigor of regulatory competition is enhanced by technological change and
diminished by information asymmetries, leadership turnover, and various sources of
principal-agent conflict that are inherent in governmental decisionmaking. The essence
of a government’s social contract is that taxpayers—as principals—award financial
resources and coercive powers to governmental agents. Taxpayers hope that government
officials will exercise the assigned powers to promote the “common good.” However, the
common good cannot be observationally defined. Moreover, especially in the short run,
an agency’s conception of the common good may be distorted by sectoral pressures.
Regulators routinely adopt reporting systems that make it difficult for citizens to
gather information either about subsidiary goals that policymakers might be pursuing or
about sectoral, bureaucratic, or personal benefits that regulatory activity might generate.
Even when evidence of discriminatory or inefficient performance surfaces, it is difficult
for outside observers to sort out its root causes or to correct the incentive defects
responsible for it.
The value of regulatory competition lies in supplying indirect economic checks on
the even-handedness and efficiency of net regulatory burdens. On the demand side,
competition encourages parties that feel overburdened by their government’s system of
regulation to reconfigure their business to slide it into the jurisdiction of a more-

6

advantageous supplier of regulatory services. It does not matter whether the new supplier
is domestic agency or a foreign one. What matters is that the regulators gain some relief,
the new regulator gains budgetary resources, and the old regulator loses them. The lower
the transition costs of moving to a less burdensome regulatory supplier, the more
complete the demand-side check becomes.
On the supply side, entry and exit costs confer competitive advantages on
incumbent regulators. In competing with would-be private regulatory enterprises,
government entities are advantaged by the financial strength imparted to them by the
presumption that they can assign catastrophic losses to taxpayers and by their ready
access to the coercive power of the state. To a nontraditional supplier, the costs of
actively gearing up to oversee even a narrow category of banking deals can be
substantial. The existence of these costs means that the number of potential new entrants
that can economically supply regulatory services to banks in a given country is relatively
limited in the short run.
Successful entry requires more than a capacity for exercising disciplinary power.
To displace a seasoned regulator, would-be entrants need specific skills, a source of
moral authority, and substantial financial and reputational capital. Entrants must be able
to promise credibly that they can fairly and efficiently produce regulatory services and
are committed and able to sustain this promise for a long while. They must be able to
manipulate system of rewards and punishments that is strong enough to change the
behavior of potential regulatees. The entry of newly chartered private regulators into
regulatory arenas is discouraged by the costs of accumulating sufficient public standing
and moral authority to be trusted with this kind of coercive authority.
In brief, the inherited market structure for regulatory services is distorted by
market power that the law freely gives to government enterprises and by reputational
advantages enjoyed by incumbent private regulators. On the one hand, representative
democracy confers renewable monopoly power on elected politicians and the regulatory
leaders they appoint. Because policymaking authority may be canceled by voters or
limited ex post by the courts, this authority becomes all the stronger, the more confidently
incumbent politicians may count on holding power and the more that top bureaucrats may

7

count on holding onto their offices and avoiding vigorous prosecution or public censure
for questionable acts.
Even in the private sector, market power is conferred in lasting fashion on a
successful regulatory enterprise. It is interesting that such traditionally hard-to-dislodge
incumbent regulators as a country’s major stock and commodities exchanges are being
subjected today to pressures from cross-country partners that hope to take over their
franchise. It is unfortunate that, for key regulatory bureaus, central banks, and ministries
of finance, takeover discipline cannot be so direct.
III. The Role of Incentive Conflicts and Regulatory Subsidies in Banking Fragility
Banking environments and patterns of banking regulation vary greatly from country
to country. Financial-institution supervision combines a capacity to observe fluctuations
in balance-sheet values (“vision”) with a capacity to influence managerial actions
(“control”) and an incentive system that governs the pursuit and exercise of these
capacities. Even when portfolios and attendant risks are concentrated within a single
country, it is difficult to establish a combination of adequate oversight of institutional
balance sheets, adequate authority to intervene in timely fashion, and bureaucratic
incentives to detect and resolve insolvent institutions in ways that adequately protect
taxpayer interests. As a result, individual countries solve this contracting problem in
different ways. Although many commonalities of interest exist, systems for setting and
enforcing financial rules are infested with incentive conflict. Even within a country,
conflicts exist between and among:
1. Regulators and the firms they regulate;
2. Particular regulators and other societal watchdogs;
3. Regulators and the politicians to whom they must report;
4. Taxpayers and the politicians and regulators they put in office.
How a country approaches and resolves these conflicts is in part hard-wired into
its political and institutional structure. For example, while many EU countries supervise
banks separately from other financial institutions, some do not. A few European
countries (Austria, Denmark, Germany, Sweden, the Netherlands, and the United
Kingdom, in particular) have established agencies that supervise bank and nonbank

8

financial institutions in an integrated way; others have to some degree integrated the
oversight of at least their bank and securities sectors (Schüler, 2003).
Every country relies on its ethical norms, government regulators, and other
professional watchdogs to bridge gaps in the bonding, deterrent rights (deterrency), and
transparency inherent in its private contracting environment. Over time, the interaction
of private and government watchdogs generates a regulatory culture. A culture may be
defined as customs, ideas, and attitudes that members of a group share and transmit from
generation to generation by systems of subtle and unsubtle rewards and punishments. A
regulatory culture constrains the ways in which an uncooperative or even unscrupulous
individual bank can be monitored and disciplined. It comprises a matrix of attitudes and
beliefs about how regulators should act. These slowly changing attitudes and beliefs
often express a distrust of government power that traces back to abuses observed in a
possibly distant past when the country was occupied, colonized, or run by a one-party
government. The culture’s taboos and traditions define standards for the fair use of
government power. Behind these standards are higher-order social norms that underlie a
nation’s political and legal environments.
The character of a country’s Regulatory Culture is spanned by six specific
components:
•

Legal authority and reporting obligations

•

Formulation and promulgation of specific rules

•

Technology of monitoring for violations & compliance

•

Allowable penalties for material violations

•

Duties of consultation: To guarantee fairness, regulated parties enjoy a right to
procedural due process that specifies burdens of proof that regulators must meet
before they can penalize violators.

•

Regulatee rights to judicial review: To bond the fairness guarantee, penalized
parties have access to inside and outside appeals procedures.

In large part, the details of each component are shaped by:
a. Recognition and response lags generated by the interaction of weakness in
the transparency of the nation’s accounting system with bureaucratic
incentives and statutory and bureaucratic checks and balances;

9

b. Regulatory competition brought about by the entry of foreign or
differently regulated institutions;
c. Regulatory personnel’s exposure to influence activity from a disciplineresistant firm’s political clout, consultation rights, and appeal privileges;
d. Social norms that protect fraudsters and bumblers against prompt
regulatory discipline.
Lobbying activity seeks to reshape the particular norms that officials stress and to
constrain the tradeoffs they make. Within limits set by a country’s regulatory culture,
how particular policy strategies officials adopt actually work is determined by regulatees’
ability to delay or stymie decisive intervention and to find and exploit circumventive
loopholes. Some of these loopholes involve the ability to relocate loss exposures that are
more closely supervised either by the home country (or by a particular host) to venues
that monitor or discipline risk-taking less effectively.
The regulatory cultures of almost every country in the world today embrace in
one form or another three strategic elements:
1. Politically-Directed Subsidies to Selected Bank Borrowers: The policy
framework either explicitly requires—or implicitly rewards—banks for
making credit available to selected classes of borrowers at a subsidized
interest rate;
2. Subsidies to Bank Risk-Taking: The policy framework commits government
officials to providing on subsidized terms explicit or implicit conjectural
guarantees of repayment to depositors and other bank creditors;
3. Defective Monitoring and Control of the Subsidies: The contracting and
accounting frameworks used by banks and government officials fail to make
anyone directly accountable for reporting or controlling the size of either
subsidy in a conscientious or timely fashion.
Taken together, the first two elements in the strategy tempt banks to extract
wealth surreptitiously from taxpayers and constrain loan officers to pass some of the
benefits to politically favored borrowers [such as builders and would-be homeowners
(especially low-income households) in the US]. Favored borrowers tend to be blocs of

10

voters regularly courted by candidates for political office and financial supporters or
cronies of influential government officials.
The third piece of the framework minimizes regulators’ exposure to blame when
things go wrong. It makes it impossible for outsiders to hold supervisors culpable for
violating their ethical duties. It prevents outsiders from readily monitoring the true costs
and risks generated by the first two strategies and interferes with efforts to subject the
intersectoral flow of net regulatory benefits to informed debate. This gap exists because
accounting systems do not report the value of regulatory benefits as a separate item for
banks that receive them. In modern accounting systems, the capitalized value of
regulatory subsidies is treated instead as an intangible source of value that, if booked at
all, is not differentiated from other elements of a bank’s so-called “franchise value.” Of
course, some of the subsidy is offset by tangible losses that politically influenced loans
eventually force onto bank balance sheets and income statements. In principle, a tangible
reserve for expected losses ought to be set up as part of the process of making a poorly
underwritten or deliberately underpriced loan. Not reserving for losses imbedded in a
loan’s preferential terms may be conceived as planting a time bomb in the asset and networth values shown on conventional bank balance sheets. Over time, the cumulative
damage from politically favored loans becomes harder and harder to hide. Between one
crisis and the next, the amount of government-favored loans grows larger and larger in
bank portfolios. Eventually, a shortfall of contractual cash flows makes it harder to gain
financing for pools of mispriced and poorly structured loans. This is how poorly
documented mortgage-backed securitizations came acropper in the US and Europe during
the summer of 2007. Although officials resist the idea, creating an enforceable obligation
for regulators to estimate in transparent and reproducible ways the ebb and flow of the
dual subsidies would empower external watchdog organizations in the private sector to
force authorities to explain whether and how these subsidies benefit taxpayers.
Sooner or later, savvy large-denomination creditors come to appreciate the
unreported hole that overvalued loans imbed in the opportunity-cost value of their bank’s
enterprise-contributed net worth (NWE). By NWE, we mean the value that an informed
buyer would pay for the bank if safety-net guarantees did not exist. If a bank’s NWE
declines through zero, it becomes a “zombie” institution. A zombie is an insolvent

11

institution that stays active only because the black magic of government guarantees
leaves its creditors with no reason to force it into a corporate grave. A zombie’s ability to
renew its deposit funding and other debt depends entirely on the continuing credibility of
the explicit and implicit government guarantees that safety-net managers attach to its
obligations.
Accounting loopholes allow a zombie institution to show positive accounting net
worth long after its NWE has turned negative. For example, although we now know that
in June 2007 the British mortgage lender Northern Rock PLC was well on its way to
becoming a zombie, management was able to post an accounting net worth equal to
roughly two percent of its assets.
Systemwide fragility F increases with the number of zombies or near-zombies (Z)
and with the aggregate size of the losses thought to be imbedded in their economic
balance sheets:
F = F[Z,

Z

NWE (j)].

(1)

j =1

Funding problems begin not when a bank becomes a zombie, but when suppliers of largedenomination funds begin to doubt whether officials can or will continue to support its
existence. Funding problems for a region’s or country’s banking system are intensified
when doubts arise about arrangements for making taxpayers absorb the cost of
guaranteeing the area’s potential zombie institutions. The triggering condition is that the
upper bound on the uncertain value of implicit and explicit government guarantees G
rises so high that taxpayer resistance threatens to make it hard for authorities to raise the
funds needed to pay the bill promptly or in full. Massive withdrawals by sophisticated
creditors are sometimes described as “silent runs,” because servicing the demands that a
troubled bank receives from large creditors generates far less publicity than the queue of
panicked small depositors that impatiently mills about in a conventional run.
However, silent runs greatly weaken bank balance sheets. The deposit outflows
that troubled banks experience must be financed by selling liquid assets and issuing
costly debt. A troubled bank’s first line of defense against a silent run is to arrange loans
from government institutions or from relatively well-informed banks with which it has
correspondent relationships. Private rescuers usually insist on receiving appropriately

12

high interest rates and demand collateralization and an upside potential for their claims.
In deciding to help a correspondent bank to weather a silent run, foreign banks are apt
first to lobby the IMF, the host government, and even their own government for
assurances that they will not be stuck with the bill for whatever losses the rescue effort
might incur.
Until officials increase the transparency and credibility of their credit support,
silent runs on weak institutions tend to escalate. Troubled banks’ sales of good assets and
increasing funding costs reduce future income and make the fragility of their condition
apparent to more and more outside observers. When a troubled bank collateralizes its
good assets at or above their market value, its unbooked losses on poorly performing
loans become a larger proportion of the assets that remain unpledged. The more funding
a troubled bank obtains at high credit spreads, the more severely its future accounting and
economic profits are squeezed and the more likely it is to engage in go-for-broke lending
and funding activities that severely pressure the profit margins of healthy competitors.
A silent run puts pressure on regulators because it progressively undermines the
willingness of taxpayers and stronger banks to tolerate the regulatory status quo. As a
silent run unfolds, reduced profit margins spread zombieness and disturbing information
is revealed about the size of taxpayers’ potential involvement. At the same time, net
regulatory benefits for weak and strong banks diverge more and more widely. Weak
banks receive safety-net subsidies from central-bank loans and government guarantees
that stronger banks and general taxpayers eventually have to pay for.
The longer a silent run proceeds, the more deeply supervisory efforts to retard the
exit or to delay the formal recapitalization of inefficient and insolvent deposit institutions
push the net regulatory benefits of other economic sectors into negative territory. The
economic and political forces exerted when a large bank suffers open and silent runs are
nicely illustrated by the British government’s response to the Northern Rock debacle. In
September 2007, an open depositor run on this bank was stopped by the government’s
promise to provide emergency funding to the £114 billion institution and to “guarantee
all existing deposit arrangements.” However, a silent run persisted. By yearend,
emergency loans from the Bank of England reached about £25 billion and Treasury
guarantees had been extended to cover most of the bank’s nondeposit obligations as well.

13

Well-publicized efforts to persuade stockholders and outside acquirers to inject private
capital into the bank showed little progress. Finally, in February 2008, the bank was
“temporarily” nationalized.
IV. Three Exculpatory Norms of Modern Crisis Management
A severely overleveraged banking system may be portrayed as an accident waiting to
happen. A regulation-induced crisis occurs when misfortune impacts a banking system
whose managers have made their institutions vulnerable to this amount and type of bad
luck. Figure One breaks the evolution of a regulation-induced banking crisis into five
stages. The 2007-08 breakdown of arrangements for financing for structured
securitizations in the US and Europe, and banking crises that rolled through Latin
America, Japan, Korea, the Philippines, Malaysia, Indonesia, Thailand, and Russia during
1997-1998 passed through the first three and one-half stages of this model of crisis
generation and response.
In 2007-2008, German, British, and American authorities showed again that
politicians are reluctant to move beyond the stopgap partial recapitalization stage (stage
4A). As long as the hopelessness of an institution’s situation can be covered up, outsiders
cannot easily distinguish a wave of financial-institution insolvencies from a transitory
shortage of aggregate liquidity. In either circumstance, a group of economically
significant firms find it exceedingly difficult to roll over their liabilities on profitable
terms. It is an accepted first-response practice for central bankers and other regulators to
provide liquidity to distressed institutions as a way to buy time for their supervisory staff
to investigate the extent to which irreparable insolvencies might underlie the distress.
This time-buying strategy is supported by three exculpatory norms whose ethical force
intensifies in times of political, market, or institutional turmoil: a mercy norm; a
nationalistic norm; and a nonescalation norm.
The mercy norm holds that it is bad policy and unacceptably cruel behavior for
regulators to abandon the employees, creditors, and stockholders of institutions they
oversee before they can convincingly establish whether the distress is too fundamental to
be remedied by subsidized loans. This norm gives regulators the discretion (if not the
duty) to alleviate the initial pains of any client institution that experiences a silent run.

14

The nationalistic norm presupposes that regulators should help domestic
institutions and marketmakers to cope with foreign competition. In practice, this norm is
reinforced by community resistance to foreign control of national credit decisions and by
lobbying pressure from politically favored sectors who suspect that foreign banks will not
serve their interests very well.
The nonescalation norm allows authorities to lend on subsidized terms to
distressed institutions as long as they can popularize the view that doing anything else
would invite a national or global financial disaster. In invoking this norm, officials must
spread fear. They must argue that, without a large injection of subsidized funds, markets
will set prices for troubled assets that are unreasonably low and prices for emergency
credit to institutions that hold these assets that are unreasonably high and that these price
movements would sweep strong and healthy institutions into the turmoil.
It is dangerous for government officials both to make these exaggerated claims
and to deny the increasingly transparent flow of subsidies that partial recapitalization
entails. For high-ranking regulators to keep churning out safety-net subsidies, two further
conditions must hold. First, they must be able to control the flow of information, so as to
keep taxpayers and the press from convincingly assessing either the magnitude of the
implicit capital transfer or the antiegalitarian character of the subsidization scheme.
Second, the self-interest of top regulators must be continually nourished by praise and
other forms of tribute from the bankers, borrowers, and investors whose losses are being
shifted to other parties.
Authorities are reluctant to move to full recapitalization until overwhelming
losses reveal themselves in the form of strongly resurging crisis pressures. The longer
the game goes on, the greater the risk that the reputations of incoming policymakers and
the particular politicians that appoint them will be saddled unfairly with the sins of their
predecessors. Although it is unwise to draw inferences from a sample of two, the U.S.
savings-and-loan mess and the most recent Argentine crisis cast some light on how costs
are allocated during the final stages in the life cycle of a regulation-induced crisis.
Formally, continuations and breakdowns in the burden-shifting process may be
analyzed as two states of an evolutionary process. Though small on any given day, the
probability (p) of a breakdown during an incentive-conflicted regulator’s term in office

15

increases with the fragility of the system for making good on implicit and explicit safetynet guarantees. It is convenient to represent the value of these guarantees as G and the
cumulative size of the taxpayer’s hidden responsibility for supporting the liabilities of
troubled institutions as (T). T and G increase with system fragility (F). In turn, whenever
F grows, p also rises. During the early stages of an incipient crisis, increments in the
probability of breakdown depend on the informativeness (A) of the accounting principles
that banks and safety-net officials use to report losses and loss exposures:
p=p[G,T,F;A] .

(2)

During these early stages, banks and their regulators are tempted to seek and provide
“accounting relief.” However, once market participants begin to recognize partial
recapitalizations and coverups as half-measures, weaknesses in A compound the problem
and improvements in A become a critical part of the crisis-resolution process.

16

Figure One
Five Stages of a Regulation-Induced Banking Crisis
1. Rent-Seeking Generates Aggressive Loss Exposures at Highly
Leveraged Institutions
• Pursuit of Safety-Net Subsidies Tied to Government-Promoted
Forms of Lending
• Pursuit of Subsidies Tied to Other Kinds of Leveraged RiskTaking
2. Adverse Events and Industry Problems Upset Financial Markets
• Banks and Regulators Keep Losses from Registering on Bank
Books by Accounting Trickery and Coverup
• Large-Denomination Creditors Test the Strength of the Safety Net
• Fragility of System Rises as Good Assets are Collateralized and
Endgame Incentives Induce Go-For-Broke Gambling
• Threat of Shortages in Safety-Net Funding Rises Over Time
3. Supplementation of Traditional Safety-Net Support Mechanisms
• Loans from Central-Bank Discount Window Can’t Carry the Load
• Inventive Accounting Loopholes and Forms of Public Credit
Expand
4. Recapitalization of Troubled Banks and Safety-Net Institutions
A. Stopgap Partial Recapitalizations: Half-Measures Move the
Financial Sector Back into Stage Two of the Cycle
B. Transformation of Bank Losses into Explicit Taxpayer
Obligations or Explicit Nationalization of Zombie Banks
5. Final Clean-Up of the Mess
• Reprivatization of Zombie Institutions
• Blame Heaped on Designated Scapegoats
• Credible Safety-Net Reforms are Adopted

17

Rolling and incompletely resolved crises sound at least three alarms. First, the frequency
and geographic extent of banking crises convincingly demonstrate that, around the world,
numerous banks have found it reasonable to book potentially ruinous risks. Looking at
the period 1977-1995, Caprio and Klingebiel (1996) cite 58 countries in which the net
worth of the banking system was almost or entirely eliminated. Second, in country after
country, domestic (and sometimes foreign) taxpayers have been billed to bail out banks,
depositors, and deposit-insurance funds. Honohan and Klingebiel (2003) confirm that, in
recent crises, taxpayers’ bill for making good on implicit and explicit guarantees typically
ran between 1 and 10 percent of GDP. The size of these bailouts establishes that, at least
in crisis countries, banks managed to put large bets on the table and were able to shift a
substantial amount of the downside of these bets to taxpayers. In many cases, authorities
were eventually blamed for the size of the bills taxpayers were asked to pay. Officials
were seen to have shirked their duties to expose and stop loss-causing patterns of credit
allocation and to have compounded the damage from credit losses by not addressing
individual-bank insolvencies until their situation had deteriorated disastrously.
In times of financial turmoil, weaknesses in ethical controls on the job
performance of government regulators responsible for protecting the safety and
soundness of financial institutions encourage regulatory forbearance. The high cost of
modern crises indicates how far the risk-taking preferences of officials responsible for
managing taxpayer risk exposures diverge from those of large-denomination creditors in
private financial markets. Although institutional mechanisms for financing safety-net
loans and guarantees differ across countries, poor information flows and incentive
conflict in government policymaking complicate the treatment of banking crises
everywhere.
Special problems of accountability and incentive conflict arise in managing crosscountry risk exposures. Financial regulators subject foreign banks and the foreign
operations of domestic banks to patterns of regulation that differ in two important ways
from those that apply to strictly domestic banking operations. First, most developed
countries are willing to allow their domestic banks to book a wider range of risks in
foreign subsidiaries than they are prepared to tolerate in home-country offices. This is
because relationships with internationally active customers are a geographically footloose

18

part of the banking business and because government officials don’t expect to confront
responsibility for foreign banking losses in domestic political arenas. This creates
incentives for offshore banks to “overlend” into foreign markets. Second, though greatly
weakened by technological change and outside political pressure, obstacle to the entry of
foreign financial firms in most banking markets still exist.
V. Globalization and Securitization of Bank Funding Opportunities
Contemporary theories of industrial organization seek to explain how a product’s
market structure evolves through time to permit efficient firms and efficient contracting
instruments to reshape or displace relatively less-efficient alternatives. The force of these
theories is particularly easy to grasp when we focus on hypothetical markets that meet a
set of ideal conditions that Baumol, Panzar, and Willig (1986) call “perfect
contestability.”
A market is perfectly contestable when entry and exit costs are each zero and
incumbent firms exit quickly whenever they find themselves faced with negative profits.
In perfectly contestable markets, low-cost firms readily displace high-cost firms and
incumbent competitors are prevented from setting monopoly prices by the threat of hitand-run entry by other equally-efficient firms. Financial markets are never perfectly
contestable. New entrants must adapt and expand their information systems before they
can safely expand their customer base. Incumbents cannot easily abandon the pipeline of
loan commitments they have promised to customers and the regulatory foundations on
which inherently nontransparent financial markets must be built are burdened with
inescapable entry and exit costs.
During the last thirty years, particularly in wholesale banking markets,
technological change has steadily lowered entry costs for foreign and nontraditional
competitors. Most of these firms undertook banking activities in innovative ways,
making creative use of substitute products, substitute organizational forms, and substitute
offshore locations. In some countries, the viability of a new entrant’s business plan was
temporarily enhanced by longstanding restrictions on how banks could compete
domestically.

19

Chief among the innovative methods of doing business was structured
securitization. With help from investment banks, credit-rating agencies, mortgage
insurers, and hedge funds, banks sliced and securitized titles to the cash flows from their
loans in ways that assigned the slicing (or “tranching”), reslicing, and servicing of flows
of interest and principal to separately capitalized conduit vehicles. By placing important
tranches of their loans through and with foreign and nonbank firms, banks permanently
layered the institutional character and broadened the geographic span of bank funding
arrangements.
Innovative funding technologies benefited borrowers by integrating bank loan
pricing within and across countries. However, outsourcing the funding side of a bank’s
balance sheet weakened its staff members’ due diligence by severing the link between the
income a lender could make from originating securitizable loans and the quality of its
system for underwriting the loans it originated. Investors in a securitized pool of loans
did not rely on either the lender’s or their own due diligence. Instead, they expected
credit-rating agencies to assess the risks in the positions they were offered and they
expected investment banks and mortgage insurers to make sure that the returns offered
would respond appropriately to differences in loan quality. Unfortunately, the naïveté
with which these expectations were held undermined agents’ incentives to meet them.
Compensation for rating and pricing individual securities was collected as soon as the
securities were floated, with little exposure to ex post blowback for personnel that might
later be shown to have made a serious rating or pricing mistake. With supervisors closing
their eyes to the erosion of this chain of agents’ contractual incentives to execute
faithfully their duties of loyalty, competence, and care, investors presumed that they were
purchasing titles to well-rated and well-priced securities.
Securitization also brought firms that were supervised in different regulatory
cultures and jurisdictions into sharper competition with one another. This mutual
invasion of traditional markets by institutions headquartered in different regulatory
cultures put pressure on particular regulatory enterprises (especially at enterprises whose
leaders’ remaining terms in office promised to be short) to relax vigilance as a way of
defending their bureaucratic turf. In retrospect, it is clear that banking supervisors did this
by regularizing and legitimating cutting-edge ways to hide or transfer risk without fully

20

exploring the threats that these complex new contracting structures imposed on individual
country safety nets.
Whenever a regulator acquiesced in innovative entry by a foreign or
nontraditional firm, it had to relax restraints that might make it hard for its traditional
clients to compete with the new entrants. Institutions pressed politicians to make this
happen sooner rather than later.
Authorities’ positive response to this competitive pressure has been labeled
financial deregulation, but our ethical perspective makes it clear that the response is
better described as desupervision.. In most countries, regulatory competition and defects
in accountability led banking supervisors to assess the risks of innovative instruments of
risk transfer with less watchfulness than these instruments deserved. With respect to
structured securitizations, banking supervisors and mortgage-insurance firms outsourced
their duty of vision to accountants and credit-rating agencies without adequately bonding
the obligations they were asking them to perform. They did this despite these firms’
obvious conflicts in goals and outsized delays in downgrading distressed securities in past
downturns (Portes, 2008).
The contestability of banking markets is greatly reduced by the political clout that
domestic banks enjoy and by the ability of supervisory entities to bill government safety
nets for the losses their heedlessness might engender. In crises, safety-net subsidies
disadvantage less-subsidized competitors and unreasonably sustain the operations of
decapitalized banks. The contestable-markets portrayal of market-structure evolution
helps us to understand that in most countries deregulation focused on unblocking entry
without addressing supervisory incentives to resist the exit of important domestic banks.
Bank and supervisory exit resistance attenuates the benefits to society that entry
relaxation would otherwise produce. Banking crises teach foreign and nontraditional
competitors the need to estimate the extent of supervisor-supported exit resistance. By
standing ready to absorb the losses of unprofitable clients, a regulator (especially a
central bank) can prevent low-cost entrants from earning the profits needed to justify hitand-run entry.
VI. Dialectics of a Regulation-Induced Banking Crisis

21

For any policymaker, a crisis may be described as a time of upheaval that
generates strong pressure for decisive changes in policy strategy. Figure Two portrays a
regulation-induced banking crisis as an evolutionary process that is driven in Hegelian
fashion by dialectical collisions of irreconcilable market and regulatory adjustments.
For any regulated institution, change – not rest – represents the path of profitmaking equilibrium. The Hegelian model of regulation assumes that the conflict between
regulated parties and their regulators can never be completely eliminated. The
contradictory forces at work in each round of adjustments are labeled the “thesis” and the
“antithesis.” Every sequence of adjustment and response produces a temporary
“synthesis” that serves in turn as the “thesis” for a new round of action and response.
In the US, policies designed to promote homeownership encouraged borrowers
and lenders alike to operate with a “perilously high degree of leverage” (Shadow
Financial Regulatory Committee, 2008). For borrowers, the value of the subsidies that
they could derive both from tax deductions for mortgage interest and from federal
programs supporting mortgage credit increased with the amount they borrowed. For
lenders, federal programs supported the securitization of home mortgages by offering
cheap guarantees and by making it possible for banks to avoid capital requirements on
mortgages that they chose to securitize. Bank supervisors did not require banks either to
estimate or to hold capital against the implicit obligations that structured securitization
vehicles passed through to a sponsor’s net worth. The high degree of leverage on
borrower positions meant that, if and when housing prices declined by more than a few
percent, marginal borrowers would be unable to service their obligations. Once a sharp
increase in delinquencies and foreclosures by subprime borrowers occurred, savvy
investors revalued and cut back their positions in securitized mortgage pools. When this
revaluation wiped out the equity of mortgage securitization conduits, reputational
concerns persuaded bank sponsors to move a good portion of conduit losses back onto
their balance sheets. Besides being billed for conduit losses, banks that had been heavily
involved in originating mortgages for sale to conduits were stuck with losses on pipelines
of ongoing mortgage commitments that they could no longer profitably securitize.
Inevitably, silent runs on these banks tested the ability of safety-net managers to manage
a spreading crisis.

22

FIGURE TWO
DIALECTICS OF A REGULATION-INDUCED CRISIS
THESIS: UNSUSTAINABLE POLICY MIX
•

Expansionary Monetary Policy and Loss-Causing Credit-Allocation
Scheme (“politically sabotaged loans”) vs. Adverse Effects of
Desupervising Risks on the Costs of Providing Safety-Net Support for
Loss-Making Banks

ANTITHESIS: SKEPTICAL INVESTORS AND DEPOSITORS TEST
GOVERNMENTS’ ABILITY TO MANAGE THE EXPANDING COSTS
OF NATIONAL SAFETY NETS
•

In a Banking Crisis, Market Tests consist of Silent Runs (Symptomized by
a Generalized Flight to Quality and Simplicity)

•

The probability of a deepening crisis rises the longer authorities refuse to
contain the damage and continue to help zombie institutions to stay in play

SYNTHESIS: REFORM OCCURS WHEN AUTHORITIES CAN NO
LONGER QUELL MARKET DOUBTS ABOUT THEIR ABILITY TO
SUSTAIN THE CONTRADICTORY POLICY MIX.
•

Credit-allocation scheme unravels

•

Costs of sustaining decapitalized institutions become manifest

23

The appropriate policy response to crisis pressures depends on the nature of the
policy contradictions that occasioned the crisis. A perennial issue is to assess the
potential insolvency of troubled banks and to determine how rapidly bank net worth is
being undermined by falling prices on crisis-creating loans. Asset-price meltdowns are
most likely to occur when incentives for overlending by domestic and offshore
institutions confront a host-country policy regime that offers incentives for
overborrowing at domestic households and firms. In such cases, pressure on asset prices
is apt to generate a crisis-intensifying run from claims issued by the insolvent borrowers
and lenders.
It is superficial to conceive of the silent runs that triggered the US securitization
crisis as manifestations of an underprovision of aggregate “liquidity.” In fact, the central
bank has for many years accommodated overspending in the favored sector and also
financed a long run of current-account deficits. A central bank can prolong a payments
deficit by letting its currency decline and by drawing down the country’s foreignexchange reserves and foreign lines of credit. In any consumption-driven currency
devaluation, the need to rebuild the central banks’ currency reserves may or may not be
urgent. If it is, authorities can shrink the current-account deficit in two complementary
ways: (1) by allowing the exchange rate to decline even further and (2) by tightening
their mix of fiscal and monetary policies.
But when a money-center country is experiencing a banking crisis, this
prescription is unattractive. These policies would impose a sizeable opportunity loss on
foreign and domestic holders of the country’s financial assets. The currency-adjustment
half of this strategy would put inflationary pressure on domestic prices. To pile on the
tight-money half of the prescription would induce a decline in aggregate economic
demand, whose effects would reduce the real value of a country’s financial assets in
general and the net worth of its banking system in particular. This would further
undermine asset values by raising prospective rates of default and delinquency on
troubled assets. In crisis circumstances, it is politically impossible for authorities to
ignore the effects that these adjustments would have on safety-net loss exposures.
In a financial center country, authorities face a Three-Way Policy Dilemma about
how to control a silent run:

24

1. Choice One: Try to finance the runs with minimal adjustment in the losscausing parts of the policy mix. We may describe this strategy as
disinformational “hardball.” Authorities may temporarily nationalize one or
more insolvent institutions and deny that any other zombies exist. They may
or may not soften the potential decline in their exchange rate by drawing
down reserves or borrowing from private and official foreign sources.
2. Choice Two: Rebalance the policy mix to make it more sustainable, but only
with respect to a narrowly defined window of time (e.g., until after the next
election). Authorities may resolve or strengthen some of the weakest
institutions and may slow monetary growth. We have described this as a
strategy of “partial recapitalization.”
3. Choice Three (unlikely to be chosen unless prior efforts to use one or both of
the other strategies have failed dramatically): Face up to and eliminate the
most obvious contradictions in the policy mix. The new policy regime should
aim for a full cleanup of insolvent institutions and to establish a more
incentive-compatible supervisory system going forward.
Leaving bank and corporate insolvencies unresolved fosters further
malinvestment and enhances the likelihood that a deeper crisis will emerge down the line.
Still, it is dangerous to acknowledge and resolve corporate and banking insolvencies in
the midst of a national recession. In crisis circumstances, politicians are strongly tempted
to reflate demand and to strengthen the credibility of safety-net guarantees, without doing
much to resolve the incentive distortions that widespread insolvency creates.
VII. The Role of Regulatory Competition in Banking Crises
Contradictory policies misallocate capital in the household, financial, corporate,
and government-planning sectors. The result is that asset values and bank net worth
eventually have to be written down. Had asset values either been supported by a
sustainable expansion in productive capacity or been written down promptly as
unfavorable information surfaced, silent runs would not have become large enough to test
the safety nets of financial-center countries.

25

The seeds of the 2007-2008 subprime crisis were sown over many decades. They
did not flower into a crisis until doubts began to surface about authorities’ willingness
and ability to measure and absorb the losses and loss exposures confronting a suddenly
decapitalized banking system. Measurement is important. As in the 1980s savings-andloan mess, crisis costs were intensified by openly delaying loss recognition at lossmaking institutions.
What the press describes as a “banking crisis” may be more accurately described
as the surfacing of tensions caused by the continuing efforts of loss-making banks to
force the rest of society to accept responsibility for their unpaid bills for making bad
loans. In US mortgage markets, longstanding systems for subsidizing poorly
underwritten loans to builders and overleveraged households imposed unbooked losses
both on banks and on supporting national safety nets.
Around the world, financial institutions and markets are supported by regulatory
systems that show numerous country-specific features (Wilson, 1986; Dermine, 2003;
Barth, et al., 2006). Differences in patterns of financial regulation address differences
that exist in the various economic, political, and bureaucratic deficiencies and
inefficiencies that each country’s regulatory system is overtly or covertly expected to
correct (Garcia and Nieto, 2006; Herring and Schuermann, 2006).
However, the survival of differences in regulatory patterns is limited by the
tendency of funding and loan-making opportunities to flow to markets and institutions
that offer their customers the best deal. The extent to which net regulatory burdens on
financial markets and institutions differ across countries is narrowed by the regulatory
arbitrage that interjurisdictional deal flows entail. When and as technological change in
information processing and telecommunications lowers the cost of transacting with
foreign entities, adverse flows of capital and financial dealmaking help to persuade a
nation’s authorities to lower the net burdens that their regulatory framework imposes on
the savers and investors that book deals in its financial markets.
In recent years, rolling banking and currency crises have become frequent for
three reasons. First, advances in information and communications technology have
simultaneously globalized banking markets and markets for government guarantees.
Second, the globalization of markets for banking and guarantee services has made it less

26

costly for domestic corporations and wealthy investors to mount silent runs on a
country’s zombie banks. Third, lenders, securitizers, credit-rating organizations, and
supervisory authorities are not compensated in ways that make them accountable for the
slow-developing but inevitable losses that their policies engender.
In 1997-1998, crises in Korea, Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, and Thailand
were hastened by the technologically driven absorption of these countries into an
international market for loanable funds that allowed large depositors to protect
themselves against the burdens of inefficient or discriminatory patterns of national
regulation. Globalization put the costs and benefits of banking regulation in these
countries into closer competition with the regulatory systems of offshore financial
centers.
Offshore banking competition shortened in two ways the crisis-gestation period
featured in traditional crisis models (such as Krugman, 1979). First, even limited entry
by outside banks expanded the stock of well-priced domestically available substitutes for
deposits that local citizens had previously held in host-country banks. This lowered the
cost to Asian depositors of participating in a silent run on domestic banks. Second, the
relative safety of foreign-bank deposit substitutes demonstrated the greater reliability of
the performance guarantees written for each offshore entrant by the regulatory systems of
its homeland.
Each crisis constitutes an exit cost that society incurs to shrink the domain of a
high-cost or discriminatory regulator. Regulation-induced crises are triggered by efforts
to avoid the inefficiencies and inequities that political maneuvering interjects into
particular markets for regulatory services. Squeezing the equilibrium rents that shortsighted or corruptible officials can extract and distribute to their supporters disciplines
incumbent regulators, but only at the margin. To improve public-service contracting in
the longer run will require authorities to expose themselves to blowback for the delayed
effects of policy mistakes by accepting a performance-based scheme of deferred
compensation.
Exploitive regulation drives sophisticated depositors, unsubsidized borrowers, and
other bank stakeholders to book at least some of their business elsewhere: either abroad
or in informal or differently regulated domestic markets. Such regulatory arbitrage limits

27

the extent to which politicians can promote a distribution of regulatory burdens that
arbitrarily narrows opportunities for important sectors of a national economy to
accumulate and manage their wealth.
The normative goal of financial reform should be to induce nondiscriminatory and
efficient patterns of regulation and supervision. Regulators should be made accountable
not just for producing a stable financial economy, but for providing this stability fairly
and at minimum long-run cost to society. In practice, this means establishing contractual
incentives that would lead authorities to follow market-mimicking standards of
supervisory performance. In the absence of explicit or implicit government guarantees,
markets would insist that any bank that experiences a spate of opportunity-cost losses do
one or more of three things: shrink, raise more equity capital, or pay higher interest rates
for its debt. The public policy problem is to design employment contracts that would
make it in supervisors’ self-interest to invoke “market-mimicking” disciplines when and
as a country’s important institutions weaken.
Although officials understand that strengthening bank supervision is part of crisis
resolution, they seem reluctant to identify the behavioral norms and incentive structures
that made a crisis country’s supervision weak in the first place or to recommend publicservice contracting and reporting reforms that would be strong enough to make tougher
supervision serve an incentive-conflicted regulator’s self-interest.
For any regime, the size of tolerable deviations from a fair and efficient
distribution of net regulatory burdens increases with the opportunity costs its citizens face
in engaging in capital flight. In turn, the benefits and costs of capital flight evolve with
information technology, the volatility of the real economy, and the fluidity of the political
environment. The information revolution that is underway in finance today makes it
short-sighted and inequitable to adopt credit-allocation schemes that inexorably eat away
at the capital of a country’s banks and that require taxpayers to subsidize weak banks and
uneconomic patterns of real investment. Credit-rating agencies and the Basel Committee
on Banking Supervision would be well-advised to abandon sampling procedures that set
aside the costs of adverse tail events and models that presume that asset risks are
relatively stationary over time. They should focus also on finding ways both to bond the
scrupulousness with which staff members perform their supervisory duties and to enlist

28

forward-looking betting and derivatives markets to help them track the changing odds of
defaults in individual countries and industries (Kane, 2003).

29

REFERENCES
Barth, James R., Gerard Caprio, and Ross Levine, 2006. Rethinking Bank Regulation:
Till Angels Govern, New York: Cambridge University Press.
Baumol, William, John C. Panzar, and Robert D. Willig, 1986. “On the Theory of
Contestable Markets,” in C. Frank Matthewson and Joseph E. Stiglitz (eds.), New
Developments in the Theory of Industrial Structure. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
pp. 339-365.
Caprio, Gerard, and Daniela Klingebiel, 1996. “Bank Insolvency: Bad Luck, Bad Policy,
or Bad Banking,” Annual Conference on Development Economics, Washington:
The World Bank, pp. 79-104.
Dermine, Jean, 2003. “European Banking: Past, Present, and Future.,” in V. Gaspar, P.
Hartmann, and O. Sleijpen (eds.), The Transformation of the European Financial
System, Frankfurt: European Central Bank, pp. 31-95.
Garcia, Gillian, and Maria Nieto, 2006. “Banking Crisis Management in the European
Union: Multiple Regulators and Resolution Authorities,” Journal of Banking
Regulation, 6, 215-219.
Herring, Richard, and Til Schuermann, 2006. “Capital Regulation for Position Risk in
Banks, Securities Firms and Insurance Companies,” in Hal Scott (ed.), Capital
Adequacy: Law, Regulation, and Implementation. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Honohan, Patrick, and Daniela Klingebiel, 2003. “The Fiscal Cost Implications of an
Accommodating Approach to Banking Crises,” Journal of Banking and Finance,
27, 1539-1560.
Kane, Edward J., 1977. “Good Intentions and Unintended Evil: The Case Against
Selective Credit Allocation,” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 9, 55-69.
______________, 1981. “Accelerating Inflation, Technological Innovation and the
Decreasing Effectiveness of Banking Regulation,” Journal of Finance, 36, 355367.
______________, 1988. “Interaction of Financial and Regulatory Innovation,” American
Economic Review, 78, 328-334.

30

______________, 1989. “Changing Incentives Facing Financial-Services Regulators,”
Journal of Financial Services Research, 2, 263-272.
______________, 1998. “Capital Movements, Asset Values, and Banking Policy in
Globalized Markets,” in Seongtae, Lee (ed.), The Implications of Globalization of
World Financial Markets, Seoul: Bank of Korea, 278-298.
______________, 2003. “What Kind of Multinational Arrangements Might Best Enhance
World Welfare?,” Pacific Basin Finance Journal, 11, 413-428.
Krugman, Paul, 1979. “A Model of Balance-of-Payments Crises,” Journal of Money,
Credit, and Banking, 11(August), pp. 311-325.
Portes, Richard, 2008. “Ratings Agency Reform,” posted on www.voxeu.org, January 12.
Schüler, Martin., 2003. How do Banking Supervisors Deal with Europe-wide Systemic
Risk?, Discussion Paper No. 03-03, Centre for European Economic Research.
Shadow Financial Regulatory Committee, 2008. Statement No. 255, Statement on
Facilitating Mortgage Renegotiations: The Policy Issues, Chicago: February 11.
Wilson, J.A.G., 1986. Banking Policy and Structure: A Comparative Analysis. New
York University Press, New York.
*

This essay extends and refocuses analysis first presented in Kane (1998). For helpful comments, the
author wishes to thank Gerard Caprio and John Wilson.

31

