                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 THE EURO MAY OVER THE NEXT 15 YEARS SURPASS THE DOLLAR AS LEADING
                     INTERNATIONAL CURRENCY

                                          Menzie D. Chinn
                                          Jeffrey A. Frankel

                                        Working Paper 13909
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13909


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2008




We thank Brad Setser for useful comments regarding the reserves data and Benn Steil for encouraging
us to write this paper. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Menzie D. Chinn and Jeffrey A. Frankel. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
The Euro May Over the Next 15 Years Surpass the Dollar as Leading International Currency
Menzie D. Chinn and Jeffrey A. Frankel
NBER Working Paper No. 13909
April 2008
JEL No. E42,F0,F02,F31

                                              ABSTRACT

The euro has arisen as a credible eventual competitor to the dollar as leading international currency,
much as the dollar rose to challenge the pound 70 years ago. This paper uses econometrically-estimated
determinants of the shares of major currencies in the reserve holdings of the world’s central banks.
Significant factors include: size of the home country, rate of return, and liquidity in the relevant home
financial center (as measured by the turnover in its foreign exchange market). There is a tipping phenomenon,
but changes are felt only with a long lag (we estimate a weight on the preceding year’s currency share
around .9). The equation correctly predicts out-of-sample a (small) narrowing in the gap between
the dollar and euro over the period 1999-2007. This paper updates calculations regarding possible
scenarios for the future. We exclude the scenario where the United Kingdom joins euroland. But
we do take into account of the fact that London has nonetheless become the de facto financial center
of the euro, more so than Frankfurt. We also assume that the dollar continues in the future to depreciate
at the trend rate that it has shown on average over the last 20 years. The conclusion is that the euro
may surpass the dollar as leading international reserve currency as early as 2015.


Menzie D. Chinn
Dept. of Economics
University of Wisconsin
1180 Observatory Drive
Madison, WI 53706
and NBER
mchinn@lafollette.wisc.edu

Jeffrey A. Frankel
Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
jeffrey_frankel@harvard.edu
1. Introduction: When the Dollar Overtook the Pound
        In the aftermath of the Second World War, the dollar emerged as the uncontested
leader among international currencies, a development of historic significance. In 1899 the
share of the pound in known foreign exchange holdings of official institutions had been
more than twice the total of the next nearest competitors, the franc and the mark, and much
greater than the dollar.1 Even as late as 1940, the level of foreign-owned liquid sterling
assets was still double the level of foreign-owned liquid dollar assets. By 1945, however,
the position of the dollar and pound, as measured by this statistic, had precisely reversed.2
The war itself -- including US lending, UK borrowing and other consequences -- had
completed the dollar's rise to ascendancy.

         The reversal reflected long-run trends in economic fundamentals that had already
been underway since the late 19th century. The US economy surpassed the British economy
in size in 1872.3 US exports did not pull ahead of UK exports until 1915. The
development of the financial system lagged behind; one reflection is that the United States
did not establish a central bank until 1913. During the years following 1914, the US passed
from net debtor to net creditor while the UK moved in the opposite direction. This had
much to do with British borrowing from the United States so as to fight World War I. The
dollar was the only currency to remain convertible into gold at a fixed price into the 1920s.4
As it emerged as a major international currency, its use in international trade and finance
widened increasingly. That the pound retained its dominant position as key currency in the
interwar period was primarily due to inertia in such arrangements. But by 1945 the
dethroning was complete.

         The decline in the pound was clearly part of a larger pattern whereby the United
Kingdom lost its economic pre-eminence, colonies, military power, and other trappings of
international hegemony. As some wonder whether the United States might now have
embarked on a path of “imperial over-reach,” following the British Empire down a road of
widening budget deficits and overly ambitious military adventures in the Muslim world, the
fate of the pound is perhaps a useful caution. The Suez crisis of 1956 is frequently recalled
as the occasion on which Britain was forced under US pressure to abandon its remaining




1
   $105.1 million in pounds, $27.2m in francs, $24.2m in marks, and $9.4 in other currencies. In
1913, the ranking was the same: $425.4 million in pounds, $275.1m in francs, $136.9m in marks,
and $55.3 in other currencies. Lindert (1969, p.16-22).
2
  Aliber (1966, p.19-20).
3
  In real terms --1990 International Gheary-Kamis dollars.
4
  E.g., Nurkse (1944), Bergsten ( 1975, p.53), and Eichengreen (1992).


                                               2
imperial designs. But the important role played by a simultaneous run on the pound, and the
American decision not to help the beleaguered currency, should also be remembered.5

2. Measuring the dollar’s international role
        In the 1990s, the question arose whether the dollar was in the process of losing its
role as unrivaled international currency, as had the pound before it.6 The yen and mark had
gained steadily during the 1970s and 1980s, as measured by shares in central banks’
holdings of foreign exchange reserves, at the dollar’s expense. The strong fundamentals of
the Japanese and German economies, particularly their current account surpluses and low
inflation rates, constituted an obvious explanation.

         But the facts in the 1990s suggested that the right answer to the question was “no.”
Observers had confused a fall in the foreign exchange value of the dollar (1985-1995), with
a fall in its international role. In reality, the Japanese and German economies and their
respective currencies remained far behind the United States and the dollar. Furthermore,
the dollar’s share in reserves actually rose throughout the 1990s, as Figure 1 shows.7 The
dollar was also in demand in other respects, for example as a transactions currency in Latin
America and wherever else in the world people had lost faith in their own currencies.




5
  E.g., Boughton (2001) and “From Suez to Baghdad,” Charlemagne, The Economist, March 22,
2003, p. 47. The prime minister was told that the US would likely not support British plans to go
to the IMF for support of the pound.
6
  Kindleberger (1995, p.6) and Kunz (1995) are among those who “cried wolf.” The February 25,
1995, issue of The Economist included an article and leader arguing that "the dollar's dominance is
waning," at the expense of the DM in particular. Others, such as Hale (1995), saw the yen as the
challenger.
7
  The ratios based upon the COFER data assume 70% of the reserves not identified are held in
dollars, and 25% in euros. See the discussion at the end of Section 6 for more detail.


                                                3
Figure 1: Reserves held by central banks as shares of total – 3 major currencies
(revised IMF data spliced into old data after 1979, and COFER data starting 1995).

     .8

     .7

     .6
                                              USD
     .5

     .4

     .3
                                                                       EUR
     .2
                                    DEM
     .1
                                                 JPY
     .0
           1975        1980       1985        1990        1995        2000        2005




        Now the question, “Is the dollar in danger of losing its exclusive role as premier
international currency?” comes up yet again. But this time the answer may be “yes.”
The primary reason is that the euro now exists as a more serious potential rival than the
mark or yen were. A secondary reason is that the US by now has a 25-year history of
chronic current account deficits and the dollar has a 35-year history of trend depreciation.

          There are various possible criteria of international currency status: use of currencies
to invoice trade, to denominate debt and loans, and so forth. We focus on reserve currency
holdings for two reasons. First, annual data for all relevant currencies are available over the
last three decades or more; the other international roles are nowhere near as
comprehensively quantifiable. A second reason for focusing on the reserve currency role is
that it is more relevant than the others to the important questions of whether the United
States will continue to be able to finance its current account deficit.

        That being said, the same factors that determine the holdings of reserve currencies
are similar to those that affect other aspect of international currency status, such as the usage
of currencies for invoicing of trade in goods and assets. This point is useful to keep in mind
as we proceed through our analysis.8


8
   Goldberg and Tille (2006), for example, argue that invoicing in commodities is in dollars
because of the lower transactions costs associated with transacting in dollars. But this lower cost
is not immutable. The choice of a currency to use in the invoicing of trade and the holding of
transactions balances depends upon the macroeconomic volatility associated with various
currencies. If the dollar becomes less desirable to hold, the euro could eventually become the
currency associated with lower transactions costs.



                                                 4
3. Reserve Currency Determinants
        We seek empirically to ascertain the determinants of international reserve currency
shares in the past, in order to ascertain the conditions and timing under which the euro might
possibly surpass the dollar in the future.9 We use as our data base the period 1973-98,
before the advent of the euro. The exercise is largely parameter estimation and
calibration, without a lot of hypothesis-testing. In other words we need to squeeze a lot
out of a small sample and so we intentionally impose some a priori information.

         The literature on what determines reserve currency status is fairly well-established, if
often lacking in quantification. Three key points.
(1) Determinants. There is a list of determining factors, which appears subsequently, in
section 5 below. The most important is the size of the country or region in which the
currency is indigenously used, but there are others as well.
(2) Network externalities or economies of scale and scope are important. Each country is
more likely to use whatever currency is used by others. Thus international currency use is
not linear in the determinants. Rather, there may be a tipping phenomenon: if one currency
were to draw even and surpass another, the derivative of reserve currency use with respect to
its determining variables would be higher in that range than in the vicinity of zero or in the
range when the leading currency is unchallenged. In that sense the switch happens
rapidly.10
(3) In the chronological sense, however, the switch happens slowly. Whatever currency has
been used in the past will continue to be used in the future. Thus inertia is great.

        We thus have three tasks: (1) ascertain the most important determinants and their
relative weights, (2) confirm that the function is non-linear and settle on an appropriate
functional form, and (3) estimate the extent of inertia, which we will represent by means of a
lagged endogenous variable. Our data come from reserve currency holdings of central
banks over the period 1973-1998. One cannot be confident that any given data set will
contain enough information to answer the questions of interest. Unfortunately the available
data do not extend anywhere near far back enough in history to observe the fall of the pound
from its number one position of a century ago. But the beginning of our data set does
capture the mark passing the pound for the number two slot, which may be a useful data
point for addressing the tipping phenomenon, item (2). We hope that there is enough
variation among the other currencies and across the other years to obtain useful estimates of
parameters of interest under categories (1) and (3).

        The disappearance of the mark, franc and guilder in 1999, and their replacement
by the euro, constitute an irreparable break in the data series. But we turn this obstacle to
advantage. We obtain a check on the meaningfulness of the equation that was estimated

9
    This represents an updating of the estimation in Chinn and Frankel (2007). That paper
elaborated on the econometrics.
10
    As Eichengreen (2005) points out, counteracting the arguments about network externalities
and tipping, particularly in determining the reserve currency function, is an argument in favor or
multiple simultaneous international currencies: competition for the affections of investors.


                                                 5
on pre-1999 data by seeing whether it successfully predicts the direction of movement
over the period 1999-2007. Then we use the equation to forecast the path of the
currency shares of the dollar, euro, and other international currencies into the future, as a
function of several different possible scenarios regarding, for example, what additional
countries eventually join EMU. While we never expected to predict that the euro could
overtake the dollar anytime soon, we entered this exercise with an open mind regarding
whether the euro might overtake the dollar in the longer term.

4. International Use of the Euro So Far
         Of the various indicators of international currency use, the sort that is available on
the timeliest basis is the currency of denomination in cross-border financial transactions.
The euro soon after its debut came into wide use to denominate bonds. Within Europe
there was a tremendous increase in issues of corporate bonds, denominated in euros,
together with a rapid integration of money markets, government bond markets, equity
markets, and banking. While the frenetic activity seemed to be related to the debut of the
euro, it does not meet the definition of “international currency use,” because it is taking
place inside the currency’s home region.11

        Outside Europe, the euro has been a success as well. Detken and Hartmann
(2000) studied the data from the euro’s first year in operation, doing a careful job of
netting out intra-euro-area holdings in order to be able to trace back a measure of euro-
precursor currencies for five years before 1999 that is comparable with post-1999
numbers. They found more of an increase in the supply of euro-denominated assets
outside of Europe than an increase in demand..      The stock of international debt
denominated in euros increased from about 20 percent on the eve of EMU, to 30 percent
in 2003 (Rey, 2005, p. 114).

        When the euro arrived, although its share approximately equaled the sum of the
shares of the mark, French franc and guilder the year before EMU, it was less than what
one would get by adding in the share of ECUs (European Currency Units). This is to be
expected: before 1999, the twelve central banks had to hold foreign exchange reserves,
including of each others’ currencies; these disappeared at the stroke of a pen on January
1, 1999. One cannot simply compare pre- and post-1999 figures to learn if the advent of
the euro has hurt the attractiveness of the dollar as international reserve currency. The
euro’s share in central banks’ foreign exchange reserves reached 19.7% in 2003 and has
grown steadily thereafter.12




11
     Gaspar and Hartmann (2005), and Rey (2005).
12
  There have been substantial revisions in the estimated euro shares. For instance, in November
2003 the IMF revised the 2002 estimate from 14.6% to 18.7 %. (IMF, 2003; ECB, 2003.); in the
2004 Annual Report, the 2002 share is 19.3. The results reported here use the revised data,
spliced together with the old data before 1980.


                                               6
        International use of the euro has grown by other criteria as well. About half of
euroland trade with non-euro area residents is invoiced in the new currency.13 The euro’s
share in international debt securities rose to above 30% (versus below 20% for the pre-
1999 legacy currencies).14 Anecdotal evidence suggests that euro cash is increasingly
accepted in retail transactions around the world, and dollar bills decreasingly so.

         The comprehensive triennial survey of foreign exchange trading volume put
together by the BIS showed the dollar still easily in first place in 2001, at 85% of all spot
trades (out of 200%), followed by the euro at 43% and the yen at 26%.15 The same
ranking holds when one adds in forwards and swaps, and derivatives that are traded over
the counter. The next triennial BIS survey, covering April 2004, showed a small gain for
the euro. Including also forwards and swaps, the dollar was involved in 89% of all
transactions, and the euro in 37% in 2004.16 The most recent survey, covering April
2007, shows the dollar having declined further, to 86 per cent of all traditional
transactions. (Meanwhile, in an unheralded come-back, the pound has been closing in
on the yen for the #3 spot.) Over-the-counter FX derivative markets tell a stronger story:
the euro has been gaining share since its creation, and the dollar losing share.17 Figure 2
illustrates the dollar’s gradual loss of share in total foreign exchange trading, traditional plus
over-the-counter derivatives.

Figure 2: Currency distribution of reported foreign exchange market turnover
Percentage shares of average daily turnover in April of each year (Shares sum to 200%).
Source: BIS (2007) Foreign exchange and derivatives market activity in 2007, page 11.

     100
                    USD


      80



      60


                                                     EUR
      40



      20



       0
            2001    2004    2007            2001    2004    2007




13
   Hartmann (1998).
14
   The annual report of the European Central Bank (2003), from which these statistics come, cites
data through mid-2003.
15
   To compare foreign exchange trading volume in the euro with volume in its predecessor
currencies, one must allow for the disappearance of intra-euro12 trading, as in the Detken and
Hartmann’s (2002, p. 558-559) “simple arithmetic of EMU.” They find that the observed decline
is almost fully accounted for in this way.
16
    Bank for International Settlements (2005).
17
   Bank for International Settlements (2007, p.11).


                                                    7
        In short, the euro is the number two international currency, ahead of the yen, and
has rapidly gained acceptance, but is still well behind the dollar, which appears to most
observers to be comfortably in the number one slot. We now turn to a consideration of
the determinants of international currency status.

5. Factors that Suit a Currency for International Currency Status
        The literature on international currencies has identified a number of determining
variables.18

         (1) Output and trade. The currency of a country that has a large share in international
output, trade and finance has a big natural advantage. The U.S. economy is still the world's
largest in terms of output and trade. By such measures, Japan should be number 2, ahead of
Germany. Alarmist fears of the early 1990s, notwithstanding, it was never very likely that
Japan, a country with half the population and far less land area or natural resources, would
surpass the United States in sheer economic size. But the euro is now the home currency to
15 countries.19 Their combined economic weight is much greater than Germany alone, or
Japan. As of 2007, it was not quite as large as the United States, as Table 1 shows. But
evaluated at current exchange rates, the value of US GDP apparently fell below that of
euroland GDP for the first time in early 2008. Very likely, most of the 12 countries that have
acceded to the EU over the last four years will eventually join EMU, which will boost
euroland's collective GDP a bit further. If the other three long-time EU members, United
Kingdom, Sweden, and Denmark, were to join, euroland would definitively surpass the
United States in economic size; but that is much less likely to happen. If any of the larger
countries do join, it will be at least some years into the future. Thus the question of relative
size also depends on the growth rates of the US and European economies. As an alternative
to GDP, we have also looked at countries’ trading volume as another indication of their
relative weights in the world economy.

Table 1: Economic Size of US vs. Europe
                                                              2004                       2007
                                                                      $ 11.5                    $ 13.8
US                                                                    trillion                  trillion
                                                  Number of                Number of
                                                  members                  members
Euro-zone                                            12     $ 9.0 trillion   13 1/              $ 11.9
                                                                                                trillion
EU (post-May 2004)                                      25             $12.1     27 2/          $ 16.6
                                                                      trillion                  trillion
1/ Includes Slovenia, but not Cyprus and Malta, who joined the euro in 2008


18
    Among the relevant references are Aliber (1966), Alogoskoufis and Portes (1992), Bergsten
(1975), Black (1989), Dooley et al. (1989), Eichengreen and Frankel (1996), Eichengreen and
Mathieson (2000), Frankel (1992, 1995), Kenen(1983), Krugman (1984), Kindleberger (1981),
Matsuyama, Kiyotaki and Matsui (1993),McKinnon (1969, 1979), Portes and Rey (1998), Rey
(2001), Swoboda (1969), Tavlas (1993), and Tavlas and Ozeki (1992).
19
   Slovenia joined in January 2007 and Cyprus and Malta in January 2008.


                                                                 8
2/ Includes Bulgaria and Romania.




     Figure 3: Currency share vs. GDP (at market rates)
                                         SHARE vs. RATIOY
                        .8

                        .7

                        .6

                        .5
               RE




                        .4
             HA




                        .3
            S




                        .2

                        .1

                        .0
                                          (GDP using market rates)
                      -.1
                             .0     .1    .2       .3        .4        .5        .6
                                               RATIOY



         (2) The country's financial markets. To attain international currency status, capital
and money markets in the home country must be not only open and free of controls, but also
deep and well-developed. The large financial marketplaces of New York and London have
long benefited the dollar and pound relative to the euro and its predecessor the
deutschemark, as Frankfurt still lag far behind as a financial center. In our earlier paper, we
took it for granted that Frankfurt was the current home of the euro. Under the scenario
where the UK decided to join EMU, the euro benefited from the double boost on counting
the UK economy into the size of the euroland economy, and bringing the advantages of
London’s deep financial markets.

         It is surprisingly difficult to come up with a proxy for size, depth, or development
that is available for all the financial centers. We have opted to use as our primary measure
data on foreign exchange turnover in the respective financial centers: New York, London,
Frankfurt, Tokyo, Zurich, etc. This measure differs from turnover of the currencies (dollar,
pound, euro, etc.), a variable that would be much more likely to be determined
simultaneously with the international currency status that we are trying to explain. It
captures, for example, the pre-eminence of London, which continues despite the small role
of the pound. This measure has the virtue of reflecting to some extent all kinds of
international financial transactions (both long-term and short-term, banking and securities,
bonds and equities). Moreover it is possible to patch together a data set covering the
desired countries and years -- though but just barely, and with increasing difficulty as one
goes back through the 1970s. We also tried an alternative proxy for the size of financial
centers – the size of the countries’ stock markets.

   (3) Confidence in the value of the currency. Even if a key currency were used only as a
unit of account, a necessary qualification would be that its value not fluctuate erratically. As



                                               9
it is, a key currency is also used as a form in which to hold assets (firms hold working
balances of the currencies in which they invoice, investors hold bonds issued internationally,
and central banks hold currency reserves). Here confidence that the value of the currency
will be stable, and particularly that it will not be inflated away in the future, is critical. The
monetary authorities in Japan, Germany and Switzerland, in the 1970s established a better
track record of low inflation than did the United States, which helped their bids for
international currency status. As recently as the 1980s, the mean and variance of the
inflation rate in the United States were both higher than in those three hard-currency
countries, though lower than in the United Kingdom, France, Italy, and many other
countries.20

        Given the good U.S. inflation performance in the 1990s, this is no longer such a
concern as it was formerly. A more important negative for the dollar is the fact that the
United States is now a large-scale debtor country. Even if the Federal Reserve never
succumbs to the temptations or pressures to inflate away the U.S. debt, the continuing U.S.
current account deficit is always a likely source of downward pressure on the dollar. Such
fears work to make dollars unattractive.

        (4) Network externalities. An international money, like domestic money, derives its
value because others are using it. It is a classic instance of network externalities. In this
sense, the intrinsic characteristics of a currency are of less importance than the path-
dependent historical equilibrium. There is a strong inertial bias in favor of using whatever
currency has been the international currency in the past.

         One can make an analogy with language. If one sat down to design an ideal
language, it would not be English. (Presumably it would be Esperanto.) Nobody would
claim that the English language is particularly well-suited to be the world's lingua franca by
virtue of its intrinsic beauty, simplicity, or utility. It is neither as elegant and euphonious as
French, for example, nor as simple and logical in spelling and grammar as Spanish or
Italian. Yet it is certainly the language in which citizens of different countries most often
converse and do business, and increasingly so. One chooses to use a lingua franca, as one
chooses a currency, in the belief that it is the one that others are most likely to use.

        Krugman (1984) showed how there can be multiple equilibria in use of an
international currency, developing some informal ideas of earlier authors such as
Kindleberger (1981), McKinnon (1979), and Swoboda (1969). Matsuyama, Kiyotaki and
Matsui (1993) went to the next level of abstraction analyzing this problem with the theory of
random matching games. See also Rey (2001).

       The implication is that small changes in the determinants will not produce
corresponding changes in the reserve currency numbers, at least not in the short run. At a
minimum, changes will show up only with a long lag. As noted, the pound remained an
important international currency even after the United Kingdom lost its position as an
economic superpower early in the century. In the present context, the inertial bias favors the
continued central role of the dollar. Also, as already noted, economies of scale suggest that,
20
     E.g., Tavlas and Ozeki (1991).


                                                10
even in the long run, measures of international currency use may not be linear in the
determinants. There may be a tipping phenomenon when one currency passes another.

        Another aspect of the network externalities is economies of scope. An individual
(exporter, importer, borrower, lender, or currency trader) is more likely to use a given
currency in his or her transactions if everyone else is doing so. If a currency is widely used
to invoice trade, it is more likely to be used to invoice financial transactions as well. If it is
more widely used in financial transactions, it is more likely to be a vehicle currency in
foreign exchange trading. If it is used as a vehicle currency, it is more likely to used as a
currency to which smaller countries peg.21 And so forth. In this paper we content
ourselves with trying to predict reserve currency holdings, with the understanding that
international usage of a currency is likely to be influenced by the same factors.

6. Econometric estimation of Demand for Reserve Currencies
        We use the IMF annual data on aggregate central bank holdings of the relevant
major currencies. The data are not generally available according to holding of individual
central banks, because most of them regard this as highly confidential.22

Functional Form

        From inspection of Figure 3, it seems apparent that the relationship between
currency shares and GDP shares is nonlinear. Indeed, the functional form cannot literally
be linear, because the currency shares are bounded between 0 and 1. A natural way of taking
into account such a constraint is to use a logistic transformation of the shares variable.23
The standard logistic transformation is symmetric, and has a maximal slope at share equal
0.50.

        Figure 4 plots the logistic of the currency share against the size variables. The
straight line now seems to fit the data much more comfortably, indicating that the logistic
may be a good guess.
21
   In some of our regression tests we tried adding to our list of determinants a measure of the
popularity of the major currencies for smaller currencies to peg to (as suggested by Eichengreen
and Mathieson, 2000). An Asian country that is pegged to the dollar, for example, is likely to
hold a larger share of its reserves in the form of the dollar. We recognize that the pegging
decision may be endogenous, determined simultaneously with the reserve holding decision and
the various other measures of international currency use. We did not find a significant positive
effect. Perhaps this is just as well; it saves us the trouble of trying to deal with the endogeneity
of the pegging decision. In what follows we emphasize regressions without the pegging-anchor
variable included.
22
   The IMF data is broken down into aggregate holdings by industrialized countries and
aggregate holdings by developing countries. Some have suggested that the first data set is more
interesting because the reliability of the statistics is higher. Others have suggested that the
second data set is more interesting because the G10 countries cannot hold their own currencies as
reserves.
23
   Logistic = log(share/(1-share)).



                                                11
Figure 4: Logistic share vs. GDP (mkt. rates)
                             LOGT vs. RATIOY
         2

         1

         0

         -1
     T




         -2
  LOG




         -3

         -4

         -5
         -6                        (GDP at market rates)
         -7
              .0     .1       .2       .3         .4      .5        .6
                                    RATIOY




Basic Estimation results, 1973-1998

        Table 2 reports results of regressions of currency shares against the variables we
have discussed, when estimation is based on the logistic transformation, which reflects
the inherent nonlinearity of the problem. Judged by the number of statistically significant
coefficients, this functional form is more successful statistically than a linear form. In all
instances a lagged endogenous variable is included, to account for partial adjustment,
which is an important factor.

        We can easily summarize the results. Size of the home country (relative income)
enters positively, significantly, and robustly. All three rate-of-return variables appear
with the hypothesized negative signs: losses in the value of a currency decrease the
attractiveness of holding it. They are statistically significant more often than not, though
inflation (expressed as the differential vis-à-vis average industrial country inflation)
shows up more strongly and consistently than does trend depreciation (estimated as 20-
year average rate of change of the value of the currency against the SDR) or exchange
rate volatility. Foreign exchange turnover, our measure of the depth of competing
financial centers shows up with the hypothesized positive sign, but is only statistically
significant in a minority of tests. The coefficient on the lagged endogenous variable
suggests a slow adjustment rate. Only about 12% of the adjustment to the long run is
estimated to occur in a single year, implying a half-life of about 5-6 years for the
adjustment process.




                                             12
Table 2: Panel Regression for Determination of Currency Shares

       Dependent variable: logit of currency shares in reserve holdings
                        Pre-euro sample (1973-98)
                                        [1]                   [2]                   [3]

            Constant                   -0.65                 -0.49                 -0.12
                                      [0.15]                [0.14]                [0.06]

         GDP ratio (y)                 2.77                  2.22                  1.04
                                      [0.64]                [0.62]                [0.29]

 Inflation differential (π)           -2.64
                                      [1.16]

       Depreciation (Δs)                                    -1.08                 -1.10
                                                            [1.29]                [0.59]

         Exratevar (σ)                -0.98                 -0.58                 -1.25
                                      [0.57]                [0.58]                [0.34]

     FX Turnover ratio (to)            0.45                  0.21                  0.43
                                      [0.29]                [0.30]                [0.14]

      Lag: logit(share t-1)            0.85                  0.88                  0.96
                                      [0.03]                [0.03]                [0.01]

              N                        182                   182                    156
            Sample                   1973-98               1973-98                1973-98
          Adjusted R2                  0.97                  0.97                   0.99

Notes: Dependent variable is logit(share) ≡ log(share/(1-share)).
All variables are in decimal form.
GDP at market rates.
Estimated using OLS.
Figures in bold face are significant at the 10% level.
Column [3] omits Japanese yen, and uses cross-section weighted standard errors.



         A little investigation reveals that the results are particularly sensitive to the
inclusion of the Japanese yen (which had a strong trend appreciation over the sample
period, without ever attaining as big an international role as predicted by many).
Excluding data for Japan yields the results in column [3], in which all variables are
statistically significant role.

       Having shed some valuable light on the relevant variables and functional form,
we estimate and adopt a two-currency version of the determinants of premier reserve
currency status. This stripped down equation is more readily used to focus on predictions
regarding the dollar-versus-euro choice 24
24
  The parameters of the two-currency version are estimated in Table 8 of Chinn and Frankel
(2007).


                                                   13
Post sample test, 1999-2007

        It is useful to assess how our model has done in terms of predicting the trends in
reserve holdings since the advent of the euro in 1999.25 This is more difficult to do than
one might think. Since the time we conducted our initial analysis, the IMF has ceased
reporting reserve holdings in the form it did up to the 2004 annual report. After this point,
the IMF has not tried to estimate the composition of reserve holdings of those central
banks that do not report details to the IMF. Instead, IMF’s COFER database now reports
an “unallocated” category. Unfortunately, from our perspective, this category is quite
large, accounting for about 26.5% of total reserves. We have to take a stand on the
composition of these unallocated reserves. We estimate the dollar share at 70%, and the
euro share at 25%.

        Both the level and the trend of the actual currency shares during 2005-2007 – up
for the euro and down for the dollar – fit very well the simulation where the rate of
returns on the currencies were expected to continue their trend of the first four years of
the decade, as Figure 5 shows. This gives some grounds for some confidence in what we
think we have learned from the historical data regarding the relevant variables, functional
form, and coefficients.



7. Extrapolation to the future
        The goal is to use the estimated parameters to forecast the shares of the dollar,
euro, and other currencies in the coming decades. Under any plausible scenario, the
dollar will remain far ahead of the euro and other potential challengers for years to come.
But we want to know if there are plausible scenarios that give a different answer for 20 or
30 years into the future and, if so, what are the variables that are most important to this
outcome. First, two caveats – these are simulations incorporating fairly mechanical
variations. There are no interactions between, say, exchange rate depreciation and exchange
rate volatility. We do not even attempt to predict the future course of these variables.
Secondly, the simulations are of course only as good as the parameters that we estimated
from the historical data, most of which are neither precisely estimated nor entirely stable.

Posited Scenarios

        In our earlier work, we experimented with a variety of scenarios. Two of them
produced the result that the euro would gradually gain on the dollar, and that sometime
early in the 2020s, the system would reach a tipping point, a rapid reversal in which the
euro would surpass the dollar, which would then settle in at the number two slot. The

25
   In Chinn and Frankel (2007), we assess the out-of-sample forecasting characteristics of the
pre-euro equations in Table 2 for all five top international currencies during the first five years of
the post-euro period. We now skip directly to the two-currency model, and update the out-of-
sample forecast by another three years of data.


                                                  14
first scenario was that EU countries that are not currently in EMU, of which Great Britain
is by far the most important for these purposes, would join.26 Even three years ago we
did not claim that this scenario was a likely one, and it appears even less likely today,
particularly in light of the good performance of the British economy since the start of
EMU. The more likely scenario seemed to be the one under which none but small EU
members joined the euro – countries that seemed to small to bother taking into account –
but under which the dollar continued to lose value in the future at the same rate that it had
in the past. This scenario produced a flipping of roles between the dollar and euro taking
place around 2022 (Figure 5).

Figure 5: Update of Fig. 12 from Chinn and Frankel (2007), Case 4, Scenario D:
Simulation of “UK entry” and continued depreciation of currencies at their 2001-04 rates.

     1.0
                    Old USD                                          EUR
                    series                                           forecast
     0.8

                                 COFER
                                 based
     0.6                         USD
                                 series

     0.4
              Old DEM/EUR                                             USD
              series                                                  forecast
     0.2                                      COFER based
                                              DEM/EUR
                                              series

     0.0
               1980       1990       2000       2010       2020       2030       2040




        On the one hand, one could argue that this scenario was too pessimistic for the
dollar in two respects: first, the 2001-2004 rate of dollar depreciation that we used was
more rapid than the longer-term historical average, and, second, the scenario did not
allow for likely more rapid economic growth in the US than among European countries.
On the other hand, one could argue that the scenario has proven to be too optimistic in
three respects: First, the dollar has actually depreciated since 2004 at a more rapid rate,
rather than a slower rate. Second, European growth prospects now appear not all that
bad after all, in light of a modest recovery of productivity growth in the meantime in
Western Europe and in light of the continuing gradual process of accession by countries
that, though small in GDP per capita, loom larger in terms of both population and growth
prospects.



26
  The ten accession countries were assumed to join EMU in 2010, Sweden and Denmark in 2015, and the
UK in 2020; the US retained its share of world income; and the dollar continued the depreciation
experienced over the 2001-04 period


                                                15
        The third point is potentially the most important, by far. The measure of
financial development that we have used until now-- forex turnover in Frankfurt versus
New York – probably understates the progress of the euro. Galati and Woodridge (2006)
“find that the liquidity and breadth of euro financial markets are fast approaching those of
dollar markets, and as a result the euro is eroding some of the advantages that historically
supported the pre-eminence of the US dollar as a reserve currency.” Three years ago we
had taken it for granted that the euro would benefit from the depth and liquidity of
London financial markets if and only if the UK were to join euroland, which we have
agreed is an unlikely prospect. (In this we shared the assumption by British
policymakers, for whom staying out of the euro was presumed to run the danger of
substantial negative effects on London as a financial center.) Frankfurt remains far less
developed as a financial center than London or New York, which in the earlier scenarios
was perhaps the clearest drag on the euro’s progress as an international currency. But as
of today, it appears that London has managed in many respects to become the financial
center for the euro even while the UK remains outside European Monetary Union.

       We now drop from the scenario the idea that the UK, Denmark and Sweden join
the euro area anytime soon. We also drop the assumptions that the dollar continues to
depreciate indefinitely at the 2001-04 rate (let alone the rate of 2004-07).

        Our second scenario is the most conservative case: the dollar in the future
depreciates only at the rate experienced on average over the 20 years up to end-2007, and
only the new accession countries join the monetary union. Using the actual market GDP
levels, exchange rate volatility and trading volumes recorded in 2007, we obtain the
predictions for the dollar versus the euro illustrated in Figure 6. In this case, the dollar
retains its primacy, even as the euro narrows the gap to a 40-60 difference.

Figure 6: Only accession countries join EMU in 2010 (UK stays out),
and currencies depreciate at the 20-year rate experienced up to 2007.
    .8

    .7
                                                      USD forecast
                           USD
    .6

    .5

    .4
                                                           EUR
                                                           forecast
    .3
                         DEM/EUR
    .2

    .1

    .0
            1980      1990       2000     2010      2020      2030       2040




                                             16
        As noted above, the issue of financial depth is important. Our third scenario
implements the idea that London, not Frankfurt, is in some sense the true financial center
of the euro. It seems implausible, however, to assert that London is entirely devoted to
providing the liquidity for the euro area. We chose to allocate 20% of London forex
trading to the euro area.27 Applying this measure of financial depth, we obtain the
forecast shown in Figure 7. In this case, the euro overtakes the dollar sometime around
2015.

        These simulations illustrate what sort of combinations of assumptions can drive
the tipping points in our model. 28


Figure 7: Only accession countries join EMU in 2010 (UK stays out),
but 20% of London turnover counts toward Euro area financial depth,
and currencies depreciate at the 20-year rates experienced up to 2007.

     .8

     .7
                             USD                                EUR
     .6
                                                                forecast

     .5

                                                              USD forecast
     .4

     .3
                           DEM/EUR
     .2

     .1

     .0
             1980       1990       2000       2010       2020       2030        2040




8. Conclusion
       Although our econometric analysis pertains only to the reserve currency role, we
believe that similar considerations apply to other criteria of international currency status.
This includes the use of the dollar versus euro as currencies in which to invoice trade,
denominate debt, hold cash, and conduct foreign exchange transactions. Consequently,

27
   This figure is selected on the basis of the fact that 42% of the total 200% of forex trading in
London involves the euro on one side of the transaction or the other. Divided by two equals 21%.
BIS (2007).
28
   For instance, this forecast presumes, as in Figure 6, dollar volatility remains much higher than
euro volatility. Assuming that this gap shrinks to that prevailing at end-2003 (as in our previous
study) would overturn this role reversal.
*


                                                17
if the dollar were to overtake the euro as a reserve currency, it is natural to conjecture that
the international usage of the dollar would also be eclipsed by the euro along these other
dimensions as well.

Possible Implications if the Dollar is Dethroned

        In recent years, foreign central banks have financed by accumulation of dollar
reserves a higher fraction of the US current account deficit, as compared to earlier in the
decade,when the capital inflows came more from the private sector. But the US cannot
necessarily rely on the support of foreign central banks indefinitely. One reason for this,
which holds even if China and some oil-exporters continue to keep their currencies
undervalued, is that they can diversify their currency holdings out of dollars, without
necessarily allowing appreciation on a trade-weighted basis. The important point is that
there now exists a credible rival for lead international reserve currency, the euro, which
has many of the desirable characteristics of an international currency. This was not true in
the late 1970s and early 1990s when the press feverishly speculated that the dollar might
be overtaken by the yen or mark.

It is true that each Asian central bank stands to lose considerably, in the value of its
current holdings, if dollar sales precipitate a dollar crash. But I agree with Barry
Eichengreen (2005) that each individual participant will realize that it stands to lose more
if it holds pat than if it joins the run, when it comes to that. Thus if we are relying on
the economic interests of other countries, we cannot count on being bailed out
indefinitely.

         If individual economic self-interest will not keep foreigners buying dollars
indefinitely, might major foreign governments feel an obligation to do so on geopolitical
grounds? They did so in the 1960s, in part because the Soviet threat drew the Western
allies together, which produced a degree of solidarity and cooperation (notwithstanding
troublemaking by Charles DeGaulle) that is not in evidence today. Even then, the
Bretton Woods system broke down. To recap the history, the day of reckoning implied
by the Triffin Dilemma was in any case accelerated substantially by the expansionary U.S.
fiscal and monetary policies of the Viet Nam War era, and the resulting widening of the
balance of payments deficit. International investors sold dollars. In August 1971 the United
States responded by unilaterally closing the official gold window and devaluing the dollar,
thereby ending the Bretton Woods regime. By March 1973, all the major industrialized
countries had given up the effort to keep their currencies pegged to the dollar. Central bank
holdings of the yen and the mark rose rapidly in the remainder of the 1970s and 1980s
(though the level still remained well behind the dollar for easily understood reasons).
         Over the last four decades, our allies have been willing to pay a financial price to
support American leadership of the international economy, because they correctly saw it
to be in their interests. In the 1960s, Germany was willing to offset the expenses of
stationing U.S. troops on bases there so as to save the United States from a balance of
payments deficit. The U.S. military has long been charged less to station troops in high-
rent Japan than if they had been based at home. In 1991, Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, and a
number of other countries were willing to pay for the financial cost of the war against



                                              18
Iraq, thus temporarily wiping out the U.S. current account deficit for the only time in a
twenty-year period. Repeatedly the Bank of Japan, among other central banks, has been
willing to buy dollars to prevent the U.S. currency from depreciating (late 1960s, early
1970s, late 1980s).
    During the same period that the United States has lost its budget surplus and the twin
deficits have re-emerged, i.e., since 2001, we have also lost popular sympathy and
political support in much of the rest of the world.29 In the past, deficits from imperial
overstretch have been manageable because others have paid the bills for our troops
overseas: Germany and Japan during the Cold War, Kuwait and Saudi Arabia in 1991.
Now the hegemon has lost its claim to legitimacy in the eyes of many. Next time the US
asks other central banks to bail out the dollar, will they be as willing to do so as Europe
was in the 1960s, or as Japan was in the late 1980s after the Louvre Agreement? We fear
not.
        Our scenarios of dollar-euro rivalry are not meant to express an optimistic
forecast regarding European economics or governance. Europeans have made many
mistakes, the leaders and public alike. But so have Americans.

Summary of conclusions

        Predictions about scenarios under which the euro might in the future rival or
surpass the dollar as the world’s leading international reserve currency are the major pay-
off of this paper. Several years ago, we thought the conditions that would produce a
reversal of roles within the subsequent two decades were along the lines of either a
scenario under which the United Kingdom joined EMU, which seems unlikely, or one in
which the dollar continues to depreciate at the same rate as it had over 2001-04 (4 per
cent per year, trade-weighted), presumably because US macroeconomic policies
eventually undermine confidence in the value of the dollar. Now, even with the UK out
of EMU, if a fraction of London’s financial markets is counted as the home for euro
transactions then, we find that the euro could overtake the dollar as early as 2015.

        If the dollar does indeed lose its role as leading international currency, the cost to
the US would probably extend beyond the simple loss of seignorage narrowly defined.
We would lose the exorbitant privilege of playing banker to the world, accepting short-
term deposits at low interest rates in return for long-term investments at high average
rates of return. When combined with other political developments, it might even spell
the end of economic and political hegemony. These are century-long advantages that
are not to be cast away lightly.

       Most recent assessments of the sustainability and adjustment of the US current
account feature substantial depreciation of the dollar in the future, whether adjustment
then operates via expenditure-switching or a valuation effect. Our results suggest that
such dollar depreciation would be no free lunch, and could have profound consequences

29
   In sharp contrast to international attitudes at the dawn of the century, the U.S. is now
viewed unfavorably in most countries surveyed by the Pew Global Attitudes Project.
Other surveys give similar results.


                                             19
for the international monetary system. These consequences include the loss of the
exorbitant privilege of easy financing of large US deficits, both government and national.
The political influence that American policymakers have internationally, including in
international institutions, could also be diminished.

       If the euro were to overtake the dollar in a few decades, it would be a once-in-a-
century event. But it happened to the pound in the last century, so who is to say it could
not happen to the dollar in this?


Acknowledgments

We thank Brad Setser for useful comments regarding the reserves data and Benn Steil for
encouraging us to write this paper.

Data Appendix

Share is the proportion of currency holdings. GDPratio is the share of world GDP (evaluated at
market exchange rates); Inflationdiff is the difference between a 5 year moving average of CPI
inflation and industrialized country inflation; Exratevar is the trade weighted exchange rate
volatility (monthly), measured as a 5 year moving average; Fxturnovertatio is turnover is daily
turnover divided by total 5 center turnover.

Reserve currency holdings. Official reserve holdings of member central banks, at end of year.
The data used is spliced version of Updated 2003 data obtained July 1, 2004 (for 1980 onward) to
an unpublished data for 1965-2001. NA observations set to 0 except for the euro legacy
currencies. Then, US dollar series is based on COFER data beginning at end-2004, while Euro
series is based on COFER data beginning at end 1999. 70% of unallocated reserves are
categorized as dollar reserves, while 25% are categorized as euro reserves. Note the 2007 entry is
for 2007Q3. In logistic transformations, 0 entries set to 0.000001 (0.0001%). Sources: IMF
Annual Reports, Table I.2, IMF unpublished data, and Currency Composition of Official Foreign
Exchange Reserves (COFER) data, December 28, 2007 version.
http://www.imf.org/external/np/sta/cofer/eng/index.htm .

Ratio of GDP to total World GDP. Ratio of GDP in USD (converted at official exchange rates) to
GDP of world aggregate. Sources: IMF, International Financial Statistics and IMF, World
Economic Outlook.

Inflation. Calculated as log difference of monthly CPI, averaged. Five year moving average is
centered. Source: IMF, International Financial Statistics; Euro area inflation for 1980-1998 is
ECB data from Alquist and Chinn (2002). Industrial country inflation from International
Financial Statistics.

Exchange rate volatility. Calculated as the standard deviation of the log first difference of the
SDR exchange rate. Source: IMF, International Financial Statistics.

Forex Turnover. 1989, 1992, 1995, 1998, 2001, 2004, and 2007 from BIS Triennial Surveys.
Billions of dollars of daily turnover, in April. Data from 1977-88 from G-30, NY Fed surveys,
central bank surveys. Observations in-between survey years log-linearly interpolated. For 1973-
1979, interpolation using 1977-79 relationship.


                                                 20
References

Alquist, Ron and Menzie Chinn, 2002, “The Euro and the Productivity Puzzle: An Alternative Interpretation,”
NBER Working Paper No. 8824 (March).

Aliber, Robert, 1966, The Future of the Dollar as an International Currency. New York: Frederick Praeger,
Publishers.

Alogoskoufis, George and Richard Portes, 1992, "European Monetary Union and International Currencies
in a Tripolar World," in Matthew Canzoneri, Vittorio Grilli and Paul Masson (eds), Establishing a Central
Bank: Issues in Europe and Lessons from the U.S., Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 273-302.

Bank for International Settlements, 2005, Triennial Central Bank Survey of Foreign Exchange and
Derivatives Market Activity in 2004 , March.

Bank for International Settlements, 2007, Triennial Central Bank Survey of Foreign Exchange and
Derivatives Market Activity in 2007 , UK Data – Results Summary, December.

Bergsten, C.Fred, 1975, The Dilemmas of the Dollar, New York: New York Univ. Press.

Black, Stanley, 1989, "Transactions Costs and Vehicle Currencies," Journal of International Money and
Finance 10 (4), December: 512-526.

Boughton, James, 2001, "Northwest of Suez: The 1956 Crisis and the IMF," IMF Staff Papers 48, no. 3,
425.

Chinn, Menzie, and Jeffrey Frankel, 2007, “Will the Euro Eventually Surpass the Dollar as Leading
International Reserve Currency?” NBER WP No. 11508, 2005. In G7 Current Account Imbalances:
Sustainability and Adjustment, edited by Richard Clarida. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 285-323.

Detken, Carsten, and Philippe Hartmann, 2000, “The Euro and International Capital Markets,” Working Paper
No. 19, European Central Bank, April. International Finance 3, no. 1, 53-94.

Detken, Carsten, and Philippe Hartmann, 2002, “Features of the Euro’s Role in International Financial
Markets,” Economic Policy 35, Fall, 555-597.

Dooley, Michael, J. Saul Lizondo, and Donald Mathieson, 1989, "The Currency Composition of Foreign
Exchange Reserves," IMF Staff Papers 36, no.2, June, 385-434.

Eichengreen, Barry, 1992, Golden Fetters: The Gold Standard and the Great Depression 1919-39, New York:
Oxford University Press.

Eichengreen, Barry, 2005, “Sterling’s Past, Dollar’s Future: Historical Perspectives on Reserve Currency
Competition,” NBER Working Paper No. 11336, May.

Eichengreen, Barry, and Jeffrey Frankel, 1996, "The SDR, Reserve Currencies, and the Future of the
International Monetary System" in The Future of the SDR in Light of Changes in the International
Financial System, edited by Michael Mussa, James Boughton, and Peter Isard, Washington, DC:
International Monetary Fund, 337-378.

Eichengreen, Barry, and Donald Mathieson, 2000, “The Currency Composition of Foreign Exchange
Reserves: Retrospect and Prospect,” IMF Working Paper 00/131, Washington DC. Revised version in The
Impact of EMU on Europe and the Developing Countries, edited by Charles Wyplosz, Oxford and New
York: Oxford University Press, 2001, 269-293.




                                                   21
European Central Bank, 2003. Review of the International Role of the Euro. Frankfurt: European Central Bank,
December.

Frankel, Jeffrey, 1992. "On the Dollar," In Peter Newman, Murray Milgate, John Eatwell, eds. The New
Palgrave Dictionary of Money and Finance, MacMillan Press Reference Books, London.

Frankel, Jeffrey, 1995. "Still the Lingua Franca: The Exaggerated Death of the Dollar," Foreign Affairs, 74, no.
4, July/August, 9-16.

Galati, Gabriele, and Philip Woodridge, 2006, “The Euro As a Reserve Currency: A Challenge to the Pre-
eminence of the US Dollar,” BIS Working Papers No. 218, October.

Gaspar, Vitor, and Philipp Hartmann, 2005, “The Euro and Money Markets: Lessons for European
Financial Integration” In The Euro at Five: Ready for a Global Role? edited by Adam Posen. Washington,
DC: Institute for International Economics, 87-98.

Goldberg, Linda , and Cedric Tille, 2006, “Vehicle Currency Use in International Trade,” Federal Reserve
Bank of New York, March.

Hale, David, 1995, "A Yen for Change: Why the Yen as a Reserve Currency is Not Far-fetched," The
International Economy, May/June.

Hartmann, Philipp, 1998, “The Currency Denomination of World Trade after European Monetary Union,”
Journal of the Japanese and International Economies, 12, 424-454.

International Monetary Fund, 2003, “Revised IMF Annual Report, data on official foreign exchange
reserves,” press release no. 03/196, Washington DC.

Kenen, Peter, 1983, The Role of the Dollar as an International Currency, Occasional Papers No. 13, Group of
Thirty, New York.

Kindleberger, Charles P., 1981, International Money, George Allen & Unwin, London.

Kindleberger, Charles, 1995, "Dollar Darkness," The International Economy, May/June 1995.

Krugman, Paul, "The International Role of the Dollar: Theory and Prospect," in Exchange Rate Theory and
Practice, edited by John Bilson and Richard Marston. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1984, 261-78.

Kunz, Diane, 1995, “The Fall of the Dollar Order: The World the United States is Losing,” Foreign Affairs 74,
no. 4, July/August, pp. 22-25.

Lindert, Peter, 1969, Key Currencies and Gold: 1900-1913, Princeton Studies in International Finance, No. 24,
August.

Matsuyama, Kiminori; Nobuhiro Kiyotaki and Akihiko Matsui. 1993. “Toward A Theory of International
Currency,” Review of Economic Studies 60, April, 283-307.
McKinnon, Ronald, 1969, Private and Official International Money: The Case for the Dollar, Essays in
International Finance, No. 74, Princeton University, April.

McKinnon, Ronald, 1979, Money in International Exchange. New York: Oxford University Press.

Nurkse, Ragnar, 1944, International Currency Experience, Geneva: League of Nations.




                                                      22
Portes, Richard, and Helene Rey, 1998, “The Emergence of the Euro as an International Currency,” NBER
Working Paper No. 6424, February.

Rey, Helene, 2001, “International Trade and Currency Exchange,” Review of Economic Studies 68, no. 2
April, 443-464.

Rey, Helene, 2005, “The Impact of a Five Year Old Euro on Financial Markets,” in The Euro at Five:
Ready for a Global Role? edited by Adam Posen (Institute for International Economics: Washington).
pp.111-116.

Swoboda, Alexander, 1969, "Vehicle Currencies in the Foreign Exchange Market: The Case of the Dollar," in
R.Aliber, ed., The International Market for Foreign Exchange, New York: Praeger, 30-40.

Tavlas, George, 1993, "The Deutsche Mark as an International Currency," in Dilip Das, ed., International
Finance: Contemporary Issues, Routledge, London, 566-579.

Tavlas, George, and Yusuru Ozeki, 1992. The Internationalization of Currencies: An Appraisal of the Japanese
Yen, IMF Occasional Paper No. 90. International Monetary Fund: Washington, D.C.

Tavlas, George, and Yusuru Ozeki, 1991. “The Japanese Yen as an International Currency,” IMF Working
Paper No. 91/2, January.




                                                    23
