                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      CAN WEAK SUBSTITUTION BE REHABILITATED?

                                             V. Kerry Smith
                                             Mary F. Evans
                                           H. Spencer Banzhaf
                                            Christine Poulos

                                          Working Paper 13903
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w13903


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2008




Smith's research was partially supported by the United States Department of Homeland Security through
the Center for Risk and Economic Analysis of Terrorism Events (CREATE) under grant number 2007-ST-061-000001.
However, any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations in this document are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect views of the United States Department of Homeland Security.
The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. (Grant# R8295081) also provided partial support. Evans'
and Poulos' research was supported by the same U.S. Environmental Protection Agency grant. Thanks
are due Mark Agee, Dan Phaneuf, Will Wheeler, Rudy Santore, Laura Taylor, and Bill Provencher
for constructive comments on earlier drafts. Susan Hinton, Alex Boutard, Kenny Pickle, and Diana
Burns helped with several aspects of earlier drafts of this research. The views expressed herein are
those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by V. Kerry Smith, Mary F. Evans, H. Spencer Banzhaf, and Christine Poulos. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Can Weak Substitution be Rehabilitated?
V. Kerry Smith, Mary F. Evans, H. Spencer Banzhaf, and Christine Poulos
NBER Working Paper No. 13903
March 2008
JEL No. Q51

                                               ABSTRACT

This paper develops a graphical analysis and an analytical model that demonstrate how weak substitution
can be used for non-market valuation. Both weak complementarity and weak substitution can be evaluated
as restrictions that allow quantity or quality changes in non-market goods to be described as price
changes that yield equivalent changes in individual well being. They are Hicksian equivalents in that
the price changes yield the same utility changes as would the quantity or quality changes. After discussion
of several potential applications of weak substitution, the paper develops the parallel between the restriction
and recent strategies from modeling differentiated goods.


V. Kerry Smith                                         H. Spencer Banzhaf
Department of Economics                                Deaprtment of Economics
W.P. Carey School of Business                          Georgia State University
P.O. Box 873806                                        Atlanta Ga.
Arizona State University                               hsbanzhaf@gsu.edu
Tempe, AZ 85287-3806
and NBER                                               Christine Poulos
kerry.smith@asu.edu                                    RTI International
                                                       Public Health and Environment Division
Mary F. Evans                                          Research Triangle Park, N.C.
Department of Economics                                cpoulos@rti.org
University of Tennessee
Knoxville, TN 37996
Evans, Mary Frances [mevans12@utk.edu]
                                Can Weak Substitution be Rehabilitated?


I.       Introduction

         Revealed preference (RP) methods for non-market valuation generally ignore weak

substitution (WS), a form of demand interdependency introduced by Feenberg and Mills [1980]

nearly thirty years ago. This restriction focuses on a relationship between a private good and a

non-market good or service that arises when the relative price of the private good is high. That

is, when consumption of the private good (the weak substitute) reaches some level, further

increases in the non-market service have no value.

         Numerous RP applications assume weak complementarity (WC), an alternative form of

demand interdependency. Mäler [1974] credits Stevens [1966] with the original insights that

motivate his demonstration of how to recover the demand for a public good from the demand for

the private good serving as the weak complement. Since this early discussion, which began with

the role of water quality and the demand for water-based recreation, environmental applications

have provided a number of examples where a private good can be described as a weak

complement to an environmental service. The service usually plays a role that is analogous to a

quality attribute of a private good.1

         In the same time span that the relevance of weak complementarity has grown, weak

substitution has languished. Evidence of this trend can be found in the revised edition of

Freeman’s classic treatment of non-market valuation methods. After reviewing the concept in

some detail in his 1992 book, he seems to have reflected the apparent professional consensus and


1
  The logic was used (without appreciating the connection to weak complementarity) in Bresnahan and Gordon’s
[1997] introduction to the issues posed in modeling the demand for new goods. It is also important to the restrictions
required to recover the Hicksian demand for a non-market good from the Marshallian demand for a non-market
good from the Marshallian demand for the private weak complement. See Bullock and Minot [2006] and Von
Haefen [2007] for discussion.


                                                                                                                    1
excluded weak substitution from his revised edition (see Freeman [1992, 2003]). He maintains

that an assumption of less than perfect substitution is not especially informative without

including a more detailed preference specification. Following Bartik [1988], Freeman argues

that, at best, substitution offers upper and lower bounds for Hicksian welfare measures.

         The new set of questions facing environmental and security-related policy analysts may

require re-thinking this judgment. In some applications ex ante mitigation activities are best

described as weak substitutes for non-market “bads.” The first area for potential applications is

motivated by the recent wildfires near San Diego, California. The fires focused attention on a

variety of private services, including concierge fire protection and remotely activated fire

retardant systems, that can serve as weak substitutes for public fire protection. An example of

the former is AIG’s Wildfire Protection Unit for specialized protection offered to homeowners

with large homes (generally valued at several million dollars) who were, at the time of the fires,

paying premiums of $10,000 or more a year for homeowners’ insurance. The services offered

were widely publicized as involving private fire fighting experts who were contracted to protect

specific homes. Efforts to protect neighboring homes were only undertaken if the activity

complemented the protection of the enrolled home.

         A second class of applications involves homeland security and the precautions

households can take to purchase extra food, water, and emergency supplies as well as

prescription drugs as a form of mitigation to avoid serious impacts from short term interruptions

in supply chains due to natural disasters or terrorist activities2. These resources could be


2
  Using Knowledge Network’s internet panel the first author on this paper, Carol Mansfield and Aaron Strong
collected information about households’ stated preferences for public activities to protect the food supply. Part of the
survey included information on non-prescription and prescription medicines households had on hand to deal with
food borne illness that might be associated with contamination of the food supply. A simple regression of the count
of six medicines or related equipment (i.e. thermometer) study participants had on hand indicated that income,
awareness of the potential for food-borne illnesses, experience with cases of food poisoning, and risk attitudes were
significant determinants (with p-values of 0.10 or smaller) of the count of mitigating substances households had on


                                                                                                                      2
described as weak substitutes for resources devoted to public planning and activities to reduce

the risk of short term disruptions.

         A third class of applications involves private behaviors to avert and mitigate

environmental health impacts due to exposures to environmental pollutants. For example, asthma

medicine may represent a weak substitute for improvements in the air quality conditions

households face. Under this interpretation when the medicine is sufficiently cheap,

improvements in air quality are irrelevant.3 A second home in a pristine environment, available

for short term trips, may serve a similar role.

         While it is difficult to gauge the importance of each of these types of responses (and

many others that could be cited as examples), it is clear these activities are an increasingly

popular response when households, particularly those with relatively higher incomes, demand

higher levels of amenities or protection from disamenities. As such, they can be used to measure

households’ demands for some types of non-market and public goods.

         This paper has three objectives. First, we develop a graphical approach introduced in

Smith and Banzhaf [2004] to demonstrate how discrete changes in substitution effects influence

the Hicksian price equivalents defined for either WC or WS. Second, we demonstrate how weak

substitution would be used to derive Hicksian consumer surplus measures. This is accomplished

by adapting one of the examples that Larson [1991] used to illustrate how weak complementarity

revealed sufficient information to describe the role of the non-market good in quasi-expenditure

functions. Finally, we discuss the relationship between weak substitution and weak




hand. This simple reduced form model is consistent with the observable sources of heterogeneity in consumer
preferences for mitigation of environmental and other public bads that the weak substitution restriction can describe.
3
  This example of course assumes that the individual or household does not derive utility directly from improved air
quality but only through its impact on the severity of asthma symptoms experienced.


                                                                                                                    3
complementarity and the role a more general characterization of weak complementarity and

weak substitution could play for non-market valuation.

II.    Hicksian Equivalent Price Changes

       Much of the literature describing alternative surplus measures, comparing policy

instruments, and analyzing changes in multiple, interrelated, public goods is based on the early

literature in the economics of rationing. It is somewhat surprising that until recently, the

descriptions of the preference restrictions used to recover measures of tradeoffs people would

make for changes in non-market goods did not also follow this same line of reasoning. Recently

Smith and Banzhaf [2004, 2007] adapt the rationing literature to demonstrate why weak

complementarity and the Willig [1978] condition are sufficient to specify a quality adjusted price

index. The index defines the price adjustment equivalent to the Hicksian consumer surplus (i.e.,

the income adjustment) for a change in a non-market good or a quality attribute. We extend their

framework to describe weak substitution in more detail.

       To develop this idea graphically, consider first the Marshallian consumer surplus for a

price change using indifference curves. With a decrease in the price of private good X from P0

to P1 , the area P1TSRP0 in panel A of figure 1 represents the change in Marshallian consumer

surplus (MCS) using a conventional (linear) demand function. Equation (1) provides an

algebraic description of P1TSRP0 for a linear demand function.

        MCS = (P0 − P1 )X 0 +      1
                                   2   (P0 − P1 )( X 1 − X 0 )                                     (1)

Rearranging terms, we have equation (2):

        MCS =   1
                2   (P0 − P1 )( X 1 + X 0 )                                                        (2)

Panel B of figure 1 provides a representation of this relationship using indifference curves.

Assume the interior budget constraint corresponds to P0 for X and the exterior to P1 . The


                                                                                                   4
tangency at A corresponds to X 1 and at C to X 0 . The Marshallian consumer surplus associated

with the price change for this case of indifference curves corresponding to linear demand is equal

to (1/2)( CD + AB ). To see this, note that with the numeraire good, z, priced at unity and income

equal to m0 the following relationships hold:

        m0 L = P0 X 0
        m0 N = P1 X 0
                                                                                                        (3)
        m0 M = P1 X 1
        m0 J = P0 X 1

Moreover, CD = m0 L − m0 N and AB = m0 J − m0 M . Substituting from equation (3) yields the

relationship given in equation (4).

        1
        2(CD + AB ) = 12 [(P0 − P1 )X 0 + (P0 − P1 )X 1 ]
                                                                                                        (4)
        MCS = 12 (P0 − P1 )( X 1 + X 0 ) = 12 (CD + AB )

       A similar logic illustrates how changes in a public good, denoted q, can be described

using equivalent (in welfare terms) price changes. Consider first the case of weak

complementarity (with X and q as weak complements) depicted in figure 2. Weak

complementarity implies increases in q have no value to the consumer when there is zero

consumption of X. Therefore in figure 2 the indifference curves for a given utility level, denoted

V, with different levels of q, will intersect at the same point (R) on the vertical axis (i.e., where

X = 0 ).

       Begin at point A in figure 2 where quality is q0 , the price of good X is P0 , utility is V,

and income is m = T . Now consider an improvement in quality from q0 to q1 . At this new level

of q, the indifference curve in x-z space is lower everywhere but at point R; in figure 2 it appears

to fan inward. Quality improvements imply an inward fanning because the amounts of the weak

complement (X) and the numeraire (z) required to maintain the same level of utility, V, decrease


                                                                                                        5
as q increases. The WTP for this quality change, holding both utility and price constant is given

by:

         WTP* = e(P0 , q0 ,V ) − e(P0 , q1 ,V ) .4                                                                           (5)

         The quality change and reduction in income by WTP * is equivalent to a parallel shift in

the budget constraint from TN to SO (dashed line) in figure 2. The new point of tangency is at

A′ , where quality is q1 , the price of good X is P0 , utility is V, and income is S = T − WTP * .

         Now consider the definition of a price change for X equivalent to the quality change in q.

Instead of reducing the individual’s income by WTP * , increase the price of X sufficiently to

return the individual to her original utility level, V, given the quality improvement. Let the new

budget constraint be TP and the new point of tangency be C. The pivot from TN to TP

represents this price change from P0 to P1 > P0 . The price change is defined so that individual is

indifferent between getting the improvement at the original price along with the reduction in

income given in equation (5) (point A′ ), or getting the improvement and an increase in price but

without the subsequent income reduction (point C). Because the price change is constructed to

exactly offset the quality change and hold utility constant, we label it as the Hicksian equivalent

price change for the quality change. In other words, points A and C would fall along the same

Hicksian demand curve for X, constructed for the utility level V.

         The income adjustment and the price adjustment are equivalent in the sense that they

bring the consumer to the same indifference curve. An alternative way to define equivalence

4
 The Hicksian consumer surplus measure associated with the quality change is given by the difference in the
Hicksian surplus for the market good at the two quality levels:
                                          P C ( q1 )           PC ( q0 )

                                             ∫ h(P, q ,V )dP − ∫ h(P, q ,V )dP
                                             P0
                                                       1
                                                                  P0
                                                                               0


where P C (⋅) represents the choke price. Integration yields
    (           )                 [(                   )                   ]
e P C (q1 ), q1 ,V − e(P0 , q1 ,V ) − e P C (q0 ), q0 ,V − e(P0 , q0 ,V ) . By the definition of weak complementarity, the
first and third terms cancel and we have the expression given in equation (5).


                                                                                                                         6
would be the price adjustment that would “un-do” the income adjustment. To construct such a

price decrease, we first decrease income by WTP * (from TN to SO). The pivot from SO to SJ

represents the price decrease that is equivalent in the sense that it brings us back to the starting

indifference curve. This adjustment is equivalent to the pivot from TN to TP only if the so-

called Willig condition is satisfied (Willig [1978].).

       Bullock and Minot [2006] have demonstrated that the Willig condition is not needed to

recover the Hicksian consumer surplus for a quality change. They extend Vartia’s [1983]

numerical solution to include two additional equations and use numerical integration to measure

the Hicksian surplus for non-market goods. The first of these equations is the difference in the

two integrals that defines the Hicksian surplus for a change in quality (or a non-market good)

with weak complementarity (i.e., equation (8) in Bullock and Minot and given in our footnote

#3). The second uses the envelope condition to define the relationship between Marshallian and

Hicksian demand under weak complementarity. Solving them simultaneously completes the

logic needed for their proposal. One could also solve numerically for the Hicksian equivalent

price by recognizing that the value of the quantity change defined in terms of the change in the

Hicksian price adjustment has to equal the value defined in terms of the price change. We

consider how this same logic can be applied in the case of weak substitution in section IV. In the

next section, we describe some examples of weak substitution.



III.   Weak Substitution – Introduction and Examples

       In contrast to weak complementarity, weak substitution assumes the existence of a level

of consumption for the private good (the weak substitute) above which improvements in the non-

market good have no value. When consumption of the weak substitute is below this threshold,




                                                                                                       7
denoted X a , quality improvements are valuable. Equivalently, using the links implied by the

economic descriptions of demand in the presence of quantity restrictions, quality improvements

are valuable when the price of the weak substitute exceeds the price that induces the threshold

consumption level, X a . Let Pa denote the price that implies the threshold consumption level:5

             VP
         −                  = Xa .                                                                                    (6)
             Vm    P = Pa



Then weak substitution is defined in equation (7):

         ∂V
                        = 0 ∀ Pˆ ≤ Pa .                                                                               (7)
         ∂q    P = Pˆ


         Figure 3 illustrates the fanning indifference curves associated with weak substitution. As

in Smith and Banzhaf’s [2004] proposal for illustrating weak complementarity, we define

indifference curves for varying levels of q but the same utility level. The inward fanning

represents the effects of quality improvements. The shape of the indifference curve to the right

of Xa will vary with each application. As drawn, the indifference curve continues to slope

downward for levels of the weak substitute above X a representing the case where X—but not

q—continues to have value beyond the threshold consumption level. In any case, to the right of

X a , changes in q do not shift the indifference curve in x-z space.

         Feenberg and Mills’ original example illustrating the concept of WS focused on

education. They assumed that private education is preferred to public education provided the

price of private school is sufficiently low. In this case (and for their story) improvements in the




5
  Pa is a function defined by the specified level of Xa and the prices of other goods and income. We illustrate how
this relationship influences the direction of the Hicksian surplus below.


                                                                                                                      8
quality of public education have no value to the parent who sends her children to private

schools.6

         Examples of weak substitution usually involve cases where the private good serving as a

weak substitute for some non-market service mitigates low levels of the non-market service or an

undesirable outcome7. If we consider cases in which consumption of the private good and

provision of non-market services are not contemporaneous, we can introduce other potential

examples. In what follows we describe three situations where weak substitution offers a basis

for explaining the link between the private goods and non-market services.

A. “Concierge” Private Protection

         The private fire protection offered to high-end property owners in Malibu, Beverly Hills,

Newport Beach and Menlo Park as well as in a dozen Colorado resort communities by AIG’s

Wildfire Protection Unit is an example of a weak substitute for public fire protection. According

to news accounts, the service, involving private firefighters, was effective in saving a number of

homes in areas of Orange and San Diego Counties in California that were hardest hit by

wildfires. A Los Angeles Times story on the fire protection services indicate that the AIG Private

Client Group Insurance began in 2000 and has grown to nearly 1 billion dollars in gross




6
  Actually, Feenberg and Mills did not specifically discuss the quality of public education, but this interpretation is
consistent with the overall logic of their discussion.
7
  Bockstael and Mc Connell’s [2007] new book on revealed preference approaches to non-market valuation uses
weak substitution to introduce a discussion of how mitigating expenditures can provide an upper bound for the
willingness to pay for improvements in environmental services. They are skeptical of finding plausible examples
where weak substitution can be useful. For example they suggest:
         “..cases in which such a threshold (as implied by weak substitution) makes sense are not easily identified. It
might seem reasonable to assume that at r=0 (the price of the weak substitute in their notation) the condition would
hold automatically, because at that point as much x (the weak substitute) as is needed can be acquired costlessly.
And as long as increases in x can completely mitigate any changes in q (the non-market resource), then at r=0,
changes in q would not matter. However at r=0 the household may more than mitigate the decline in q” (pp. 256-
257). (parenthetical comments added). This comment misses the point. The weak substitute is not a perfect
substitute for q with sufficient consumption of x. Rather it eliminates the need to consider q. The individual can
choose to consume higher levels of x so long as there is a price where further changes in q no longer matter.


                                                                                                                     9
premiums.8 The firm also offers a similar service for hurricanes which involves dispatching pre-

disaster consultants to assess shutter protection, property storage, and landscaping. Restoration

teams help with restoration and repairs after storms. This first example illustrates how

heterogeneity in preferences and abilities to pay are likely to imply differences in the virtual

price thresholds for a weak substitute for different income groups.

B. Health Production

         Most discussions of mitigation rely on some specified health production function and use

the relationship between measures of environmental quality and purchased inputs to derive

measures of the willingness to pay for improvements in quality (see Freeman [2003 ] for an

overview and Agee and Crocker [1996] as an example). Epidemiological research suggests high

concentrations of ground level ozone can affect the frequency and severity of asthma attacks if

asthmatic children are outside during these episodes (see Friedman et. al. [2001]). Under these

conditions the services of a high-quality day care (or the time of one household member)

supervising young children during periods of high ozone similarly could be treated as a weak

substitute. To implement the model empirically, one would require a detailed record of the time

profile of ozone conditions and an especially extensive record of how households with young

asthmatic children respond by allocating their time or resources to assure their children avoid

these exposures.9

C. Disasters and Self Protection

         Durable and non-durable goods can play a mitigating role in the presence of natural and

man-made disasters. Some households maintain inventories of food, water and medicines to

8
  See Yoshimo [2007].
9
  With the collaboration of Carol Mansfield of RTI International, we investigated the feasibility of using a panel data
set she had collected on ozone and children’s time outdoors. However, the data included insufficient detail on prices
(actual and virtual), expenditures incurred, and time use records to allow a test of this proposed example of weak
substitution..


                                                                                                                    10
respond to short-term disasters. Others have private wells, electric generators, wood burning

stoves, etc. in part to respond to short term outages in public sources for water or power.10

Purchases of auxiliary power or water supplies may, in some situations, be treated as weak

substitutes for services to respond to disruptions in public systems. In other words, if the price of

household, point-of-use water treatment were low enough (including any shadow costs

associated with non-price rationing), then some public water treatment services would not be

missed.11 Likewise if the price of a generator (at the extensive margin) and /or the price of fuel

(at the intensive margin) were low enough, then electricity would not be missed during a power

failure.

           Each of these examples offers an opportunity to observe the tradeoffs a specific group of

households would be willing to make for a change (or to avoid a change) in one or more non-

market goods. Private expenditures (or insurance payments) are generally not available with

sufficient spatial resolution to undertake a test without significant data collection. However,

often analysts do not consider looking for the required supplementary data when there is not a

clear theoretical basis to describe how the data would be used to estimate these incremental

values. In the next section we develop the weak substitution argument graphically and illustrate

how Larson’s [1991] early example using weak complementarity can be adapted for application

to weak substitution.

IV.        Weak Substitution: Graphical and Algebraic Analysis

A. Describing Weak Substitution with Graphs


10
   Often these decisions serve multiple objectives. As a result, it is not possible to associate the tradeoffs they imply
exclusively with a specific non-market good (or bad) as a substitute. However, this jointness in objectives is not
always present and we raise them here as an opportunity for future research.
11
   In the north eastern corner of Maricopa County in Arizona, public water supplies are becoming more uncertain
for private homeowners. Wells are also unreliable sources for water with persistent droughts. As a result a number
of the homeowners have installed large private water tanks to ensure a reliable water supply independent of the
decisions of water providers for the general public.


                                                                                                                      11
        Figure 4 uses the Smith-Banzhaf format to describe how quality change can be translated

into a Hicksian price change for the case of weak substitution. The two panels in figure 4

illustrate two roles for the relative prices of X and z. In panel A the budget constraint pivots at

X a . As drawn, an individual who consumes the threshold level of the weak substitute, X a , is

unable to consume z (e.g., P( X a ) ⋅ X a = income ). Panel B places the X intercept to the right of

the threshold.12

        In both panels, the pivot in the budget constraint from the outer budget line, tangent to

V (q0 ) at A, to the inner constraint and corresponding tangency at C, defines a change in the

relative price of z. The budget constraint tangent at A depicts the lower price for the numeraire

good z, denoted Pz (q 0 ) . The inner budget constraint, tangent at C, relates to the higher price,

Pz (q1 ) . By construction, points A and C will lie along the same Hicksian demand curve. In this

case, the weighted average of AB and CD (measured along the X-axis) corresponds to the

Hicksian surplus for the price (and quality) change as detailed in equations (8a) through (8c).

                1
         AB =      (Pz (q1 ) − Pz (q0 )) ⋅ z0                                                                    (8a)
                Pa

                1
         CD =      (Pz (q1 ) − Pz (q0 ))⋅ z1                                                                     (8b)
                Pa

         1                  ⎛      ⎞
           ( AB + CD ) = 1 ⎜⎜ 1    ⎟⎟ ⋅ (Pz (q1 ) − Pz (q0 )) ⋅ ( z1 + z 0 )                                     (8c)
         2               2 ⎝ Pa     ⎠

When Pa is normalized to unity, this relationship is comparable to our earlier description of the

Hicksian willingness to pay for a quality change with weak complementarity. However, with

weak substitution the most direct graphical approach to illustrate the connection to Hicksian

12
  Alternatively, one could consider a third figure where the X intercept was placed to the left of the threshold
consumption level. As we illustrate below each characterization implies a different set of Marshallian demands for z
that provide the basis for recovering measures of the economic value of changes in q.


                                                                                                                 12
equivalent prices uses the price of our numeraire. This is because weak substitution implies a

discontinuity in the demand for z at the threshold level of consumption of the weak substitute.

We can introduce a third indifference curve (labeled V (q1 ) in panel A of figure 4),

corresponding to a quality level of q1 and a higher utility level, to define the Marshallian

                                                          1
measure of the quality change (or price change in z) as     ⋅ Pa ⋅ (CD + EF ) .
                                                          2

       It may seem surprising that the best price to use for changes in q, when q and X are linked

as weak substitutes, is the price of z (the numeraire good in our graph). However, closer

inspection of the figure reveals that z, in fact, serves as a weak complement to q. That is, if we

pivot panel A in figure 4 and place X on the vertical axis with z on the horizontal, then the level

of z corresponding to Xa (labeled z a in the figure) defines what Smith and Banzhaf [2004]

characterize as weak complementarity “at a point.” Thus, following the same logic as with weak

complementarity, this interpretation provides an alternative explanation for why Pz serves as a

price index for the amenity change. To put it in other terms, in the two good case, a level of X

(coupled with a given income) defines a level of z. Weak substitution identifies the level of X,

                                                                                  m − Pa X a
Xa, above which q has no value thus implicitly defining a level of z, z a =                  , below
                                                                                     Pz

which q has no value.

       This suggests a dual interpretation of the WC and WS preference restrictions, which is

straightforward once we realize that the properties of the indirect utility function allow another

interpretation of the restrictions. V (⋅) is homogenous of degree zero in prices and income. This

property implies, for our two good example, that an adjustment to the price of X is equivalent to




                                                                                                       13
an adjustment to the price of z plus an income adjustment.13 To illustrate how this parallel

relates to applications, consider a case where weak complementarity is frequently used—a

discrete choice over communities.14 Suppose in a two community world, a household is

indifferent among different levels of air quality in all communities except the community in

which the household resides. That is, for any given price of housing in Community 2, the

household is indifferent to air quality in Community 1 unless the price in Community 1 is low

enough. In this case, we can say that housing in Community 1 is a weak complement to air

quality in Community 1. Alternatively, we could say that for any given price of housing in

Community 1, the household is indifferent to air quality in Community 1 unless the real price in

Community 2 is high enough. This example illustrates the mathematical connection, but the

similarity of the two goods disguises the fact that the interpretation can be quite different. In

practical applications, it will not always be possible to model z as a weak complement to q; the

weak substitution relationship with a private good X may be more intuitive and more empirically

tractable.

        Figure 5 illustrates the discrete change implied by WS as a discontinuous jump in the

Hicksian demands for z, labeled here as Dz (⋅) for utility at V, that occurs at z a . With two

market goods, quantities of z below z a are equivalent to quantities of X above X a , a region in

which changes in q have no value. Hence, the Hicksian demand for z, at a constant level of

utility, does not change over this range with changes in q. Weak substitution provides the

information that allows the value of the quality change from q0 to q1 to be expressed in terms of

the change in the area under this demand in a way that is comparable to weak complementarity.


13
   Our formulation actually parallels Friedman's [1949] interpretation of the Marshallian demand curve, in which
money incomes are constant but the prices of all other goods are adjusted to maintain utility levels.
14
   We could have equivalently used the example of modeling the choice between different recreation sites.


                                                                                                                   14
In this case, weak substitution allows the analyst to define Pz (q1 ) and Pz (q0 ) and it also assures

that equation (9) reduces to (10).

                    PzC                             PzC

         ABCD =     ∫ D (t , P , q ,V )dt − ∫ D (t , P , q ,V )dt
                    Pz
                            z       a       1
                                                    Pz
                                                               z       a       0                                   (9)


                    Pz ( q1 )                        Pz ( q0 )

         ABCD =        ∫ D (t , P , q ,V )dt − ∫ D (t , P , q ,V )dt
                      Pz
                                z       a       1
                                                          Pz
                                                                   z       a       0                              (10)


where Pzc denotes the choke price for z. When q = q1, the demand corresponds to the higher

segment, BC, and for q = q0 the lower segment AD represents demand. The integral of Dz (⋅)

from Pz (q0 ) to Pzc exactly offsets the integral from Pz (q1 ) to Pzc implying the terms for this

segment cancel and we are left with the two terms in (10).

B. Describing Weak Substitution with an Algebraic Example

        In addition to the graphical interpretation in the last section, we can also illustrate how

weak substitution works algebraically using the virtual price for the weak substitute. To do so

we simply adapt the analysis Larson [1991] outlined for the case of a weak complement with a

linear Marshallian demand.15 Assume equation (11) describes the Marshallian demand for X, the

weak substitute for q.

         X = α + βP + γq + δm                                                                                     (11)

where P denotes the price of the weak substitute. α, β, γ, and δ are parameters in the demand

function. Using Hausman’s [1981] logic we can apply Roy’s identity and integrate back to

obtain the quasi-expenditure function as in equation (12), with b(q, V ) the constant of

integration.


15
  There is nothing that precludes more general cases or an analogue to the Bullock-Minot numerical approach for
computing the Hicksian surplus.


                                                                                                                  15
                                                      1⎛               β⎞
        e(P, q, b(q, V )) = b(q, V ) exp(δP ) −        ⎜ α + β P + γq + ⎟                           (12)
                                                      δ⎝               δ⎠

        This model is well defined for ePP < 0 and X ≥ 0 . Larson uses weak complementarity,

together with the boundary conditions to derive an expression for b(q, V ) . We follow his logic

for the case of weak substitution with one change to simplify the algebra: we substitute

b(q, V ) = exp(a (q, V )) . Simply repeating the steps to derive the Hicksian demand from equation

(12), we have equation (13) as the demand function and (14) as Pa , the price that induces the

consumer to acquire X a .

                                                  β
         X = δ exp(a(q, V )) exp(δP ) −                                                                    (13)
                                                  δ

                 1                1              1  ⎛      β⎞
        Pa = −       a(q, V ) −       ln(δ ) +    ln⎜ X a + ⎟                                              (14)
                 δ                δ              δ ⎝       δ⎠

                                                                                  ∂e(Pa ,⋅,⋅)
        Substituting equation (14) into (12) and using weak substitution (                    = 0 ), we have
                                                                                     ∂q

a closed form expression for the constant of integration identified in equation (12). More

                                                            ∂e(Pa ,⋅,⋅)
specifically, e(Pa ) is given in equation (15) and                      in (16)
                                                               ∂q

                                         β 1⎧      ⎡ − a (q, V ) 1 ⎛       β ⎞⎤      β⎫                    (15)
    e( Pa ,⋅,⋅) = [− ln (δ )] + X a +     − ⎨α + β ⎢            − ln⎜ X a + ⎟⎥ + γq + ⎬
                                         δ δ⎩      ⎣ δ           δ ⎝       δ ⎠⎦      δ⎭

        ∂e(Pa ,⋅,⋅) β ∂a(q, V ) γ
                   = 2         − = 0.                                                                      (16)
           ∂q       δ   ∂q      δ

Solving (16) and integrating we have in (17)

                             γδ
             a (q, V 0 ) =      q + c(V 0 )                                                                (17)
                              β




                                                                                                           16
where c(V 0 ) denotes the constant of integration and V0 indicates we use the initial or baseline

conditions to define it. Substituting (17) into equation (12) we have the expenditure function that

incorporates weak substitution for X at X a .




                            ⎡     γδ            ⎤ 1⎛               β⎞
        e(P, q, V 0 ) = exp ⎢δP +    q + c(V 0 )⎥ − ⎜ α + βP + γq + ⎟                                (18)
                            ⎣      β            ⎦ δ⎝               δ⎠

       This expression can be used to measure the Hicksian surplus for changes in q provided

the condition defining q holds only for X < X a . This threshold is essential because the analysis

is based on the assumption that improvements in q have no value to an individual when his

consumption of X exceeds X a . As a result, equation (18) defines a conditional quasi-

expenditure function that is relevant only for P > Pa and X < X a .

V.     Summary and Extensions

       The short answer to the rhetorical question in our title is a resounding “yes”. Indeed, it

would seem that weak substitution offers the potential for direct application in the analysis of a

wide range of private mitigating activities, especially those currently undertaken primarily by

high income households. A graphical interpretation of the restriction illustrates how to define and

measure the Hicksian price equivalent of amenity changes under weak substitution. In addition

to providing this graphical analysis, we offer some potential explanations that would motivate

the use of weak substitution in applications. Both mitigation and a more general conception of

the implications of different aggregation strategies for amenity services consumed over time

provide prospects for applications involving weak substitution between an amenity service and

one (or a composite of) private good(s).




                                                                                                    17
           Weak complementarity and weak substitution are preference restrictions that imply

changes in substitution effects at specific threshold levels of consumption of the related private

goods. Once we acknowledge the prospect for discrete changes in pure Hicksian substitution

effects, there is no reason to stop with the assumption that the changes only take place once or at

“corners”. Instead, the possibilities are constrained only by analysts’ ability to envision

applications displaying the changes that are implicitly hypothesized by WC or WS.

           Thus, in principle, we could have a set of discrete changes in a WC or WS relationship,

provided there was a discrete set of choice alternatives available, as in our two-community

choice example above. Suppose for the case of weak substitution that the threshold where the

private good ceases to serve as a substitute for non-market quality changes with the level of the

non-market good or even with the levels of other goods consumed. The concierge fire protection

could be differentiated based on size, location or other characteristics of the structure being

protected. Or, in the health context, at relatively low ambient lead exposure, a single course of

chelation treatment may be sufficient to remove all the accumulated lead. After that single

course of treatment, reductions in environmental lead would have no further value. At higher

levels of ambient exposure, multiple courses of treatment may be required before exhausting the

weak substitution relationship. Figure 6 illustrates such a case with the indifference curves

associated with each level of q “spiraling” from a common envelop.16 The relevant domain for

each curve begins with its respective quality-defined threshold. It is easy to see that even in this

16
     Figure 6 is constructed using the following preference specification:,
                                                    1
           U = X − X + ( Z − c) * q for X               2
                                                            ≤X,
                               1
           U = Z − c for X         2
                                       >X,
and
            X = a − bq .
q both enters as a repackaging factor for Z and lowers the threshold X . Figure 6 has been constructed assuming
a=10, b=1, and c=10 at q={1,2,3}.


                                                                                                                  18
case a pivoting of the budget constraint around its X-intercept – that is, an adjustment to the price

of z – can also define a compensating adjustment for the quality change. Indeed, this would be

true even if q only affected the threshold point and not the marginal rate of substitution

conditional on the distance from the threshold point (i.e., when q does not repackage z). The

reason for this result is that, in all of these cases, the marginal rates of substitution for each fan

(or spiral), fixing X, are ordered by q. When weak complementarity and weak substitution are

used to motivate orderings for the marginal rates of substitution between z and X with changes in

q, they can be seen as illustrations of how insights from the use of montone comparative statics

can be considered for revealed preference approaches to non-market valuation.

        Heterogeneity in mitigation services for natural hazards or private services to supplement

public services that reduce the risks of harm due to these hazards would be consistent with these

structures. They are also potentially useful in offering a specific structural restriction for

alternative plans presented in a conjoint survey framework. In this context, they are usually

designed to measure the economic tradeoffs people would be willing to make for different

aspects of non-market services. The stated choice analysis usually formulates a set of policies

that are intended to serve as substitutes for losses in environmental services or as mechanisms for

restoring or enhancing non-market services. When the questions involve substitutes for non-

market services then the different levels of attributes can capture how features of a plan affect the

price threshold for the weak substitute.




                                                                                                         19
References

Agee, Mark D. and Thomas D. Crocker, 1996, “Parental Altrusim and Child Lead Exposure:
      Inferences from the demand for Chelation Therapy” Journal of Human Resources , Vol
      31 (3): 677-691.

Bartik, Timothy J, 1988, “Evaluating the Benefits of Non-marginal Reductions in Pollution
        Using Information on Defensive Expenditures,” Journal of Environmental Economics
        and Management 15: 111-127.

Bockstael, Nancy E. and Kenneth E. McConnell, 1993, “Public Goods as Characteristics of Non
      Market Commodities” 3, Economics Journal, Vol. 103, 1244-1257.

Bockstael, Nancy E. and Kenneth E. Mc Connell, 2007, Environmental and Resource Valuation
      with Revealed Preferences: a Theoretical Guide to Empirical Models (Dordrecht, The
      Netherlands: Springer)

Bresnahan, Timothy F. and Robert J. Gordon, editors, 1997, The Economics of New Goods,
      Studies in Income and Wealth, No. 58, (Chicago: University of Chicago Press).

Bullock, David S. and Nicholas Minot, 2006, “On Measuring the Volume of a Non-Market Good
       Using Market Data,” American Journal of Agricultural Economics, Vol. 88 (November):
       961-973.

Feenberg, Daniel and Edwin S. Mills, 1980, Measuring the Benefits of Water Pollution
      Abatement (New York: Academic Press).

Freeman, A. Myrick III, 1992, The Measurement of Environmental and Resource Values: Theory
      and Methods (Washington, DC: Resources for the Future).

Freeman, A. Myrick III, 2003, The Measurement of Environmental and Resource Values: Theory
      and Methods, Second Edition (Washington, DC: Resources for the Future).

Friedman, Milton, 1949, “The Marshallian Demand Curve,” The Journal of Political Economy
      57(6): 463-495.

Friedman, M.S., K.E. Powell, L. Hutwagner, L.M. Graham, and W.G. Teague, 2001, “Impact of
      Changes in Transportation and Commuting Behaviors During the 1996 Summer Olympic
      Games in Atlanta on Air Quality and Childhood Asthma,” Journal of the American
      Medical Association, 285(7): 897-905.

Hausman, Jerry A. 1981, “Exact Consumer Surplus and Deadweight Loss” American Economic
     Review, Vol.71 (September):662-676.

Larson, Douglas M., 1991, “Recovering Weakly Complementary Preferences,” Journal of
       Environmental Economics and Management, 21 (September): 97-108.



                                                                                            20
Mäler, Karl G., 1974, Environmental Economics: A Theoretical Inquiry (Baltimore: John
       Hopkins University Press for Resources for the Future).

Seig, Holger, V. Kerry Smith, H. Spencer Banzhaf and Randy Walsh, 2004, "Estimating the
       General Equilibrium Benefits of Large Changes in Spatially Delineated Public Goods,"
       International Economic Review, Vol 45 (November): 1047-1077.

Smith, V. Kerry and H. Spencer Banzhaf, 2004, “A Diagrammatic Exposition of Weak
       Complementarity and the Willig Condition,” American Journal of Agricultural
       Economics 86 (May): 455-466.

Smith, V. Kerry and H. Spencer Banzhaf, 2007 “Quality Adjusted Price Indexes and the Willig
       Condition, Economic Letters (94): 43-48.

Stevens, Joe B., 1966, “Recreation Benefits from Water Pollution Control”, Water Resources
       Research, Vol. 2: 167-182.

Vartia, Y.O. 1983, “Efficient Methods of Measuring Welfare Change and Compensated Income
        in Terms of Ordinary Demand Function,” Econometrica, Vol. 51 (January): 79-98.

Von Haefen, Roger H., 2007, “Empirical Strategies for Incorporating Weak Complementarity
      into Consumer Demand Models,” Journal of Environmental Economics and
      Management, Vol. 54 (July): 15-31.

Willig, Robert D., 1976, “Consumer’s Surplus without Apology,” American Economic Review
        66 (4): 589-597.

Willig, Robert D., 1978, “Incremental Consumer’s Surplus and Hedonic Price Adjustment,”
        Journal of Economic Theory 17 (February): 227-53.

Yoshimo, Kim, 2007, “Another Way the Rich are Different: Concierge-level Fire Protection”
      Los Angeles Times, October 26.




                                                                                              21
Figure 1. Marshallian consumer surplus for a price decrease




   P                                                              z
                                                                       D
                                                                  m0

                                                                  N                  A

                            R
   P0                                                             M

                                                                  L    C
                                      S
   P1                                                                                             u1
                  T




                                                                  J                      B   u0


                      X0         X1                           X            X0      X1                  X


                  Panel A                                                       Panel B




                                                                                                       22
Figure 2. Deriving the price change equivalent to the quality change with weak complementarity

     z

   R


   T


   S
                             A
   z0


              C
                                                                              V (q0 )

                   A’
                                                                              V (q1 )



                        X0               P        O                N                        J    X




                                                                                                     23
Figure 3. Fanning indifference curves with weak substitution

 z
                               V (q0 )




            V (q1 )




                                                               X
                                          Xa




                                                                   24
Figure 4. Weak substitution and Hicksian demand


 z
                                                                z


                   V (q1 )


                                                                                        V (q0 )
                                                                    V (q1 )

               F
                                 E
 z2
                                     A
           B                             D                                                        A
 z0

 z1
                                                  V (q0 )
                   C

 za                                                                              C
                       V (q1 )


                                             Xa             X                                         Xa   R   X
                   Panel A                                                    Panel B




                                                                                                                   25
Figure 5. Hicksian demand for z with q and X weak substitutes



          $


           Pzc

                       Dz

                                     B
      Pz(q1)




                                      A
      Pz(q0)

                                                                C
          Pz
                                             D
                                                                    Dz(Pa , q1)

                                                          Dz(Pa , q0)


                                     za                                   z




                                                                                  26
Figure 6. Cascading thresholds with weak substitution



  90.197




      10
           .002                                         100
                                              X




                                                              27
