                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               CAN EXCHANGE RATES FORECAST COMMODITY PRICES?

                                          Yu-Chin Chen
                                          Kenneth Rogoff
                                           Barbara Rossi

                                       Working Paper 13901
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w13901


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2008




We would like to thank C. Burnside, C. Engel, M. McCracken, R. Startz, V. Stavrakeva, A. Tarozzi,
M. Yogo and seminar participants at the University of Washington for comments. We are also grateful
to various staff members of the Reserve Bank of Australia, the Bank of Canada, the Reserve Bank
of New Zealand, and the IMF for helpful discussions and for providing some of the data used in this
paper. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Yu-Chin Chen, Kenneth Rogoff, and Barbara Rossi. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Can Exchange Rates Forecast Commodity Prices?
Yu-Chin Chen, Kenneth Rogoff, and Barbara Rossi
NBER Working Paper No. 13901
March 2008, Revised July 2008
JEL No. C52,C53,F31,F47

                                             ABSTRACT

We show that "commodity currency" exchange rates have remarkably robust power in predicting global
commodity prices, both in-sample and out-of-sample, and against a variety of alternative benchmarks.
This result is of particular interest to policymakers, given the lack of deep forward markets in many
individual commodities, and broad aggregate commodity indices in particular. We also explore the
reverse relationship (commodity prices forecasting exchange rates) but find it to be notably less robust.
We offer a theoretical resolution, based on the fact that exchange rates are strongly forward looking,
whereas commodity price fluctuations are typically more sensitive to short-term demand imbalances.


Yu-Chin Chen                                        Barbara Rossi
Department of Economics                             Department of Economics
206 Condon Hall, Box 353330                         Duke University
University of Washington                            PO Box 90097
NE 1100 Campus Parkway                              213 Social Sciences Building
Seattle, WA 98195-3330                              Durham, NC 27708
yuchin@u.washington.edu                             brossi@econ.duke.edu

Kenneth Rogoff
Thomas D Cabot Professor of Public Policy
Economics Department
Harvard University
Littauer Center 232
Cambridge, MA 02138-3001
and NBER
krogoff@harvard.edu
                                                                                                                     2


                                               1.   Introduction

This paper demonstrates that the exchange rates of a number of small commodity exporters have

remarkably robust forecasting power over global commodity prices. The relationship holds both in-

sample and out-of-sample. It holds when non-dollar major currency cross exchange rates are used,

as well as when one assumes that the key variables are stationary with high persistence. We also

…nd that commodity prices Granger-cause exchange rates in-sample, assuming one employs suitable

methods to allow for structural breaks. However, this relationship is not robust out-of-sample.

       We argue that the apparent disconnect between the forward and reverse regressions can be

traced to the fact that the exchange rate is fundamentally a forward-looking variable that likely

embodies information about future commodity price movements that cannot easily be captured by

simple time series models.         In contrast, commodity prices tend to be quite sensitive to current

conditions because both demand and supply are typically quite inelastic. In addition, …nancial

markets for commodities tend to be far less developed than for the exchange rate.                       As a result,

commodities tend to be less of a barometer of future conditions than are exchange rates.1

       Our laboratory here is that of the “commodity currencies.” These include the Australian,

Canadian, and New Zealand dollars, as well the South African rand and the Chilean peso.                           For

all of these ‡oating currencies, price ‡uctuations in world commodity markets represent exogenous

terms-of-trade shocks that impact a signi…cant share of their country’s exports.                       By adopting

   1
     The existing literature provides only scant empirical evidence that economic fundamentals can consistently explain
movements in major OECD ‡oating exchange rates, let alone actually forecast them, at least at horizons of one year
or less. Meese and Rogo¤’s (1983a,b, 1988) …nding that economic models are useless in predicting exchange rate
changes remains an outstanding challenge for international macroeconomists, although some potential explanations
have been put forward. Engel and West (2005), for example, argue that it is not surprising that a random walk forecast
outperforms fundamental-based models, as in a rational expectation present-value model, if the fundamentals are I(1)
and the discount factor is near one, exchange rate should behave as a near-random walk. See also Rossi (2005a, 2006)
for alternative explanations. Engel, Mark and West (2007) and Rogo¤ and Stavrakeva (2008) o¤er discussions of the
recent evidence.
                                                                                                                     3


testing procedures that are robust to parameter instabilities, we uncover an empirical regularity

that has potentially important practical implications to a wide range of developing countries.2

    We are not the …rst to test present value models of exchange rate determination by running a

reverse regression. Campbell and Shiller (1987), and more recently in Engel and West (2005), show

that because the nominal exchange rate re‡ects expectations of future changes in its economic

fundamentals, it should help predict them.               However, previous tests have employed standard

macroeconomic fundamentals such as interest rates, output and money supplies that are plagued

by issues of endogeneity, rendering causal interpretation impossible and undermining the whole

approach.3 This problem can be …nessed for the commodity currencies, at least for one important

determinant, the world price for an index of their major commodity exports.4

    Even after so …nessing the exogeneity problem, disentangling the dynamic causality between

exchange rates and commodity prices is still complicated by the possibility of parameter instabil-

ity, which confounds traditional Granger-causality regressions. After controlling for instabilities

using the approach of Rossi (2005b), however, we uncover robust in-sample evidence that exchange

rates predict world commodity price movements. Individual commodity currencies Granger-cause

their corresponding country-speci…c commodity price indices, and can also be combined to predict

movements in the aggregate world market price index.

   2
     Disentangling the dynamic relationship between the exchange rate and its fundamentals is complicated by the
possibility that this relationship may not be stable over time. Mark (2001) states, “. . . ultimately, the reason boils
down to the failure to …nd a time-invariant relationship between the exchange rate and the fundamentals.” See also
Rossi (2006).
   3
     This problem is well-stated in the conclusion of Engel and West (2005), ”Exchange rates might Granger-cause
money supplies because monetary policy makers react to the exchange rate in setting the money supply. In other
words, the preset-value models are not the only models that imply Granger causality from exchange rates to other
economic fundamentals.”
   4
     We hasten to emphasize that while our results provide strong support for the proposition that exchange rates
depend on the present expected value of commodity prices, they do not necessarily lend support to any of the various
popular monetary models of exchange rate determination (e.g., Dornbusch 1976). Our results can equally well be
rationalized in a model with fully ‡exible prices as in a model with highly sticky prices.
                                                                                                             4


      As one may be concerned that the strong ties global commodity markets have with the U.S.

dollar may induce endogeneity in our data, we conduct robustness checks using nominal e¤ective

exchange rates as well as rates relative to the British pound.5 Free from potential "dollar e¤ect",

the results con…rm our predictability conclusions. We next consider longer-horizon predictability

as an additional robustness check, and test whether exchange rates provide additional predictive

power beyond information embodied in commodity forward prices (forward markets in commodities

are very limited –most commodities trade in futures markets for only a limited set of dates.)6

      In the …nal section, we summarize our main results and put them in the context of the earlier

literature that focused on testing structural models of exchange rates.



                             2.    Background and Data Description

Although the commodity currency phenomenon may extend to a broader set of developing countries,

our study focuses on …ve small commodity-exporting economies with a su¢ ciently long history of

market-based ‡oating exchange rates, and explores the dynamic relationship between exchange

rates and world commodity prices.

      As shown in Appendix Table A1, Australia, Canada, Chile, New Zealand, and South Africa

produce a variety of primary commodity products, from agricultural and mineral to energy-related

goods. Together, commodities represent between a quarter and well over a half of each of these

countries’total export earnings. Even though for certain key products, these countries may have

some degree of market power (e.g. New Zealand supplies close to half of the total world exports of

  5
     For example, since commodities are mostly priced in dollars, one could argue that global commodity demands
and thus their prices would go down when the dollar is strong.
   6
     Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke (June 9, 2008) has noted the importance of …nding alter-
natives to the limited and thin futures market for commodities, see www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/
speech/bernanke20080609a.htm
                                                                                                              5


lamb and mutton), on the whole, due to their relatively small sizes in the overall global commodity

market, these countries are price takers for the vast majority of their commodity exports.7 As

such, global commodity price ‡uctuations serve as an easily-observable and exogenous shock to

these countries’exchange rates.

    From a theoretical standpoint, exchange rate responses to terms-of-trade shocks can operate

through several well-understood channels, such as the income e¤ect and the Balassa-Samuelson

channel.8 In practice, however, sound theories rarely translate into robust empirical support in the

exchange rate literature. Moreover, for most OECD countries, it is extremely di¢ cult to actually

identify an exogenous measure of terms-of-trade. The commodity currencies we study overcome

these concerns.    Not only are exogenous world commodity prices easily observable from the few

centralized exchanges in real time, and they are also available at high, daily frequency.


2.1.   The Present Value Approach.                In this section, we discuss the asset-pricing approach

which encompasses a variety of structural models that relate the nominal exchange rate st to its

fundamentals ft and its expected future value Et st+1 .                 This approach gives rise to a present-

value relation between the nominal exchange rate and the discounted sum of its expected future

fundamentals9 :



                                                  P
                                                  1
                                                        j
                                           st =             Et (ft+j jIt )                                  (1)
                                                  j=0


   7
     In 1999, for example, Australia represents less than 5 percent of the total world commodity exports, Canada
about 9 percent, and New Zealand 1 percent. Furthermore, substitution across various commodities also mitigates
the market power these countries have, even within the speci…c market they appear to dominate. See Chen and
Rogo¤ (2003) for a more detailed discussion and analyses.
   8
     See, for example, Chen and Rogo¤ (2003), and Chs. 4 and 9 in Obstfeld and Rogo¤ (1996).
   9
     The transversality or ”no-bubbles” condition is imposed here.
                                                                                                      6


where      and   are parameters dictated by the speci…c structural model, and Et is the expectation

operator given information It . It is this present-value equation that shows that exchange rate s

should Granger-cause its fundamentals f .

      While the present-value representation is well accepted from a theoretical standpoint, there

is so far little convincing empirical support for it in the exchange rate literature.    The di¢ culty

lies in the actual testing, as the standard exchange rate fundamentals considered in the literature

are essentially all endogenous and jointly determined with exchange rates in equilibrium. They

may also directly react to exchange rate movements through policy responses.            When f is not

exogenous, a positive …nding that exchange rate s Granger-causes fundamental f could simply be

the result of endogenous response or reverse causality, and is thus observationally equivalent to

a present-value model.     For instance, exchange rates Granger-causing money supply or interest

changes may simply be the result of monetary policy responses to exchange rate ‡uctuations, as

would be the case with a Taylor interest rate rule that targets CPI in‡ation.           Exchange rate

changes may also precede in‡ation movements if prices are sticky and pass-through is gradual. As

such, positive Granger-causality results for these standard fundamentals are di¢ cult to interpret

and cannot be taken as evidence for the present-value framework, unless the fundamental under

consideration is clearly exogenous to exchange rate movements. Commodity prices are a unique

exchange rate fundamental for these countries because the causality is clear, and a direct testing

of the present-value theoretical approach is thus feasible.10 In addition, since these countries all

experienced major changes in policy regimes and/or market conditions (such as the adoption of an

in‡ation target), we also emphasize the importance of allowing for time-varying parameters.

 10
   Amano and van Norden (1993), Chen and Rogo¤ (2003, 2006), and Cashin, Cespedes, and Sahay (2004), for
example, establish commodity prices as an exchange rate fundamental for these commodity currencies
                                                                                                           7


       As we are going to show, given the present value model (1) we should expect that exchange rates

predict exogenous world commodity prices even if commodity prices do not predict future exchange

rates. Suppose, for example, that commodity price changes are driven by a variable Xt that is

perfectly forecastable and known to all market participants but not to econometricians:        cpt = Xt .

The example is extreme, but there are plausible cases where it may not be a bad approximation

to reality. For example, commodity prices may depend in part on fairly predictable factors, such

as world population growth, as well as cobweb ("corn-hog") cycles that are predictable by market

participants’expertise but are not easily described by simple time series models.11 Thus, there may

be patterns in commodity pricing that could be exploited by knowledgeable market participants

but not by the econometrician. Such factors are totally extraneous to exchange rate dynamics.

Note that econometricians omitting such variables may likely …nd parameter instabilities, such as

those that we indeed detect in our regressions.

       To make the example really stark, let’s assume that the (known) sequence fX g          =t;t+1;:::   is

generated by a random number generator. Note that someone who does not know fX g                 =t;t+1;:::


will not be able to forecast commodity prices even though they are perfectly forecastable by market

participants. Since commodity prices are perfectly forecastable by the markets, (1) and ft = cpt

imply:
                                                      P
                                                      1
                                                            j
                                           st+1 =               cpt+j + zt+1 :                         (2)
                                                      j=1


where zt are other shocks determining exchange rates in equilibrium independently of commodity

prices.

       Note that     cpt will be of no use for the econometrician in forecasting   st+1 , as it will be of

  11
       See Williams and Wright (1991), for example.
                                                                                                                     8


no use for forecasting       cpt+1 . But      st will be useful in forecasting        cpt+1 ; because it embodies

information about Xt+1 : This asymmetry is indeed starkly observed in our empirical …ndings on

out-of-sample forecasts, as shown in Section 3 below. We …nd exchange rates to forecast commodity

prices well, but not vice versa.12 Our results follow directly from the fact that exchange rates are a

strongly forward looking variable and do not directly depend on the variables explaining commodity

prices. The dependency comes only through the net present value relationship.


2.2.    Data Description and Empirical Strategy. We use quarterly data over the following

time-periods: Australia (from 1984:1 to 2008:1), Canada (from 1973:1 to 2008:1), Chile (from 1989:3

to 2008:1), New Zealand (from 1987:1 to 2008:1), and South Africa (from 1994:1 to 2008:1).13 For

each commodity economy, we aggregate the relevant dollar spot prices in the world commodity

markets to construct country-speci…c, export-earnings-weighted commodity price indices (labeled

“cp”).14    For nominal exchange rates (“s”), we use the end-of-period U.S. dollar rates from the

Global Financial Data for the majority of our analyses. We also present results based on nominal

e¤ective exchange rates (from the IFS) and cross rates relative to the British pound as robustness

checks. To capture price movements in the overall aggregate world commodity markets, we use

the aggregate commodity price index (“cpW ”) from the IMF, which is a world export-earnings-

weighted price index for over forty products traded on various exchanges.15 (We choose the IMF

  12
      The point of having Xt generated by a random number generator is to produce the simplest case where using
past exchange rates and commodity prices is not going to help forecast X.
   13
      Canada began ‡oating its currency in 1970, and Australia and New Zealand abandoned their exchange rate pegs
in 1983 and 1985 respectively. For Chile and South Africa, our sample periods are chosen a bit more arbitrarily: Chile
operated under a crawling peg for most of the 1990s, and the starting point for South Africa roughly corresponds to
the end of apartheid. We note that we also conducted all the analyses presented in this paper using monthly data.
The results are qualitatively similar and are available upon request.
   14
      Individual commodity price data are collected from the IMF, Global Financial Database, the Bank of Canada,
and the Reserve Bank of New Zealand. Appendix Table A1 provides the country-speci…c weights used to aggregate
individual world commodity prices into country-speci…c indices.
   15
      The IMF publishes two aggregate indices: one includes fuel prices and starts in 1992, and one without fuel prices
that starts in 1980. Our qualitative results are una¤ected by the choice between the two. In the analyses below, we
                                                                                                                      9


index because it is one of the most comprehensive, but note that our results are robust to using

other aggregate commodity indices, such as the Goldman Sachs index, the Commodity Research

Bureau Index, among others.16 ) Finally, we use forward price data from Bloomberg for a selected

set of metal products - gold, silver, platinum, and copper - to compare with our exchange rate-based

forecasts.

    As standard unit root tests cannot reject that these series contain unit roots, we proceed to

analyze the data in …rst-di¤erences, which we denote with a preceding                       .17    In Section 4, we

present an alternative predictive regression speci…cation that is robust to the possibility that the

autoregressive roots in these data may not be exactly one, although very close to it (i.e. they

are "local-to-unity").       We see that our …ndings are robust to these di¤erent assumptions.                       In

addition, we note that even in the individual data series, we observe strong evidence of structural

breaks, found mostly in early 2000’s.18            This …nding foreshadows one of our major conclusions

that controlling for parameter instabilities is crucial in analyzing the exchange rate-fundamental

connection.

    We examine the dynamic relationship between exchange rates and commodity prices both in

terms of Granger-causality and out-of-sample forecasting ability.19 We regard these two tests as

report results based on the longer series.
  16
     These indices in general contain between ten and twenty commodities, including energy products. Some are
"three-dimension" index that pull information across futures contracts of di¤erent maturities, and they employ a
variety of weighting schemes. We …nd our main results are robust to employing these alternative indices.
  17
     Here we do not consider cointegration but …rst di¤erences since we are not testing any speci…c models. Chen and
Rogo¤ (2003) showed that, in analyzing real exchange rates, DOLS estimates of cointegrated models and estimates
of models in di¤erences produce very similar results. (From a practical point of view, real exchange rates and
nominal ones behave very similarly.) Chen (2005) examines commodity-priced augmented monetary models in the
cointegration framework.
  18
     A more detailed analysis of the time series properties of these series, as well as the other fundamentals typically
used in the canonical exchange rate literature, are not included in this draft but are available upon request.
  19
     Previous studies on commodity currencies emphasize the strong contemporaneous causal relationship from com-
modity prices to exchange rates. There has been little success in …nding stable dynamic relationships in various
exchange rate forecasting exercises (see Chen (2005), for example.)
                                                                                                                   10


important alternative approaches to evaluating the predictive content of a variable. The in-sample

tests take advantage of the full sample size and thus are likely to have higher power, while the out-

of-sample forecast procedure may prove more practical as it mimics the data constraint of real-time

forecasting and is more sensitive to misspeci…cation problems.20


            3.   Exchange Rates and Commodity Prices: Which Predicts Which?

In this section, we analyze the dynamic relationship between nominal exchange rates and commodity

prices by looking at both in-sample predictive content and out-of-sample forecasting ability. We

…rst examine whether the exchange rate can explain future movements in commodity prices, as a

test of the present-value theoretical approach. Following the Meese-Rogo¤ (1983a,b) literature, we

next look at the reverse analysis of exchange rate predictability by commodity prices.

       Using Rossi’s (2005b) procedure that is robust to time-varying parameters, we …rst see that

individual exchange rates Granger-cause movements in their corresponding country-speci…c com-

modity price indices, and that this predictive content translates to superior out-of-sample forecast

performance relative to both a random walk (RW) and an autoregressive (AR) benchmark. We

then look into multivariate analyses using several exchange rates and forecast combinations. We

…nd these commodity currencies together forecast price ‡uctuations in the aggregate world com-

modity market quite well.          Figures 1 and 2 present a quick visual preview to this key …nding.

World commodity price forecasts based on the exchange rates - whether entered jointly in a multi-

variate model or individually under a forecast combination approach - track the actual data quite

well, dramatically better than the random walk.

  20
    Note that all data are available in real-time and are never revised. As is well-known in the literature, in-sample
predictive tests and out-of-sample forecasting tests can and often provide di¤erent conclusions, which could result
from their di¤erences in the treatment of time-varying parameters, the possibility of over-…tting, sample sizes, and
other biases...etc. See Inoue and Kilian (2004). We do not promote one over the other here, but recognize the
trade-o¤s.
                                                                                                                  11


       Concerning the reverse exercise of forecasting exchange rates, addressing parameter instability

again plays a crucial role in uncovering evidence for in-sample exchange rate predictability from

commodity prices.        The out-of-sample analyses, however, show little evidence of exchange rate

forecastability beyond a random walk, suggesting the reverse regression to be more fragile.

       All the analyses in this section are based on U.S. dollar exchange rates. Later, we will demon-

strate the robustness of our results by looking at di¤erent numeraire currencies, and longer-horizon

predictive regressions robust to “local-to-unity”regressors. Appendix 2 provides an overview of the

time series methods that we use.


3.1.      Can Exchange Rates Predict Commodity Prices?.                        We …rst investigate the empirical

evidence on Granger-causality, using both the traditional testing procedure and one that is robust

to parameter instability. We demonstrate the prevalence of structural breaks and emphasize the

importance of controlling for them. Our benchmark Granger-causality analyses below include one

lag each of the explanatory and dependent variables, though our …ndings are robust to the inclusion

of additional lags.21


       In-Sample Granger-Causality (GC) Tests. Present value models of exchange rate deter-

mination imply that exchange rates must Granger-cause fundamentals. In other words, ignoring

issues of parameter instabilities, we should reject the null hypothesis that                 0   =   1   = 0 in the

regression:22

                                      Et cpt+1 =      0   +   1   st +   2   cpt                                 (3)

  21
    Additional lags are mostly found to be insigni…cant based on the BIC criterion.
  22
    We note that the qualitative results are the same if one tests for only 1 = 0: Our choice here is more consistent
with the driftless random walk benchmark commonly used in the exchange rate literature. Our …nding is also robust
to the inclusion of additional lags, or even the exclusion, of cpt .
                                                                                                                  12


       Panel A in Table 1 reports the results based on the above standard Granger-causality regression

for the …ve exchange rates and their corresponding commodity price indices. All variables are …rst

di¤erenced, and the estimations are heteroskedasticity and serial correlation-consistent.23 The table

reports the p-values for the tests, so a number below 0.05 implies evidence in favor of Granger-

causality (at the 5% level). We note that overall, traditional Granger-causality tests …nd little

evidence of exchange rates Granger-causing commodity prices.24

       An important drawback in these Granger-causality regressions is that they do not take into

account potential parameter instabilities. We …nd that structural breaks are a serious concern not

only theoretically as discussed above, but also empirically as observed in the individual time series

data under consideration.25 Table 2 reports results from the parameter instability test, based on

Andrews (1993), for the bivariate Granger-causality regressions.                        We observe strong evidence of

time-varying parameters in several of these relationships. As such, we next consider the joint null

hypothesis that      0t   =   0   = 0 and   1t   =   1   = 0 by using Rossi’s (2005b) Exp             W test, in the

following regression setup:26



                                      Et cpt+1 =         0t   +   1t   st +   2   cpt                             (4)



Table 3, Panel A shows that this test of Granger-causality, which is robust to time-varying para-

meters, indicates stronger evidence in favor of a time-varying relationship between exchange rates

  23
     Results are based on the Newey and West (1987) procedure with bandwidth T 1=3 (where T is the sample size.)
  24
     We also estimated R2 of the in-sample regressions. The values are 16% for Australia, 35% for New Zealand, 1%
for Canada, 8% for Chile and 4% for South Africa.
  25
     Results from structural break analyses using Andrews’ (1993) QLR test and Rossi’s (2005b) Exp-W* test are
available upon request.
  26
     See Appendix 2 for a detailed description of Rossi’s (2005b) test. In addition, we tested only 1t = 1 = 0
and con…rmed that our positive Granger-causality …ndings are not the result of random walk fundamentals with
time-varying drifts.
                                                                                                              13


and commodity prices. As shown later in the analyses using nominal e¤ective exchange rates and

rates against the British pound, addressing parameter instability is again crucial in uncovering

these Granger-causality relationships.27


                                  INSERT TABLES 1, 2 AND 3 HERE


       Out-of-Sample Forecasts.        We now ask whether in-sample Granger-causality translates into

out-of-sample forecasting ability. We adopt a rolling forecast scheme based on eq. (3). We report

two sets of result. First, we estimate eq. (3) and test for forecast encompassing relative to an

autoregressive (AR) model of order one (Et cpt+1 =              0t   +   t   cpt ).   Second, we present results

based on a random walk benchmark due to its signi…cance in the exchange rate literature. Here, we

estimate eq. (3) without the lagged dependent variable               cpt , and test for forecast encompassing

relative to a random walk (Et cpt+1 = 0).28              Speci…cally, we use a rolling window with size

equal to half of the total sample size to estimate the model parameters and generate one-quarter

ahead forecasts recursively (what we call “model-based forecasts”).29 Table 4 reports two sets of

information on the forecast comparisons. First, the numbers reported are the di¤erence between the

mean square forecast errors (MSFE) of the model and the MSFE of the benchmark (RW or AR(1)),

both re-scaled by a measure of their variability.30         A negative number indicates that the model

outperforms the benchmark.          In addition, for proper inference, we use Clark and McCracken’s

(2001) “ENCNEW” test of equal MSFEs to compare these nested models.                           A rejection of the

null hypothesis, which we indicate with asterisks, implies that the additional regressor contains

  27
     This …nding is also supported by analyses using state-space time-varying parameter models.
  28
     The order of the benchmark autoregressive model was selected by the Bayesian information criterion. We also
extend the comparison to a random walk with drift, and …nd similar results.
  29
     Rolling forecasts are robust to the presence of time-varying parameters and have the advantage of not making
any assumption as to the nature of the time variation in the data. We implement rolling, rather than recursive,
forecasts as the former adapt more quickly to possible time variation.
  30
     This procedure produces a statistic similar to the standard Diebold and Mariano (1995) test statistic.
                                                                                                                    14


out-of-sample forecasting power for the dependent variable.31

    Panel A in Table 4 shows that exchange rates help forecast commodity prices, even out-of-

sample.32     The exchange rate-based models outperform both an AR(1) and a random walk in

forecasting changes in world commodity prices, and this result is quite robust across the …ve coun-

tries.33 The strong evidence of commodity price predictability in both in-sample and out-of-sample

tests is quite remarkable, given the widely documented pattern in various forecasting literature that

in-sample predictive ability often fails to translate to out-of-sample success.34


                                           INSERT TABLE 4 HERE


3.2.    Can Exchange Rates Predict Aggregate World Commodity Price Movements?

Multivariate Predictions and Forecast Combinations.                           Having found that individual ex-

change rates can forecast the price movements of its associated country’s commodity export bas-

ket, we next consider whether combining the information from all of our commodity currencies can

help predict price ‡uctuations in the aggregate world commodity market. For the world market

index, we use the aggregate commodity price index from the IMF (cpW ) described earlier. We

will show that forecasts of commodity prices improve by combining multiple commodity curren-

cies. Intuitively, a priori, one would expect that global commodity prices depend mainly on global

shocks, whereas commodity currency exchange rates depend on country-speci…c shocks, in addition

  31
     We note that ENCNEW test (that is, the asterisks in the tables) is the more formal statistical test of whether our
model outperforms the benchmark, as it corrects for …nite sample bias in MSFE comparison between nested models.
Therefore, it is possible for the model to outperform the benchmark even when the computed MSFE di¤erences is
positive. See Clark and West (2006) for a more detailed explanation.
  32
     We also estimated R2 of the out-of-sample regressions. The values are 4% for Australia, 14% for New Zealand,
2% for Canada, 8% for Chile and 15% for South Africa.
  33
     We note that the sample size for South Africa, being quite a bit shorter than the other countries, may not be
su¢ cient for meaningful testing of out-of-sample forecast power.
  34
     In addition, because exchange rates are available at extremely high frequencies, and because they are not subject
to revisions, our analysis is immune to the common critique that we are not looking at real time data forecasts.
                                                                                                                    15


to global shocks (mainly through commodity prices.) Thus, a weighted average of commodity cur-

rencies should, in principle, average out some of the country speci…c shocks and produce a better

forecast of future global commodity prices.

       We …rst look at the in-sample predictability of the world price index and consider multivariate

Granger-causality regressions using the three longest exchange rate series (South Africa and Chile

are excluded to preserve a larger sample size)35 :



                    Et cpW
                         t+1 =       0   +   11   sAU
                                                   t
                                                      S
                                                        +   12   sCAN
                                                                  t   +    13   sN
                                                                                 t
                                                                                   Z
                                                                                     +    2   cpW
                                                                                                t                  (5)



Panels A through C in Table 5 show results consistent with our earlier …ndings using single curren-

cies.36 This time, traditional Granger-causality tests suggest that the commodity currencies have

predictive power (panel A), and controlling for time-varying parameters reinforces the evidence in

favor of the three exchange rates jointly predicting the aggregate commodity price index (panel C).

       We next extend the analysis to look at out-of-sample forecasts. We consider two approaches:

multivariate forecast and combination of univariate forecasts. The multivariate forecast uses the

same three exchange rates as in equation (5) above to implement the rolling regression forecast

procedure described in the previous section. We again use Clark and McCracken’s (2001) “ENC-

NEW”test to evaluate the model’s forecast performance relative to a random walk forecast. Table

5 Panel D shows that using the three commodity currencies together, we can forecast the world

commodity price index signi…cantly better than both a random walk and an autoregressive model

at the 1% level. This forecast power is also quite apparent when we plot the exchange rates-based

  35
    The index only goes back to 1980, so the sample size we are able to analyze is shorter in this exercise for Canada.
  36
    As discussed in Section 2, we report here results based on the non-fuel commodity index from the IMF, as it
covers a broad set of products and goes back to 1980. Additional results based on alternative aggregate indices,
including the IMF index with energy products, are available upon request.
                                                                                                                 16


forecasts along with the actual realized changes of the (log) global commodity price index in Figure

1. The random walk forecast is simply the x-axis (forecasting no change). We see that overall, the

commodity currency-based forecasts track the actual world price series quite well, and …t strikingly

better than a random walk.37


                                INSERT TABLE 5 AND FIGURE 1 HERE


    We next consider forecast combination, which is an alternative way to exploit the information

content in the various exchange rates.              The approach involves computing a weighted average of

di¤erent forecasts, each obtained from using a single exchange rate.                 That is, we …rst estimate

the following three regressions and generate one-step ahead world commodity price forecasts, again

using the rolling procedure:



                         Et cpW;i
                              t+1 =       0;i   +    1;i   sit where i = AU S; CAN; N Z                         (6)



    While there are di¤erent methods to weigh the individual forecasts, it is well known that simple

combination schemes tend to work best (Stock and Watson 2003 and Timmermann 2006.)                              We

consider equal weighting here, and compare our out-of-sample forecast of future global commodity

prices,     b W;AU
            cpt+1
                   S
                     +      b W;CAN
                            cpt+1   +      b W;N
                                           cpt+1
                                                 Z
                                                   =3, with the random walk forecast. We report the

result in Table 5 Panel E. Again, we observe that the MSFE di¤erence is negative, indicating that

the commodity price forecasts constructed from combining individual exchange rate-based forecasts

outperform both the random walk and the autoregressive forecasts.38                  This …nding is illustrated

graphically in Figure 2, which plots the forecasted global commodity price obtained via forecast

  37
     We can improved the forecast performance of the model even more by further including lagged commodity prices
in the forecast speci…cations.
  38
     To judge the signi…cance of forecast combinations, we used critical values based on Diebold and Mariano (1995).
                                                                                                           17


combination, along with the actual data (both in log di¤erences). The random walk forecast, of

no change, is the x-axis. The …gure shows that the combined forecast tracks the actual world price

series much better than the random walk.


                                       INSERT FIGURE 2 HERE


       Finally, as a robustness check, we also examine whether each individual exchange rate series by

itself can predict the global market price index.39 We note that this exercise is perhaps more a test

to see whether there is strong co-movement amongst individual commodity price series, rather than

based on any structural model. The …rst lines (labeled "st GC cpt+1 ") in Table 6 report results for

the predictive performance of each country-speci…c exchange rates. Remarkably, the …nding that

exchange rates predict world commodity prices appears extremely robust: individual commodity

currencies each have predictive power for price changes in the aggregate global commodity market.

As an example, Figure 3 shows how well the Chilean exchange rate alone can forecast changes in

the aggregate commodity market index over the last 9 years.


                               INSERT TABLE 6 AND FIGURE 3HERE


3.3.      Can Commodity Prices Predict Exchange Rates?. Having found strong and ro-

bust evidence that exchange rates can Granger-cause and forecast out-of-sample future commodity

prices, we now consider the reverse exercise of forecasting these exchange rates. First, we show

positive in-sample results by allowing for structural breaks. In terms of out-of-sample forecasting

ability, however, commodity currencies exhibit the same Meese-Rogo¤ puzzle as other major cur-

rencies studied in the literature; none of the fundamentals, including commodity prices, consistently

  39
    The sample sizes now di¤er for each country, and for Chile and South Africa, we have less than 10 years of
our-of-sample forecasts as they have only a short history of ‡oating exchange rate.
                                                                                                                            18


forecasts exchange rate movements better than a random walk.40

    The lower panels (Panel B) in Tables 1-4, and Table 6 present results on exchange rate pre-

dictability by commodity prices. We …rst consider whether commodity prices Granger-cause nom-

inal exchange rate changes, using standard tests that ignore the possibility of parameter instability.

We look for rejection of the null hypothesis that the                    0   =       1   = 0 in the following regression:



                                       Et st+1 =        0   +   1    cpt +               2   st                             (7)



    Similarly to the results in Panel A, Table 1 Panel B shows that traditional Granger-causality

tests do not …nd any evidence that commodity prices Granger-cause exchange rates. We do …nd

strong evidence of instabilities in the regressions, however, as seen in Table 2 Panel B. We then

test the joint null hypothesis of       0t   =   0   = 0 and        1t   =       1   = 0, using Rossi’s (2005b) Exp         W

test in the following regression:



                                      Et st+1 =        0t   +   1t       cpt +           2   st                             (8)



Results in Table 3, Panel B, show that when looking at in-sample Granger-causality, exchange rates

are predictable by their country-speci…c commodity price indices, once we allow for time-varying

parameters. This is a very promising result given previous failures to connect the exchange rate

and its fundamentals dynamically. We note that there does not appear to be signi…cant di¤erences

between using exchange rates to predict commodity prices or vice versa, when we look at in-sample

  40
     We conducted, but excluded from this draft, the same analyses presented in Tables 1-4 using the standard
exchange rate fundamentals as well. (These include the short-run interest rate di¤erential, the long-run interest rate
di¤erential, the in‡ation rate di¤erential, the log real GDP di¤erential, and the log money stock di¤erential between
the relevant country-pairs.) We observe exactly the Meese-Rogo¤ puzzle, consistent with …ndings in the literature.
                                                                                                  19


Granger-causality regressions robust to parameter instability.

   The major di¤erence between the two directions comes from comparing out-of-sample forecast-

ing ability. Comparing Panel B to Panel A in Table 4, we see that there are no negative numbers

in Panel B and overall little evidence of exchange rate predictability, giving us exactly the Meese-

Rogo¤ stylized fact. We note the same pattern in Table 6, where individual exchange rates forecast

aggregate world commodity price index better than a random walk, but world commodity price

index in general does not help forecast exchange rates.

   This asymmetry in forecastability can be the result of many factors, ranging from potential

non-linearities to the relative depth of the exchange rate markets, which may contribute to the

exchange rates being more closely approximated by a random walk than commodity prices. Our

favored explanation, as discussed in Section 2, is that exchange rates likely contain valuable market

information on the future evolution of commodity prices that cannot be easily captured by an

econometrician. The reverse regression is much less powerful, because commodity prices tend to

be extremely sensitive to current shocks, given the low short-term elasticities of both demand and

supply.


                                   4.   Robustness Analyses

The previous section shows strong evidence that the U.S. dollar-based exchange rates of the …ve

commodity-exporters can forecast price movements in global commodity markets. This novel …nd-

ing raises some questions as well as potentially interesting implications, which we explore in this

section. First, we consider whether this dynamic connection between movements in the currencies

and in the commodity prices may result from a “dollar e¤ect”, as both are priced in U.S. dol-

lars. Second, we consider an alternative predictive regression speci…cation that is robust to highly
                                                                                                  20


persistent regressors, and examine longer-horizon predictions, up to two years ahead. Finally, we

compare exchange rate-based commodity price forecasts with those based on commodity forwards,

using information from several metal forward markets as an example.


4.1.   Alternative Benchmark Currencies. Since commodity products are priced in dollars,

there may be some endogeneity induced by our use of dollar cross rates in the analyses above.

For instance, one could imagine that when the dollar is strong, global demand for dollar-priced

commodities would decline, inducing a drop in the associated commodity prices. Any aggregate

uncertainty about the U.S. dollar may also simultaneously a¤ect commodity prices and the value

of the dollar (relative to the commodity currencies.) To remove this potential reverse causality or

endogeneity, this section re-examines the predictive Granger-causality regressions and out-of-sample

forecast exercises using nominal e¤ective exchange rates and bilateral exchange rates relative to the

British pound. Table 7(a) and 7(b) report results parallel to those in Tables 1-4. Panels A and

B report the p-values for the Granger-causality and Andrews’(1993) QLR tests for the predictive

regressions. Panel C shows predictability results robust to parameter instabilities, using Rossi’s

(2005b) Exp     W test.    Lastly, Panel D reports the relative MSFEs from comparing exchange

rate-based models to the AR(1) benchmark and the random walk in out-of-sample forecasts.

   Overall, we see that our earlier conclusions are extremely robust, and the importance of ad-

dressing parameter instability is even more pronounced here. Ignoring structural breaks, hardly

any of the traditional Granger-causality tests in Panel A reject the null hypothesis of no relation-

ship between exchange rates and commodity prices. However, as before, we uncover substantial

instabilities in such regressions (Panel B), found mostly around 2002-2005. When such instability

is taken into account, we see strong indication in favor of Granger-causality.     In particular, we
                                                                                                                   21


see the evidence is stronger when we use exchange rates to predict the commodity price indices

than the other way around. Panel D shows that the predictive power of exchange rates for future

commodity prices carries over to out-of-sample forecasts as well.41


                                           INSERT TABLE 7 HERE


4.2.     Highly Persistent Regressors and Long-Horizon Predictability. We have analyzed

the dynamic connections between nominal exchange rates and fundamentals using data in …rst-

di¤erences thus far. This approach is consistent with the view that the series contain unit roots,

which both has overwhelming empirical support and is theoretically sensible.42 In this section, we

consider an alternative speci…cation and inference procedure that is robust to the possibility that

the largest autoregressive (AR) roots in these series may not be exactly one, despite being very

close to one. That is, we model the regressors in the predictive regressions as highly persistent and

use tests statistics based on local-to-unity asymptotics.43 We consider the robustness of our main

…ndings (in Section 3) to this form of high persistence in the regressors, and also to longer-horizon

predictive analyses. Results below show that our earlier …ndings are very robust.

       We focus on three countries only: Australia, Canada, and New Zealand, as they have longer

sample periods which are necessary for more meaningful testing of long-horizon predictability.

Letting st and cpt denote the levels of nominal exchange rate and fundamental (commodity prices)

  41
     Using monthly data, we also observe strong predictability of commodity prices, both in- and out-of-sample, using
nominal e¤ective exchange rates. This is another indication that "the dollar e¤ect" is not dominating our …ndings.
  42
     See Obstfeld and Rogo¤ (1996), Mark (2001), for example. A not-for-publication appendix providing detailed
empirical analyses on the time series properties of the fundamentals we consider is available upon request.
  43
     See Elliott (1998), Campbell and Yogo (2006), for example. The local-to-unity asymptotics allows us to obtain
reliable small sample approximations to the distribution of the test statistics when, empirically, the largest root is
close to unity, and conveniently avoids problems arising from pre-test bias.
                                                                                                                    22


at time t, the short horizon exchange rate predictive regression can be expressed as follows:



                                         st+1 =          1   +     cpt +        st +    1;t+1                       (9)



                                                1
                                        b (L)       (1           L) cpt+1 =     2   +   2;t+1



where      1;t+1   and   2;t+1   are assumed to be contemporaneously but not serially correlated, and

is assumed to be “local-to-unity” (very close to 1).                           The inference procedure robust to highly

persistent regressors for this short-horizon predictive regressions is based on Campbell and Yogo

(2006).

       Assuming the same stochastic process for cpt above, the corresponding long-horizon regression

can be expressed as:44

                                          h
                                          j=1       st+j =         h   cpt +     st +    t;h                       (10)


The long horizon regression analyses are based on Rossi’s (2007) procedure, which consists of

inverting Elliott, Rothenberg and Stock’s (1995) test in the …rst stage, and adopting Campbell and

Yogo’s (2006) test in the second stage.

       For the reverse direction - using exchange rates to predict commodity prices - the regression

robust to highly persistent regressor can be speci…ed as:



                                          h
                                          j=1       cpt+j =         h st   +    cpt +     t;h                      (11)

  44
    Regression (9) includes the lagged endogenous variable, where we assume j j < 1.P The formula in Rossi (2007)
                                                                                       h
has to be modi…ed to take this into account. Her expression (4.14) becomes: h =        j=1
                                                                                            j 1
                                                                                                (1   ) 1 , and the
                                                                                           h    j
con…dence interval follows straightforwardly from this. Direct calculations show that   h j=1 .
                                                                                                                     23


where st would then be assumed to "highly persistent":



                                               1
                                       b (L)       (1   L) st+1 =    1   +   2;t+1




       Table 8 reports the 95% con…dence intervals for              estimated from (9) in the rows with "h =

1"(one quarter-ahead forecast), and con…dence intervals for                  h   estimated from (10) and (11) in the

rows under "h = 4" and "h = 8", for one- and two-year-ahead forecasts, respectively.45 When the

con…dence intervals do not contain zero, we consider them as evidence in favor of predictive ability.

The table shows that the predictability at long horizons is quite strong, both from exchange rates

to commodity prices and vice-versa (with the exception of predicting the Canadian commodity

price index). This supports our earlier …ndings, based on …rst-di¤erenced speci…cations, that the

in-sample dynamic connection between commodity prices and exchange rates is very strong and

robust.46


                                           INSERT TABLE 8 HERE


4.3.      Commodity Forwards.             Our results provide strong and robust evidence that commodity

currency exchange rates can forecast future spot commodity prices. An obvious question then is

how their predictive power compares to information in the derivatives markets. Do exchange rates

contain additional information beyond what’s in the forward or futures prices? We provide a brief

  45
    We note the h =1 case is just a special case of the other two.
  46
    We also conducted additional analyses using standard fundamentals, although these are highly endogenous, as
we have noted. In the interest of space, we do not report the full table here. Overall, we …nd that for most countries
and most fundamentals, we are able to reject the null hypothesis of no predictability (i.e. most con…dence intervals
exclude zero). In this paper, we do not consider out-of-sample forecasts at long horizons for two reasons: …rst, the
main puzzle in the literature is the lack of short horizon forecastability of exchange rates and commodity prices, as
the literature, in some instances, did …nd empirical evidence in favor of long-horizon predictability (cfr. Mark, 2001).
Second, the evidence in favor of long horizon predictability is nevertheless plagued by spurious regressions problems
as well as di¢ culties in assessing signi…cance (cfr. Rossi, 2005).
                                                                                                     24


analysis in this section by looking at …rst the copper forward market, and then an aggregate forward

price index of three metal products. We note that for the type of …xed-horizon forecasts conducted

in this paper, futures prices and price indices are of limited use. This is because standardized futures

contracts have only a few …xed delivery dates per year, and the indices contain price information

averaged over contracts of di¤erent maturity dates. Forward prices, on the other hand, provide an

easy comparison with our forecasts. However, forward trading in commodities is thin, and data

availability appears limited to a few metal products only.

   We …rst test whether individual exchange rates can predict copper spot prices a quarter ahead,

after controlling for the forward premium in the market. We note that amongst our …ve countries,

copper constitutes a signi…cant share of the overall commodity exports only for Chile. As such,

world copper price should be a signi…cant fundamental for the Chilean exchange rate only. Based

on the present value framework discussed in Section 2, the Chilean exchange rate should thus help

forecast future movements in world copper prices.                                          cu denote the
                                                             To test this hypothesis, let ft+1

one-quarter ahead forward price of copper at time t, cpcu
                                                       t the spot price of copper, and st the


bilateral exchange rate of each country relative to the U.S. dollar. We consider the following two

regression speci…cations:



                       Et cpcu
                            t+1 =     0   +    1
                                                    cu
                                                   ft+1    cpcu
                                                             t  +       2    cpcu
                                                                               t +       3    st    (12)


                         Et cpcu
                              t+1 =       0
                                                 cu
                                              + ft+1      cpcu
                                                            t  +    2       cpcu
                                                                              t +    3       st     (13)


The …rst regression is a forward premium regression of market e¢ ciency, augmented to include

the lagged exchange rate changes. The second regression further imposes the forward premium
                                                                                                               25


coe¢ cient to be unity.47

    Panel A in Table 9 shows standard test results for whether              3   = 0; that is, whether exchange

rates Granger-cause future copper prices above and beyond the copper forward premium.48 Panel C

reports results based on Granger-causality tests robust to instability, and we note that the exchange

rate coe¢ cient is signi…cant at 5% or below only for Chile. Panel D reports results for out-of-sample

forecast comparisons of models (12) and (13) relative to the speci…cations without the exchange

rate term. The results for Chile are again highly signi…cant, and the only ones that consistently

show forecast improvements and negative reported MSFE di¤erences when the exchange rate term

is included.    The …nding that only the Chilean exchange rate shows strong predictive power for

future copper prices, both in-sample and out-of-sample, con…rms our economic intuition behind the

exchange rate-commodity price linkage discussed in Section 2.

    Next, since our model suggests that commodity currencies in general should contain information

about aggregate commodity indices rather than about speci…c individual products, we construct an

equal-weighted index of gold, silver, and platinum prices to see if our exchange rates can forecast

this index better than the corresponding forward rate index.49              Speci…cally, we construct a spot

metal price index and a forward rate index for gold, silver, and platinum, as below:



                                      1
                               cpM         Gold
                                 t+1 = ( cpt+1 +          cpSi
                                                            t+1
                                                               lver
                                                                    +   cpPt+1
                                                                             latinum
                                                                                     )                       (14)
                                      3

                M                1P i
               ft+1    cpM
                         t+1 =      (f         cpit+1 ) where i = Gold, Silver, and Platinum                 (15)
                                 3 i t+1

  47
     We test both of these equations with and without including the lagged commodity price term ( 2 cpt ), and …nd
qualitatively similar results.
  48
     South Africa is not reported as the sample size is too short to get sensible results.
  49
     With the availability of more forward price data, we can extend our analysis to look a more comprehensive
aggregate index.
                                                                                                                   26


       We use all …ve of our exchange rates to forecast changes in the spot index             cpM
                                                                                                t+1 out of sample,


using to the following speci…cation:



                                               P
                 Et cpM
                      t+1 =       0   +   1j       sjt where j = AUS, CAN, CHI, NZ, and SA                       (16)
                                               j


       Figure 4 shows the comparison of the actual spot price movements, exchange rate-based fore-

casts, and the averaged forward rates over the period from 2002Q4 to 2008Q1.50 We note that

the forward rate index severely under-predict actual spot price movements.                     More importantly,

despite the fact that we are only looking at a limited set of products, we see that the exchange

rates together provide a much better prediction of the actual spot price movements.51

       These results suggest that the information embodies in the exchange rates is not only di¤erent

from what’s incorporated into forward price setting, it appears more useful as an indicator for

actual future price movements.            This …nding has obvious signi…cance for policy, and we believe

warrant further investigation which we leave for future research.52


                                INSERT TABLE 9 AND FIGURE 4 HERE


                                                   5.   Conclusion

This paper investigates the dynamic relationship between commodity price movements and ex-

change rate ‡uctuations. After controlling for time-varying parameters, we not only …nd a robust

  50
     The time frame for comparison is limited by data availability. With only …ve years of forward price data, we are
unable to conduct the same marginal predictability analyses as above.
  51
     Additional Deibold and Mariano (1995) tests con…rm easily that the exchange-rate based forecast outperforms
the forward rate forecast.
  52
     Indeed, Federal Reserve Chairman Bernanke mentioned in his June 9th, 2008 speech that the markets for longer-
dated futures contracts are often quite illiquid, suggesting that the associated futures prices may not e¤ectively
aggregate all available information. He then raised the question of whether it is possible to improve our forecasts of
commodity prices, using information from futures markets but possibly other information as well. Our results o¤er
a viable answer.
                                                                                                   27


relationship, we also uncover a surprising …nding that exchange rates are very useful in forecast-

ing future commodity prices.     From a technical perspective, because our approach is robust to

parameter-instabilities and because commodity prices are essentially exogenous to the exchange

rates we consider, our …ndings can be given a causal interpretation and thus represent a substan-

tial advance over the related exchange rate literature.       We are able in particular to overcome

the greatest di¢ culty in testing single-equation, reduced-form exchange rate models, namely, that

the standard fundamentals may be endogenous and that omitted variables may lead to parameter

instabilities. For these reasons, we argue that commodity currencies o¤er an ideal laboratory for

cutting-edge work on exchange rate models. There simply is no other instance of such a consistently

clear and identi…able shock as world commodity prices.

   Our results are robust to multivariate regressions, choice of the numeraire currency, forecast

combinations, highly persistent (local-to-unit root) regressors, and longer-horizon predictions. One

might eventually extend the approach to look at countries that have few or no commodities, such

as most of Asia, to see if commodity prices a¤ect the value of their currencies, and if their currency

‡uctuations may o¤er predictive power for, say, oil prices.
                                                                                             28


                                          6.   References

Amano, R., van Norden, S., (1993), “A Forecasting Equation for the Canada-U.S. Dollar Exchange

Rate,” The Exchange Rate and the Economy, 201-65. Bank of Canada, Ottawa.

   Andrews, D. W. K. (1993), “Tests for Parameter Instability and Structural Change with Un-

known Change Point”, Econometrica 61(4), 821-856.

   Campbell, J. Y., and R. Shiller (1987), "Cointegration and Tests of Present Value Models,"

Journal of Political Economy 95(5), 1062-88.

   Campbell, J. Y., and M. Yogo (2006), “E¢ cient Tests of Stock Return Predictability”, Journal

of Financial Economics 81, 27-60.

   Cashin, P., L. Céspedes, and R. Sahay (2004) "Commodity Currencies and the Real Exchange

Rate" Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 75, pp. 239-68.

   Chen,Y. (2005), “Exchange Rates and Fundamentals: Evidence from Commodity Currencies”,

University of Washington Working Paper.

   Chen,Y., and K. S. Rogo¤ (2003), “Commodity Currencies”, Journal of International Eco-

nomics 60, 133-169.

   Chen,Y., and K. S. Rogo¤ (2006), “Are the Commodity Currencies an Exception to the Rule?”,

University of Washington Working Paper.

   Clark, T., and M. McCracken (2001), “Tests of Equal Forecast Accuracy and Encompassing for

Nested Models”, Journal of Econometrics 105(1), 85-110.

   Clark, T., and K. D. West (2006), “Using Out-of-sample Mean Squared Prediction Errors to

Test the Martingale Di¤erence Hypothesis”, Journal of Econometrics 135, 155-186.

   Diebold, F. X., and R. Mariano (1995), “Comparing Predictive Accuracy”, Journal of Business

and Economic Statistics 13(3), 253-263.
                                                                                                29


   Dornbusch, R. (1976), “Expectations and Exchange Rate Dynamics”, Journal of Political Econ-

omy 84, 1161-1176.

   Elliott, G. (1998), “On the Robustness of Cointegration Methods When Regressors Almost

Have Unit Roots”, Econometrica 66(1), 149-158.

   Elliott, G., T. J. Rothenberg and J. H. Stock (1996), “E¢ cient Tests for an Autoregressive Unit

Root”, Econometrica, 64, 813-836.

   Engel, C., N. Mark and K. D. West (2007), “Exchange Rate Models Are Not as Bad as You

Think”, in D. Acemoglu, K. S. Rogo¤ and M. Woodford (eds.), NBER Macroeconomics Annual.

   Engel, C., and K. D. West (2005), “Exchange Rates and Fundamentals”, The Journal of Political

Economy 113(3), 485-517.

   Hayashi, F. (2000), Econometrics, Princeton University Press.

   Inoue, A., and L. Kilian (2004), "In-Sample or Out-of-Sample Tests of Predictability: Which

One Should We Use?" Econometric Reviews 23, 371–402.

   Mark, N. (2001), International Macroeconomics and Finance: Theory and Econometric Meth-

ods. Oxford: Blackwell.

   Meese, R., and K. S. Rogo¤ (1983a), “Exchange Rate Models of the Seventies. Do They Fit

Out of Sample?”, The Journal of International Economics 14, 3-24.

   Meese, R., and K. S. Rogo¤ (1983b), “The Out of Sample Failure of Empirical Exchange Rate

Models”, in Jacob Frankel (ed.), Exchange Rates and International Macroeconomics, Chicago:

University of Chicago Press for NBER.

   Meese, R., and K. S. Rogo¤ (1988), “Was it Real? The Exchange Rate-Interest Di¤erential

Relation Over the Modern Floating Rate Period”, The Journal of Finance 43(3), 923-948.

   Newey, W., and K. D. West (1987), “A Simple, Positive Semi-De…nite, Heteroskedasticity and
                                                                                           30


Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix”, Econometrica 55, 703-708.

   Obstfeld, M., and K. S. Rogo¤ (1996), Foundations of International Macroeconomics. Cam-

bridge, MA: MIT Press.

   Rogo¤, K. S. (2007), Comment to: “Exchange Rate Models Are Not as Bad as You Think”, in

D. Acemoglu, K. S. Rogo¤ and

   M. Woodford (eds.), NBER Macroeconomics Annual.

   Rogo¤, K. S., and V. Stavrakeva (2008), “The Continuing Puzzle of Short Horizon Exchange

Rate Forecasting", NBER Working paper 14071.

   Rossi, B. (2005a), “Testing Long-Horizon Predictive Ability, and the Meese-Rogo¤ Puzzle”,

International Economic Review 46(1), 61-92.

   Rossi, B. (2005b), “Optimal Tests for Nested Model Selection with Underlying Parameter In-

stability”, Econometric Theory 21(5), 962-990.

   Rossi, B. (2006), “Are Exchange Rates Really Random Walks? Some Evidence Robust to

Parameter Instability”, Macroeconomic Dynamics 10(1), 20-38.

   Rossi, B. (2007), “Expectations Hypotheses Tests at Long Horizons”, Econometrics Journal

10(3), 1-26.

   Stock, J. H. and M. W. Watson (2003), “Combination Forecasts of Output Growth in a Seven-

Country Data Set,” forthcoming Journal of Forecasting.

   Timmermann, A. (2006), “Forecast Combinations”, in: C. Granger, G. Elliott and A. Timmer-

mann (eds.), Handbook of Economic Forecasting, Volume 1, North Holland.

   Wright, B. and J. C. Williams (1989), "A theory of negative prices for storage", Journal of

Futures Markets 9, 1–13.
                                                                                                                                                31


                                                            7.    Tables
                        Table 1. Bivariate Granger-Causality Tests

                              AUS                   NZ                CAN                  CHI                           SA

               A. P-values of H0 :          0   =       1    = 0 in    cpt+1 =             0    +       1    st +        2   cpt

                              0.21                  0.11           0.07**                  0.11                    0.01***

               B. P-values of H0 :          0   =       1   = 0 in     st+1 =          0    +       1       cpt +        2   st

                              0.42                  0.50              0.92                 0.70                      0.40

               Note: The table reports p-values for the Granger-causality test. Asterisks

               mark rejection at the1% (***), 5% (**), and 10% (*) signi…cance levels

               respectively, indicating evidence of Granger-causality.



                   Table 2. Andrews’(1993) QLR Test for Instabilities

                 AUS                   NZ                             CAN                                   CHI                       SA

  A. P-values for stability of (     0t ;       1t )   in:       cpt+1 =      0t   +       1t       st +      2     cpt

                 0***                 0.63                             0.13                                 0.56                       0***

               (2004:1)                                                                                                              (2005:3)

  B. P-values for stability of (     0t ;       1t )   in:       st+1 =      0t   +    1t       cpt +         2     st

                 0***                0.02**                           0.05**                                0***                       0***

               (2002:2)            (2002:3)                        (2002:2)                     (2004:4)                          (2005:3)

Note: The table reports p-values for Andrew’s (1993) QLR test of parameter stability. Asterisks mark

rejection at the 1% (***), 5% (**), and 10% (*) signi…cance levels respectively, indicating evidence

of instability. When the test rejects the null hypothesis of parameter stability, the estimated break-dates

are reported in the parentheses.
                                                                                             32



         Table 3. Granger-Causality Tests Robust to Instabilities,

                                     Rossi (2005b)

                 AUS               NZ               CAN                     CHI       SA

A. P-values for H0 :    t   =   = 0 in    cpt+1 =    0t   +    1t    st +   2   cpt

                 0***             0.30              0.05**                  0.22      0***

B. P-values for H0 :    t   =   = 0 in    st+1 =    0t   +    1t    cpt +   2   st

                 0***            0.02**              0.36                   0***      0***

Note: The table reports p-values for testing the null of no Granger-causality that are

robust to parameter instabilities. Asterisks mark rejection at the 1% (***),5% (**),

and 10% (*) signi…cance levels respectively, indicating evidence in favor of Granger-

causality.
                                                                                                                 33



                Table 4. Tests for Out-of-Sample Forecasting Ability

                  AUS                    NZ            CAN                           CHI                SA

Panel (a): Autoregressive benchmark

A. MSFE di¤erence between the model: Et cpt+1 =                0t   +    1t    cpt +        2t   st

and the AR(1): Et cpt+1 =        0t   +    1t    cpt

                1.74***              0.42***           1.05**                   -0.16***              1.33**

B. MSFE di¤erence between the model: Et st+1 =             0t   +       1t    st +     2t    cpt

and the AR(1): Et st+1 =        0t   +    1t    st

                  0.24                   0.31           1.63                        1.18**              1.57



Panel (b): Random walk benchmark

A. MSFE di¤erence between the model: Et cpt+1 =                0t   +    1t    st

and the random walk: Et cpt+1 = 0

                -2.11***             -1.51***          -0.01                    -0.44***              -1.37***

B. MSFE di¤erence between the model: Et st+1 =             0t   +       1t    cpt

and the random walk: Et st+1 = 0

                 0.54*                0.32**            0.59                         0.99               2.09

Note. The table reports re-scaled MSFE di¤erences between the model and the random walk

forecasts. Negative values imply that the model forecasts better than the random walk.

Asterisks denote rejections of the null hypothesis that random walk is better in favor of the

alternative hypothesis that the fundamental-based model is better at 1% (***), 5% (**), and

10% (*) signi…cance levels, respectively, using Clark and McCracken’s (2001) critical values.
                                                                                                      34



 Table 5. Exchange Rates and the Aggregate Global Commodity Price Index

                         Panel A. Multivariate Granger-Causality Tests

                                                0***

                      Panel B. Andrews’(1993) QLR Test for Instabilities

                                           0*** (2003:2)

                     Panel C. Multivariate Granger-Causality Tests Robust

                                  to Instabilities, Rossi (2005b)

                                                0***

                           Panel D. Out-of-Sample Forecasting Ability

      AR(1) benchmark: -1.08***                         Random walk benchmark: -1.18***

                                 Panel E. Forecast Combination

          AR(1) benchmark: -2.08**                     Random walk benchmark: -1.44

Notes: The table reports results from various tests using the AUS, NZ and CAN exchange rates

to jointly predict aggregate global future commodity prices (cpW ). Panels A-C report the p-values,

and Panels D and E report the di¤erences between the model-based forecasts and both the RW

and AR forecasts. *** indicates signi…cance at the 1% level, and ** signi…cance at 5%.
                                                                                                                              35



    Table 6. Aggregate Global Commodity Price Index and Individual Exchange Rates

                                                                 AUS                 NZ           CAN              CHI        SA

                                       Panel A. Granger-Causality Tests

st GC cpW
        t+1                                                      0***              0.01***         0***            0***      0.23

cpW
  t GC st+1                                                         0.87             0.37          0.77             0.36      0.12

                                       Panel B. Andrews’(1993) QLR Test for Instabilities

st GC cpW
        t+1                                                      0.10*               0.26         0.06**           0***      0***

                                                                (2003:2)           (2004:3)      (2003:2)      (2004:4)     (2005:3)

cpW
  t GC st+1                                                      0***               0***          0.04**           0***      0.74

                                                                (2003:2)           (2003:2)      (2003:2)      (2004:4)     (2005:3)

                                       Panel C. Granger-Causality Tests Robust to Instabilities, Rossi (2005b)

st GC cpW
        t+1                                                      0***              0.04**          0***            0***      0***

cpW
  t GC st+1                                                      0***               0***           0.22            0***      0.03*

                                       Panel D. Out-of-Sample Forecasting Ability

      AR(1) benchmark:                 st ) cpW
                                              t+1               -2.32***           -0.80***      -0.71**       -2.23***      0.80

                                       cpW
                                         t ) st+1                   0.74             0.61          0.47            1.78**   0.31**

Random walk benchmark:                 st ) cpW
                                              t+1               -1.82***           -1.06***      -0.65***      -1.62***      0.39*

                                       cpW
                                         t ) st+1                   1.30            0.51*          1.53             1.28    0.98**

Note. Panels A-C report p-values for tests for              0   =     1   = 0 based on two regressions:

(i)       cpW
            t+1 =   0   +   1   st +   2   cpW                  W
                                             t (labeled st GC cpt+1 ) and (ii)                st+1 =   0   +   1     cpW
                                                                                                                       t


+     2    st (labeled cpW
                         t GC st+1 ). Estimated break-dates are reported in parentheses. Panel D


reports the di¤erences between model-based out-of-sample forecasts versus the AR and RW forecasts,

where the model is Et yt+1 =               0   +   1   xt (labeled x ) y). Asterisks indicate signi…cance

levels at 1% (***), 5% (**), and 10% (*) respectively.
                                                                                                               36



                              Table 7(a). Nominal E¤ective Exchange Rate

                                       AUS            NZ            CAN          CHI       SA

                        Panel A. Multivariate Granger-Causality Tests

st GC cpt+1                             0.31          0.28          0.18         0.35    0.01***

cpt GC st+1                             0.06          0.11          0.49         0.45      0.34

                        Panel B. Andrews’(1993) QLR Test for Instabilities

st GC cpt+1                            0***           0.61       0.03**          0***      0***

                                      (2003:4)        --        (2002:3)     (2004:3)    (2005:2)

cpt GC st+1                           0.01***          1            0.19         0***     0.09*

                                      (2003:4)        --             --      (2004:3)    (2005:2)

                        Panel C. Granger-Causality Tests Robust to Instabilities, Rossi (2005b)

st GC cpt+1                            0***           0.77       0.05**          0.09*     0***

cpt GC st+1                           0.02**          0.27          0.70         0***      0.16

                        Panel D. Out-of-Sample Forecasting Ability

AR(1) benchmark:        st ) cpt+1    0.31***     0.46***           0.91*        1.32    0.42***

                        cpt ) st+1      0.42          0.39      0.15***          0.28      0.57

 RW benchmark:          st ) cpt+1   -1.99***    -1.69***           -0.51        0.80    -1.75***

                        cpt ) st+1      0.62     -0.01***       -1.78***         1.88      0.73

Note. Panels A-C report p-values for tests of    0=    1=    0 based on two regressions: (i) Et cpt+1 =      0+ 1    st

+   2   cpt (labeled st GC cpt+1 ) and (ii) Et st+1 =        0+ 1    cpt +   2   st (labeled cpt GC st+1 ). Estimated break-

dates are reported in parentheses. Panel D reports the di¤erences between the same model-based out-of-sample

forecasts versus the AR(1) and RW forecasts. Asterisks indicate 1% (***), 5% (**), and 10% (*) signi…cance levels.
                                                                                                                37



                          Table 7(b). U.K. Pound as the Numeraire Currency

                                       AUS            NZ            CAN           CHI        SA

                        Panel A. Multivariate Granger-Causality Tests

st GC cpt+1                             0.18          0.38          0.07*         0.16     0.01***

cpt GC st+1                             0.79       0.07*            0.51          0.21       0.16

                        Panel B. Andrews’(1993) QLR Test for Instabilities

st GC cpt+1                            0***        0***         0.03**           0.01***    0***

                                      (2004:1)   (2004:2)       (2002:2)     (2004:4)      (2005:3)

cpt GC st+1                           0.07**           1             1            0.06*     0***

                                      (2004:1)        --             --      (2004:4)      (2005:3)

                        Panel C. Granger-Causality Tests Robust to Instabilities, Rossi (2005b)

st GC cpt+1                            0***       0.01***           0***         0.02**     0***

cpt GC st+1                            0.09*          0.14           1            0.06*     0***

                        Panel D. Out-of-Sample Forecasting Ability

AR(1) benchmark:        st ) cpt+1    0.98***     1.61***       0.87***      -0.64***      1.06***

                        cpt ) st+1      0.50     -0.06***           0.86         0.54***     0.95

 RW benchmark:          st ) cpt+1   -1.58***    -1.07***       -0.36**          -0.52**   -1.68***

                        cpt ) st+1      0.48      0.18**            1.24          0.88*      1.27

Note. Panels A-C report p-values for tests of    0=    1=    0 based on two regressions: (i) Et cpt+1 =       0+ 1    st

+   2   cpt (labeled st GC cpt+1 ) and (ii) Et st+1 =        0+ 1    cpt +   2    st (labeled cpt GC st+1 ). Estimated break-

dates are reported in parentheses. Panel D reports the di¤erences between the same model-based out-of-sample

forecasts versus the AR(1) and RW forecasts. Asterisks indicate 1% (***), 5% (**), and 10% (*) signi…cance levels.
                                                                                                38



           Table 8. Short- and Long-Horizon Predictive Regressions

                     (Robust to Highly Persistent Regressors)

         A. Con…dence Interval for        in: Et   h     cpt+j =
                                      h            j=1              h st   +     cpt

         h:               1                          4                                 8

AUS                  (0.01;0.02)               (0.01;0.04)                      (0.01;0.04)

NZ                  (-0.06;-0.05)             (-0.12;-0.16)                    (-0.13;-0.23)

CAN                 (-0.04;0.001)             (-0.05;0.002)                    (-0.05;0.002)

CHI                  (0.17;0.22)               (0.20;0.36)                      (0.20;0.37)

SA                   (0.02;0.03)               (0.02;0.05)                      (0.02;0.05)



         B. Con…dence Interval for        in: Et   h     st+j =
                                      h            j=1             h cpt   +     st

         h:               1                          4                                 8

AUS                  (0.22;0.25)               (0.61;0.98)                      (0.80;1.81)

NZ                   (0.18;0.20)               (0.38;0.62)                      (0.41;0.92)

CAN                (-0.01;-0.002)             (-0.01;-0.004)                   (-0.02;-0.005)

CHI                 (-0.03;-0.01)             (-0.04;-0.02)                    (-0.04;-0.03)

SA                   (0.03;0.09)               (0.04;0.14)                      (0.04;0.14)

Note. The table reports con…dence intervals for the long horizon regression parameter

 h   at di¤erent horizons h.
                                                                                                        39



                               Table 9. Forward Rate Regressions for Copper

                                       AUS               NZ          CAN          CHI

                                Panel A. Granger-Causality Tests

"forward premium 1"                    0.85             0.09         0.75        0.03**

"forward premium 2"                    0.21             0.44         0.72       0.01***

                                Panel B. Andrews’(1993) QLR Test for Instabilities

"forward premium 1"                    0.73             0.72         0.87         0.52



"forward premium 2"                    0.24             0.74         0.33         0***

                                                                                (2005:1)

                                Panel C. Granger-Causality Tests Robust to Instabilities, Rossi (2005b)

"forward premium 1"                    0.87             0.12           1          0.24

"forward premium 2"                    0.29             0.61         0.44         0***

                                Panel D. Out-of-Sample Forecasting Ability

"forward premium 1"                  1.92***          -0.01***      1.12**      -0.18***

"forward premium 2"                    0.02             0.66         1.16       -1.54***

Note. Panels A-C report p-values for tests for   3=   0 based on two regressions: (i) Et cpcu
                                                                                           t+1 =
                                                                                                           cu
                                                                                                   0 + 1 (ft+1


 cpcu
   t )+   2   cpcu
                t +   3   st (labeled "forward premium 1") and (ii) Et cpcu
                                                                         t+1 =
                                                                                         cu
                                                                                    0 +(ft+1   cpcu
                                                                                                 t )+     2
                                                                                                              cpcu
                                                                                                                t +   3   st

(labeled "forward premium 2"). Estimated break-dates are reported in parentheses. Panel D reports the

di¤erences between model-based out-of-sample forecasts and the forecasts of the model that does not include

the lagged exchange rate. Asterisks indicate signi…cance levels at 1% (***), 5% (**), and 10% (*) respectively.
                                                                                                                    40



 Figure 1. Forecasting Aggregate Global Commodity Price with Multiple Exchange Rates

                                           Model : Et cpW
                                                        t+1 =   0   +   11   sAU
                                                                              t
                                                                                 S +
                                                                                       12   sCAN
                                                                                             t   +    13   sN
                                                                                                            t
                                                                                                              Z




                                    0.08
                                                  Model's forecast
                                                  Actual realization
                                    0.06
   Global commodity price change




                                    0.04


                                    0.02


                                       0


                                   -0.02


                                   -0.04



                                           1996      1998           2000            2002       2004          2006
                                                                             Time


Note. The …gure plots the realized change in the global commodity price level (labeled “Actual

realization”) and their exchange rate-based forecasts (labeled “Model’s forecast”)
                                                                                                                    41



  Figure 2. Forecasting Aggregate Global Commodity Price Using Forecast Combination:

                                                  Model: ( cpW;AU
                                                             t+1
                                                                  S
                                                                    +       cpW;CAN
                                                                              t+1   +      cpW;N Z
                                                                                             t+1 )=3;


                                              where Et cpW;i
                                                         t+1 =    0;i   +   1;i   sit , i = AU S; CAN; N Z




                                    0.08
                                                    Forecast combination
                                                    Actual realization
                                    0.06
   Global commodity price change




                                    0.04


                                    0.02


                                       0


                                   -0.02


                                   -0.04



                                           1996       1998       2000              2002        2004          2006
                                                                            Time


Note. The …gure plots the realized change in the global commodity price level (labeled “Actual

realization”) and their forecasts based on the three exchange rates (labeled “Forecast combination”)
                                                                                                                      42



  Figure 3. Forecasting Aggregate Global Commodity Price with Chilean Exchange Rates

                                                                    Sample : 1999       2007

                                                              Model : Et cpW
                                                                           t+1 =    0   +   1   sCHI
                                                                                                 t




                                    0.08            Model's forecast
                                                    Actual realization
                                    0.06
   Global commodity price change




                                    0.04


                                    0.02


                                       0


                                   -0.02


                                   -0.04


                                      1999   2000      2001      2002    2003    2004            2005   2006   2007
                                                                            Time


Note. The …gure plots the realized change in the global commodity price level (labeled “Actual

realization”) and their exchange rate-based forecasts (labeled “Model’s forecast”)
                                                                                                                                   43



     Figure 4. Forecasting Metal Price Index with Exchange Rates vs. with Forward Rates

                                                                        Sample : 2002Q4     2008Q1

                                      Model : Et cpM
                                                   t+1 =   0   +   11    sAU
                                                                          t
                                                                             S +
                                                                                   12   sCAN
                                                                                         t   +    13   sN
                                                                                                        t
                                                                                                          Z +
                                                                                                                14   sCHI
                                                                                                                      t   +   15   sSA
                                                                                                                                    t

                                                                                        M
                                                                        Forward index: ft+1;t    cpM
                                                                                                   t




                                     0.15


                                      0.1
      Changes in Metal Price Index




                                     0.05


                                        0


                                     -0.05
                                                                                                Model forecast
                                                                                                Forward index
                                      -0.1                                                      Actual realization


                                     -0.15
                                             2003          2004                  2005              2006               2007
                                                                                    Time


Note. The …gure plots the realized change in the spot metal price index (labeled “Actual

realization”), the corresponding forward rate, and the exchange rate-based forecast (labeled “Model forecast”)
                                                                                              44


       8.   Appendix 1. Composition of the Commodity Price Indices
                   Table A1. Commodity Export Compositions

       Australia                 Canada                 New Zealand           South Africa

  1983Q1-2008Q1           1972Q1-2008Q1             1986Q1-2008Q1            1994Q1-2008Q1

Product            Wt.    Product         Wt.    Product              Wt.    Product    Wt.

Wheat              8.3    Aluminum        5      Aluminum             8.3    Coal       22

Beef               7.9    Beef            7.8    Apples               3.1    Gold       48

Wool               4.1    Canola          1.2    Beef                 9.4    Platinum   30

Cotton             2.8    Coal            1.8    Butter               6.5

Sugar              2.5    Copper          2      Casein               6.7

Barley             1.9    Corn            0.5    Cheese               8.3

Canola             1      Crude Oil       21.4   Fish                 6.7

Rice               0.5    Fish            1.3    Kiwi                 3.7

Aluminum           8.1    Gold            2.3    Lamb                 12.5   Chile

Copper             2.8    Hogs            1.8    Logs                 3.5    1989Q1-2008Q1

Nickel             2.6    Lumber          13.6   Pulp                 3.1    Product    Wt.

Zinc               1.5    Nat. Gas        10.7   Sawn Timber          4.6    Copper     100

Lead               0.7    Newsprint       7.7    Skim MP              3.7

Coking coal        14.7   Nickel          2.4    Skins                1.6

Steaming coal      9.7    Potash          1.6    Wholemeal MP         10.6

Gold               9.4    Pulp            12.8   Wool                 7.7

Iron ore           9.3    Silver          0.3

Alumina            7.4    Wheat           3.4

LNG                4.8    Zinc            2.3
                                                                                                                                     45


                                       9.   Appendix 2: Time Series Methods

This section provides a description of the test statistics used in this paper. Let the model be:

yt = x0t     1 t    + "t , t = 1; ::T , where xt      1   is a p       1 vector of explanatory variables.53


9.1.        Granger-causality tests.                 Traditional Granger-causality regressions assume that the pa-

rameter       t    = ; that is,       is constant. They are implemented as:


                                                                                0
                                            GC : WT = T b                   0       Vb   1   b   0 ;



where Vb is a consistent estimate of the covariance of b . For example, Vb = Sxx1 SS
                                                                                  b 1 , Sxx
                                                                                     xx
       TP1
 1                     0
T 1          xt     1 xt 1 ;
       t=1


                                                                                                                            !
                            1 PT             0
                                                          TP1                   j            1 P T
                  Sb =            xt 1b
                                      "t b
                                         "t xt   1    +            1    j            j               xt 1b
                                                                                                         "t b
                                                                                                            "t      0
                                                                                                                 j xt 1 j       ;   (17)
                            T t=2                         j=2               T 1=3            T t=j+1


b
"t     yt     x0t        b , and b is the full-sample OLS estimator:
                     1



                                                                            1                           1
                                      b=     1 TP1              0                   1 TP1
                                                   xt        1 xt 1                       xt     1 yt       :
                                             T t=1                                  T t=1


Under the null hypothesis of no Granger-causality ( = 0), WT is a chi-square distribution with p

degrees of freedom. If there is no serial correlation in the data, only the …rst component in (17) is

relevant.

  53
     The Granger-causality test described below is valid under the following assumptions: (i) fyt ; xt g are stationary
and ergodic, (ii) E (xt x0t ) is nonsingular, (iii) E (xt "t ) = 0 and (iv) fxt "t g satis…es Gordin’s condition (p. 405,
Hayashi, 2000) and its long-run variance is non-singular. Condition (iii) allows the data to be serially correlated, but
rules out endogeneity. Rossi (2005b) relaxes these conditions.
                                                                                                                                                 46


9.2.      Rossi (2005b).           Rossi (2005b) shows that traditional Granger-causality tests above may

fail in the presence of parameter instabilities. She therefore develops optimal tests for model

selection between two nested models in the presence of underlying parameter instabilities in the

data. The procedures are based on testing jointly the signi…cance of additional variables that are

present only under the largest model and their stability over time.54 She is interested in testing

whether the variable xt has no predictive content for yt in the situation where the parameter                                                      t


might be time-varying. Among the various forms of instabilities that she considers, we focus on

the case in which      t   may shift from          to           6=         at some unknown point in time.

       The test is implemented as follows. Suppose the shift happens at a particular point in time .

Let b 1 and b 2 denote the OLS estimators before and after the time of the shift:


                                                                           1                                     1
                           b            1 P1               0                    1 P1
                               1   =              xt    1 xt 1                              xt          1 yt         ;
                                            t=1                                      t=1
                                                  TP1                               1                      TP1                  1
                           b                1                          0                            1
                               2   =                     xt         1 xt    1                                    xt      1 yt       :
                                        T          t=                                       T              t=



       The test builds on two components:                   b        + 1                    b           and b 1           b . The …rst is simply the
                                                        T       1                   T           2                          2


full-sample estimate of the parameter,                  b + 1                       b           = b ; a test on whether this component is
                                                   T     1                      T       2


zero is able to detect situations in which the parameter is constant but di¤erent from zero. However,

if the regressor Granger-causes the dependent variable in such a way that the parameter changes

but the average of the estimates equals zero, then the …rst component would not be able to detect

such situations. The second component is introduced to perform that task. It is the di¤erence of

  54
    Rossi (2005b) considered the general case of testing possibly nonlinear restrictions in models estimated with
General Method of Moments. Here, we provide a short description in the simple case of no Granger-causality
restrictions in models whose parameters are consistently estimated with Ordinary Least Squares (OLS), like the
Granger-causality regressions implemented in this paper. She also considers the case of tests on subsets of parameters,
that is the case where yt = x0t 1 t + zt0 1 + "t and the researcher is interested in testing only whether xt Granger-
causes yt .
                                                                                                                                                                                                47


the parameters estimated in the two sub-samples; a test on whether this component is zero is able

to detect situations in which the parameter changes at time . The test statistic is the following:

        Exp      WT =
                                                                                                                                                    0                                                1
            [0:85T                                                                                                                                  B               b               b                C
              P ]                                                        0                                                          0                                   1               2
        1
        T
                         1
                        0:7   exp     1
                                      2            b
                                                       1
                                                                 b
                                                                     2
                                                                                          b
                                                                                              1   + 1                      b
                                                                                                                               2
                                                                                                                                           Vb   1B
                                                                                                                                                    @
                                                                                                                                                                                                     C
                                                                                                                                                                                                     A
                                                                                      T                               T
            =[0:15T ]                                                                                                                                       b                               b
                                                                                                                                                        T       1   + 1                 T       2
                                                                     0                                                                          1
                                                                            0 b 1
                                                     B                   T Sxx S1 Sxx                                          0                C
                                          where Vb = B
                                                     @
                                                                                                                                                C;
                                                                                                                                                A
                                                                                          0                   T            0 S
                                                                                                                          Sxx b 1 Sxx
                                                                                                                  T            2




                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                  1 P                        0                   P1                       j                 1 P
               Sb1 =                        xt 1b
                                                "t b
                                                   "t xt         1       +                    1           1=3
                                                                                                                                           xt 1b  "t j x0t 1 j
                                                                                                                                               "t b                             ;           (18)
                                      t=2                                        j=2                                               t=j+1

                                      1       TP                             0
               Sb1 =                                       xt 1b
                                                               "t b
                                                                  "t xt           1
                                  T          t= +1
                                                                                   !                                                                    !
                                    TP                               j                                1       TP
                              +                1                                                                           xt 1b  "t j x0t 1 j
                                                                                                                               "t b                         :                               (19)
                                  j= +1                    (T            )1=3                     T           t=j+1



Under the joint null hypothesis of no Granger-causality and no time-variation in the parameters

(   t   =     = 0), Exp               WT has a distribution whose critical values are tabulated in Rossi’s (2005b)

Table B1. If there is no serial correlation in the data, only the …rst component in (18) and (19) is

relevant.


9.3.        Tests of out-of-sample rolling MSFE comparisons. To compare the out-of-sample

forecasting ability of:



                                                                         M odel : yt = x0t                                1 t      + "t                                                     (20)

                                                       Random W alk : yt = "t ;                                                                                                             (21)
                                                                                                                               48


we generate a sequence of 1 step-ahead forecasts of yt+1 using a rolling out-of-sample procedure.

The procedure involves dividing the sample of size T into an in-sample window of size m and an out-

of-sample window of size n = T        m        + 1. The in-sample window at time t contains observations

indexed t m+1; : : : ; t. We let ft ( b t ) be the time-t forecast for yt produced by estimating the model
                                                Pt 1                                              1P
over the in-sample window at time t; with b t =  s=t
                                                                                           0
                                                                                   m+1 xs xs
                                                                                                    t 1
                                                                                                    s=t m+1 xs ys+1     indicating

the parameter estimate; we let ftRW denote the forecast of the random walk (that is, ftRW = 0).

   To compare the out-of-sample predictive ability of (20) and (21), Diebold and Mariano (1995),

West (1996) suggest focusing on:



                                                                   2                         2
                                     dt       yt    ft ( b t )                yt     ftRW                                    (22)


They show that the sample average of dt , appropriately re-scaled, has an asymptotic standard

Normal distribution. However, this is not the case when the models are nested, as in our case.

Clark and McCracken’s (2001) show that, under the null hypothesis that the model is (21), the

tests of Diebold and Mariano (1995) and West (1996) do not have a Normal distribution. They

propose a new statistic, ENCNEW, which is the following:


                                          P
                                          T                               2
                                 1
                                 n                 yt        ft ( b t )             yt    ft ( b t )   yt   ftRW
             EN CN EW = n         "t=m+1                                                                        2
                                                                                                                    #
                                    1 P                                                  P
                                       T                                                 T
                                                                     2              1                       2
                                      n                 yt      ftRW                n            yt    ftRW
                                          t=m+1                                         t=m+1


Its limiting distribution is non-standard, and critical values are provided in Clark and McCracken

(2001). Clark and West (2006) propose a correction to (22) that results in an approximately

normally distributed test statistic.
