                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                WHY DO FOREIGNERS INVEST IN THE UNITED STATES?

                                          Kristin J. Forbes

                                        Working Paper 13908
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13908


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2008




Thanks to Pierre Azoulay, Henning Bohn, Stephanie Curcuru, Tomas Dvorak, Steve Kamin, Philip
Lane, Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti, Vincenzo Quadrini, Frank Warnock, and seminar participants at
MIT, Harvard, the NBER, the San Francisco Pacific Basin Conference and the IMF-UK ESRC Conference
on International Macro-Finance for extremely helpful comments and discussions. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Kristin J. Forbes. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Why do Foreigners Invest in the United States?
Kristin J. Forbes
NBER Working Paper No. 13908
April 2008, Revised October 2008
JEL No. F2,F3,F4,G1

                                               ABSTRACT

Why are foreigners willing to invest almost $2 trillion per year in the United States? The answer affects
if the existing pattern of global imbalances can persist and if the United States can continue to finance
its current account deficit without a major change in asset prices and returns. This paper tests various
hypotheses and finds that standard portfolio allocation models and diversification motives are poor
predictors of foreign holdings of U.S. liabilities. Instead, foreigners hold greater shares of their investment
portfolios in the United States if they have less developed financial markets. The magnitude of this
effect decreases with income per capita. Countries with fewer capital controls and greater trade with
the United States also invest more in U.S. equity and bond markets, and there is no evidence that foreigners
invest in the United States based on diversification motives. The empirical results showing a primary
role of financial market development in driving foreign purchases of U.S. portfolio liabilities supports
recent theoretical work on global imbalances.


Kristin J. Forbes
MIT Sloan School,Room E52-455
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
kjforbes@mit.edu
I.      Introduction
The causes and implications of global imbalances have recently been a major focus of the
academic literature in international trade and finance. One of the most contentious aspects of this
literature is whether the current system of large global imbalances can continue. Most traditional
models suggest that this system will not persist because the United States must stabilize its
external debt ratios, and part of this adjustment will involve a large dollar depreciation (Obstfeld
and Rogoff (2007) and Blanchard, Giavazzi and Sa (2005)). A more recent series of papers
argues that this system of imbalances could continue for an extended period due to factors such
as: differences in financial market development that make U.S. assets more attractive (Caballero,
Farhi and Gourinchas (2008), Mendoza, Quadrini and Ríos-Rull (2006) and Ju and Wei (2006)), a
persistent return differential between U.S. and foreign asset holdings (Gourinchas and Rey (2007)
and Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2007a)), or even “dark matter” (Hausmann and Sturzenegger
(2006)). A focus of several papers is the key role of the more developed, liquid and efficient U.S.
financial markets in attracting foreign capital. Which side of this debate is correct has important
implications for the global financial system.


Although discussions of global imbalances traditionally focused on trade flows and saving-
investment imbalances, more recent attention has focused on the corresponding capital flows.
Gross capital flows into the United States totaled $7.8 trillion over the five years from 2003
through 2007, increasing each year to reach $2.1 trillion in 2007. 1 Why are foreigners willing to
invest an average of over $5 billion every day in the United States—especially given relatively
low returns relative to comparable investments in other countries and a widespread expectation of
continued dollar depreciation? Moreover, despite the increased role of government and official
institutions in U.S. capital inflows, 76% of gross capital flows into the United States from 2003
through 2007 were made by the private sector and 81% of U.S. external liabilities were held by
the private sector at end-2007. Understanding the motivation behind the millions of individual
decisions that drive these capital inflows is critically important to understanding if this massive
net transfer of capital into the United States can last. The stability of these capital inflows is
generally believed to be the greatest vulnerability to the current system of global imbalances.


This paper attempts to explain why foreigners, and especially private-sector investors, are willing
to invest such large amounts of money into the United States. It begins by documenting who

1
 When combined with the $1.29 trillion of U.S. capital outflows, this funded the U.S. current account
deficit of $731 billion. Data from Bureau of Economic Analysis, Survey of Current Business (July 2008).


                                                                                                          1
holds U.S. portfolio liabilities and shows that foreigners have earned substantially lower returns
on their U.S. investments over the past five years than U.S. investors have earned abroad, even
after removing the effects of exchange rate movements and official sector investments. This
return differential against foreigners even exists within individual asset classes (equities, foreign
direct investment, and to a lesser extent, bonds) and even after making rough adjustments for risk.
A simple analysis also shows that standard portfolio allocation models do a poor job explaining
patterns of foreign investment in the United States, especially in explaining the large variation in
different countries’ portfolio allocations to U.S. investments.


There are, however, a number of reasons why foreign, private-sector individuals would invest in
the United States—despite earning relatively low returns—that are not incorporated in these
simple portfolio allocation models. To test the validity of these different theories, this paper
builds on three different literatures: on home bias, on the allocation of investment across
countries, and on the macroeconomic determinants of capital flows corresponding to global
imbalances. It uses new annual information on foreign holdings of U.S. equities and bonds and
essentially runs a “horse race” to evaluate the predictions from the various theoretical models and
existing empirical work.


This analysis is different from earlier work in this literature in three ways. First, this paper is the
only analysis that focuses on the determinants of investment into only the United States in order
to focus on its unique role in attracting foreign capital flows and the corresponding implications
for global imbalances. Second, this paper focuses on the determinants of all types of portfolio
investment, as compared to most of the empirical work which only focuses on equity flows
(despite the greater importance of debt flows and their inclusion in the models). 2 It also includes
information on all types of investors (including mutual funds, hedge funds, pension funds, life
insurance companies, and government agencies), as compared to some work which only focuses
on specific investors (usually mutual funds). Finally, it focuses on what drives foreign individuals
and companies to invest in the United States, as well as on the macroeconomic determinants of
capital flows, combining what have been very different literatures.




2
 From 2003-2007, 47% of gross capital flows into the United States was in the form of bonds, while only
7% was in equities. Exceptions to this focus on equity markets are: Burger and Warnock (2003, 2007),
which focuses on U.S. investment in foreign bond markets and Lane (2006a), which estimates the bilateral
composition of international bond portfolios for members of the EMU.


                                                                                                          2
The empirical results suggest that a primary factor driving both equity and bond flows into the
United States is a country’s level of financial development. Countries with less developed
financial markets tend to hold a greater share of their portfolios in the United States, and the
strength of this relationship is inversely related to a country’s income level. This primary role for
financial development supports the recent focus of the theoretical literature on global imbalances.
There is also strong evidence that countries with greater trade flows with the United States and
fewer capital controls invest relatively more in U.S. equity and debt markets. The results also find
some support for “return-chasing” in equity (although not bond) markets, i.e. that foreigners tend
to invest more in the United States if their equity markets have recently performed worse relative
to U.S. markets. There is some evidence that countries that are “closer” with the United States
(through cultural ties as well as distance) and that have stronger corporate governance invest
more in U.S. equities. Foreigners do not invest more in either U.S. equity or debt markets if
returns in their own markets are less correlated with the United States, providing little support for
a diversification motive for foreign investment.


The remainder of this paper is as follows. Section II discusses the data on foreign holdings of
U.S. liabilities and documents the return differentials between foreign investments in the United
States and U.S. investments abroad. It also describes the substantial variation in countries’
portfolio allocations toward the United States. The remainder of the paper presents the main
analysis of what determines foreign holdings of U.S. portfolio liabilities. Section III develops a
simple model to structure the empirical analysis, links this model to the existing literature, and
discusses seven reasons why private-sector investors around the world might invest in the United
States. Section IV discusses several econometric issues and then presents empirical results on the
determinants of foreign investment in U.S. equity markets. Section V presents results for foreign
investment in U.S. bond markets, including an analysis of the differences between private and
official-sector investment patterns. Section VI concludes.




II.     Background and Data: Foreign Investment in the United States
This section provides some background on patterns of foreign investment in the United States and
discusses the main data set on foreign portfolio holdings of U.S. liabilities. It answers three
questions: Who is investing in the United States? What returns have foreigners earned from
investing in the United States? And have foreigners tended to “over” or “under” invest in the
United States as compared to the predictions of standard portfolio models?



                                                                                                     3
II.A. The Data: Who Invests in the United States?
In order to measure foreign investments in U.S. equity and debt markets, this paper primarily uses
data from the “Report on Foreign Portfolio Holdings of U.S. Securities,” compiled by the U.S.
Department of the Treasury, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, and the Board of Governors
of the Federal Reserve System (hereafter referred to as USG). It also performs sensitivity tests
and augments certain parts of the analysis using an additional data set—the “Coordinated
Portfolio Investment Survey,” compiled by the International Monetary Fund (hereafter referred to
as IMF). Appendix A provides additional information on the data, including details on the
differences in the data sets. 3


Both the USG and IMF data report foreign holdings of U.S. portfolio liabilities broken down by
country and security type on an annual basis from 2000/2001 until 2006/7 and offer important
advantages over previous data sets. 4 This is the first time that an annual time series (albeit still
short) is available for international asset and liability positions. Before 2002 data on U.S. foreign
assets and liabilities was only available in five-year intervals, and papers requiring more timely
information were forced to calculate international holdings using accumulated flow data
combined with estimated valuation adjustments. As has been well-documented, data on cross-
border capital flows is highly problematic and estimates of asset and liability positions based on
accumulated flow data can differ significantly from actual holdings (due to various challenges
such as tracking flows to their originating country). 5 Another advantage of these two data sets is
that they encompass holdings of U.S. liabilities by all types of private foreign investors. In
contrast, many other papers have focused only on mutual fund investments—thereby ignoring
important investor groups, such as hedge funds, banks, pension funds, and insurance companies.
One shortcoming of both data sets, however, is that they only include portfolio investment and do
not include foreign direct investment. 6


The primary data set used in this paper—the USG data—is collected under the authority of the
International Investment and Trade Services Survey Act and reporting is mandatory for all

3
  Griever, Less and Warnock (2001) provide details on the USG data and a comparison to the IMF data.
4
  The USG data is available for 2000 and then annually from 2002 through 2007. The IMF data is available
annually from 2001 through 2006 (and a more limited version is available for 1997).
5
  See Cleaver and Warnock (2003) and Griever, Lee and Warnock (2001).
6
  Foreign direct investment is defined as a holding of at least 10% of the value of the firm, creating a
somewhat random division with equity portfolio investment. Foreign direct investment was 14% of total
U.S. liabilities in 2007, while equity and debt liabilities were 52%.


                                                                                                        4
institutions meeting the Survey’s reporting criteria (which includes U.S. resident issuers of
securities and U.S. resident custodians that manage the safekeeping of U.S. securities for foreign
resident entities). 7 The USG data provides information on the stock of foreign holdings of U.S.
equities and debt securities (both short- and long-term), and also includes reserves held by foreign
official institutions. Significant penalties can be imposed for non-reporting, so compliance and
data quality are believed to be very good. One concern with the data (as well as with all available
data on international portfolio assets and liabilities) is that it can over-report the asset holdings of
major financial centers that are intermediaries for transactions from other countries. This includes
investment in mutual funds, which then invest the mutual fund assets in foreign companies. 8
Experts who collect this data believe that this misreporting through third parties is much less of a
problem in this data on foreign holdings of U.S. liabilities than in data on capital flows (including
the U.S. government data on capital flows) and other sources of data on international asset
positions. Nonetheless, it is still a concern and is addressed in the sensitivity tests.


The total USG sample includes information on $9.77 trillion of U.S. portfolio liabilities in 2007
held by just over 200 countries/entities. Of these liabilities, $3.13 trillion are equities and $6.64
trillion are debt securities. Figure 1 graphs the 25 largest reported holdings in 2007. The three
largest reported holdings of U.S. portfolio liabilities are Japan (with $1,197 billion), China (with
$922 billion) and the United Kingdom (with $921 billion). The distribution of U.S. holdings by
size is heavily skewed, with only 24 countries holding U.S. portfolio assets of over $100 billion.
The division of countries’ holdings between equity and debt securities also varies significantly
across countries. For example, Japan holds 18% equities and 82% debt, while Canada holds 73%
equities and 27% debt.


The IMF data is similar to the USG data, but has several important differences. One major
disadvantage is that it has more limited country coverage—with 71 countries/entities and $6.25
trillion of U.S. portfolio liabilities included for 2006 (versus 200+ countries/entities and $7.78
trillion for the USG data in the same year). Several countries included in the USG data and

7
  Since the data set only includes information from U.S. custodians and non-U.S. custodians based in the
United States, it does not capture purchases and sales of U.S. assets by non-U.S. custodians located outside
the United States. This issue is largely mitigated by the common use of U.S. custodians to hold U.S.
securities on behalf of foreign custodians, which are included in the USG dataset.
8
  See Lane (2006b) for details on Ireland, in which a large share of foreign investment in Irish equities is
actually investment in Irish mutual fund companies which then invest largely in non-Irish equities.
McKinsey Global Institute estimates that mutual funds comprised about 19% of global assets under
management in 2006. The sensitivity analysis addresses this issue by removing financial centers from the
analysis and including a dummy for financial centers. Neither extension has an impact on the key results.


                                                                                                           5
excluded from the IMF data are important holders of U.S. liabilities, such as China and Middle
Eastern oil exporters. A second disadvantage of the IMF data is that it is collected by different
governments using different reporting standards and therefore is not as consistently calculated
across countries. Despite these important disadvantages, however, the IMF data is still worth
using for sensitivity tests and analyses that differentiate between private sector and overall
investment patterns. 9 As shown in Figure 2, foreign official entities currently hold about 19% of
foreign holdings of U.S. liabilities and were particularly important for bond markets. These
foreign official holdings are not included in the IMF data, but are included in the USG data
(although not disaggregated from private foreign investment).


II.B. What Returns Have Foreigners Earned from Investing in the United States?
Whether foreigners have earned high returns from investing in the United States has recently been
debated in the academic literature. Gourinchas and Rey (2007) show that over long periods of
time (since 1952 or 1973) foreigners earned substantially lower returns on their U.S. investments
than U.S. investors earned abroad, even within specific asset categories (FDI, equities, bonds and
bank loans). Cline (2005) also finds a positive return differential on aggregate investment
positions since 1992, but argues this is mainly due to different rates of return on FDI and
significant return differentials did not exist in other asset classes. Lane and Milesi-Ferretti
(2007a) show that return differentials between U.S. and foreign investors are highly dependent on
exchange rate movements and only exist in short periods between 1994 and 2005. More recently,
Curcuru, Dvorak and Warnock (2008) find systematic errors in the data used to calculate these
returns and show that the average return differential for equities and bonds on U.S. investment
abroad versus foreign investment in the United States was close to zero from 1994 through 2005.
Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2007b) focus on the return differential for all types of investment (not
just equities and bonds) and also argue that previous estimates of return differentials have been
overstated due to systematic measurement errors in capital gains on the U.S. external portfolio.


Table 1 estimates returns for a more recent period (and the period that will be the focus of the
empirical analysis)—from 2002 through 2006—and addresses the concerns raised in recent work
about measurement error. Although long-term return differentials are important in studying the
dynamics of the U.S. current account deficit, investors are more likely to base current asset
allocation decisions on returns over the last five years (or even less). Calculating these return

9
 Both datasets include investment by government-sponsored investment funds that do not constitute
official reserve holdings, such as sovereign wealth and pension funds.


                                                                                                     6
differentials involves a number of issues (discussed in Appendix B), but focusing on the more
recent data allows a more accurate calculation of returns, especially for specific asset classes. 10
Table 1 shows that foreigners earned an average annual return of only 4.3% on their U.S.
investments over the last five years, which is substantially less than the 11.2% return that U.S.
investors earned on their foreign investments. The last line of the table reports the Sharpe ratio for
U.S. and foreign investment and shows that these return differentials continue to exist even after
making this rough adjustment for risk. Some of this return differential is due to the depreciation
of the dollar since 2002. 11 The right side of the table, however, shows that even after removing
the impact of exchange rate movements, foreigners investing in the United States earned less than
half of what U.S. investors earned abroad from 2002 through 2006.


One partial explanation for this lower rate of return for foreigners is that a portion of U.S. capital
inflows reflect official sector purchases—purchases that place less importance on expected
returns. 12 A related explanation for this return differential is the composition of foreign
investment in the United States versus U.S. investment abroad. Foreigners that invest in the
United States prefer assets with lower volatility, despite lower expected returns, while U.S.
investors may prefer higher-risk assets with corresponding higher expected returns. 13


Table 2 adjusts for both of these effects by reporting average annual returns on U.S. and foreign
private-sector investments in FDI, bonds and equities from 2002 through 2006. 14 The table shows
that even within specific asset classes, non-official sector investors from outside the United States
have earned significantly lower returns on their U.S. holdings than U.S. investors have earned
abroad. For example, foreign investors earned only 7.6% on their U.S. equity holdings and 5.3%
on their U.S. bond holdings, while U.S. investors earned 17.4% and 6.7% abroad, respectively.

10
   More specifically, important details necessary to calculate return differentials by asset type and to adjust
for systematic differences in revisions are only available for recent years.
11
   The dollar depreciated by 19% from January 2002 through year-end 2006, based on the broad trade-
weighted exchange index compiled by the U.S. Federal Reserve System.
12
   For example, Dooley, Folkerts-Landau and Garber (2003) argue that foreign governments may purchase
U.S. assets in order to maintain undervalued exchange rates and/or to accumulate highly liquid, low-risk
reserve assets.
13
   Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2007a) discuss this “hedge fund” characteristic of the United States (and many
other industrial countries) in the sense that it is “long in foreign equity and short in foreign debt”.
Gourinchas and Rey (2007) describe the United States as a “venture capitalist”, because its assets tend to be
concentrated in shorter-term, higher return assets such as equity and FDI, while foreigners tend to hold a
larger share of their portfolio in longer-term, lower-return assets (such as bank loans and debt).
14
   The statistics include U.S. official reserve assets, but these are very small (only 1.6% of total U.S.-owned
assets abroad at year-end 2007) and should not affect the overall return calculations. Moreover, since most
U.S. official holdings of foreign assets are government bonds and other conservative investments, this
would generate a downward bias in these estimates of U.S. returns on foreign investments.


                                                                                                             7
For all portfolio securities (equities and bonds), foreign investors earned less than half of what
U.S. investors earned abroad. These return differentials continue to exist, especially for equity
and FDI, even after making a rough adjustment for risk and exchange rate movements.


These return differentials should not be interpreted as evidence that foreigners have made poor
investments or that U.S. investors are somehow “better” than foreign investors. Foreigners may
choose to invest in the United States for a range of reasons (discussed in more detail in Section
III) other than simply to earn high returns. Moreover, these recent return differentials largely
reflect the recent performance of U.S. versus foreign equity and bond markets. From 2002
through 2006 the return on a broad U.S. equity market index was less than 8%, while the return
on a broad global equity market index (excluding the United States) was almost 14%. 15 Over the
same period the return on a broad U.S. bond market index was about 5%, while the return on a
broad global bond index (excluding the United States) was just over 8%. 16 In fact, from 2002
through 2006 the average annual return for the U.S. equity market index was the lowest in a
sample of 52 equity markets, and the U.S. bond market return was lower than 43 out of 47 bond
markets around the world. 17 Of course, this underperformance of U.S. markets over the past five
years may not continue in the future, especially since an important factor in this
underperformance is the depreciation of the dollar over this period. Investors may place some
weight on past returns when making asset allocation decisions (as discussed in Section III.C.), but
expectations of future returns is even more important.


II. C. Do Foreigners Over- or Under-Invest in the United States?
Using the data discussed in Section III.A, it is possible to calculate a measure of exposure by
individual countries to U.S. equity and debt securities. I calculate this “USExposurei,j” of country
i to U.S. security j using the equation:

                                     USInvestmentsi , j
                 USExposurei , j =                          ,                                   (1)
                                      TotalPortfolioi , j

where USInvestmentsi,j is total holdings of U.S. portfolio liabilities by country i of security j from
the USG or IMF data (as discussed in Section II. A.). TotalPortfolioi,j is the entire portfolio

15
   The U.S. equity index is the S&P 500 and the foreign index is the MSCI EAFE. Data is from Bloomberg.
16
   The U.S. bond market index is constructed as a weighted average of U.S. agency, corporate and Treasury
bonds, with weights equal to foreign holdings of each bond type. The foreign bond index is the Lehman
foreign bond index. All indices are reported by Bloomberg and are unhedged returns.
17
   Based on equity and bond returns calculated in U.S. dollars and reported by Datastream. See Appendix C
for more detailed information on data sources.


                                                                                                       8
holdings by country i of security j and is calculated as total domestic market capitalization for
country i of security j plus total foreign assets held by country i of security j less all foreign
holdings of country i’s liabilities of security j. Securities j can be either equity or debt securities.
Data on domestic market capitalization for equities is taken from Standard & Poor’s (2006) and
for debt securities is taken from the Bank of International Settlements. 18 Data on total foreign
assets held by country i and foreign holdings of country i’s liabilities is taken from the IMF data
for the corresponding calculations. This data is not available in the USG data, so I use estimates
of foreign equity assets and liabilities reported in Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2007) and foreign
debt assets and liabilities reported by IMF (2008). 19


I calculate this ratio using the USG and IMF data for each type of security and then drop extreme
outliers (defined as USExposurei,j with values less than 0 or greater than 100%), the SEIFiCs, and
Luxembourg. 20 Table 3 lists summary statistics for the 25 countries with the greatest foreign
exposure for equity and debt markets in 2006 based on the preferred USG data. It also reports
debt holdings based on the IMF data to show how private sector holdings differ from the USG
data which also includes official-sector reserve holdings. The table shows that there is substantial
variation in different countries’ exposure to U.S. equity and debt. Foreign exposure to U.S. debt
markets also tends to be greater than that for equity markets—especially for the USG data which
includes official-sector reserve holdings.


Table 3 also shows that foreign exposure to U.S. markets is quite low and, in most cases,
substantially less than predicted by standard portfolio allocation models. Standard portfolio
theory (discussed in more detail in Section III.A.) predicts that under basic assumptions, investors
should hold the global market portfolio. Most countries, however, have substantially less
exposure to U.S. assets than the U.S. share of the global portfolio—a pattern well-documented in
most countries and referred to as “home bias”. More specifically, in 2006 the U.S. equity market
was 36% of global equity market capitalization, and U.S. debt markets were 38% of global debt

18
   Data is from the BIS Quarterly Review, Tables 11, 16A and 16B (September 2006). Available online at
http//www.bis.org/statistics/secstats.htm.
19
   Special thanks to Lane and Milesi-Ferretti for providing updated (and unreleased) data on international
equity positions. Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2007) provide more detailed information on international equity
positions than IMF (2008).
20
   SEIFiCs are: Aruba, Bahamas, Barbados, Bermuda, British Virgin Islands, Cayman Islands, Cyprus,
Gibraltar, Guernsey, Isle of Man, Jersey, Lebanon, Macao, Malta, Mauritius, Netherlands Antilles, Panama,
Turks and Caicos, and Vanuatu. Extreme outliers are mainly financial centers and countries that would be
dropped from the empirical analysis anyway due to data availability for other variables. For example, in
2006 for the USG data on equity holdings, no observations have a value of USExposure greater than 100%
and Ireland, Luxembourg and Uruguay are the only countries with calculated values less than zero.


                                                                                                         9
markets. 21 Mean foreign holdings of U.S. equities and debt, however, were only 4.3% and 14.8%
of countries’ portfolios, respectively, and median holdings were even lower.


Moreover, Table 4 shows that countries exhibit home bias towards most other large countries,
especially in equity markets, although on average they are more underweight the United States
than other major financial markets. 22 For example, foreigners hold an average of 4.2% of their
debt portfolios in Germany, as compared to a market portfolio weight of 5.9%, so they have
71.7% of the “optimal” global portfolio of German debt. Foreigners hold an average of 21.7% of
the optimal equity and 37.9% of the optimal debt portfolio for the major financial markets, as
compared to an average of 13.5% and 24.9%, respectively, for the United States. 23 Investors,
however, are even more underweight some markets than the United States. Foreigners hold only
3.8% of the optimal portfolio in Japanese debt and 6.0% in Canadian equities.


These results raise several important questions. If countries are not investing in the United States
according to the predictions of standard portfolio models, what factors determine their optimal
holdings of U.S. liabilities? Will foreigners continue to invest in the United States in the presence
of consistently lower returns than if they kept their money at home? What factors explain the
substantial variation in different countries’ exposure to U.S. equity and debt markets?




III.     The Model and Data: Why do Foreigners Invest in the United States?
III. A. Background
Three different literatures provide a framework to analyze the determinants of foreign investment
in the United States: the literature on home bias, on the allocation of investment across countries,
and on the macroeconomic determinants of global imbalances.


First, standard portfolio theory shows that if investors care only about the mean and variance of
the real return of their invested wealth, if markets are efficient, and the cross-border barriers to


21
   This includes international and domestic debt securities, as well as government, corporate and financial
debt. Based on data from the BIS Quarterly Review (2006).
22
   For a more detailed analysis of cross-border investment patterns, see Bertaut and Kole (2004) and Chan,
Covrig and Ng (2005). Bertaut and Kole (2004) also find that foreigners exhibit home bias toward most
countries and tend to underweight U.S. equities by more than they underweight foreign equities in general.
23
   If foreign countries reduced their home bias against the United States, this would not necessarily generate
an increase in net U.S. capital inflows because U.S investors could simultaneously reduce their home bias
and increase gross capital outflows (which could be even great than the increase in gross capital inflows).


                                                                                                           10
investment are small, then investors should hold the world market portfolio of stocks. An
extensive literature on “home bias”, however, shows that investors deviate substantially from this
prediction and tend to hold a larger share of domestic assets in their portfolios. 24 The literature
on home bias explores several possible reasons: explicit barriers and costs to international
investment, informational asymmetries leading to different valuations of foreign and domestic
assets, investors’ desire to hold a larger share of domestic equities to hedge against inflation or
other risks, tax and legal systems that generate different expected returns for citizens of different
countries, behavioral biases (such as investors exaggerating the risks of investing abroad or being
overly optimistic about returns of domestic companies), and ownership of “domestic”
multinational companies that have substantial international exposure.


A second (and related) literature examines how investors allocate their investment across
different countries. For example, Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2008), Bertaut and Kole (2004), and
Faruqee, Li and Yan (2004) estimate the determinants of international equity holdings for a cross-
section of countries in either 1997 or 2001. Lane (2006a) estimates the bilateral composition of
international bond portfolios for the Euro area and individual EMU member countries. Instead of
focusing on a cross-section of countries, several papers focus on the determinants of U.S.
investment abroad, such as Leuz, Lins and Warnock (2008), Aggarwal, Klapper and Wysocki
(2005), and Burger and Warnock (2003, 2007). Cai and Warnock (2006) is the only paper to
consider the opposite—the determinants of foreign investment in the United States—by focusing
on security-level, U.S. equity investments in a sample of U.S. and foreign institutional
investors. 25 An additional series of papers focuses on how specific factors can affect the
allocation of capital across countries, such as the impact of corporate governance, accounting
standards, institutions, distance or other cross-country linkages. No papers in this literature,
however, have yet focused on the determinants of country-level holdings of U.S. portfolio
investment, or on the determinants of foreign holdings of both U.S. equities and bonds.




24
   For example, see Chan, Covrig and Ng (2005), Ahearne Griever, and Warnock (2001), Tesar and Werner
(1995), Cooper and Kaplanis (1994) and French and Poterba (1991). For a recent summary of work on
home bias, see Kho, Stulz, and Warnock (2006).
25
   This analysis is fundamentally different than the analysis in this paper, however, as it focuses on how
characteristics of specific securities (i.e., firm characteristics such as size, dividend yield and other financial
ratios) affect foreign and domestic investment, instead of evaluating how characteristics of the foreign
investor (such as linkages to the United States, financial market development, capital controls, etc.) affect
investment. Cai and Warnock (2006) also only focuses on institutional investment in equities, rather than
this paper’s broader focus on all types of investments in both equities and bonds.


                                                                                                               11
A final (and more recent) related literature is on the macroeconomic determinants of capital flows
corresponding to global imbalances. These papers model how macroeconomic variables such as
financial market development, growth, productivity, the demand for savings, and trade flows can
affect capital flows across countries. Several of the most recent and noteworthy papers (discussed
in more detail in Section III.C.) focus on the role of financial development and include Caballero,
Farhi and Gourinchas (2008), Mendoza, Quadrini and Ríos-Rull (2006) and Ju and Wei (2006).


III. B. The Model
This paper uses a modeling framework with substantial flexibility in order to incorporate the
insights from each of these three different literatures on international capital flows and investment
patterns. The model closely follows Cooper and Kaplanis (1986) and its adaptation in Chan,
Covrig and Ng (2005). Begin with a standard assumption that a representative investor in country
i maximizes the expected return of his investments for a given level of variance:


                                    Max (wi′R − wi′ci ) ,                                       (1)

         subject to:                wi′Vwi = v           and                                    (2)

                                    w i′ I = 1 ,                                                (3)


where wij is the proportion of individual i’s total wealth invested in securities of country j, wi is
the corresponding (J x 1) vector of these portfolio weights, R is a (J x 1) vector of pre-tax
expected returns, cij is the cost to investor i of investing in country j, ci is the corresponding (J x
1) vector, V is the (J x J) variance/covariance matrix of gross returns, v is the given constant
variance and I is a unity column vector.


Next, form a Lagrangean of the maximization problem in equations (1) through (3), with λ and μi
as the Lagrangean multipliers on equations (2) and (3), respectively. Then, set the derivative of
the Lagrangean with respect to wi equal to zero and it is possible to solve for the optimal portfolio
for investor i:


                                        −1
                           w i = ⎛⎜ V           ⎞
                                  ⎝          λ ⎟⎠ (R − c i − μ i I )                            (4)

with                            (
                          μi = I ′V −1R − I ′V −1ci − λ    ) (I ′V I ).
                                                                 −1




                                                                                                        12
Aggregate the individual portfolio holdings to obtain the market clearing condition for the world
capital market equilibrium:


                          ∑Pw = w *,
                               i   i                                                            (5)


with Pi the proportion of world wealth owned by country i, wi* is the proportion of the world
market capitalization in country i’s market, and w* is the corresponding column vector of wi*’s.


Then, define z as the global minimum variance portfolio:


                          z = (V −1 I ) (I ′V −1 I ) ,                                          (6)


and combine equations (4) through (6) to obtain:


                          λV (wi − w *) = (∑ Pi ci − ci ) − z ′(∑ Pi ci − ci )I .               (7)


Equation (7) shows the standard result that if there is no cost for investor i to access both
domestic and foreign markets (i.e. that cij=0 for all i and j) then every investor will hold the world
market portfolio. If the costs to investing in different countries are not equal to zero, however,
then the portfolio holdings of each investor (representing each country) will differ from the world
market portfolio.


Finally, to derive the central equation for estimation, it is useful to make the simplifying
assumption that the covariance matrix (V) is diagonal with all variances equal to s2. Then each
country will invest in country j (with i ≠ j) an amount that deviates from the world market
portfolio according to:


                          λs 2 (wij − w j *) = (z ′ci − cij ) − (z ′∑ Pi ci − ∑ Pk ckj ) .      (8)


The first term on the right of equation (8) is the weighted average marginal cost for investor i to
invest anywhere in the world. The second term is the cost for investor i to invest in country j. The
third term is the world-weighted average marginal cost of investing, and the last term is the
weighted average marginal cost for all countries to invest in country j. The equation shows the


                                                                                                      13
intuitive result that each country i’s share of its portfolio allocated to country j will depend on that
country’s relative cost of investing in country j (the first parentheses on the right) versus the
relative cost for all countries of investing in country j (the last parentheses on the right).


Since this analysis will only focus on investment in one country—the United States—then j=U.S.,
and equation (8) can be further simplified to: 26


                            (wi ,US   − wUS *) = −θ (ci ,US − z ′ci + χ ),                           (9)



With θ and χ as constants, θ = 1 λs 2 and χ = z ′         ∑ Pc − ∑ P c
                                                               i i           k k ,US   .


Equation (9) shows the intuitive result that holding everything else equal, countries with a higher
cost of investing in the United States relative to investing elsewhere will tend to have lower
shares of their portfolio invested in the United States (i.e., wi,US − wUS* < 0). The equation also
shows that foreign investment in the United States is determined by two sets of variables: the cost
of investing specifically in the United States (ci,US) and the cost of investing abroad in general (ci).


III. C. The Variables: Theory and Data
This general theoretical framework can incorporate the range of factors identified in the literature
on home bias, international investment patterns, and global imbalances to predict investment by
other countries in the United States. More specifically, the model suggests that a country’s
investment in the United States (relative to the U.S. global market weight) is determined by
variables that affect the country’s general cost (or benefit) from investing abroad (ci) and its cost
(or benefit) of investing specifically in the United States (cij). The remainder of this section
discusses the theoretical and empirical motivation for including seven variables to measure these
effects: each country’s controls on capital flows, financial market development, corporate
governance and institutions, return differential with the United States, correlation in returns with
the United States, distance and informational links with the United States, and bilateral trade




26
  Since the U.S. share of the global market portfolio changes across time, it is necessary to include the
wUS* in the left-hand side variable instead of absorbing it into the constant for the panel estimation in
Sections IV and V.


                                                                                                            14
flows with the United States. 27 It also discusses the data sources and construction of each
variable. 28 Appendix C reports additional details on the variables.


Capital Controls
One factor determining a country’s cost of investing abroad is the country’s capital controls, and
especially its restrictions on private sector capital flows. For example, Ahearne, Griever, and
Warnock (2004) show that restrictions on ownership of foreign equities significantly reduces
foreign equity ownership by U.S. investors. Burger and Warnock (2003) find that U.S. investors’
foreign bond portfolios are overweight countries with more open capital accounts.


Measuring a country’s capital controls, however, is not straightforward (see Forbes, 2007a and
2007b, and Magud and Reinhart, 2007). Moreover, most measures of capital controls are
extremely broad and do not focus on portfolio investment, which is the key component for this
analysis. Therefore, I construct a new measure of capital controls that focuses on controls on
capital account transactions by the private sector relative to the purchases of equity and debt
securities. The index ranges from 0 to 3 and is based on detailed country information from the
International Monetary Fund’s Annual Report on Exchange Rate Arrangements and Exchange
Restrictions (AREAER).


Financial Market Development
A focus of recent models on global imbalances is the incentive for countries with less developed
financial markets and limited domestic investment opportunities to invest abroad (especially in
the United States) in order to gain the benefits of a more liquid and efficient financial sector.
Caballero, Farhi and Gourinchas (2008) develop a model in which high-growth economies (such
as emerging markets and oil-exporting nations) generate a demand for saving instruments, and
given the limited instruments available in their own economies, they purchase U. S. instruments.
Mendoza, Quadrini and Ríos-Rull (2006) model a world in which countries with less developed


27
   The first variable (controls on capital outflows) affects the country’s general cost of investing abroad.
The last 4 variables (return differential, correlation in returns, distance and informational links, and bilateral
trade flows with the United States) all affect the country’s cost of investing specifically in the United
States. The variables measuring the country’s financial market development and corporate
governance/institutions can capture both aspects—as they incorporate not only the potential gains from
investing abroad, but also the gains from investing in the country with the best (or among the best) financial
market development and corporate governance/institutions.
28
   In some cases a number of statistics could have been used to measure each variable. The final statistics
selected were chosen to balance existing theory and evidence with data availability for a broad cross-
section of countries. The sensitivity analysis also explores the effect of using different variable definitions.


                                                                                                              15
financial systems accumulate foreign assets in countries with more advanced financial markets,
so that countries with negative net foreign asset positions can receive positive factor payments (as
experienced by the United States). Ju and Wei (2006) develop a model in which poor countries
have less efficient financial sectors but high returns to investment, generating large outflows of
financial capital from the developing countries but inflows of foreign direct investment. 29


Several papers, however, have argued that the relationship between financial market development
and foreign portfolio investment may be positive instead of negative. For example, Martin and
Rey (2004) develop a model that focuses on transactional frictions in asset markets and predicts
that larger countries will have deeper domestic equity markets and hold more foreign assets. Lane
and Milesi-Ferretti (2008) find evidence that countries with more developed stock markets tend to
have larger foreign equity holdings and argue that barriers to international investments may fall as
countries develop more financial market sophistication in their domestic markets. Gruber and
Kamin (2008) look at the broader issue of the determinants of current account balances and find
that financial development does not explain international patterns of current account balances. 30


Therefore, the impact of a country’s financial market development on its investment in the United
States remains an empirical question, and I use several different measures of financial market
development to test its role. To measure financial market development for the regressions
analyzing foreign investments in U.S. equity markets, I begin by using the ratio of stock market
capitalization to GDP. For regressions analyzing investments in U.S. bond markets, I begin by
using the ratio of private bond market capitalization to GDP. I focus on these measures as they
most closely follow the theoretical work on financial market development, but sensitivity tests
also use a variety of other measures of financial development.


Corporate Governance and Institutions
Just as foreigners may choose to invest in the United States in order to benefit from its liquid and
efficient financial markets, foreigners may also choose to invest in the United States in order to
benefit from its strong corporate governance, accounting standards and institutions—all of which
would raise their expected returns from investment. Several papers find evidence that corporate

29
   In related work that does not explicitly focus on global imbalances, Caballero and Krishnamurthy (2006)
develop a model in which emerging market economies have significant growth potential but limited
domestic financial instruments, generating capital flows to developed economies and bubbles in emerging
markets.
30
   Kamin points out, however, that this does not necessarily imply a negative relationship between a
country’s level of financial development and its demand for U.S. liabilities.


                                                                                                       16
governance affects capital flows, and especially that countries with stronger corporate governance
receive more investment. 31 Kim, Sung and Wei (2008), however, argue that there should be a
positive (instead of negative) correlation between a country’s level of corporate governance and
its exposure to countries with strong corporate governance (such as the United States). They
study foreign investment in Korean companies and find that countries with stronger corporate
governance are more likely to avoid investment in companies with weaker corporate governance,
while countries with weaker corporate governance do not discriminate between high- and low-
governance firms.


Since a number of different variables are needed to capture the various aspects of a country’s
corporate governance, accounting standards and overall institutional environment affecting
investment, I create an index to measure a country’s relevant aspects of corporate governance.
The index is the first standardized principal component of: control of corruption, rule of law,
regulatory quality, and property rights. The index takes on higher values for countries with a
better environment for investment and is constructed to have a mean of zero. 32


Returns
Several papers have documented that investors tend to “chase returns” by increasing investments
in stocks, countries or funds that have overperformed and decreasing investment in securities that
have underperformed. For example, Froot, Scharfstein and Stein (1992) show that institutional
investors tend to buy equities when the market rises and sell when the market falls. Bohn and
Tesar (1996) show that U.S. investors underweight countries that have recently had weaker stock
market performance. Sirri and Tufano (1998) show that consumers invest disproportionately in
mutual funds that have recently performed well, and Zhao (2005) shows that international equity
fund investors sell funds with lower returns. Taking a different approach, Caballero and
Krishnamurthy (2006) develop a model in which emerging markets tend to invest more at home
when domestic returns increase. This generates “bubbles” and simultaneously reduces capital
outflows to more developed countries with more highly developed financial markets.



31
   For example, Daude and Fratzscher (2006) find that portfolio investment is higher in OECD countries
with greater transparency, stronger investor protection, and lower levels of corruption. Aggarwal, Klapper
and Wysocki (2005) and Gelos and Wei (2005) show that U.S. mutual funds invest more in emerging
markets with stronger corporate governance. Leuz, Lins and Warnock (2008) find that firm-level corporate
governance measures are an important determinant of U.S. investment in countries with weak corporate-
level governance and disclosure rules.
32
   The sensitivity analysis also considers a number of alternate measures of corporate governance.


                                                                                                        17
More recent work, however, challenges this evidence on return chasing for international
investments. Thomas, Warnock and Wongswan (2007) argue that previous measures of return
chasing (or momentum trading) based on flow instead of stock data is flawed. When they use
their preferred measure and new data on U.S. holdings of foreign equities, they find that U.S.
investors do not show evidence of return chasing in foreign equity markets over the last 25 years.
In preliminary work, Hau and Rey (2007) also find no evidence of return chasing in a sample of
international equity funds from 1997 through 2002.


In order to test for any effect of return chasing on foreign portfolio investment in the United
States, I include a variable in the empirical analysis measuring the return differential between
each country and the United States over the past year. This measure captures whether the
domestic equity or bond market has recently outperformed or underperformed the U.S. market.
For regressions estimating foreign investment in U.S. equities, I control for the percent difference
in equity market returns (using the broadest equity index available for each country). For
regressions estimating investment in U.S. bonds, I control for the percent difference in bond
market returns (using an index that includes corporate, government and agency bonds for each
country). 33 In each case I focus on returns expressed in U.S. dollars.


Correlation/Diversification Benefits
Standard finance theory (and the model developed in Section III.B.) shows that when investors
construct their portfolios, they seek to maximize their expected returns subject to a minimum
variance. Demand for an asset will depend on the correlation between that asset’s returns and the
returns of other assets in the portfolio. 34 Since investors tend to hold large shares of their
portfolios in their home assets (home bias), then if returns in the United States are less correlated
with returns in the home country, investors should hold a greater share of U.S. assets to receive
the benefits of diversification. This prediction has received mixed support in the empirical
literature on international investment patterns. For example, Burger and Warnock (2003) find that
U.S. investors’ foreign bond portfolios are overweight countries whose bond returns are less
correlated with U.S. returns. Chan, Covrig and Ng (2005), however, find that investors place
higher portfolio weights on equity markets which are more (not less) correlated with their own
country’s returns. Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2008) focus on correlations in growth rates and find
that investors hold larger positions in countries with more correlated business cycles.

33
     Detailed information on the specific equity and bond indices is available in Appendix C.
34
     For a formal example of this concept, see Davis, Nalewaik and Willen (2001).


                                                                                                    18
In order to test if diversification benefits are an important determinant of foreign investment in
the United States, I measure the correlation in stock and bond returns between each country’s
markets and the U.S. markets. More specifically, for regressions estimating foreign investment in
U.S. equities, I control for the correlation in monthly dollar stock returns between each country’s
broadest equity index and a broad U.S. equity index over the last three years. 35 For regressions
estimating investment in U.S. bonds, I control for the correlation in monthly dollar bond returns
between each country’s broad bond market index (including corporate, government and agency
bonds) and a broad U.S. bond market index over the last three years.


“Closeness” / Distance
Several papers provide empirical evidence that investors prefer to invest in countries that are
“closer”—with closeness measured not only by geographic distance, but also by familiarity and
“connectivity”. For example, Portes, Rey and Oh (2001) show that information flows measured
by variables such as telephone traffic and tourism are significant determinants of U.S. cross-
border capital flows, especially for transactions in equities and corporate bonds. Bertaut and Kole
(2004) find that regional and political ties and distance are important determinants of cross-border
diversification patterns. Daude and Fratzscher (2006) find that informational frictions (measured
by distance, the volume of bilateral telephone traffic, trade in newspapers and periodicals, and the
immigrant stock) significantly affect capital inflows for OECD economies, although they have
less effect on equity and debt securities than on FDI and loans. Coval and Moskowitz (1999) even
find that within the same country, investors are more likely to invest in companies headquartered
closer to their home city. Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2008), however, find no significant role for
“closeness” when predicting cross-border asset holdings and suggest that informational frictions
may matter more for turnover and capital flows than asset positions.


In order to test if any of these aspects of “closeness” affect foreign investment in U.S. portfolio
liabilities, I construct an index to incorporate the various aspects of distance, familiarity and
connectivity between each country and the United States. More specifically, the index is the first
standardized principal component of six variables: the log of distance between the country and
the United States, the cost of a phone call to the United States, and dummy variables for whether
the country shares a common language (English), shares a border, was a former colony of the


35
     Detailed information on the specific equity and bond indices is available in Appendix C.


                                                                                                      19
United States, and has a currency union with the United States. The index takes on higher values
for “closer” countries and is constructed to have a mean of zero.


Bilateral Trade Flows
Several theoretical papers have predicted a relationship between bilateral trade flows and
international asset positions or capital flows, although the empirical evidence on any relationship
is inconclusive. For example, Obstfeld and Rogoff (2001) show that even if global financial
markets are complete, frictions in product markets will generate a home bias in equity positions.
Antràs and Caballero (2007) develop a model of a world with heterogeneous financial
development and show that trade and capital flows are complements in less-financially developed
economies (which is the opposite of the classical Heckscher-Ohlin-Mundell paradigm). Lane and
Milesi-Ferretti (2008) find empirical evidence that bilateral imports are a strongly correlated with
bilateral equity holdings. Ahearne, Griever, and Warnock (2004), however, find no significant
impact of trade flows on foreign asset holdings.


In order to capture any potential relationship between trade flows and foreign investment in the
United States, I include a variable in the empirical analysis controlling for total trade (exports
plus imports) between each country and the United States divided by the country’s GDP.


III. D. Summary Statistics
The previous section discussed seven variables that are be included in the base estimates of the
determinants of foreign portfolio investment in the United States. Tables 5 and 6 report summary
statistics and a correlation matrix when these seven variables are combined with the USG data on
foreign portfolio holdings of U.S. liabilities discussed in Section II. 36




IV.      Estimation and Equity Market Results
IV. A. Estimation
Combining the model resulting in equation (9) with the variables and data discussed in Section III
yields the following model for estimation. I also include country and year dummies.




36
  To create the final data set, I drop observations with: (1) no information on holdings of U.S. equities or
debt in either the USG or IMF data sets; (2) no information on GDP; or (3) no information on either equity
market capitalization or total debt securities (which are needed to create the U.S. exposure variables).


                                                                                                          20
DevUSi,t = αi + β1 CapitalControlsi,t + β2 FinancialDevelopmenti,t + β3 CorporateGovernancei,t
                  + β4 Returnsi,t + β5 Correlationi,t + β6 Closenessi,t + β7 Tradei,t + δt + εit;     (10)


where DevUSi,t is the log deviation of each country i’s holdings of U.S. portfolio liabilities from
the world market portfolio in year t 37 ; αi are the country-specific effects; CapitalControlsi,t,
FinancialDevelopmenti,t, CorporateGovernancei,t, Returnsi,t, Correlationi,t, Closenessi,t, and
Tradei,t are variables measuring capital controls, financial development, corporate governance,
market returns, market correlations, closeness, and trade (as defined in Appendix C) for each
country i over year t or at the end of year t; δt are the year dummy variables and εit is the error
term. Equation (10) is estimated separately for each asset (equities or debt).


One potential issue with equation (10) is endogeneity with the measures of financial
development. More specifically, stock market capitalization and private bond market
capitalization (the measures of financial market development for the base equity and debt
regressions, respectively) are components of the calculation of foreign exposure to U.S. equity
and debt markets. To address this problem in the equity regressions, I instrument for stock market
capitalization using stock market value traded to GDP. 38 In the debt regressions, I instrument for
private bond market capitalization using the share of private bond market capitalization in total
bond market capitalization and the ratio of private credit by deposit money banks and other
financial institutions to GDP. 39 The sensitivity analysis also shows that the key results are robust
to using different measures of financial development and different instrument sets.


In addition to endogeneity, there are several other econometric issues with estimating equation
(10): the limited time-series variation in several of the explanatory variables, the correlation
between the country-fixed effects and other explanatory variables, and the structure of the error
term. More specifically, most of the variance in several of the explanatory variables is across


37
   I focus on results using the logarithmic deviation, ln (wi,,t,US /wt,US*), for the dependent variable instead
of the difference for two reasons. First, the logarithmic form more closely approximates a normal
distribution and is a better fit for the data. Second, this is the form more commonly used in other work on
the cross-country determinants of portfolio investment based on similar models, such as in Chan, Covrig
and Ng (2005). The sensitivity analysis also reports results using the difference in each country i’s holdings
of U.S. portfolio liabilities from the world market portfolio and shows that the key results are robust.
38
   The correlation between stock market value traded and stock market capitalization (both relative to GDP)
is 74%. The correlation between stock market value traded and the dependent variable is 23%.
39
   The correlation between private bond market capitalization to GDP and the share of private in total bond
market capitalization is 73%. The corresponding correlation with the private credit variable is 60%. The
correlation of the two variables with the dependent variable is -18% and -16%, respectively.


                                                                                                             21
countries and not across time. To take an extreme example, the “closeness” between each country
and the United States (as measured by distance, cost of a phone call, and dummy variables if the
country has a common language, shared land border, former colonial relationship or is in a
currency union with the United States) is constant or close to constant for most countries across
years. Therefore, using estimators that only focus on the within-country variation across time
(such as fixed effects) are not desirable. Another issue is that the error term has a complex
structure, not only because portfolio holdings of U.S. assets tend to be highly correlated from year
to year for each country, but also because the error terms have different variances across
countries. Therefore, it is necessary to utilize an estimator that has sufficient flexibility to
incorporate this error structure.


In order to address each of these issues, I use a cross-sectional, time-series FGLS estimator that
allows for the error terms to be heteroscedastic and autocorrelated within each panel (i.e.,
country), but uncorrelated across countries. (The sensitivity analysis also reports results for
different estimators.) The autocorrelation term is assumed to be AR1 and allowed to vary across
countries. In other words, the error term follows the structure:


                 E[εit]= ρiεi, t-1+ μit ,

                 E[μit]= 0,                                                            (11)

                 Var[μit]=σ2i , and

                 Cov[μit μis]=0, if t≠s and i≠j.


IV. B. Central Results: Equity Markets
Table 7 reports the main regression results predicting foreign investment in U.S. equities as
specified in equation (10) using the FGLS estimation technique discussed in Section IV.A.
Columns (1) and (2) report the central results based on the USG data, with and without a variable
controlling for lagged GDP per capita. Since this variable is usually significant and due to
concerns that Corporate Governance, Financial Development, and Capital Controls are highly
correlated with GDP per capita (as shown on Table 6), I continue to include a control for lagged
GDP per capita in the reported regressions. (Excluding this control has no effect on the key




                                                                                                   22
results.) Column (3) reports results using the IMF instead of the USG data. 40 Column (4) reports
a specification when Trade is dropped, due to the high correlation between Trade and Closeness.


Many of the coefficient estimates in these first 4 columns of Table 7 have the expected sign and
are highly significant, while others have fluctuating significance and even varying sign. More
specifically, the coefficients on Financial Development, Capital Controls, and Returns are all
consistently negative and significant, indicating that countries with lower levels of financial
development, fewer controls on private-sector capital flows, and lower equity market returns
(relative to U.S. returns) tend to hold a greater share of their portfolios in U.S. equities. The
coefficient on Trade or Closeness is positive and significant, although the coefficients on both are
often not significant in the same regression. This is not surprising given the high multicollinearity
between these two variables. 41 This suggests that countries that are “closer” and trade more with
the United States also tend to invest more in U.S. equity markets—although it is difficult to
differentiate between the effects of these two variables. The positive coefficient on Corporate
Governance suggests that countries with higher levels of corporate governance tend to invest
more in U.S. equity markets, supporting the analysis by Kim, Sung and Wei (2008). The
coefficient on Correlation is usually positive (and its sign and significance is not robust to the
following series of sensitivity tests), providing no support for the diversification argument that
countries whose stock market returns are less correlated with U.S. stock returns invest more in
U.S. equity markets.


The coefficient estimates in Table 7 also suggest that the magnitude of the effects of some of
these variables on foreign investment in U.S. equity markets can be large. More specifically, take
the example of Italy—which held $29.1 billion (2.4% of its total equity portfolio) in U.S. equities
in 2006 according to the USG data. Using the specification in Column 1, the coefficient on
Financial Development predicts that if Italy increased its stock market capitalization to GDP to
the level France 42 , its holdings of U.S. equities would fall by $3.7 billion to 2.1% of its total
equity portfolio. If Italy removed its remaining capital controls (reducing its index measure from
1 to 0) and held everything else constant, the coefficient on Capital Controls predicts that Italy
would increase its holdings of U.S. equities by $7.1 billion. If Italy’s equity market returns


40
   I repeat all of the tests discussed in this section using the IMF data. The key results and conclusions are
unchanged, so I focus on reporting results using the preferred USG data.
41
   The variables used to create the index for Closeness are also the same variables often used to instrument
for trade flows between countries.
42
   This is an increase from 46.4% to 85.1%, which is less than one-half a standard deviation.


                                                                                                            23
increased by 5% (relative to returns in U.S. equity markets), then the coefficient on Returns
predicts that Italy would reduce its holdings of U.S. equities by $3.0 billion. The impact on U.S.
equities would be even greater for changes in countries that currently have very large holdings of
U.S. equities. For example, if Japan increased its stock market capitalization to GDP to the level
of the United Kingdom, the coefficient estimates suggest it would reduce its U.S. equity holdings
by $26.3 billion. 43 If Japan’s stock market returns increased by 5% per year (relative to returns in
the United States), it would reduce its U.S. equity holdings by $20.3 billion. 44


Next, to further explore this relationship between financial development and foreign investment
in U.S. equities, I test if this relationship varies with a country’s income. 45 I begin by including an
interaction term between Financial Development and GDP per capita. As shown in column (5) of
Table 7, the coefficient on Financial Development continues to be negative and highly
significant, and the coefficient on the interaction term between Financial Development and GDP
per capita is positive and highly significant. This suggests that the negative impact of financial
development on foreign investment in U.S. equities tends to diminish as income levels increase. 46
Then I reestimate the base model for two sub-samples: high-income countries and low/middle
income countries. 47 Columns (6) and (7) show the results. The estimated coefficient on Financial
Development is significantly larger (more negative) in the low/middle income group. This further
suggests that the negative impact of financial development on investment in U.S. equities is
greater for lower income countries.


Even if a country’s level of financial development is a key factor affecting its decision to invest in
U.S. equities, it still may not be an important determinant of overall foreign investment and
capital flows into the United States if it is not an important factor for the countries responsible for
the majority of investment into the United States. More specifically, as shown in Figure 1 and
discussed in Section II, a small number of countries are responsible for the majority of investment

43
   Japan held $194.5 billion of U.S. equities at the end of 2006 (according to the USG data). Its stock
market capitalization to GDP was 93.8%, as compared to 134.7% for the United Kingdom.
44
   For comparison, total U.S. equity market capitalization was $19.4 trillion at year-end 2006.
45
   The literature on financial development, capital account openness, and growth suggests that these
relationships may be nonlinear and depend on a country’s income level. For example, Klein (2003) shows
that there is a positive and significant effect of capital account openness and stock market liberalization on
economic growth for middle-income countries, but not for poor countries nor for rich countries.
46
   Including a squared interaction term to capture any non-linearities in this relationship does not improve
the fit of the regression and the coefficient on the squared term is insignificant.
47
   Income divisions for this analysis are based on World Bank classifications. There is not a consistently
significant difference between middle and low income countries, but the sample size of low income
countries is so small that it is impossible to draw any meaningful conclusions for this sample.


                                                                                                            24
into the United States. Foreign holdings of U.S. equities are heavily skewed, with an average
holding of $10.6 billion and median holding of $22.0 million in 2006. To control for this and
focus on the key determinants of overall investment in the United States, I perform two additional
tests. Column (8) of Table 7 repeats the main regression analysis, but only includes observations
for which countries hold at least $50 billion of U.S. equity liabilities. 48 Column (9) repeats the
main analysis, but weights observations by GDP. 49 It also includes the additional interaction term
between Financial Development and GDP per capita (which does not affect the main results). In
each case, the coefficient on Financial Development remains negative and significant, suggesting
that financial development is an important factor determining overall investment levels in the
United States and not just the investment patterns of small countries.


IV. C. Concerns and Sensitivity Tests: Equity Markets
The key results reported above are subject to a number of potential concerns, such as the measure
of financial development, estimation technique, and role of outliers. This section attempts to
address each of these concerns and then performs an additional series of sensitivity tests. All of
these tests are also repeated using the IMF data, which has no impact on the key results.


Since the impact of financial market development on foreign investment in the United States is a
key focus of this paper, the left side of Table 8 begins by taking a closer look at alternative
measures of financial market development. 50 Columns (1) and (2) measure financial market
development using stock value traded to GDP and then the stock turnover ratio. Column (3)
reports results using an index of financial market development in equity markets, which is
constructed as the first standardized principle component of: stock market capitalization to GDP,
stock market turnover, and private credit by deposit money banks and other financial institutions
to GDP. Column (4) uses the initial measure of stock market capitalization to GDP to measure
financial development, but uses a broader set of instruments (stock market value traded to GDP,
stock market turnover, and private credit by deposit money banks and other financial institutions
to GDP). The negative and significant coefficients on these different measures of financial



48
   This is close to the mean plus one standard deviation.
49
   I also weight observations by the country’s U.S. equity holdings, and the key results are unchanged.
50
   The table reports results that include the controls for GDP per capita and its interaction with Financial
Development because both variables are consistently significant in the regressions. Key results are
unchanged if one or both of these controls are excluded. Variables used to construct the different measures
of financial market development are from Beck, Demirgüç-Kunt and Levine, (2000), using the revised
version of the data through 2005 and available at: http://econ.worldbank.org.


                                                                                                          25
development support the result that less financially-developed economies (no matter how
financial development is measured) hold a greater share of their portfolios in U.S. equities.


Next, I use several different estimation techniques. First, column (5) of Table 8 ignores the time-
series variation in the data and estimates equation (10) using a cross-section, with each variable
averaged across all available periods. Errors are also adjusted for heteroscedasticity. Second,
column (6) returns to using panel data, but estimates the model using pooled OLS with errors
adjusted for clustering by countries and heteroscedasticity. Third, column (7) estimates equation
(10) using a tobit model (in order to adjust for the restriction that no country can hold less than
0% or more than 100% of their equity exposure in the United States). Fourth, Column (8) uses a
quantile model in order to estimate the median (instead of the mean) of the dependent variable
and therefore to reduce the impact of outliers and skewness in the dependent variable. The tobit
and quantile regressions include bootstrapped standard errors adjusted for heteroscedasticity and
clustering by country. Finally, column (9) calculates the dependent variable as the difference
between each country i’s holdings of U.S. portfolio liabilities and the world market portfolio in
year t (instead of using the logarithmic form). Although the significance of most of the coefficient
estimates fluctuates across these different estimation techniques, the coefficients on Financial
Development and its interaction with GDP per capita remain negative and significant.


Due to possible concerns with the data (as discussed in Section II), I next perform several tests for
the impact of outliers and sample selection. I drop major financial centers due to concerns that
investment in the United States by financial centers may be over-reported because of their role as
financial intermediaries (including as the base for many mutual funds). 51 I also include a dummy
variable for financial centers. The dummy is usually positive and significant, but has no impact
on the other key results. Finally, I drop the 10 largest outliers and then drop one country at a time.
Some of these results are reported in columns (10) and (11) of Table 8. These tests indicate that
financial centers and outliers are not affecting the key results. When I repeat the main regression
and drop one country at a time, the coefficients on Financial Development and its interaction term
are each always significant at the one percent level.




51
 Major financial centers are defined as: Hong Kong, Ireland, Japan, Singapore, Switzerland, and the
United Kingdom. The SEIFiCs were already dropped from the sample.


                                                                                                      26
For another series of sensitivity tests, I use different definitions for key variables. 52 First, I
measure Returns and Correlation over different time horizons, and also measure Correlation as
the correlation in growth rates with the United States (instead of in equity returns). Second, I drop
the period dummies. Third, I use several different indices of corporate governance, combining
variables such as: corruption, the rule of law, regulatory quality, protection of property rights, and
accounting disclosure. 53 In most cases the coefficient on the various indices of corporate
governance is positive and significant. When the measures of corporate governance are included
individually instead of aggregated into an index, however, the coefficients are sometimes
positive, sometimes negative, and have varying significance levels. Many of the coefficient signs
and significance vary across different specifications. This suggests that as a whole, countries with
better corporate governance may invest more in U.S. equities, but due to the high
multicollinearity between the different measures of governance, it is extremely difficult to
disentangle exactly which components of corporate governance are most important.


As a final set of sensitivity tests, I include additional control variables in the base regression. First
I add controls for regional dummy variables. These regional dummy variables are jointly highly
significant. 54 Second, because investors may seek to hold foreign assets with lower currency risk,
I include a dummy variable equal to one if the country has its currency pegged to the U.S.
dollar. 55 This dummy variable is usually negative (instead of positive) and often significant.
Third, in order to test for any non-linearities in the impact of income on foreign investment in
U.S. equities, I include controls for GDP per capita squared and/or cubed. Fourth, since countries
with large exchange rate movements or a high inflation rate could have a higher demand for U.S.
assets, I add a control variable measuring the percent change in the exchange rate (versus the
dollar) over the past year or the annual rate of CPI inflation. 56 The sign and significance of the
income, exchange rate and inflation variables fluctuate based on the specification and data set.



52
   The estimates for the remainder of this section are not reported due to space constraints and because the
main results summarized at the end of this section do not change. Any estimates that differ from the main
conclusions are discussed in detail. All estimates are available from the author.
53
   The measures of property rights and the corruption index are from the Heritage Foundation, Index of
Economic Freedom, available at http://www.heritage.org/index/. The index of accounting disclosure is
from La Porta, López-de-Silanes and Shleifer (2006). Other data sources are listed in Appendix C.
54
   For example, when I include the regional dummy variables in a regression using the USG data and
including controls for GDP per capita and its interaction with Financial Development, the χ2(6) test
statistic of the joint significance of the regional dummy variables is 185.6.
55
   This includes countries that have adopted the U.S. dollar. The variable is from Shambaugh (2004) and
available at: http://www.dartmouth.edu/~jshambau/.
56
   Data source for both statistics is the IMF’s International Financial Statistics, CD-ROM.


                                                                                                          27
Several patterns become apparent in this full series of sensitivity tests. The coefficient that is
consistently significant (usually at the 5% and always at the 10% level) in all specifications is the
negative coefficient on Financial Development—even when financial development is measured
using very different definitions (as shown in Table 8). Countries with less developed financial
markets have a greater share of their equity investments in the United States—even after
controlling for a variety of other factors that influence investment. Furthermore, this relationship
appears to be stronger as income levels fall; in other words, the negative impact of financial
market development on foreign investment in U.S. equities is greater for lower income countries.


Several other variables predicting foreign investment in U.S. equities are usually (but not always)
significant across these sensitivity tests. The coefficients on Capital Controls and Returns are
usually negative and significant. The coefficient on Corporate Governance is also often (although
not always) positive and significant. The coefficient on either Closeness or Trade is usually
positive and significant—with the effect of Trade appearing to be stronger than for Closeness,
although it is difficult to differentiate between these two highly correlated variables. The sign and
significance of the coefficient on Correlation fluctuates across specifications (although it is more
often positive than negative).


This series of empirical results provides evidence that certain variables proposed in the theoretical
literature are more important predictors of foreign investment in U.S. equities than other variables
that also have strong theoretical support. Countries with less developed financial markets appear
to hold a larger share of their portfolios in U.S. equities—especially for low and middle income
countries. Countries with fewer controls on private sector capital flows, with lower returns in
their domestic equity markets (relative to returns in the United States), and better corporate
governance tend to invest more in the United States. Countries that trade more with and are
“closer” to the United States also tend to invest more in U.S. equity markets. In contrast to
theoretical predictions, countries with less correlated market returns with the United States do not
tend to invest more in U.S. equity markets.




V.      Bond Market Results
V. A. Central Results: Bond Markets
Moving from equity to debt markets, Table 9 reports results predicting foreign investment in U.S.
debt markets (including corporate, government and agency bonds) as specified in equation (10).



                                                                                                     28
The first two columns report the base results, with and without a control for Trade. Next, since
the sample size for these base regressions is close to half that for the equity regressions and a
disproportionate share of the dropped countries are low- and middle-income economies, Column
(3) modifies the specification to increase sample size. 57 More specifically, it measures Financial
Development using private credit by deposit money banks and other financial institutions to GDP
and drops the controls for Return and Correlation (which are usually not significant in the bond
market regressions). These changes increase the sample size from 32 to 53 and increase the
number of low and middle income countries from 13 to 34. Column (4) includes a control for
Financial Development interacted with GDP per capita. Columns (5) and (6) report estimates for
middle/low and high income countries, respectively. These columns suggest that the impact of
financial development on investment in U.S. bond markets decreases with income per capita.


Next I repeat the extensive series of sensitivity tests discussed in Sections IV. C., and since the
coefficients on GDP per capita and its interaction with Financial Development are both
significant, I continue to include them in the tests. The remainder of Table 9 reports a selection of
these sensitivity tests. Columns (7) and (8) focus on estimates for countries with the largest
holdings of U.S. debt by including only countries that hold over $50 billion in U.S. bonds or
using GDP-weights, respectively. Columns (9) and (10) use different measures of financial
development in bond markets 58 and column (11) drops financial centers due to data concerns
related to their use as third-party intermediaries for purchases of U.S. securities.


These results estimating the determinants of foreign investment in U.S. bond markets (and the full
set of results that are not reported due to space constraints), agree with some, but not all, of the
preceding results for foreign investment in U.S. equity markets. Financial Development continues
to be consistently negative and highly significant, indicating that countries with less developed
financial markets tend to invest a larger share of their portfolios in U.S. bonds. Moreover, the
positive and significant coefficient on the interaction between Financial Development and GDP
per capita suggests that this effect continues to decrease with income per capita, i.e. that the
effect of financial development on investment in U.S. bonds is weaker for higher income

57
   The sample size decreases mainly because the market information necessary to construct the variables for
Financial Development, Returns and Correlation is not as widely available for bond as equity markets.
58
   Column (9) uses private credit by deposit money banks and other financial institutions divided by GDP.
Column (10) uses an index of bond market development that is the first standardized principle component
of private bond market capitalization, public bond market capitalization, and private credit by deposit
money banks and other financial institutions (all divided by GDP). All variables are from Beck, Demirgüç-
Kunt and Levine (2000), using revised data through 2005 available at: http://econ.worldbank.org.


                                                                                                        29
countries. The coefficient on Capital Controls is often negative and significant (although this is
not robust across all specifications and appears to be partially caused by a few countries with
stringent capital controls). The coefficient on Correlation continues to usually be positive and is
often insignificant, indicating that the correlation between a country’s returns and the U.S. market
is not important in predicting foreign investment in U.S. bonds or equities.


Most of the other coefficient estimates in Table 9, however, differ from the estimates predicting
foreign investment in U.S. equity markets. The coefficients on Corporate Governance and
Returns are often insignificant. The coefficient on Closeness is now never positive and
significant, and instead is often negative and significant. Column (2) shows that it no longer
becomes positive and significant when Trade is excluded from the regression (as occurred in the
equity market regressions). This may indicate that “closeness” is less important in predicting
foreign investment in bond markets than equity markets. The coefficient on Trade is more
consistently positive and usually (but not always) highly significant, possibly suggesting that
trade with the U.S. is a more important predictor of investment in bond than equity markets.


The results from regressions predicting foreign investment in U.S. bonds have a lower degree of
explanatory power and less consistent results across specifications for many variables than the
regressions predicting foreign investment in U.S. equities. The most consistent result, however,
continues to be the negative relationship between a country’s level of financial market
development and its investment in U.S. portfolio liabilities. Moreover, the magnitude of this
effect can be large. To take an extreme example, consider the case of China. China held $695
billion of U.S. bonds at the end of 2006—the second largest holdings after Japan—and has fairly
undeveloped domestic debt markets. The base regression results (column (1) in Table 9) predict
that if China developed its debt markets so that its private bond market capitalization to GDP
increased to the sample mean (to about the level for South Korea) and everything else remained
constant, then China would reduce its holdings of U.S. debt by about $200 billion. 59


V. B. Private versus Official Sector Investment: Bond Markets
One important difference between foreign investment in U.S. equity and debt markets is the role
of the official sector. 60 Although official holdings of U.S. equities have been small, Figure 2


59
  This is equivalent to about 2% of marketable U.S. Treasury, agency and corporate debt.
60
  “Official” sector investment is foreign official reserve holdings and does not include assets held or
invested by quasi-government agencies.


                                                                                                          30
shows that official holdings of U.S. debt, and especially U.S. government and agency bonds, are
substantial. 61 From 2003 through 2007, about 24% of U.S. capital inflows were foreign official
purchases of U.S. agency and Treasury bonds. Foreign official investment in U.S. portfolio assets
may be affected by different factors than foreign private sector investment.


To test for different factors driving private and official investment in U.S. bonds, Table 10 repeats
the main analysis using the IMF data instead of the USG data. As discussed in Section II.A., the
IMF data only includes private sector investment, while the USG data also includes official sector
reserve holdings. Columns (2) through (4) also report a selection of alternate specifications based
on the IMF data. These results (and the full series of sensitivity tests that are not reported) show
that the key results predicting foreign investment in U.S. bond markets do not change when
official sector investments are excluded. Financial market development continues to have a
negative and significant effect on foreign investment in U.S. bonds, and this effect continues to
decrease as income per capita increases. Other coefficient estimates also have similar sign and
significance (or lack therefore) as the base regressions in Table 9. The one noteworthy change is
the magnitude of the coefficient estimates for Financial Development and its interaction term.
The coefficient estimates tend to be larger for the IMF data than the USG data, suggesting that the
impact of financial market development on investment in U.S. debt markets may be greater for
the private sector than the official sector.


As a final test for differences between official and private investment in U.S. debt, I add a control
variable for each country’s official reserve holdings to GDP. 62 If a country has larger reserve
holdings, it is more likely to accumulate the “safe-haven asset” of U.S. bonds (especially
Treasuries). 63 Column (5) of Table 10 reports results for private sector investment in U.S. bonds
(using the IMF data), and column (6) reports the same regression when official sector investment
is included (using the USG data). Column (7) reports results for foreign investment in U.S. equity
markets. 64 The coefficient on reserves is only positive and significant in the regression predicting



61
   As of June 2007, foreigners owned 11.3% of U.S. equities, of which 8.5% were official institutions.
Foreigners owned 56.9% of marketable U.S. Treasuries, of which 73.9% were official institutions.
Foreigners owned 21.4% of U.S. agency bonds and 24.0% of corporate and other debt, of which 57.5%
and 3.6%, respectively, were official institutions. Source: U.S. Treasury Report on Foreign Portfolio
Holdings of U.S. Securities, Tables 2 and 6. (April 30, 2008)
62
   The data on reserve holdings (less gold) is from the IMF’s IFS CD-ROM.
63
   Portes and Rey (1998) discuss how the role of the dollar as the major reserve currency affects the
demand for U.S. assets.
64
   Results using the IMF data are basically the same as those based on the USG data.


                                                                                                         31
foreign holdings of U.S. bonds when official sector investment is included. 65 These intuitive
results suggest that countries with larger reserve holdings tend to hold greater shares of their bond
portfolio in U.S. debt markets when the bond portfolio includes official as well as private sector
assets. There is no evidence that countries with larger reserve holdings, however, hold a greater
share of their private-sector bond portfolio or equity portfolio in U.S. investments.




VI.     Conclusions
Although foreigners investing in U.S. equity and bond markets have earned lower returns over the
past five years than if they had invested in the same asset classes in their own countries, there are
still several reasons why they might choose to continue investing in the United States and
financing the large U.S. current account deficit. More specifically, foreign investors may choose
to purchase U.S. portfolio investments in order to benefit from the highly developed, liquid, and
efficient U.S. financial markets, from the strong corporate governance and institutions in the
United States, and/or to diversify risk (especially if returns in U.S. financial markets have a low
correlation with returns in their own country’s domestic financial markets). Investors outside the
United States may also choose the United States over other countries due to their strong linkages
with the United States through trade flows or other measures of “closeness” (such as distance,
inexpensive communications, or sharing a common language).


This paper evaluates which of these factors suggested in the theoretical and empirical literature
are actually significant determinants of foreign investment in the United States. The strongest and
most consistent result is that a country’s financial development is an important factor affecting its
investment in both U.S. equity and debt markets. More specifically, countries with less developed
financial markets invest a larger share of their portfolios in the United States and the magnitude
of this effect decreases with income per capita. Countries with fewer controls on capital flows and
larger trade flows with the United States also invest more in U.S. equity and debt markets. Return
differentials may also be important in predicting U.S. equity (although not bond) investments, as
foreigners invest more in U.S. equities if they have had relatively lower returns in their own
equity markets. The “closeness” between each country and the United States may play some role
in determining equity (although not bond) investment in the United States. Finally, despite strong


65
  When I attempt to capture the impact of reserve accumulation in the bond market regressions by
including more indirect measures—such as a country’s trade balance to GDP or a dummy variable if the
country’s currency is pegged to the United States—these coefficients are usually insignificant.


                                                                                                       32
theoretical support, diversification motives appear to have little impact on patterns of foreign
investment in the United States.


These results—and especially the primary role of a country’s financial market development in
determining its investment in the United States—have three important implications. First, the
results support a recent trend in the theoretical literature on global imbalances that emphasizes the
role of the highly liquid and efficient U.S. financial markets. Although the exact mechanism
varies across models, a key theme in recent papers is that lower levels of financial market
development in other countries will continue to support capital flows into the United States,
thereby supporting the U.S. current account deficit and large global imbalances without major
changes in asset prices. A second (and related) implication is that as countries around the world
continue to develop and strengthen their own financial markets, this will gradually reduce this
important driver of capital flows into United States. These adjustments would likely occur slowly,
however, as developing financial markets (especially in low-income countries) is a prolonged
process. Finally, and potentially more worrisome, since the liquid and efficient financial markets
of the United States are a major impetus behind U.S. capital inflows, anything that undermines
the perceived advantages of U.S. equity and bond markets could present a serious risk to the
sustainability of U.S. capital inflows. If countries with less developed financial markets begin to
question the relative advantages of U.S. financial markets, this could lead to a more rapid
adjustment in U.S. capital inflows, global imbalances and asset prices.




                                                                                                   33
                       Appendix A: Data on U.S. Foreign Portfolio Liabilities

As discussed in Section II.A., this paper focuses on the USG data on foreign portfolio liabilities,
but it also selectively uses the CPIS data from the IMF to perform additional tests and sensitivity
checks. The IMF data is the only cross-country source of information on international assets and
liabilities. It provides data on the stock of cross-border holdings of equities and debt securities
valued at market prices and broken down by counterparty country. This information is collected
by the authorities in each participating country, subject to a set of guidelines and standards
established by the IMF. The information on portfolio liabilities is derived from each partner
country’s reported values of its portfolio assets. 66 The IMF sample includes information on $6.25
trillion of U.S. portfolio liabilities in 2006, of which $5.06 is held by 71 non-official sector
entities and the remainder is reserves held by governments and international organizations.

Although the IMF data has many benefits and is the only cross-country source of information on
international assets and liabilities, it also has several shortcomings. First, as discussed in Section
II. A., country coverage is limited and several countries with significant international portfolio
positions have not participated in the survey. Table A1 shows that of the $1.52 trillion difference
between the IMF and USG data sets in 2006, $1.21 trillion can be explained by differences in
coverage (with $1.16 trillion in just 4 countries/regions—China, Middle East Oil Exporters,
Taiwan, and the British Virgin Islands). Second, even for countries that do report data, in some
cases holdings are under-reported due to incomplete coverage. 67 For both of these reasons, U.S.
international liabilities reported in the IMF data are lower than actual U.S. international liabilities.
Third, although the IMF has provided a set of data guidelines, different countries use different
sources and methods of compiling the data. 68 Fourth (and related to the above concerns), some of
the observations in the IMF data appear to be inaccurate, suggesting serious reporting problems. 69
A final important difference between the IMF and USG data is that the IMF data does not include
U.S. liabilities held by foreign official institutions as reserves in the data broken out by country. 70
For confidentiality reasons, it only reports information on official reserves as an aggregate sum.

          Table A1: U.S. Portfolio Liabilities in USG and IMF Data Sets in 2006 (bn$)
               Total in USG data                                                              7,778
               Total in IMF data                                                              6,254
               Countries included in USG but not in IMF data                                  1,211
                                              China                                             699
                                              Middle East Oil Exporters1                        243
                                              Taiwan                                            135
                                              British Virgin Islands                             78
                                              New Zealand                                        12
                                              Others                                             43
Notes: (1) Iran, Iraq, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia and UAE. This excludes Bahrain, which is in the IMF data.


66
   The IMF requires that each country report its international portfolio assets, but only “encourages”
countries to report their liabilities.
67
   For example, the Cayman Islands reports portfolio holdings by the banking sector but not mutual funds.
68
   For example, some countries use end-investors and others use custodians as sources of the data. Some
countries require that data is reported to the compiler in aggregate, while others report on a security basis.
69
   This is most problematic for the SEIFiCs and Luxembourg. Warnock (2007) finds that the Euro area
holds 800% of the Luxembourg stock market in 2001 in the IMF data, reflecting intermediaries’ holdings.
70
   Both data sets include official sector holdings that are not labeled reserves, including sovereign wealth
and pension funds.


                                                                                                                 34
                                   Appendix B: Return Calculations

The equation used to calculate the returns on U.S. investment abroad and foreign investment in
the United States is:

         Returnt = (Incomet +ΔValuationt ) (Stock t −1 + 0.5 * Flowt ) ,                              B1

where Returnt is the return on the asset over period t; Incomet is the income stream earned on the
asset over period t (such as interest payments on bonds, dividend payments on equities, or
receipts on foreign direct investment); ΔValuationt is the change in the valuation of the asset over
period t due to changes in prices and exchange rates, 71 Stockt-1 is the stock of the asset or liability
at the start of period t, and Flowt is the net flows or purchases of the asset over period t.

The data is from the Bureau of Economic Analysis’ (BEA) Survey of Current Business. The
“original” estimates are from the initial data release published in July of each year (or if not
available, the reported “published” statistic in the first available revision). The “revised”
estimates are from the most updated versions of the relevant tables, as reported on the BEA
website as of June 15, 2007 (or if not available, from the July 2007 revisions).

Data on U.S. stocks of assets and liabilities is from the table on the International Investment
Position of the United States at Yearend (IIP). All statistics use direct investment at market value.
The data on valuation changes is also from Table 1 on the IIP for each year (and since revisions
to this table are not available, the “original” release is used for all calculations). Data on income
and flows is from the table on International Transactions Accounts Data (ITA). Some of the
information on specific asset categories (corporate bonds, corporate stocks, agency bonds, and
U.S. Treasury bonds and bills) is only broken out in the annual revisions. Also, none of the
estimates includes the impact of financial derivatives (which just began to be reported in 2007).

Some of the reported data only includes private sector investment. Although the BEA
differentiates between private and official investment in the asset/liability data and in U.S.
income receipts, it does not explicitly make this differentiation in income flows corresponding to
foreign-owned U.S. liabilities. In order to make this calculation, I make several assumptions.
First, I assume that all income payments on direct investment, interest on U.S. corporate bonds,
and dividends on U.S. corporate stocks are payments to non-official sector investors. This should
tend to overstate the returns to foreign, non-official sector investment in the United States, as
some official entities may hold small amounts of corporate stocks, bonds and direct investment in
their portfolios. Any such holdings, however, are small in aggregate and should only have a
minor effect on return estimates. 72 Next, I assume that interest payments on U.S. Treasuries
(including bonds, notes, and bills) are divided between the official sector and non-official sector
in the same proportion as the corresponding shares of U.S. Treasury instruments held by each
group in each year. Finally, non-official sector holdings of “corporate and other bonds” includes
non-official sector holdings of agency bonds. Therefore I calculate the corresponding income


71
   In addition to valuation effects due to price and exchange rate changes, the BEA also reports valuation
effects due to “other changes”. These other changes usually result from changes in coverage and
methodology, so I do not include them as part of the valuation effect.
72
   For example, in 2006 foreign official holdings of U.S. liabilities that were not U.S. government liabilities
and not liabilities of U.S. banks (and therefore includes more than foreign official investment in direct
investment, corporate stocks and corporate and agency bonds) was only $350 billion or 2.8% of total non-
official investment in the United States. The corresponding statistic for 2000 was 1.0%, however,
suggesting that foreign purchases of non-traditional U.S. liabilities have increased recently.


                                                                                                            35
stream as the total interest on corporate bonds plus the share of total interest payments on U.S.
agency bonds based on the share of total U.S. agency bonds held by non-official investors.

For the return calculations, I focus on unrevised data instead of revised BEA data for two reasons.
First, the BEA fully revises position data based on new benchmark surveys, but only partially
revises the corresponding data on capital flows, likely due to challenges in attributing the flows to
different sources. As shown in Curcuru, Dvorak, and Warnock (2008), this mismatch in revisions
leads to greater estimates of the return differentials between U.S. and foreign investors using the
(partially) revised data instead of the original data. A second (and related) reason for focusing on
the unrevised data is that it reports valuation changes each year, and breaks these valuation
changes into changes due to price movements, exchange rate movements, and other effects (such
as changes in coverage and methodology). In contrast, the revised data does not break out
valuation changes by source—or even report the overall valuation change per year—and there are
significant series breaks from the end of one year to the start of the next year (especially for bond
data). As shown in Curcuru et al. (2008) and Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2007b), this leads to
significant errors in the calculation of valuation changes and has a substantial impact on estimates
of return differentials.

To show the impact of these effects, Table B1 reports average returns from 2002 to 2006 using
the original BEA data, revised data, and revised data combined with valuation changes based on
the original data (to adjust for series breaks). The table shows that the major difference in
estimates between the different data releases is due to the errors in the calculations of valuation
changes in the revised data due to the series breaks across years. The return differential between
U.S. investment abroad and foreign investment in the United States, however, continues to exist
within each asset class—no matter which data series are utilized. The return differential is slightly
smaller using the original data than the revised data (as reported in Curcuru et al. (2008)), so the
estimates reported in Section II.B. of this paper are the most conservative estimates. 73

                                         Table B1
     Average Return Calculations Using Different BEA Data Releases, 2002-06 (in percent)

                              Original BEA                     Revised & Original               Revised BEA
                                   Data                           BEA Data1                          Data
                              U.S.    Foreign                    U.S.    Foreign                U.S.    Foreign
                             Assets     Assets                  Assets    Assets               Assets    Assets
                            Abroad in U.S.                     Abroad     in U.S.              Abroad in U.S.
     Total Investment         11.2       4.3                     11.1       4.2                 15.3      5.8
     Non-official investment
     FDI                      16.3       5.6                      16.6           5.6             16.4         4.8
     Equities                 17.4       7.6                      17.4           7.5             20.7         10.3
     Bonds2                    6.7       5.3                       7.7           5.5             14.9         1.9
     Portfolio Securities3    14.3       5.9                      14.3           6.0             18.8         5.0
Notes: (1) Uses revised data for stocks and flows, but unrevised data for valuation changes.(2) Includes corporate,
agency and Treasury bonds. (3) Equities and bonds.



73
  Curcuru et al. (2008) show that there is no significant difference between the returns foreigners earned
investing in U.S. portfolio securities relative to what U.S. investors earned abroad. A close comparison of
their estimates with this paper shows that the key difference in results is due to different time periods.
Curcuru et al. focus on a longer period of time—from 1994 through 2005—instead of 2002 through 2006.
Otherwise estimates are virtually identical.


                                                                                                                      36
                                                                  Appendix C: Variable Information
Variable      Definition                                       Source                                            Additional Notes
Capital       Index ranging from 0 to 3. Country               Calculated using data from the International      If data is not available for a specific component of the index then it is
Controls      receives 1 point for a capital control in each   Monetary Fund’s Annual Report on Exchange         assumed to be 0.
              of these categories: capital market              Rate Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions
              securities, capital transactions for personal    (AREAER), years 1997-2005.
              capital movements, and capital transactions
              for institutional investors.
Closeness     Index constructed as the first standardized      Data on phone calls is from                       Distance is the log of the great circle distance in miles between the capital
              principal component of: distance to U.S.,        http://www.phone-rate-calculator.com.             city of each country and the United States. Cost of phone call is the lowest
              cost of phone call to U.S., and dummy            Remainder of data is from Rose and Spiegel        cost available for a 5-minute international phone call from the country to the
              variables if the country has a common            (2002) and Clark, Sadikov, Tamirisa, Wei, and     United States during business hours.
              language, shared land border, former             Zeng (2004). Data is available at websites:
              colonial relationship or is in a currency        http://faculty.haas.berkeley.edu/arose/RecRes.
              union with the U.S.                              htm and www.nber.org/~wei.
Corporate     Index constructed as the first standardized      Data on corruption, rule of law and regulatory    Corruption measures extent to which public power is exercised for private
Governance    principal component of: control of               quality is from World Bank (2006). Data on        gain, including petty and grand forms of corruption, and “capture” of state
              corruption, rule of law, regulatory quality,     property rights is from Heritage Foundation,      by elites and private interests. Rule of law measures extent to which agents
              and property rights.                             Index of Economic Freedom, available at           have confidence in and abide by the rules of society, including contract
                                                               http://www.heritage.org/index/.                   enforcement and likelihood of crime and violence. Regulatory quality
                                                                                                                 measures ability of government to formulate and implement sound policies
                                                                                                                 and regulations that permit private sector development. Property rights is
                                                                                                                 assessment of the ability of individuals to accumulate private property,
                                                                                                                 secured by clear laws enforced by the state.
Correlation   Correlation in monthly returns over the last     Constructed using data on stock and bond          Stock return indices based on Datastream’s index if available. If Datastream
              three years. Returns are stock returns for       return indices in U.S. dollars from Datastream.   does not calculate the index, then I use the S&P/IFC index, and if this is not
              equity regressions and bond returns for          Bond indices include corporate, agency and        available, then I use the Dow Jones index (all of which are reported by
              bond regressions.                                government bonds.                                 Datastream). See notes on Return for details on bond indices.
Financial     Measured by stock market capitalization to       From Beck, Demirgüç-Kunt and Levine               Private bond market capitalization includes private domestic debt securities
Development   GDP for equity regressions. Measured by          (2000), revised version with data through         issued by financial institutions and corporations. Financial development is
              private bond market capitalization to GDP        2005 available at: http://econ.worldbank.org.     instrumented for in both the equity and bond regressions.
              for bond regressions.
Returns       Percent difference in average monthly            Stock and bond return indices in U.S. dollars     Bond returns from Citigroup’s WGBI, All Maturities Total Return Indices
              returns with the U.S. over the last year.        from Datastream. Bond indices include             for developed countries and JPMorgan’s EMBI Global Diversified Bond
              Returns are stock returns for equity             corporate, agency and government bonds.           Return Indices for developing countries. If neither source is available, then I
              regressions and bond returns for bond                                                              use Citigroup’s ESBI index, then Merrill Lynch’s USD Emerging Sovereign
              regressions.                                                                                       Index. See notes on Correlation for details on stock indices.
Trade         Sum of total exports and imports between         Data on imports and exports from:                 Exports and imports are total merchandise imports, and imports including
              the United States and the country divided        International Monetary Fund, Direction of         cost, insurance and freight (c.i.f.).
              by the country’s GDP.                            Trade Statistics. Data on GDP from World
                                                               Bank, World Development Indicators CD-
                                                               ROM (2006).




                                                                                                                                                                                     37
                                           References

Aggarwal, Reena, Leora Klapper and Peter Wysocki. (2005). “Portfolio Preferences of Foreign
Institutional Investors.” Journal of Banking and Finance 29: 2919-46.

Ahearne, Alan, William Griever and Francis Warnock. (2004). “Information Costs and Home
Bias: An Analysis of U.S. Holdings of Foreign Equities.” Journal of International Economics 62:
313-36.

Antràs, Pol and Ricardo Caballero. (2007). “Trade and Capital Flows: A Financial Frictions
Perspective.” NBER Working Paper #13241.

Beck, Thorsten, Asli Demirgüç-Kunt and Ross Levine. (2000). "A New Database on Financial
Development and Structure." World Bank Economic Review 14: 597-605. Revised version with
data through 2005 from 3/21/07 available at: http://econ.worldbank.org.

Bertaut, Carol and Linda Kole. (2004). “What Makes Investors Over or Underweight?:
Explaining International Appetites for Foreign Equities.” International Financial Discussion
Papers Number 819. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.

Blanchard, Olivier, Francesco Giavazzi and Filipa Sa. (2005). “International Investors, the U.S.
Current Account, and the Dollar.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity. 1(Spring): 1-66.

Bohn, Henning and Linda Tesar. (1996). “U.S. Equity Investment in Foreign Markets: Portfolio
Rebalancing or Return Chasing?” American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings 86: 77-81.

Burger, John and Francis Warnock. (2007). “Foreign Participation in Local-Currency Bond
Markets.” Review of Financial Economics 16(3): 291-304.

Burger, John and Francis Warnock. (2003). “Diversification, Original Sin, and International Bond
Portfolios.” International Finance Discussion Papers #755. Board of Governors of the Federal
Reserve System.

Caballero, Ricardo, Emmanuel Farhi and Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas. (2008). “An Equilibrium
Model of ‘Global Imbalances’ and Low Interest Rates.” American Economic Review 98(1): 358-
93.

Caballero, Ricardo and Arvind Krishnamurthy. (2006). “Bubbles and Capital Flow Volatility:
Causes and Risk Management.” Journal of Monetary Economics 53(1, January): 35-53.

Cai, Fang and Frank Warnock. (2006). “International Diversification at Home and Abroad.”
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System IFDP Working Paper No. 793.

Chan, Kalok, Vicentiu Covrig and Lilian Ng. (2005). “What Determines the Domestic Bias and
Foreign Bias? Evidence from Mutual Fund Equity Allocations Worldwide.” The Journal of
Finance LX(3): 1495-1534.

Clark, Peter, Azim Sadikov, Natalia Tamirisa, Shang-Jin Wei and Li Zeng. (2004). “A New Look
at Exchange Rate Volatility and Trade Flows.” Unpublished mimeo.

Cleaver, Chad and Francis Warnock. (2003). “Financial Centers and the Geography of Capital
Flows.” International Finance 6(1): 27-59.



                                                                                               38
Cline, William. (2005). The United States as a Debtor Nation. Washington, DC: Institute of
International Economics and Center for Global Development.

Cooper, Ian and Evi Kaplanis. (1994). “Home Bias in Equity Portfolios, Inflation Hedging, and
International Capital Market Equilibrium.” Review of Financial Studies 7: 45-60.

Cooper, Ian and Evi Kaplanis. (1986). “Costs to Crossborder Investment and International Equity
Market Equilibrium.” In J. Edwards, J. Franks, C. Mayer and S. Schaefer, eds. Recent
Developments in Corporate Finance. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pgs. 209-240.

Coval, Joshua and Tobias Moskowitz. (1999). “Home Bias at Home: Local Equity Preference in
Domestic Portfolio.” Journal of Finance 54: 2045-73.

Curcuru, Stephanie, Tomas Dvorak, and Francis Warnock. (2008). “The Stability of Large
External Imbalances: The Role of Returns Differentials.” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
forthcoming.

Daude, Christian and Marcel Fratzscher. (2006). “The Pecking Order of Cross-Border
Investment.” European Central Bank Working Paper #590.

Davis, Steven, Jeremy Nalewaik and Paul Willen. (2001). “On the Gains to International Trade in
Risky Financial Assets.” NBER Working Paper #7796.

Di Giovanni, Julian. (2005). “What Drives Capital Flows? The Case of Cross-Border M&A
Activity and Financial Deepening.” Journal of International Economics 65(1): 127-49.

Dooley, Michael, David Folkerts-Landau and Peter Garber. (2003). “An Essay on the Revived
Bretton Woods System.” NBER Working Paper #9971.

Faruqee, Hamid, Shujing Li and Isabel Yan. (2004). “The Determinants of International Portfolio
Holdings and Home Bias.” IMF Working Paper #WP/04/34.

Forbes, Kristin. (2007a). “The Microeconomic Evidence on Capital Controls: No Free Lunch.” In
Sebastian Edwards, ed., Capital Controls and Capital Flows in Emerging Economies: Policies,
Practices, and Consequences. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pgs. 171-202.

Forbes, Kristin. (2007b). “One Cost of the Chilean Capital Controls: Increased Financial
Constraints for Smaller Traded Firms.” Journal of International Economics 71(2): 294-323.

Froot, Kenneth, David Scharfstein, and Jeremy Stein. (1992). “Heard it on the Street:
Informational Inefficiencies in a Market with Short-Term Speculation.” Journal of Finance 47:
1461-84.

French, Kenneth and James Poterba. (1991). “Investor Diversification and International Equity.”
American Economic Review 81: 222-226.

Gelos, R. Gaston and Shang-Jin Wei. (2005). “Transparency and International Portfolio
Holdings.” The Journal of Finance LX(6): 2987-3020.

Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier and Hélène Rey. (2007). “From World Bank to World Venture
Capitalist: U.S. External Adjustment and the Exorbitant Privilege.” In Richard Clarida, ed. G7
Current Account Imbalances: Sustainability and Adjustment. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, pgs. 11-66.


                                                                                                 39
Griever, William, Gary Lee and Francis Warnock. (2001). “The U.S. System for Measuring
Cross-Border Investment in Securities: A Primer with a Discussion of Recent Developments.”
Federal Reserve Bulletin 87(10): 633-650.

Gruber, Joseph and Steven Kamin. (2008). “Do Differences in Financial Development Explain
the Global Pattern of Current Account Imbalances?” Federal Reserve Board International Finance
Discussion Paper #923. March.

Hau, Harald and Hélène Rey. (2007). “Global Portfolio Rebalancing Under the Microscope.”
Unpublished working paper.

Hausmann, Ricardo, and Frederico Sturzenegger. (2006). “Global Imbalances or Bad
Accounting? The Missing Dark Matter in the Wealth of Nations.” CID Working Paper No. 124.
Harvard University, John F. Kennedy School of Government.

International Monetary Fund. (2008). International Financial Statistics CD-ROM. May.

Ju, Jiandong and Shang-Jin Wei. (2006). “A Solution to Two Paradoxes of International Capital
Flows.” NBER Working Paper #12668.

Kang, Jun-Koo and René Stulz. (1997). “Why is there a home bias? An analysis of foreign
portfolio equity ownership in Japan.” Journal of Financial Economics 46: 3-28.

Kho, Bong-Chan, René Stulz and Francis Warnock. (2006). “Financial Globalization,
Governance, and the Evolution of Home Bias.” NBER Working Paper #12389.

Kim, Woochan, Taeyoon Sung and Shang-Jin Wei. (2008). “How Does Corporate Governance
Risk at Home Affect Investment Choices Abroad?” NBER Working Paper #13721.

Klein, Michael. (2003). “Capital Account Openness and the Varieties of Growth Experience.”
NBER Working Paper No. 9500.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio López-de-Silanes and Andrei Shleifer. (2006). “What Works in
Securities Laws." Journal of Finance 61(1, February): 1-32.

Lane, Philip. (2006a). “Global Bond Portfolios and EMU.” International Journal of Central
Banking 2(2, June): 1-23.

Lane, Philip. (2006b). “Globalisation and the Irish Economy.” Institute for International
Integration Studies Occasional Paper No. 1 (March).

Lane, Philip and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti. (2008). “International Investment Patterns.” Review
of Economics and Statistics. Forthcoming.

Lane, Philip and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti. (2007a). “A Global Perspective on External
Positions.” In Richard Clarida, ed. G7 Current Account Imbalances: Sustainability and
Adjustment. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pgs. 67-98.

Lane, Philip and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti. (2007b). “Where Did All the Borrowing Go? A
Forensic Analysis of the U.S. External Position.” Unpublished working paper.

Leuz, Christian, Karl Lins and Francis Warnock. (2008). “Do Foreigners Invest Less in Poorly
Governed Firms?” Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming.


                                                                                               40
Magud, Nicolas and Carmen Reinhart. (2007). “Capital Controls: An Evaluation.” In Sebastian
Edwards, ed., Capital Controls and Capital Flows in Emerging Economies: Policies, Practices,
and Consequences. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pgs. 645-674.

Martin, Philippe and Hélène Rey. (2004). “Financial Super-Markets: Size Matters for Asset
Trade.” Journal of International Economics 64(2): 335-61.

Mendoza, Enrique, Vincenzo Quadrini and José-Víctor Ríos-Rull. (2006). “Financial Integration,
Financial Deepness and Global Imbalances.” NBER Working Paper #12909.

Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth Rogoff. (2007). “The Unsustainable U.S. Current Account
Position Revisited.” In Richard Clarida, ed. G7 Current Account Imbalances: Sustainability and
Adjustment. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pgs. 339-366.

Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth Rogoff. (2001). “The Six Major Puzzles in International
Macroeconomics: Is There a Common Cause?” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 15: 339-90.

Portes, Richard and Hélène Rey. (1998) “The Emergence of the Euro as an International
Currency.” Economic Policy April: 305-43.

Portes, Richard, Hélène Rey and Yonghyup Oh. (2001). “Information and Capital Flows: The
Determinants of Transactions in Financial Assets.” European Economic Review 45: 783-96.

Rose, Andrew and Mark Spiegel. (2002) “A Gravity Model of Sovereign Lending: Trade, Default
and Credit.” NBER Working Paper No. 9285.

Shambaugh, Jay. (2004). “The Effect of Fixed Exchange Rates on Monetary Policy.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 119(1, Feb.): 301-52.

Sirri, Erik and Peter Tufano. (1998). “Costly Search and Mutual Fund Flows.” Journal of Finance
53:1589-1622.

Standard and Poor’s. (2006). Global Stock Markets Factbook. New York: Standard & Poor’s.

Tesar, Linda and Ingrid Werner. (1995). “Home Bias and High Turnover.” Journal of
International Money and Finance 14:467-93.

Thomas, Charles, Francis Warnock and Jon Wongswan. (2007). “Trading Strategies and
International Portfolio Performance.” Unpublished working paper (August).

Warnock, Francis. (2007). “Financial Globalization.” Background note for Roundtable on New
Features of the International Monetary System, New Challenges for Global Monetary
Governance. Durban, South Africa. (September).

World Bank (2006). Worldwide Governance Indicators: 1996-2005. Available at:
http://web.worldbank.org. Version from September 15, 2006.

Zhao, Xinge. (2005). “The Determinants of Flows into Retail International Equity Funds.”
Unpublished mimeo.




                                                                                             41
                                               Table 1
                           Total Return on Investment Positions (in percent)

                        Includes Effect of Exchange                               Excludes Effect of Exchange
                               Rate Movements                                           Rate Movements
                       U.S. Assets    U.S. Foreign                                U.S. Assets   U.S. Foreign
                         Abroad         Liabilities                                Abroad         Liabilities
      2002                 -4.9             -5.5                                     -8.7            -5.9
      2003                21.2              10.5                                     14.2             9.8
      2004                12.6               5.8                                      9.1             5.4
      2005                  9.9              2.6                                     14.2             3.0
      2006                17.4               8.0                                     14.0             7.7
      Average annual return
      2002-06             11.2               4.3                                      8.6                  4.0
                  1
      Sharpe Ratio        0.68             -0.02                                     0.42                 -0.06

  Notes: Direct investment at market value. Returns include income flows and valuation changes (which include price
  changes and exchange rate movements). See Appendix B for details on return calculation.
  (1) The Sharpe ratio is a risk-adjusted performance measure, calculated as: (Ri - Rf)/σi with Ri the mean return for asset
  i; σi the standard deviation of returns for asset i; and Rf the risk-free interest rate (which is measured as the average
  interest rate on the 10-year U.S. Treasury bond over this period).
  Source: Based on original data from the Bureau of Economic Analysis. See Appendix B for details.




                                          Table 2
           Returns on Private Sector Investment Positions: 2002-2006 (in percent)

                                                                                                            All Securities
           Direct Investment1                      Equities                       Bonds2
                                                                                                        (Equities & Bonds2)
           U.S.           U.S.            U.S.            U.S.           U.S.           U.S.              U.S.        U.S.
          Assets        Foreign          Assets         Foreign         Assets        Foreign            Assets     Foreign
         Abroad        Liabilities       Abroad        Liabilities      Abroad       Liabilities        Abroad Liabilities
2002       -10.6         -18.8            -16.0          -21.8           14.6           9.3               -8.9        -4.2
2003        33.8          21.9             40.7           28.0            9.6           6.0               32.7        13.7
2004        19.8           8.8             19.4           11.5            4.8           5.6               15.1        8.0
2005        14.6           3.5             17.0           4.9            -0.4           0.7               12.1        2.4
2006        24.0          12.5             25.8           15.6            5.0           5.1               20.7        9.5
Average Returns
2002-6      16.3           5.6              17.4          7.6              6.7             5.3            14.3          5.9
Exclude
            12.9           5.6              12.0          7.6              4.9             4.6            9.9           5.4
ER3
Sharpe
            0.72          0.08              0.62          0.18             0.41         0.31              0.65          0.21
Ratio4

  Notes: Private sector refers to “non-official” asset positions for foreign-owned assets in the United States. Returns
  incorporate income receipts plus valuation changes (which includes price changes and exchange rate movements). See
  Appendix B for details on return calculations
       (1) Direct investment at market value.
       (2) Bonds include corporate, government and agency bonds.
       (3) Average returns exclude the impact of exchange rate movements.
       (4) See Table 1 for definition.
  Source: Based on original data from Bureau of Economic Analysis. See Appendix B for details.




                                                                                                                         42
                            Table 3:
    Foreign Exposure to U.S. Equity and Debt Markets in 2006

   Equity − USG data                      Debt − USG data                    Debt − IMF data
Paraguay          27.8%              El Salvador        67.1%         Israel                80.8%
Costa Rica        27.8%              Costa Rica         66.6%         Kazakhstan            50.1%
Singapore         26.4%              Jordan             60.0%         Kuwait                34.8%
Venezuela         25.0%              China              49.2%         Costa Rica            30.9%
Netherlands       22.4%              Kazakhstan         48.4%         Bulgaria              29.8%

Botswana               18.0%         Belgium                 39.3%    Bahrain              28.1%
Switzerland            15.2%         Latvia                  38.3%    Ireland              19.3%
Canada                 15.2%         Singapore               33.9%    Chile                18.8%
New Zealand            12.1%         Mexico                  29.4%    Uruguay              15.8%
Norway                 11.7%         Hong Kong               26.7%    Hong Kong            15.3%

Uganda                 10.3%         Macedonia               26.3%    Norway               13.0%
Denmark                 9.7%         Colombia                25.0%    United Kingdom       12.6%
Armenia                 8.9%         Switzerland             18.7%    Colombia              9.8%
United Kingdom          8.0%         Indonesia               18.5%    Russian Federation    8.7%
Sweden                  7.6%         Chile                   17.6%    Singapore             8.6%

Mexico                  7.1%         Slovenia                13.8%    Switzerland           8.4%
Swaziland               6.8%         Thailand                13.6%    Estonia               8.2%
Australia               6.3%         Poland                  12.7%    Canada                6.8%
Austria                 5.7%         Ireland                 12.6%    Sweden                6.7%
Ecuador                 5.4%         Philippines             12.6%    Argentina             6.0%

Israel                  4.9%         Korea, South            11.5%    Australia             5.9%
Japan                   4.9%         Turkey                  11.4%    Japan                 5.7%
France                  4.4%         Malaysia                10.1%    Netherlands           5.5%
Bolivia                 3.8%         Canada                   9.8%    Venezuela             4.9%
Germany                 3.7%         United Kingdom           9.4%    Philippines           4.6%

Mean                    4.3%                                 14.8%                          9.5%
Median                  1.3%                                  9.1%                          4.3%
Std. Deviation          6.8%                                 17.2%                         14.6%
Minimum                 0.0%                                  0.1%                          0.0%
Maximum                27.8%                                 67.1%                         80.8%
Observations               82                                    54                            51

   Source: See Section III for details on calculation and data.




                                                                                                    43
                                   Table 4
          Foreign Exposure to Major Equity and Debt Markets in 2006
                                                                                   % Global Portfolio
                             Foreign Exposure                    Global                  Weight
                                           Standard             Portfolio        Based on     Based on
                         Mean    Median
                                           Deviation             Weight           Mean        Median
Australia     Equity      0.3%      0.1%       0.4%              2.0%                12.6%          4.1%
              Debt        0.8%      0.3%       2.0%              1.3%                60.8%        20.0%

Canada        Equity       0.2%        0.1%         0.3%          3.1%                 6.0%            1.9%
              Debt         0.3%        0.1%         0.4%          1.9%                13.2%            4.4%

France        Equity       1.3%        0.6%         2.0%          4.5%                28.3%          13.0%
              Debt         2.0%        1.1%         2.6%          4.9%                41.5%          22.1%

Germany       Equity       1.0%        0.3%         1.5%          3.0%                33.6%          11.3%
              Debt         4.2%        1.8%         6.4%          5.9%                71.7%          31.5%

Japan         Equity       1.2%        0.3%         2.0%          8.7%                13.4%            3.6%
              Debt         0.5%        0.1%         1.0%         12.3%                 3.8%            1.0%

Switzerland   Equity       0.8%        0.3%         1.2%          2.2%                34.3%          12.6%
              Debt         0.1%        0.1%         0.1%          0.4%                28.2%          15.1%

United        Equity       2.2%        0.9%         4.3%          7.0%                31.8%          13.3%
Kingdom       Debt         3.2%        1.5%         4.4%          5.4%                59.4%          27.8%

United        Equity       4.8%        2.0%         7.2%         35.8%                13.5%           5.6%
States        Debt         9.5%        4.3%        14.6%         38.2%                24.9%          11.2%

Average       Equity       1.5%        0.6%         2.4%          8.3%                21.7%           8.2%
              Debt         2.6%        1.2%         3.9%          8.8%                37.9%          16.6%

Notes: All calculations based on IMF data. Global portfolio weight is the share of the country’s equity or
debt market in the global equity or debt market. Equity market capitalization data from Standard & Poor’s
(2007) and bond market data from BIS Quarterly Review, Tables 11, 16A and 16B, December 2007.




                                                                                                        44
                                              Table 5
                                          Summary Statistics
Variable                         # Obs.     Mean     Median    Std. Dev.    Min.    Max.
DevUS, equities1                  410       -2.966   -2.871      1.574     -6.804   0.874
DevUS, bonds1                     260       -1.684   -1.621      1.269     -5.306   0.804
Capital Controls                  520        1.737    2.000      1.019      0.000   3.000

Financial Development,
equities                          478        0.532   0.280      0.993      0.000    16.017
Financial Development,
bonds                             476        0.567    0.390     0.446       0.038   2.024
Corporate Governance              503        0.027   -0.446     1.929      -4.173   3.477

Returns, equities                 483        0.516   0.291      0.641       0.001   5.281
Returns, bonds                    224        0.285   0.215      0.319      0.001    2.652
Correlation, equities             380        0.472   0.727      0.543      -0.939   0.992

Correlation, bonds                285        0.168   0.295      0.577      -0.867   1.000
Closeness                         515       -0.001   0.043      1.270      -3.118   6.588
Trade                             520        0.099   0.049      0.114       0.003   0.681

  Note: (1) Based on USG data.




                                                                                        45
                                                               Table 6
                                                          Correlation Matrix

                         DevUS,     DevUS,   Capital    FinDev     FinDev   Corp.    Returns    Returns   Correl.    Correl.   Close-
                                                                                                                                        Trade
                         equities   bonds    Controls   equities    bonds   Gov.     equities    bonds    equities   bonds      ness

DevUS, equities           1.000
DevUS, bonds              0.214     1.000
Capital Controls         -0.423     0.132     1.000
Financial Development,
                          0.213     0.038     -0.123     1.000
equities
Financial Development,
                          0.373     -0.143    -0.346     0.187     1.000
bonds
Corporate Governance      0.610     -0.098    -0.513     0.426     0.542    1.000
Returns, equities        -0.115     0.115     0.197     -0.160     -0.172   -0.196    1.000
Returns, bonds            0.066     0.042     -0.021     0.122     0.022    0.063    -0.321     1.000
Correlation, equities     0.154     0.050     -0.129     0.254     0.190    0.217     0.150     -0.006     1.000
Correlation, bonds        0.039     -0.054    -0.144    -0.037     0.058    0.142    -0.405     -0.102    -0.329     1.000
Closeness                 0.286     0.108     -0.216    -0.146     -0.087   0.036     0.086     -0.065     0.031     -0.005    1.000
Trade                     0.148     0.474     0.127      0.098     -0.168   -0.157   -0.022     0.014      0.028     -0.023    0.515    1.000
GDP per capita            0.567     -0.226    -0.532     0.331     0.533    0.905    -0.155     0.045      0.255     0.097     0.109    -0.240


  Note: Based on USG data.




                                                                                                                                                 46
                                                                                   Table 7
                                                        Regression Results: Foreign Investment in U.S. Equities

                                    Full             Full           IMF               Full                Full          Middle &               High              Largest           GDP
                                  Sample           Sample           Data            Sample              Sample         Low Income1           Income1            Holdings2        weighted
                                    (1)              (2)             (3)              (4)                 (5)               (6)                 (7)                (8)              (9)
            Capital              -0.217**         -0.195**        -0.208**         -0.200**            -0.143**          -0.283**            -0.102**             0.024          -0.115**
            Controls              (0.049)          (0.048)         (0.044)          (0.049)             (0.042)           (0.037)             (0.033)            (0.044)          (0.030)
            Financial            -0.354**         -0.291**        -0.407**         -0.227**           -11.292**            -1.177**          -0.172**            -0.155*         -14.720**
            Development           (0.085)          (0.086)         (0.090)          (0.077)             (1.363)             (0.179)           (0.073)            (0.091)           (1.517)
            Corporate             0.363**         0.514**          0.242**         0.598**              0.350**             -0.071           0.791**             0.673**          0.542**
            Governance            (0.041)         (0.073)          (0.054)         (0.072)              (0.070)             (0.057)          (0.055)             (0.097)          (0.051)
            Returns              -0.022**         -0.022**        -0.039**         -0.029**             -0.008              -0.010            -0.032*            -0.071**         -0.030**
                                  (0.007)          (0.007)         (0.009)          (0.007)             (0.006)             (0.007)           (0.019)             (0.030)          (0.008)
            Correlation           0.098*          0.105**          0.165**          0.090*              0.135**            0.190**            -0.106             -0.435**           0.053
                                  (0.053)         (0.052)          (0.076)          (0.050)             (0.049)            (0.068)            (0.088)             (0.165)          (0.053)
            Closeness             -0.053            0.037           0.031          0.191**              -0.107               0.043            -0.011             -0.199**           0.018
                                  (0.059)          (0.068)         (0.058)         (0.042)              (0.071)             (0.057)           (0.050)             (0.039)          (0.045)
            Trade                 3.261**         2.548**          2.151**                              4.477**            3.190**           1.477**             2.835**          1.140**
                                  (0.699)         (0.813)          (0.473)                              (0.816)            (0.775)           (0.677)             (0.561)          (0.539)
            GDP per                               -0.458**         2.519**         -0.576**            -0.424**                                                  3.070**          -0.545**
            Capita                                 (0.143)         (0.154)          (0.131)             (0.141)                                                  (0.865)           (0.129)
            Financial Development                                                                       1.112**                                                                   1.441**
            * GDP per capita                                                                            (0.137)                                                                   (0.149)
            Countries         65                     65               46              65                   65                 41                24                  8                65
            Observations      319                    319             221              319                 319                 199               120                 36              319
            Wald χ2          479.1                  463.7           1161.3           572.6               576.2               437.0             542.4              1606.1           1615.0
Notes: Explanatory variable is the log of the deviation in each country’s holdings of U.S. equity liabilities from the world market portfolio based on USG data. * and ** are significant at the 10% and 5%
levels, respectively. Standard errors in parentheses. See Appendix C for variable definitions. Estimates are FGLS and are adjusted for heteroscedasticity and autocorrelation within each country.
Regressions include period dummy variables. (1) Based on World Bank definitions. (2) Only includes observations for which country holds over $50 billion in U.S. equities.




                                                                                                                                                                                                       47
                                                                          Table 8
                                         Regression Results: Foreign Investment in U.S. Equities – Sensitivity Tests
                       Different Measures of Financial Development                                     Different Estimation Techniques3                                         Excludes:
                      St. Value     Stock                    Adds                     X-section                                                        Differ-          Financial
                       Traded     Turnover      Index1    Instrmts2                   Averages       X-section         Tobit          Quantile          ences           Centers4       Outliers5
                          (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)                        (5)            (6)             (7)              (8)             (9)               (10)           (11)
  Capital             -0.143**     -0.084*     -0.126**    -0.211**                   -0.513**       -0.338**        -0.335**          -0.310         -0.008**          -0.127**       -0.193**
  Controls             (0.042)     (0.047)      (0.039)     (0.030)                    (0.172)        (0.148)         (0.161)          (0.211)         (0.003)           (0.045)        (0.038)

  Financial          -11.056**       -4.590**       -6.936**      -15.319**          -18.572**       -14.943**       -14.951**       -19.042**        -0.150**          -10.077**        -10.059**
  Development          (1.334)        (0.841)        (0.408)        (1.116)            (4.701)         (3.657)         (5.243)         (5.907)         (0.062)            (1.557)          (1.245)

  Corporate            0.350**        0.480**       0.452**        0.566**              0.311          0.408*          0.407*           0.382         0.008**            0.357**          0.422**
  Governance           (0.070)        (0.072)       (0.056)        (0.060)             (0.224)         (0.206)         (0.221)         (0.256)        (0.003)            (0.074)          (0.069)

  Returns              -0.008        -0.017**        -0.005        -0.014**            -0.098          -0.039          -0.040          -0.035          -0.001             -0.008          -0.011**
                       (0.006)        (0.006)        (0.006)        (0.006)            (0.134)         (0.028)         (0.028)         (0.037)         (0.000)            (0.007)          (0.005)

  Correlation          0.135**        0.123**         0.055        0.217**             1.045**          0.330           0.334           0.280           0.000             0.088*          0.166**
                       (0.049)        (0.049)        (0.042)       (0.043)             (0.489)         (0.226)         (0.240)         (0.266)         (0.003)            (0.053)         (0.047)

  Closeness            -0.107         0.123*        -0.123**        -0.093             -0.007           0.038           0.038          -0.055         0.005**             -0.054            0.029
                       (0.071)        (0.066)        (0.054)        (0.061)            (0.117)         (0.107)         (0.160)         (0.202)        (0.003)             (0.076)          (0.066)

  Trade                4.477**        2.095**       4.006**        3.288**             3.191*         3.533**          3.552*           3.221         0.163**            4.464**          3.232**
                       (0.816)        (0.770)       (0.549)        (0.659)             (1.605)        (1.584)          (1.904)         (2.406)        (0.032)            (0.859)          (0.716)

  GDP per              -0.197        -0.611**         0.173        -0.871**           -0.795**       -0.753**        -0.752**          -0.615*         -0.010            -0.499**         -0.635**
  Capita               (0.138)        (0.144)        (0.109)        (0.115)            (0.293)        (0.291)         (0.315)          (0.368)         (0.007)            (0.151)          (0.135)

  Fin.Dev. *           1.088**        0.449**       0.702**        1.515**             1.815**        1.477**         1.478**          1.876**        0.014**            0.988**          0.987**
  GDP cap              (0.134)        (0.090)       (0.043)        (0.110)             (0.472)        (0.364)         (0.519)          (0.589)        (0.006)            (0.162)          (0.124)
  Countries              65              65            62             62                  65             65               65              65              65                 60               63
  Observations           319            319           303            303                  65             319             319             319             319                294              308
  Wald χ2               576.2          585.1         3061.4         1470.1                                                                              891.3              431.1            699.4

Notes: See notes to Table 7. All regressions except column 5 include period dummies. (1) Index is the first standardized principle component of: stock market capitalization/GDP, stock market turnover,
and private credit by deposit money banks and other financial institutions to GDP. (2) Includes additional instruments for financial market development: stock market turnover and private credit by
deposit money banks and other financial institutions to GDP. (3) Standard errors are clustered by country in columns 6-8. Dependent variable in column 9 is measured as the differences instead of log
deviation. (4) Excludes major financial centers: Hong Kong, Ireland, Japan, Singapore, Switzerland, and the U.K. (5) Excludes 10 observations that are largest outliers based on fitted regression.




                                                                                                                                                                                                     48
                                                                                   Table 9
                                                            Regression Results: Foreign Investment in U.S. Bonds

                                                                                     Middle &                                                              Financial Development               Excludes
                                                                                       Low              High            Largest             GDP-                measured by:                   Financial
                     Base             Base            Base1            Base          Income2          Income2          Holdings3          weighted          Credit1      Index4                Centers5
                      (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)            (5)              (6)               (7)               (8)              (9)          (10)                   (11)
Capital              0.014          0.081**         -0.200**          -0.055           0.026           -0.039            0.089            -0.108**         -0.083**       0.050                  0.052
Controls            (0.042)         (0.041)          (0.045)          (0.042)         (0.080)          (0.041)          (0.057)            (0.041)          (0.034)      (0.042)                (0.044)
Financial           -0.714*         -0.555**        -0.493**        -21.379**         -1.704**        -0.912**         -203.476**         -31.172**       -15.570**          -5.252**          -18.398**
Development         (0.375)          (0.263)         (0.150)          (5.611)          (0.641)         (0.445)           (22.981)          (3.435)          (1.958)           (0.773)            (5.750)
Corporate           0.198**         0.283**          0.106**           0.075           -0.004          0.384**            0.125            0.263**          0.286**            0.094              0.130
Governance          (0.077)         (0.061)          (0.038)          (0.087)          (0.087)         (0.118)           (0.167)           (0.082)          (0.053)           (0.072)            (0.101)
Returns              0.002            0.004                            0.003            0.002           0.003             0.009             0.006*           0.004             0.000              0.000
                    (0.003)          (0.003)                          (0.003)          (0.006)         (0.009)           (0.011)            (0.004)         (0.003)           (0.003)            (0.004)
Correlation          0.045            0.040                            0.054           -0.014           0.091            0.465**             0.055          -0.017             0.025             0.135*
                    (0.057)          (0.068)                          (0.057)          (0.183)         (0.114)           (0.143)            (0.076)         (0.059)           (0.056)            (0.072)
Closeness          -0.102**           0.055         -0.304**         -0.245**           0.034         -0.479**           -0.058           -0.342**         -0.322**          -0.313**             0.070
                    (0.049)          (0.036)         (0.065)          (0.067)          (0.031)         (0.071)           (0.066)           (0.038)          (0.044)           (0.040)            (0.067)
Trade               2.470**                          4.833**          4.334**         3.719**          6.208**            0.473            5.313**          4.654**          5.230**            1.981**
                    (0.575)                          (0.630)          (0.651)         (0.701)          (0.984)           (1.197)           (0.378)          (0.387)          (0.389)            (0.743)
GDP per            -0.473**         -0.787**        -0.593**         -0.708**                                           -1.468**          -1.111**         -1.577**          0.560**            -1.140**
Capita              (0.223)          (0.161)         (0.109)          (0.273)                                            (0.481)           (0.247)          (0.226)          (0.228)             (0.315)
Fin. Dev.                                                             2.138**                                           19.624**           2.965**          1.517**          0.505**            1.887**
* GDP cap                                                             (0.563)                                            (2.196)           (0.362)          (0.199)          (0.081)            (0.589)
Countries             152              152             248              152              55              93                38                152              184              152                129
Observations          32               32              53                32              12              19                10                 32               40               32                 27
Wald χ2              175.1            121.2           288.2            217.3            93.8            132.2            1828.9             492.9            382.2            696.2              107.8
   Notes: Explanatory variable is log deviation in each country’s holdings of U.S. debt liabilities from the world market portfolio based on USG data. * and ** are significant at the 10% and 5% level,
   respectively. Standard errors in parentheses. See Appendix C for variable definitions. Estimates are FGLS adjusted for heteroscedasticity and autocorrelation within each country. Period dummies
   included. (1) Financial Development is measured by private credit by deposit money banks and other financial institutions to GDP. (2) Based on World Bank definitions. (3) Only includes observations
   for which country holds over $50 billion in U.S. bonds. (4) Financial Development Index is constructed as the first standardized principle component of: private bond market capitalization to GDP,
   public bond market capitalization to GDP and private credit by deposit money banks and other financial institutions to GDP. (5) Excludes financial centers (as listed in Table 8).



                                                                                                                                                                                                      49
                                               Table 10
                     Private Sector vs. Official Sector Investment in U.S. Bonds

                            IMF Data (excludes official sector reserves)                                             USG Data
                                                          Financial
                                Largest       GDP-        Develop.                                             Bond             Equity
                      Base     Holdings1 weighted          Index2        Base                                Holdings          Holdings
                       (1)         (2)         (3)           (4)          (5)                                   (6)               (7)
Capital             -0.072**    -0.150**    -0.111**       -0.011      -0.091**                               -0.059           -0.192**
Controls             (0.037)     (0.032)     (0.030)       (0.033)      (0.038)                               (0.043)           (0.040)
Financial          -41.547**        -97.559**        -42.149**         -9.797**        -41.751**            -30.948**          -9.673**
Development         (3.220)          (12.097)         (4.430)           (0.891)          (3.225)              (6.180)           (1.240)
Corporate             -0.076           0.014          -0.256**           0.057            -0.079               0.014            0.418**
Governance           (0.053)          (0.098)          (0.063)          (0.055)          (0.053)              (0.084)           (0.046)
Returns              -0.002           -0.012          -0.004**           0.002           -0.002                0.000            -0.006
                     (0.002)          (0.009)          (0.002)          (0.002)          (0.002)              (0.003)           (0.006)
Correlation           0.004            0.009            0.047            0.045           -0.003                0.074            0.117**
                     (0.054)          (0.101)          (0.050)          (0.060)          (0.054)              (0.056)           (0.047)
Closeness           -0.187**         -0.378**         -0.256**         -0.274**         -0.167**              -0.077           -0.182**
                     (0.022)          (0.061)          (0.036)          (0.022)          (0.026)              (0.087)           (0.066)
Trade                2.705**          3.840**          3.284**         2.546**          2.232**               2.900**           5.204**
                     (0.460)          (0.504)          (0.480)         (0.378)          (0.557)               (0.909)           (0.798)
GDP per              0.459**           0.324           1.198**         1.830**          0.397**              -0.887**          -0.427**
Capita               (0.154)          (0.487)          (0.179)         (0.217)          (0.158)               (0.297)           (0.121)
Fin. Dev. *          4.228**          9.420**          4.167**         0.968**          4.245**               3.139**           0.947**
GDP per cap          (0.323)          (1.166)          (0.437)         (0.088)          (0.325)               (0.613)           (0.124)
Reserves /                                                                                0.401               1.780**          -1.272**
GDP                                                                                      (0.343)              (0.459)           (0.323)
Countries              31               11               31               31               31                    32                65
Observations           153              46               153              153              153                  152               316
Wald χ2               560.0           23352.6           323.8            648.4            556.4                188.1             863.2

 Notes: Explanatory variable is log of the deviation in each country’s holdings of U.S. debt or equity liabilities from the world market
 portfolio. * and ** are significant at the 10% and 5% level, respectively. Standard errors in parentheses. See Appendix C for variable
 definitions. Estimates are FGLS adjusted for heteroscedasticity and autocorrelation within each country. Period dummies included.
       (1) Only includes observations for which country holds over $50 billion in U.S. bonds.
       (2) Financial Development Index is constructed as the first standardized principle component of: private bond market
       capitalization to GDP, public bond market capitalization to GDP, and private credit by deposit money banks and other financial
       institutions.




                                                                                                                                     50
                                                                                          Figure 1
                                                                     Largest Holdings of U.S. Portfolio Liabilities in 2007
               1,200


               1,000


                800
US$ Billions




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Debt
                600                                                                                                                                                                                               Equity


                400


                200


                  0
                                              Cayman Islands


                                                                            Canada




                                                                                                         Switzerland
                                                               Luxembourg




                                                                                                                                     Middle East Oil Exporters *




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Taiwan
                                                                                                                       Netherlands




                                                                                                                                                                                                Singapore
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Australia




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Hong Kong
                       Japan




                                                                                               Ireland
                               China




                                                                                                                                                                             Bermuda




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 South Korea




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             B.V.I.
                                                                                                                                                                   Germany




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Norway




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Sweden
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Brazil
                                                                                                                                                                                       France




                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Russia
                                       U.K.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Mexico
                                                                                     Belgium




     Notes: Based on USG data released on 4/30/2008. Includes official and non-official sector holdings.
             * Bahrain, Iran, Iraq, Kuwait, Oman Qatar, Saudi Arabia & United Arab Emirates.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 51
                                             Figure 2a
                       Composition of Gross Foreign Capital Inflows - 2003-07

                                Other
                                31%
                                                                                                    U.S. Agencies
                                                                                                         7%
         Agencies
           2%
                                                                 Official                                           Other Official
                                                                 Flows                                                 Flows
                                                                  24%                                                   5%
Corporate Bonds
     22%

                                                                                             U.S. Treasuries
              U.S. Treasuries                     FDI                                             11%
                                    Equities      10%
                    5%
                                      7%
  Based on data from Bureau of Economic Analysis, Survey of Current Business (July 2008), U.S. International Transactions table.




                                               Figure 2b
                          Composition of Foreign Holdings of U.S. Assets - 2007


                                        Other
                                                                                        Official Holdings -
                                        29%
                                                                                         U.S. Agencies
           Agencies                                                                             5%
             3%
                                                                                                                  Other Official
     Corporate                                                   Official                                           Holdings
      Bonds                                                      Holdings                                             5%
       15%                                                        19%


   U.S. Treasuries
         4%                                                                                     Official Holdings -
                                                   FDI
                         Equities                                                                U.S. Treasuries
                                                   14%
                          16%                                                                           9%
 Bas ed on data from Bureau of Economic Analysis, Survey of Current Bus ines s (July 2008), International Investment Position table.
 Direct investment at current cost.




                                                                                                                          52
