                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          A THEORY OF MILITARY DICTATORSHIPS

                                            Daron Acemoglu
                                             Davide Ticchi
                                            Andrea Vindigni

                                         Working Paper 13915
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w13915


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2008




We thank seminar participants at Brown, CIFAR, Rochester and Toulouse. Acemoglu gratefully acknowledges
financial support from the National Science Foundation. Much of the work on this paper was done
when Acemoglu and Vindigni were visiting Yale and Collegio Carlo Alberto. They thank the Economics
Department and the Leitner Program in International Political Economy at Yale and Collegio Carlo
Alberto for their hospitality. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Daron Acemoglu, Davide Ticchi, and Andrea Vindigni. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
A Theory of Military Dictatorships
Daron Acemoglu, Davide Ticchi, and Andrea Vindigni
NBER Working Paper No. 13915
April 2008
JEL No. H20,N10,N40,P16

                                             ABSTRACT

We investigate how nondemocratic regimes use the military and how this can lead to the emergence
of military dictatorships. Nondemocratic regimes need the use of force in order to remain in power,
but this creates a political moral hazard problem; a strong military may not simply work as an agent
of the elite but may turn against them in order to create a regime more in line with their own objectives.
The political moral hazard problem increases the cost of using repression in nondemocratic regimes
and in particular, necessitates high wages and policy concessions to the military. When these concessions
are not sufficient, the military can take action against a nondemocratic regime in order to create its
own dictatorship. A more important consequence of the presence of a strong military is that once
transition to democracy takes place, the military poses a coup threat against the nascent democratic
regime until it is reformed. The anticipation that the military will be reformed in the future acts as
an additional motivation for the military to undertake coups against democratic governments. We show
that greater inequality makes the use of the military in nondemocratic regimes more likely and also
makes it more difficult for democracies to prevent military coups. In addition, greater inequality also
makes it more likely that nondemocratic regimes are unable to solve the political moral hazard problem
and thus creates another channel for the emergence of military dictatorships. We also show that greater
natural resource rents make military coups against democracies more likely, but have ambiguous effects
on the political equilibrium in nondemocracies (because with abundant natural resources, repression
becomes more valuable to the elite, but also more expensive to maintain because of the more severe
political moral hazard that natural resources induce). Finally, we discuss how the national defense
role of the military interacts with its involvement in domestic politics.


Daron Acemoglu                                      Andrea Vindigni
Department of Economics                             Princeton University
MIT, E52-380B                                       Department of Politics
50 Memorial Drive                                   037 Corwin Hall
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347                            Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER                                            vindigni@Princeton.EDU
daron@mit.edu

Davide Ticchi
Department of Economics
University of Urbino
via Saffi, 42
61029 Urbino ITALY
davide.ticchi@uniurb.it
    “The class that bears the lance or holds the musket regularly forces its rule upon the class
that handles the spade or pushes the shuttle.” Gaetano Mosca (1939 p. 228).


1     Introduction

Nondemocratic regimes almost always rely on some degree of repression against competing
groups. This repression is often exercised by a specialized branch of the state, the military.1
Despite the prevalence of nondemocratic regimes throughout history and the important role
played by the military in such regimes, the typical assumption is that the military is a “perfect
agent”of some social group, such as the elite. There has been little systematic analysis of why
and how the military uses its coercive powers to support a nondemocratic regime rather than
setting up a regime more in line with its own preferences. This question is relevant since, while
many nondemocratic regimes survive with the support of the military, there are also numerous
examples of military dictatorships that have emerged either as a result of a coup against a
nondemocratic regime or against the subsequent democratic government.
    In this paper, we take a …rst step in the analysis of the role of the military in nondemocratic
regimes and develop a theory of military dictatorships. At the center of our approach is the
agency relationship between the elite in oligarchic regimes and the military.2 The main idea
is that creating a powerful military is a double-edge sword for the elite. On the one hand,
a more powerful military is more e¤ective in preventing transitions to democracy. On the
other hand, a more powerful military necessitates either greater concessions to the military or
raises the risk of a military takeover. We investigate the conditions under which the military
will act as the agent of the elite in nondemocratic regimes (oligarchies) and the conditions
under which oligarchies will turn into military dictatorships. Our approach also sheds light on
the role of the military in coups against democracy. If the elite create a powerful military to
prevent democratization, then the military also plays an important role in democratic politics
until it is reformed, and such reform is not instantaneous.3 In particular, we show that faced
with a powerful military, a newly-emerging democratic regime will either need to make costly
    1
      Throughout the paper, the military may be thought to include the secret police and other law-enforcement
agencies. We also use the terms the military and the army interchangeably.
    2
      Since we draw a distinction between military dictatorships and nondemocratic regimes controlled by the
elite, we use the term oligarchy to refer to the latter and nondemocracy as a general term encompassing both
military dictatorships and oligarchies.
    3
      This assumption is consistent with O’Donnell and Schmitter’s (1986) emphasis that the power of the army
plays an important role at the early stages of democratic transitions. For instance, a relatively weak army may
be easier to reform than a stronger one. Our model will show that this is generally true, but also that weaker
militaries may sometimes be more di¢ cult to control.



                                                      1
concessions or face a high probability of a coup. This coup threat disappears once the military
is reformed. Interestingly, however, it is the anticipation that the military will be reformed
as soon as the opportunity arises that makes it di¢ cult to control the military during the
early phases of a democratic regime— because this creates a commitment problem, making it
impossible for democratic governments to make credible promises to compensate soldiers for
not taking actions against democracy.
       More speci…cally, our model economy consists of two groups, the rich elite and the citizens,
distinguished by their incomes (endowments). Democracy leads to redistributive policies, in
particular, to the provision of public goods, which are bene…cial for the citizens and costly
for the rich elite. Consequently, starting from an oligarchy in which they hold power, the
elite are unwilling to allow a transition to democracy. The only way they can prevent this
is by creating a specialized unit of the state, the military, responsible for using force and
repressing demands for democratization.4 A powerful military, however, is not only e¤ective in
preventing a transition to democracy but also creates a political moral hazard problem because
it can turn against the elite and take direct control of the government (for example, in order
to create greater redistribution towards its own members). Consequently, the elite have three
potential strategies in oligarchy: (1) no repression, thus allowing a rapid (smooth) transition
to democracy; (2) repression, while also paying soldiers an e¢ ciency wage so as to prevent
military takeovers; (3) repression without signi…cant concessions to soldiers, thus opting for
non-prevention or facing the risk of a military takeover.
       We characterize the equilibria in this environment and analyze the role of the military
in politics. The presence of a strong military changes both democratic and nondemocratic
politics. If democracy inherits a large military from the previous nondemocratic regime, then
it will also be confronted with a choice between making concessions to the military and facing
a coup threat. The decisive voter in democracy always wishes to prevent coups but this may
not be possible. In particular, soldiers realize that when the opportunity arises democracy will
reform the military reducing their rents. Since democracy cannot commit to not reforming
the military when it has the chance to do so, it can only make current concessions to soldiers
(since promises of future concessions are not credible) and current concessions may not be
   4
    In principle, the elite may prevent democratization by using some combination of “carrot” and of “stick,”
that is, not only by using repression but also by making concessions and promising redistribution of income to
(some of) the poor. The scope and limitations of such promises of redistribution have been analyzed in previous
work (see Acemoglu and Robinson, 2000 and 2006) and here we ignore them for simplicity. We also ignore the
possibility of cooptation of some subset of the citizens using various means, such as the distribution of public
jobs (see, for example, Acemoglu, Ticchi and Vindigni, 2006).



                                                       2
su¢ cient to compensate the soldiers for the prospect of a military dictatorship. Consequently,
our …rst result shows that societies in which nondemocratic regimes in the past have chosen
large militaries may have di¢ culty consolidating democracy and may instead end up with
military dictatorships.5 This result is not only intuitive but also provides us with a particular
reason why social con‡ict in nondemocracy may create costs for (future) democracies. More
speci…cally, the desire of the rich to prevent democratization by bequeathing a large army to
democracy may lead to worse economic performance during democracy because of the con‡ict
between citizens and soldiers that this induces.
    In oligarchy, whether the elite prefer to set up a large military depends on the e¤ectiveness
of the military and on the extent of inequality. When the military is not very e¤ective or
inequality is limited, the elite prefer to allow a smooth transition to democracy, because such
a regime will not be highly redistributive (while repression is likely to fail). On the other
hand, when military repression is likely to be e¤ective and inequality is high, the elite prefer
to build a strong military for repression and deal with the political agency problem by paying
the military an e¢ ciency wage. This equilibrium con…guration will therefore correspond to a
situation in which the military is (e¤ectively) an agent of the elite, which is the presumption in
the existing literature. However, we also show that under certain circumstances the elite may
prefer to use repression but not pay high wages to soldiers, thus allowing military coups against
their own regime to take place along the equilibrium path. In this case, nondemocratic regimes
persist due to the repression of the citizens, though the military undertaking the repression is
not an agent of the elite and acts in its own interests. These interests involve attempting a
coup against the elite whenever there is an opportunity for doing so.6
    An interesting implication of our model concerns the relationship between inequality and
the size and composition of government spending. When inequality is low, the society is
democratic, but the amount of spending is relatively low, and most of it is in the form of
public goods. As the level of inequality increases and the society remains democratic, the
size of the government (the amount of public good provision) increases. As inequality rises
further, the society is likely to be nondemocratic (because it fails to transition to democracy).
   5
     Most military dictatorships in Central and South America, which have resulted from coups against de-
mocratic regimes, may be thought of as being of this type. These examples are further discussed in Section
6.
   6
     Examples of military dictatorships that have resulted from coups against oligarchic/nondemocratic regimes
include the majority of the military regimes that have emerged in Peru between the 1820s and the 1930s, the
army-backed regime created in Thailand after the 1932 coup that ended the rule of the Thai absolutist monarchy,
the regime created in Egypt after Major Nasser’s coup against the monarchy, and the junta in Panama in 1968
that followed the coup by the National Guard under the leadership of Omar Torrijos.



                                                      3
In this case, the level of taxes and the amount of government spending depend on the nature
of the nondemocratic regime. If it is oligarchic, taxes and spending are low. However, if it is
a military dictatorship, then taxes and government spending are high, but all of this spending
is on the military— not on public goods.
    We then enrich our baseline model by introducing natural resources. Natural resources
increase the political stakes because soldiers realize that they will be able to capture the natural
resource rents if they take power. As a result, natural resource abundance makes democracies
more likely to fall to military coups. The e¤ect of natural resources on oligarchic regimes is
ambiguous, however. On the one hand, the oligarchic regime has a stronger preference for
repression and may be able to use the income from natural resources in order to buy o¤ the
military. On the other, the military is more tempted to undertake coups against the oligarchic
regime.
    Our baseline model abstracts from the national defense role of the military, so that the
only use of military coercion is in domestic politics. At the end of the paper, we also use our
model to investigate a potentially important interaction between international and domestic
politics. In particular, we investigate the national defense role of the military on democrati-
zation. Somewhat paradoxically, we …nd that when the army is more important for national
defense, democratic consolidation becomes more likely. The reason is that, in the absence
of an international role for the military, the citizens are unable to commit to maintaining a
strong military. The presence of international threats makes the promises of the citizens more
credible, because democracy also needs the military, and facilitates democratic consolidation.
    The two building blocks of our approach are that the military should be considered as
a potentially self-interested body— or in fact, a collection of self-interested individuals— and
that there should be a distinction between nondemocratic regimes controlled by the economic
elite (“oligarchies”) and military dictatorships. Both of these receive support from the qualita-
tive evidence in the political science literature. The self-interest of soldiers and the corporate
self-interest of the army are major themes of the political science literature on military dicta-
torships, emphasized by, among others, Finer (1976), Nordilinger (1977) and Needler (1987).7
   7
     This contrasts with existing models of democratic transitions or coups, such as those in Acemoglu and
Robinson (2001, 2006), where the military is assumed to be a perfect agent of the elite. This same perspective
is often adopted in political science and sociology literatures with Marxian foundations (e.g., Moore, 1966,
Luebbert, 1991). For instance, Barrington Moore’s (1966) classic work suggests an explanation for divergent
paths of political development in terms of di¤erent types of class coalitions. The possibility that any state
apparatus, including the army, may have some independent role as a coalition partner, is ignored. Subsequent
contributions inspired by Marxian approaches, including work by Poulzantas (1978) and Skocpol (1979), pay
greater attention to the “agency” of the state, but do not focus on the role of the military in politics nor note



                                                       4
Nordilinger (1977 p. 78), for example, argues that

          “The great majority of coups are partly, primarily, or entirely motivated by the
      defense or enactment of the military’s corporate interests.”

    Similarly, Needler (1987 p. 59) observes:

          “... the military typically intervenes in politics from a combination of motives
      in which defense of the institutional interests of the military itself predominates,
      although those interests are frequently construed so as to be complementary to the
      economic interests of the economic elite.”

    The distinction between oligarchic regimes and the military dictatorships is also well rooted
in a large political science literature (see for example the survey in Brooker, 2000, and the
references there). Huntington (1968) and Finer (1976), for example, emphasize the prevalence
of authoritarian elite-controlled regimes supported by the military, which are similar to our
oligarchic regimes, and contrast these with military dictatorships. Examples of the former
include the dictatorship that Getulio Vargas established in Brazil in 1937, which was a mainly
civilian authoritarian regime, relying on the support of the military for its political survival,
and other Central and South American regimes formed at roughly the same time (see also the
discussion in Section 6 below). More recent examples include Marcos’s long lasting regime
in the Philippines and President Fujimori’s regime’s in Peru, which was established following
his de facto coup to extend his rule and powers beyond their constitutional limits. Both of
these regimes were backed by the army, but the military establishment did not have important
decision-making powers.
    Perhaps more common in practice are military dictatorships, where the military or a subset
of o¢ cers are in direct control. Such military dictatorships are studied in detail by Brooker
(2000), Welch and Smith (1974), Perlmutter (1977, 1981), Nordlinger (1977).8 Contemporary
examples include the regimes established in Pakistan by General Ayub Khan, by General
Muhammad Zia-ul-Haq and by General Pervez Musharraf, the regimes established in Turkey
after the coups in 1960, 1971 and 1980, in Guatemala after the coup of 1954 under the leadership
Carlos Catrillo Armas, in El Salvador in 1956 with Oscar Osorio’s government, in Brazil after
the interactions we emphasize here.
   8
     A hybrid regime type, “bureaucratic authoritarianism,” based on a coalition between the military and the
economic elites, whose primary goal is the promotion of economic modernization, has also been identi…ed by
O’Donnell (1973). The practical applicability of this concept has appeared quite limited though, and we do not
pursuit it in this paper.


                                                      5
the overthrow of President Joao Goulart’s government in 1964, and in Greece after the military
coup of 1967. The military has also been the dominant political force in Thailand since the
1932 coup and has repeatedly intervened in politics whenever it perceived a threat to its own
power by nascent civilian political institutions.9
       Our paper is a contribution to a number of distinct literatures. First, there is now a
substantial literature on political transitions, but to the best of our knowledge, no paper in
this literature models the relationship between the elite and the military (see Acemoglu and
Robinson, 2006, for an overview of this literature). Consequently, this literature does not
distinguish between oligarchic regimes and military dictatorships discussed above.
       Second, there is a large literature on political agency in democracies, where citizens try
to control politicians using elections and other methods (e.g., Barro, 1973, Ferejohn, 1986,
Besley and Case, 1995, Persson, Roland and Tabellini, 1997, 2000, Acemoglu, 2005, Acemoglu,
Golosov and Tsyvinski, 2008, Alesina and Tabellini, 2007; see Persson and Tabellini, 2000 and
Besley, 2006, for surveys). In contrast, the potential agency relationship between the elite
and the military has not been modeled. In this regard, the literature on the organization of
nondemocratic regimes and other aspects of agency relationships in dictatorships is closely
related to our work. This area includes the early important work by Wintrobe (1998), as
well as recent papers by Acemoglu, Robinson and Verdier (2004), Egorov and Sonin (2004),
Dixit (2006) and Debs (2007a,b) focusing on nondemocratic agency relationships. These works
neither address the issue of controlling the military nor provide a framework for thinking about
the emergence of military dictatorships. The only exceptions are Ticchi and Vindigni (2003),
which studies the e¤ect of the organization of the military on the consolidation of democracy,
and recent work by Besley and Robinson (2007), which investigates the relationship between
the military and civilian governments, though focusing on a di¤erent set of questions than our
paper.
       Third, the recent literature in comparative politics of public …nance (e.g., Persson, Roland
and Tabellini, 1997, 2000, Persson and Tabellini, 2003) investigates the in‡uence of di¤erent
types of democratic institutions on …scal policy and economic outcomes, but does not inves-
   9
     It is also possible to give a slightly di¤erent (somewhat more speculative) interpretation to the possibility of
non-prevention in oligarchy. According to this interpretation, the case where the elite allow a powerful military
to form but do not take steps to prevent coups can be viewed as an implicit support for military dictatorships
by the elite. An example of this is the experience of Peru in the early 1930s. The raise of the Alianza Popular
Revolucionaria Americana (a violent revolutionary movement) led the Peruvian elites to support a coup d’état
by Colonel Sanchez Cerro. Roquié (1987 p. 115) describes this as follows: “The ruling classes that had long
been civilian in their orientation put aside their distrust of the military and supported the colonel’s coup. The
massacres in Trujilio in 1932 involving the army and the APRA were to establish a long-lasting defensive alliance
between the military and the upper bourgeoise.”


                                                         6
tigate the impact of di¤erent types of nondemocratic regimes, and in particular, the contrast
between oligarchic regimes and military dictatorships. Our paper adds to this literature by
modeling the impact of di¤erent types of nondemocratic institutions on …scal policy and eco-
nomic outcomes. In particular, a distinctive implication of our theory in this respect is that
nondemocracies should typically have more military spending than democracies.10
         Finally, as mentioned above, there is a substantial political science literature on military
dictatorships, though this literature does not provide formal models of the relationship between
the military and the elite, nor does it approach it as an agency problem. Some of the important
contributions in this literature have been cited above.
         The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents our basic model. Section
3 characterizes the Markov Perfect Equilibrium in this environment and presents our main
results. Section 4 shows that the equilibria characterized in Section 3 are also the subgame
perfect equilibria. Section 5 presents a number of extensions of the baseline environment
of Section 2, including an analysis of the implications of natural resources and international
threats on oligarchic and democratic equilibria. Section 6 illustrates some of the main ideas of
our analysis with a brief discussion of the emergence and consolidation of democracy and the
role of the military in Central America. Section 7 concludes, while the Appendix contains the
proofs omitted from the text.


2         Basic Model

In this section, we describe the economic and political environment. We consider an in…nite
horizon economy in discrete time with a unique …nal good. Each agent j at time t = 0
maximizes                                     1
                                              X
                                                    t
                                         E0             cj;t +    j;t Gt   ;                                (1)
                                              t=0

where E0 is the expectation at time t = 0, cj;t                  0 denotes the consumption of the agent in
terms of the …nal good, Gt        0 is the amount of public good provided at time t, and          j;t   2 f0; 1g
is an indicator function denoting the occupational choice of the agent. This variable determines
whether or not the individual bene…ts from the public good.
         The total population of the society is normalized to 1. Of those 1         n > 1=2 have low skills
and can produce        AL     0, while the remaining n agents are highly skilled and can produce
AH         AL . We will often refer to the (rich) high-skill agents as the “elite”since at the beginning
    10
    This result is consistent with the evidence presented in Mulligan, Gil and Sala-i-Martin (2004), which …nds
that nondemocratic regimes spend more on the military than democracies.


                                                         7
they will be in control of the political system, and we will refer to low-skill agents as the
“citizens.” There are two occupations: producer and soldier. With a slight abuse of notation,
we use the subscript j 2 fL; M; Hg to also denote low-skill producers, military (soldiers) and
high-skill producers. Soldiers do not produce any output, while producers generate income AL
or AH depending on their skill level. To simplify the analysis and reduce notation, we assume
throughout that only low-skill agents can become soldiers.11
    Furthermore, we also assume that           j;t   = 1 for j = L and     j;t   = 0 otherwise. This implies
that only production workers bene…t from the public good, for example, because the public
good corresponds to services that rich agents and the military receive through other means
(such as health care or schooling) or because the public good is associated with roads and
other infrastructures mostly used by low-skill production workers. This assumption is adopted
to simplify the expressions and has no e¤ect on our qualitative results.
    The size of the military at time t is denoted by xt . We normalize the size of the military
necessary for national defense to 0, thus the only reason for xt > 0 is repression in domestic
politics. In particular, we assume that xt takes one of two values, xt 2 f0; xg, where x > 0 is
size of the military necessary for repression. We denote the decision to have (build) an army
at time t by at 2 f0; 1g, with at = 1 corresponding to xt = x. The government (social group)
in power chooses at 2 f0; 1g, except that, as will be described below, it may take a while
for a newly-emerging democracy to be able to reform (disband) an already-existing army by
choosing at = 0 (that is, there will be further constraints on the choice of at in democracy).
We also assume throughout that
                                                x < 1=2         n;                                         (2)

so that low-skill producers are always the absolute majority in the population. This implies
that, given the policy instruments speci…ed below, in majoritarian elections the median voter
will always be a low-skill producer.
    Aggregate (pre-tax) output at time t will be

                                   Yt = 't (1        n       xt ) AL + nAH ;                               (3)

where 't 2 f1        ; 1g captures potential distortions from coups with               2 (0; 1). When there
is no coup attempt (against oligarchy or democracy), we have 't = 1. Instead, when there is
a coup attempt, a fraction         of production is lost due to the disruption created by the coup,
  11
     This is natural, since military wages are more attractive to low-skill than to high-skill agents. We could
introduce an additional constraint to ensure that the income of rich agents is greater than those of soldiers
whenever the military is recruiting, though we do not do so to simplify notation.


                                                         8
thus 't = 1         < 1. Let us also denote

                                       Y       (1       n) AL + nAH ;                                            (4)

as the potential output of the economy, which will apply when the size of the military is equal
to 0 and there are no disruptions from coups.
   Aggregate output can be taxed at the rate                     t   2 [0; 1] to raise revenue for public good
provision and to pay the salaries of soldiers. We model the distortion of the costs of taxation
in a simple reduced-form manner: when the tax rate is                         t,   a fraction C ( t ) of the output
(thus a total of C ( t ) Yt ) will be lost due to tax distortions. These may result from distortions
resulting because taxes discourage labor supply or savings, or because of the administrative
costs of collecting taxes. This …scal technology implies that when the tax rate is equal to                        t,

government revenues per unit of production will be

                                                    t    C ( t) :                                                (5)

We assume that C : [0; 1] ! R+ is a continuously di¤erentiable and strictly convex function
that satis…es the following Inada conditions (which will ensure interior solutions): C (0) = 0
(so that there are no distortions without taxation), C 0 (0) = 0 and C 0 (1) > 1. Let us also
de…ne ^ 2 (0; 1) as the level of taxation at which …scal revenues are maximized (i.e., the peak
of the La¤er curve), which is uniquely de…ned by

                                                             1
                                           ^            C0       (1) ;                                           (6)

               1
where (C 0 )       is the inverse of the derivative of the C function. This tax rate ^ is strictly
between 0 and 1 because of the Inada conditions.
   Finally, without loss of any generality, we parameterize AL and AH as

                                           1
                                    AL                  Y and AH              Y;                                 (7)
                                           1        n                     n

for some       2 (n; 1). This parameterization implies that a higher                        corresponds to greater
inequality. We do not make the dependence of AL and AH on                           explicit unless this is necessary
for emphasis.
   We will represent the economy as a dynamic game between soldiers, low-skill producers
(citizens) and the elite. As explained further below, given the policy instruments, there is no
con‡ict within the groups, so we can suppose without any loss of generality that a representative



                                                         9
agent from each group (e.g., the commander of the army, a decisive voter in democracy, or a
representative agent in oligarchy) makes the relevant policy choices.12
     In principle, there are two state variables in this game. The …rst one is the size of the
military from the previous period, xt            1   2 f0; xg. The second is the political regime denoted by
st , which takes one of three values, democracy D, oligarchy (elite control) E, military M . The
size of the military from the previous period, xt               1,   only matters because immediately following
a transition to democracy (without a coup attempt) it may not be possible for the democratic
government to choose at = 0 and reform the military. Instead, we assume that they will have
to wait for one period before being able to reform the military. This assumption captures the
realistic feature that once a large army is in place, a new and potentially weak democratic
government may not be able to disband the army immediately. The fact that it takes only one
period for it to be able to do so is only for simplicity and in subsection 5.3, we consider the
case where the opportunity to reform the military arises stochastically.
     This structure simpli…es not only the analysis but also the notation. In particular, instead of
carrying xt     1   as a state variable we can de…ne an additional regime, “transitional”democracy
T D, which occurs if, and only if, xt            1   = x, st    1    = E, and there has been no coup attempt.
Loosely speaking, transitional democracy corresponds to a situation in which the majority (low-
skill producers) have de jure political power but this is constrained by the de facto political
power of the military. The only di¤erence between st = T D and st = D is that with st = T D,
at = 0 is not possible. Otherwise, in both regimes, a representative low-skill producer is in
power. Since in our baseline model transitional democracy lasts for one period, st = T D is
immediately followed by st+1 = D, unless there is a successful military coup, in which case it
is followed by st+1 = M . Given this description, we represent the state of the dynamic game
by st 2 S        fD; E; M; T Dg.
     Key policy decisions are made by the government in power. The policy decisions are a
linear tax rate       t   2 [0; 1] on the income of the producers, the level of public good provision,
Gt        0, wage for soldiers, wt         0, and the decision regarding the size of the army, at 2 f0; 1g.
In addition to at ,       t,   Gt and wt , the military (the military commander) decides whether or not
to undertake a coup against the regime in power (if the military is active), which is denoted
by    t   2 f0; 1g, with        t   = 1 corresponding to a coup attempt, and, if             t   = 0, it also decides
whether or not to repress the citizens in oligarchy, which is denoted by                 t       2 f0; 1g, with   t   =1
  12
     Alternatively, we could consider a citizen-candidate model (e.g., Besley and Coate, 1997) in which in democ-
racy all agents vote, in military only the soldiers vote, and in oligarchy only the rich elite vote. The results in
this case are identical to those presented below, but the analysis requires additional notation.



                                                           10
corresponding to repression. In addition, individuals should have a decision of whether to
apply to an army position and also soldiers should have a decision to quit the military. Both of
these decisions translate into a participation constraint that the value to a low-skill agent in the
military should be higher than the value to a low-skill producer. Assumption 1 below ensures
that this is always the case and to simplify notation, we do not introduce these additional
decisions explicitly.13
         If in oligarchy the elite choose at = 0, then there is a smooth transition to democracy, in
particular, st+1 = D following st = E. The important point here is that when the elite choose
smooth transition, there is no transitional democracy since the oligarchic regime has not set
up a military. In contrast, if in oligarchy, the military is present but chooses not to repress
(   t    = 0), then the regime transitions to transitional democracy, that is, st+1 = T D. Finally, if
at = 1 and        t   = 1, so that there is an e¤ective military and it chooses to repress the citizens,
then transition to democracy takes place with probability                  2 [0; 1]. Therefore,     represents
an inverse measure of the e¤ectiveness of the military repression, with               = 0 corresponding to
the case in which the repression of the democratic demands of the citizens by the military is
fully e¤ective.
         We also assume that when the military attempts a coup against either regime, which, in
both cases, is denoted by          t   = 1, it succeeds with probability     2 (0; 1). If the coup succeeds,
then a military dictatorship, st+1 = M , emerges. To simplify the analysis, we assume that
s = M is absorbing, so the society will remain as a military dictatorship if a coup ever succeeds
(and in equilibrium, st = D will also be absorbing). However, if a military coup fails, then
we immediately have st+1 = D regardless of the regime at time t; if the regime at time
t is st = T D, then the transitional period will be over and the army will be reformed at
t + 1; if, on the other hand, st = E, then the con‡ict between the military and the elite
implies that there is no e¤ective repression and a democratic regime emerges immediately
and can use the window of opportunity resulting from the failure of the coup to reform the
military. This description therefore implies that the transitional democracy regime, s = T D,
only arises following failed repression. If there is no repression, there is no army, so democracy
is automatically consolidated (and thus s = D), and if there is a coup attempt, then the con‡ict
between the army and the elite enables the emergence of consolidated democracy (and thus,
again, s = D). Finally, recall that when the military attempts a coup (                  t   = 1), the society
su¤ers an income loss and 't = 1                < 1 in equation (3).
    13
    In other words, it will always be a best response for low-skill producers to apply to the military and it is
never a best response for soldiers to quit the military.


                                                        11
    Throughout we adopt the convention that …scal policies enacted at time t are implemented
even if there is regime change and the new regime starts enacting policies from t + 1 onwards.
Moreover, the military wage wt announced by any non-military regime is conditional on both
repression and no coup attempt. These wages are withheld if there is a coup attempt.
    The government budget constraint at time t can therefore be written as

                                          wt xt + Gt       (   t   C ( t )) Yt ;                                    (8)

where Yt is aggregate income at time t given in (3), (              t    C ( t )) Yt is total tax revenue resulting
from the linear tax        t,   and the left-hand side is the total outlays of the government, consisting
of public good expenditures, Gt , and spending on the military, wt xt .
    We now summarize the timing of events. At time t, the economy starts with the state
variable st 2 S, which determines the group in power.

   1. Unless st = T D, the group in power chooses at 2 f0; 1g and announces a …scal policy
       vector ( t ; wt ; Gt ) that satis…es the government budget constraint (8). If st = T D, then
       at = 1 and the group in power only chooses ( t ; wt ; Gt ).

   2. In oligarchy, if there is no military (at = xt = 0), then there is a transition to fully-
       consolidated democracy and st+1 = D.

   3. When xt = x, in democracy and in oligarchy, the military commander decides whether
       or not to attempt a coup              t   2 f0; 1g. If a coup is attempted, it is successful with
       probability        and a military dictatorship is established (and st+1 = M ). If a coup fails,
       a consolidated democratic regime, st+1 = D, emerges next period.

   4. If the elite have formed a military (xt = x), then st+1 = D. If the military remains active
       and does not attempt a coup               t   = 0, then it also decides whether or not to repress the
       citizens,    t   2 f0; 1g. If repression fails (probability ) or if the military chooses not to
       repress, then st+1 = T D.

   5. Taxes are collected and wages are paid according to the announced policy vector ( t ; wt ; Gt )
       if there is no military coup attempt. If there is such an attempt, then wt = 0.14
   14
      This description of the timing of events makes it clear that when a particular vector of policies, ( t ; wt ; Gt ),
is announced, it is not known for sure whether this will satisfy the government budget constraint, (8), because
there might be a coup attempt reducing income and tax revenues, and also removing the burden of military
expenditures. In such cases, we assume that the amount of public good provision, Gt , is the “residual claimant,”
so that if ( t ; wt ; Gt ) does not satisfy (8) as equality, Gt adjusts up or down to ensure this.



                                                           12
    Finally, we assume that the society starts with s = E, i.e., an oligarchic regime, and also
with x   1   = 0, so the elite are free to either form a military of size x or leave x0 = 0 in the
initial period.


3     Characterization of Equilibria

We now characterize the Markov Perfect Equilibria of the game described in the previous
section. Markov Perfect Equilibria are both simple and natural in the current context. In
Section 4, we show that all of our results generalize to Subgame Perfect Equilibria.

3.1    De…nition of Equilibrium

We …rst focus on pure strategy Markov Perfect Equilibria (MPE). Let ht;k denote the history of
the dynamic game described above up to time t and stage k of the stage game of time t, and let
H t;k be the set of such histories. Strategies assign actions for any history in H t;k . Markovian
strategies, instead of conditioning on the entire history, condition only on the payo¤-relevant
state variables, here st 2 S, and on the prior actions within the same stage game, denoted
by kt 2 K. Consequently, a MPE is de…ned as a set of Markovian strategies that are best
responses to each other given every possible history ht;k 2 H t;k . In the context of the game
here, MPE is a natural equilibrium because it directly introduces the commitment problems
that are central to our analysis. However, we will see that the same commitment problems are
present in a very similar fashion when we focus on subgame perfect equilibria.
    More formally, let      be a Markovian strategy mapping, that is,

                                      :S        K ! [0; 1]   R2+   f0; 1g3 ;

which assigns a value for each of the actions, the tax rate         t   2 [0; 1], the military wage wt 2 R+ ,
the level of the public good Gt 2 R+ , the decision of whether to create or reform the military
at 2 f0; 1g, and the coup and repression decisions of the military,              t   2 f0; 1g and   t   2 f0; 1g,
for each value of the state variable S and each combination of prior moves in the stage game
given by K. An MPE is a mapping                 that is a best response to itself at every possible history
ht;k 2 H t;k . To characterize the dynamics of political institutions, we de…ne the one-step
transition probability of st conditional on its past value and the limiting distribution of s
induced by the MPE strategy pro…le                 as

                         p (st j st   1)   :S    S ! [0; 1] and q (s) : S ! [0; 1] :


                                                        13
These concepts will be useful in describing how regimes change in equilibrium and what the
likelihood of di¤erent regimes are in the long run.
   We next proceed to characterizing the MPE by …rst determining (the net present dis-
counted) values of di¤erent individuals (groups) under di¤erent regimes.

3.2     Values in Democracy

Let us start with the values of the three groups in democracy, st = D. Decisions in democracy
are made by majoritarian voting and the median voter will always be a low-skill producer.
This implies that democracy will be an absorbing state as long as at = 0 is chosen in all
future periods, and clearly, at = 0 is always a dominant strategy for a low-skilled producer in
democracy. In view of this, we obtain the following proposition (recall that Y is de…ned in
(4)).

Proposition 1 The unique MPE starting in any subgame with s = D (i.e., a consolidated
democracy) involves at = 0;         =   D; w       = ; Gt = GD at each date t, where the democratic
                                t              t

tax rate   D   is given by
                                        D                   1          AL
                                                   C0            1             ;                (9)
                                                                       Y
and the level of public good is given by

                                        GD =            D
                                                                 C    D
                                                                              Y:               (10)

Moreover, consolidated democracy is an absorbing state so that p (D j D) = 1 and q (D) = 1.

   Proof. Clearly, the median voter in democracy would never choose at = 1, since this
would reduce the tax base and potentially create a coup threat against democracy. Therefore,
democracy is an absorbing state and the optimal policy can be characterized by the solution
to the following static maximization problem

                                uL (D)                  max          (1        ) AL + G        (11)
                                                   2[0;1];G2R+
                                subject to G                (        C ( )) Y:

Given the Inada conditions and the convexity of C ( ), (11) has a unique interior solution. The
…rst-order condition of this problem then gives the unique equilibrium tax rate as (9), and the
corresponding level of public good as (10).
   The values of low- and high-skill producers are then given by
                                                                          D   AL + G D
                                            uL (D)               1
                             V L (D) =                                                         (12)
                                             1                            1

                                                            14
and
                                                                 D   AH
                                            uH (D)       1
                                V H (D) =                                 :                            (13)
                                             1               1
Here and throughout, D (or E, M or T D) in parentheses denotes the regime, while superscripts
denote the identity of the agent. In addition, u denotes per period returns and V denotes
“values,” that is, the net present discounted values.
   The value of an ex soldier in this regime is also V M (D) = V L (D), since former soldiers
will now work as low-skill producers. At this point, it is also useful to de…ne

                                      aL     1      D
                                                        AL + G D                                       (14)

as the net per period return to a low-skill producer in democracy. This expression will feature
frequently in the subsequent analysis.
   Finally, recall that according to our parameterization AL                  (1   ) Y = (1   n). It is then
evident that   D   does not depend on Y and is a strictly increasing function of . This last result
is due to the well-known e¤ect of inequality on redistribution in models of majority voting on
linear taxes (e.g., Romer, 1975, Roberts, 1977, Meltzer and Richard, 1981). We note this as a
corollary for future reference (proof omitted).

Corollary 1 The democratic tax rate         D,   given by (9), is strictly increasing in the extent of
inequality parameterized by .

3.3   Values under Military Rule

A military regime, s = M , can only occur when xt = x and it is an absorbing state. Since
xt 2 f0; xg, the military government has no option to change the size of the military without
disbanding itself (and obviously it would not want to expand the military even if it could, since
this would imply dissipation of the rents captured by the military among a greater number of
soldiers). Consequently, the military government will simply maximize the utility of soldiers
subject to the government budget constraint. Moreover, we assume that there is a natural
seniority system in the military, so that current soldiers are not …red in order to hire new
applicants. Then, provided that the participation constraint of soldiers is satis…ed (see below),
current soldiers will remain in the army forever and receive the military wage. Finally, because
in state M the military can never lose power, this problem boils down to that of maximizing
the static utility of a representative soldier subject to the government budget constraint.




                                                   15
       At this point, consider the maximization problem of the military government. This takes
the form

                               uM (M )           max               w                              (15)
                                            2[0;1];w2R+ ;G2R+

                               subject to wx + G       (       C ( )) Y        xAL ;

where the objective function incorporates the fact that soldiers do not bene…t from the public
good (i.e.,    M;t   = 0 in (1)). Since   does not feature in the objective function, the solution to
(15) involves taxing at rate ^ de…ned in (6) to maximize tax revenues (thus maximizing the
constraint set) and also setting to zero the public good, Gt = 0. This generates a unique per
soldier wage of wM given by
                                            (^   C (^)) Y           xAL
                                     wM                                    ;                      (16)
                                                      x
where Y again denotes the potential output de…ned in (4). Evidently, as long as the military
government is in power it will set the tax rate ^ extracting as much revenue from the producers
as possible and will redistribute all the proceeds to the soldiers. As noted above, the interesting
case for the current paper is the one where wM is su¢ ciently high that entering the military and
undertaking a coup is an attractive option for low-skill producers. We next impose Assumption
1, which will ensure this. Recall that the per period utility of the low-skill agents in democracy
is aL (which is simply a function of the underlying parameters, given by (14), with         D   and GD
de…ned uniquely in (9) and (10)). The following assumption ensures that wM is su¢ ciently
greater than aL so that the participation constraint of soldiers (of being in the military both
during military dictatorships, democratic regimes and oligarchies) is always satis…ed.

Assumption 1
                                            1            aL
                                                                       :
                                                   wM         aL
       In particular, this assumption immediately implies that the expected value of a coup for
soldiers is always greater than the value of a low-skill producer in permanent democracy, that
is,
                       V M (coup)         V M (M ) + (1            ) V L (D)    V L (D) ;

which is su¢ cient to guarantee the participation constraint in all regimes. Note that Assump-
tion 1 is not very restrictive. For example, as the size of the military, x, becomes small, any
      > 0 satis…es this assumption. We maintain Assumption 1 throughout the paper, without
stating it explicitly.

                                                    16
    The following proposition describes the equilibrium under a military rule (proof omitted).

Proposition 2 The unique MPE in any subgame starting with s = M (i.e., military dictator-
ship) involves the following policy vector at each date:                     M    = ^ as de…ned in (6), GM = 0, and
wM given in (16). Moreover, military dictatorship is an absorbing state so that p (M j M ) = 1
and starting with s = M at any point, we have q (M ) = 1.

    Given the unique continuation equilibrium in Proposition 2, the (net present discounted)
values for individuals who are currently members of the military, for low-skill non-military and
for high-skill elite agents are given by
                                         uM (M )             1    (^         C (^)) Y         xAL
                      V M (M ) =                                                                    ;          (17)
                                          1              1                        x
                                                       uL (M )          (1       ^ ) AL
                                     V L (M ) =                                           ;                    (18)
                                                        1                    1
and
                                                   uH (M )              (1       ^ ) AH
                                 V H (M ) =                                               :                    (19)
                                                    1                        1
Notice that the expressions for uL (M ) and V L (M ) do not include a term for the option value
of low-skill producers becoming a soldier. This is because even though each low-skill producer
would like to become a soldier, the military will not be hiring any more soldiers, since xt = x
already and there are no quits from the army.

3.4    Values in Transitional Democracy

We now turn to the analysis of transitional democracy, where st = T D. Recall that this
regime will emerge when st       1   = E, xt       1   = x,       t 1   = 1 and repression fails (probability    ).
Moreover, this regime is indeed “transient”; if there is no coup attempt or the coup attempt
fails at this point, then st+1 = D, and if there is a successful coup attempt, then st+1 = M .
Clearly, depending on the subsequent regime, either the equilibrium of Proposition 2 or that
of Proposition 1 will apply. We now investigate policy choices and the reaction of the military
during the transitional period.
    Suppose that the democratic government during the transitional period has announced the
policy vector   T D ; w T D ; GT D   , and to start with, let us ignore the participation constraint of
soldiers, which ensures that they prefer not to quit the military (will return to this below).
Now if the military chooses          t   = 0 (that is, no coup attempt), then the value of a typical
soldier is
                              V M (T D j no coup) = wT D + V L (D) ;                                           (20)

                                                             17
which incorporates the fact that the soldiers will receive the military wage wT D today and
do not receive utility from the public good. We have also substituted for the continuation
value to the soldiers, which, from Proposition 1 and equation (12), is given as the value in a
consolidated democracy V M (D) = V L (D). In particular, in line with Proposition 1, at the
next date the government will choose to reform the army and all former soldiers will become
low-skill producers, accounting for the continuation value of V L (D).
      In contrast, if    t   = 1, the value of a soldier is

                             V M (T D j coup) =        V M (M ) + (1       ) V L (D) ;                       (21)

which incorporates the fact that when the military undertakes a coup, the soldiers do not
receive the wage wT D and the coup succeeds with probability . Following a successful coup,
a military dictatorship is established and the continuation value of the soldiers is given by
V M (M ) as in (17) (cf. Proposition 2). If the coup fails (probability 1                  ), soldiers become
low-skill producers and simply receive the continuation value of the low-skill producer in a
consolidated democracy, V L (D) as in (12).15 Comparing these two expressions, we obtain the
no-coup constraint:
                                   V M (T D j no coup)        V M (T D j coup) :                             (22)

Using (20) and (21), the no-coup constraint can be written as

                                          wT D                wM    aL ;                                     (23)
                                                  1

where wM is de…ned in (16) and aL in (14). Constraint (23) de…nes the minimum military wage
that democracy must o¤er to soldiers in order to prevent a coup attempt. In what follows, we
will use wT P for the (“transitional prevention”) wage that makes this constraint hold as equality
and     TP   for the corresponding tax rate. This wage level can be thought of as an e¢ ciency
wage for the military to induce them to take the right action (that is, not to undertake a coup).
Clearly, this wage depends on the success probability of the coup , and the gap between the
value that soldiers will receive in a military dictatorship, V M (M ) = wM = (1                       ), and their
value in democracy, V L (D) = aL = (1             ).
      The question is whether a democratic government would pay this minimum military wage
in order to prevent a coup attempt. This will depend on two factors. The …rst is whether it is
feasible to pay such a wage (and satisfy the government budget constraint, (8)). The second is
whether it is desirable for low-skill producers to pay this wage. The feasibility condition requires
 15
      There is no di¤erential taxation or further punishments that are possible on former soldiers.


                                                        18
this minimum wage times the number of soldiers to be less than the maximum revenue that
can be raised, that is,
                                    wT P x    (^    C (^)) Y       xAL :                                  (24)

The right-hand side is the maximum revenue that can be raised, since it involves taxation at
the revenue-maximizing rate ^ and the tax base consists of the entire population except the x
soldiers. Using the expression for wM in (16), the condition (24) can be seen to be equivalent to
wT P      wM . Alternatively, using the expression for wT P from (23), we …nd that the feasibility
constraint, (24), is satis…ed if and only if

                                              1         wM
                                                                   ^:                                     (25)
                                                     wM      aL

This condition states that preventing a coup attempt is feasible only if                  is less than some
critical threshold ^ . Otherwise, only very high wages will discourage soldiers from attempting
a coup and such high wages cannot be paid without violating the government budget constraint.
Note also that Assumption 1 ensures aL < wM and thus                  < ^ .16
       Next, suppose that it is feasible for democracy to pay the wage wT P . Is it bene…cial for
low-skill producers to pay this wage or is it better for them to face the risk of a military
coup? To answer this question, suppose that a wage of wT P can indeed be paid— i.e., (25) is
satis…ed— and compare the low-skill producers’utilities under the two scenarios. When they
pay the necessary e¢ ciency wage, the value of low-skill producers is

                        V L (T D j no coup) = 1         TP
                                                             AL + GT P + V L (D) ;                        (26)

where      TP   is the utility-maximizing tax rate for the low-skill producer subject to the no-coup
constraint, (23), and GT P        0 is the utility-maximizing level of public good spending during
the transitional phase. Alternatively, if there is no coup prevention during the transitional
democracy, the value of a low-skill producer is

       V L (T D j coup) = 1       TN
                                       (1     ) AL + G T N +         V L (M ) + (1      ) V L (D) ;       (27)

since in this case there are no payments to the military, and now                TN   and GT N denote the
utility-maximizing policy choices when coup attempts are not prevented.17 The rest of the
expression incorporates this fact. Current output is a fraction 1                  of potential output (4)
  16
     This also implies that the participation constraint of soldiers in this case, V M (T D) V L (D), is always
satis…ed.
  17
     The full maximization program when the low-skill producer chooses not to prevent coups is given in the
proof of Proposition 3.


                                                      19
because of the disruption caused by the coup attempt and there is a probability              that the
coup is successful and the regime from tomorrow on will be a military dictatorship, giving value
V L (M ) to the representative low-skill producer. Now combining the previous two expressions,
we obtain that a low-skill producer will prefer to prevent coups during transitional democracy
if
                              V L (T D j no coup)     V L (T D j coup) :                            (28)

     The next proposition shows that whenever (25) is satis…ed, (28) is also satis…ed, so that
coups against democratic governments are always prevented when prevention is …scally feasible.
Assumption 1 is assumed to hold throughout, thus we limit attention to               .

Proposition 3 Let ^ be de…ned by (25). Then, the unique MPE in any subgame starting with
s = T D is as follows.

       If   2 [ ; ^ ], then the transitional democracy chooses the policy vector     T P ; w T P ; GT P

       and prevents a military coup. At the next date, s0 = D (i.e., p (D j T D) = 1), the
       military is reformed and the policy vector in consolidated democracy characterized in
       Proposition 1 is implemented. The long-run equilibrium in this case involves democracy
       with probability 1, i.e., q (D) = 1.

       If   2 (^ ; 1], then transitional democracy chooses the policy vector   T N ; w T N ; GT N   and
       the military attempts a coup, i.e.,    = 1. Consequently, we have p (D j T D) = 1            and
       p (M j T D) = , and thus starting with s = T D, q (D) = 1           and q (M ) = .

     Proof. See the Appendix.
     The essence of Proposition 3 is that condition (28) is always satis…ed, so low-skill pro-
ducers are better o¤ when coups are prevented. However, this may not be possible because
coup prevention may require excessive e¢ ciency wages. In particular, this will be the case
when condition (25) is not satis…ed. There is a clear ine¢ ciency in equilibria involving coups
(because of the economic disruption that they cause). The source of this ine¢ ciency is in the
commitment problem; if the democratic regime could promise high wages to soldiers in the
future, both low-skill producers and soldiers could be made better o¤. Nevertheless, as shown
in Proposition 1, the unique MPE after s = D involves reform of the military and thus no e¢ -
ciency wages for the soldiers. Thus the inability of the democratic regime to commit to future
rewards to soldiers is the source of coup attempts. We will see in Section 4 that the restriction
to Markovian strategies is not important here. Instead, the commitment problem emerges

                                                 20
from the underlying economics of the interaction between democracy and the military— the
fact that the military, whose main function here is repression, is not needed in democracy.
   A number of other features related to this result are worth noting. First, if (25) is satis…ed,
then transitional democracy may pay even higher wages (and thus make greater concessions) to
the military than an oligarchic regime would (which we will study in the next subsection). This
again re‡ects the commitment problem; because democracy has no use for a large military, it
cannot commit to not reforming it and thus it needs to make greater concessions today in order
to prevent coup attempts. Second, the extent of income inequality in‡uences whether there
will be coup attempts against democracy. In particular, the threshold ^ in (25) depends on
the inequality parameter    via its e¤ects on aL and wM . It can be veri…ed easily that greater
inequality— a higher — increases wM and reduces aL , thus reducing ^ . This makes coups more
likely in more unequal societies. Intuitively, this is because in a more unequal society, V L (D)
is lower, and thus the prospect of becoming a low-skill producer is less attractive for the current
soldiers, who are more tempted to undertake a coup to secure a military dictatorship. The
rents that soldiers can appropriate in the military regime are also greater in a more unequal
society because net output is greater (a smaller fraction of the potential output Y given in (4)
is foregone as a result of the fact that some of the potential producers are joining the army).
We state this result in the next corollary (proof in the text):

Corollary 2 Higher inequality (higher ) reduces ^ and makes coups in transitional democracy
more likely.

   Finally, it is also useful to compute, for future reference, the values to soldiers and the
elite in a transitional democracy. First, the value to soldiers in transitional democracy does
not depend on whether there is coup prevention or not. This is because in both cases soldiers
receive the value of a coup against democracy, either as expected return for undertaking a
coup or as a result of the e¢ ciency wages paid by the democratic government to satisfy their
no-coup constraint. This value is given by

                         V M (T D) =       V M (M ) + (1     ) V L (D) :                      (29)

In contrast, the value to the elite depends on whether          is greater or less than ^ , which
determines whether transitional democracy can prevent coups. When            > ^ , there will be a
coup attempt in transitional democracy and the elite’s value is given by

         V H (T D j coup) = (1      ) 1     TN
                                                 AH +      V H (M ) + (1     ) V H (D) :      (30)

                                                 21
In contrast, when         ^,

                          V H (T D j no coup) = 1      TP
                                                            AH + V H (D) ;                    (31)

where    TN   and   TP   refer to the tax rates de…ned in Proposition 3.

3.5     Values in Oligarchy

We now turn to the analysis of subgames starting with s = E. The key economic insight here
is that unlike democracy, an oligarchic regime may bene…t from having a military used for
repression (thus preventing democratization). Counteracting this is the political moral hazard
problem mentioned in the Introduction, whereby the military may turn against the elite and
try to establish a military dictatorship.
   In oligarchy, the elite have three possible strategies:

  1. choose xt = 0 and allow immediate democratization (recall that x         1   = 0). We denote
      this strategy by S, “smooth transition;”

  2. choose xt = x and allow coups. We denote this strategy by N for “non-prevention;”

  3. choose xt = x and pay high enough military wages to prevent coups. We denote this
      strategy by P for “prevention.”

   The third strategy would not be attractive for the elite if the military chooses not to repress,
since they would obtain no bene…t from having the military and pay both direct (…nancial) costs
and indirect costs (in terms of the risk of a military dictatorship). Lemma 1, which is at the
end of this section, shows that the military always prefers repression, that is,     = 1 whenever
s = E, thus the third strategy for the elite is indeed viable. Throughout this subsection we
make use of the result of this lemma, which will be stated and proved at the end.
   We next compute the values to the elite corresponding to these three strategies. In all
cases, the elite always supply no public good, since this is costly for them in terms of taxes
and they do not obtain any bene…t from public good. Consequently, if they choose the …rst
strategy, that of smooth transition, they will set the lowest possible tax rate (     S   = 0) and
accept the fact that p (D j E) = 1. This will give them a value of

                                    V H (E; S) = AH + V H (D) ;                               (32)

where V H (D) is the value of the high-skill (elite) individuals in consolidated democracy given
by (13).

                                                  22
   The second strategy for the elite, non-prevention, is to create an army, but not to prevent
military coups. In this equilibrium, soldiers attempt a coup against the oligarchic regime and
therefore receive zero wages. Consequently, zero taxes are again feasible and optimal for the
elite, and their value from this strategy can be written as

                  V H (E; N ) = (1        ) AH +        V H (M ) + (1   ) V H (D) ;             (33)

where (1     ) AH is the ‡ow payo¤ to the elite (net of the disruption caused by the coup),
V H (M ), given by (19), is the value to the elite under military dictatorship, which occurs if the
coup attempt by the military is successful (probability ), and …nally V H (D), given by (13),
is the value to the elite in consolidated democracy, which occurs if the coup attempt by the
military fails (probability 1      ). Recall that here we are making use of the assumption that
if a coup attempt against the oligarchic regime fails, this immediately leads to a consolidated
democracy.
   Finally, if the elite set up an army to repress the citizens and also pay the required e¢ ciency
wage to prevent military coups, then their value can be written recursively as

               V H (E; P ) = 1        P
                                          AH +     (1      ) V H (E; P ) + V H (T D) ;          (34)

where V H (T D) is given by (30) or (31) in the previous subsection depending on whether
is greater than or less than ^ . (34) also incorporates that to prevent military coups the elite
have to impose a tax rate of      P   on all incomes (to …nance the military e¢ ciency wage), and
the state of oligarchy with prevention recurs next period with probability 1          , whereas with
probability , repression fails and the political state switches to transitional democracy, giving
the elite the value V H (T D). Rearranging (34), we obtain

                                              1     P     AH +    V H (T D)
                            V H (E; P j ) =                                 ;                   (35)
                                                        1    (1    )

where, for future reference, we have written this value as a function of the probability that
repression fails, , i.e. as V H (E; P j ). The important observation here is that V H (E; P j )
is continuous and strictly decreasing in . The easiest way to see that it is decreasing is from
(34), by noting that V H (E; P j ) = V H (E; P ) > V H (T D).
   To characterize the equilibrium starting in a subgame with s = E, we need to compute the
value of the tax rate   P   necessary to allow for prevention, and then compare the values to the
elite from the three possible strategies outlined above. Let us …rst look at the values to the
military.

                                                   23
      The military has three possible strategies. They decide whether to attempt a coup against
oligarchy and, if they do not undertake a coup, whether or not to repress the citizens. The
participation constraints of soldiers and oligarchy will make sure that the last option is not
chosen. We refer to the military’s strategies as “coup”, “repression” (to denote no coup and
repression), and “non-repression”(to denote no coup and non-repression). Let us …rst consider
the value to the soldiers when they attempt a coup ( = 1). Their value can then be written
as:
                           V M (E j coup) =           V M (M ) + (1         ) V L (D) :                        (36)

This expression incorporates the fact that when they attempt a coup, soldiers will not receive
a wage and that the coup will succeed with probability                  giving them a value of V M (M ) and
fail with probability 1          , in which case the regime will transition to a fully consolidated
democracy with a value of V L (D) for the soldiers.18
      The value to the soldiers when they do not attempt a coup and choose repression (                         =0
and     = 1), satis…es the recursion

            V M (E j repression) = wP +              V M (T D) + (1         ) V M (E j repression) .

This expression re‡ects the fact that soldiers receive the wage wP today because they have
successfully carried out the necessary repression. The continuation value then accounts for the
fact that the same state will recur tomorrow with probability 1                      (i.e., as long as repression
succeeds). If instead repression fails (probability ), they will receive the continuation value of
transitional democracy, V M (T D), given by (29) (recall that this expression applies regardless
of whether      is greater than ^ or not). Solving the recursion above we obtain that
                                                              wP +     V M (T D)
                                V M (E j repression) =                           .                             (37)
                                                                1      (1    )
      The no-coup constraint in oligarchy is therefore

                                   V M (E j repression)        V M (E j coup)                                  (38)

with V M (E j repression) and V M (E j coup) given in (36) and (37).19 The expressions in (37)
   18
      Notice that the value to soldiers from a coup against the oligarchy is the same as the value from transitional
democracy, i.e. V M (E j coup) = V M (T D), since a coup gives them the same value regardless of which regime
it is attempted against. Furthermore, recall also that in the MPE of the subgame beginning in transitional
democracy, soldiers have the same value regardless of whether they attempt a coup (since when a coup is
prevented, the no-coup constraint is binding).
   19
      We can also verify at this point that the participation constraint of soldiers in oligarchy is always satis…ed.
This participation is given by V M (E j repression) V L (E; S), since, in view of Lemma 1, whenever it exists, the
military prefers repression to no repression. Without the military, there will be smooth transition to democracy.
Using the fact that V L (E; S) = AL + V L (D) together with the no-coup constraint (38) and Assumption 1,
ensures that the above inequality and thus the participation constraint is always satis…ed.


                                                         24
and (36) immediately imply that the constraint (38) is equivalent to wP                                wM + (1        ) aL .
The minimum military wage consistent with coup prevention is

                                             wP =        wM +          (1       ) aL :                                 (39)

    To …nance this military wage, the elite will impose a tax rate of                         P,   which must satisfy the
government budget constraint (8), thus

                                        wP x =       P
                                                          C        P
                                                                            Y    xAL :                                 (40)

Combining (40) with (39) and using (16), we …nd that this tax rate is implicitly and uniquely
de…ned by
                           P                                                 aL x              P
                                =       (^    C (^)) +     (1           )         +C               ;                   (41)
                                                                            Y xAL
and moreover      P   2 (0; ^). The uniqueness of                  P    follows from the fact that C ( ) is strictly
convex and satis…es C (0) = 0, and the remaining terms on the right-hand side are strictly
positive. Thus at most one value of              P   can satisfy (41) and moreover, this unique solution is
strictly between 0 and         ^.20
    Di¤erentiation of (41) with respect to                    also establishes that the tax rate             P   is strictly
decreasing in inequality. Therefore, when inequality is greater, a lower tax rate is su¢ cient
for the elite to prevent coup attempts. This result is the outcome of two counteracting e¤ects
of inequality on the no-coup constraint. First, as inequality increases democracy becomes
less attractive for the soldiers because in democracy they will become low-skill producers. A
consolidated democracy is more likely when the military attempts a coup against the oligarchic
regime and thus this “outside option” e¤ect of inequality reduces wP and                               P.   Counteracting
this is the “greed” e¤ect resulting from the fact that as inequality increases, the value to
soldiers in military dictatorship, V M (M ), increases (recall (17)). However, the …scal revenues
collected for any level of            when xt = x are also increasing in                 and in fact proportional to the
e¤ect of inequality on V M (M ). Consequently, the outside option e¤ect always dominates the
greed e¤ect and       P   is decreasing in       (in the extent of inequality).
    Finally, it can be veri…ed that the participation constraint of soldiers in oligarchy is always
satis…ed. This constraint is given by

                           V M (E j repression)           V L (E; S) = AL + V L (D) :                                  (42)
  20
     That P > 0 follows from the fact that C (0) = 0. To establish that P < ^, note from (41) that P is
strictly increasing in and that, by the de…nition of ^,     C ( ) is strictly increasing in for all < ^, and is
maximized at ^. Moreover, when = 1, we have P C P = (^ C (^)), which implies that P < ^ when
  = 1; since P is strictly increasing in , the same conclusion holds for all 2 [0; 1].


                                                              25
The no-coup constraint, (38), implies that V M (E j repression)                V M (E j coup), while As-
sumption 1, combined with (36), implies V M (E j coup)               V L (D), where V L (D) is de…ned in
(14). Since V L (D) > V L (E; S), (42) is always satis…ed.
       We end this subsection by showing that the military never chooses no coup and non-
repression (            = 0 and     = 0) in oligarchy. The remainder of the analysis of equilibrium in
oligarchy is presented in the next subsection in the context of the complete characterization of
the MPE.

Lemma 1 In any MPE starting in a subgame with st = E, the military never chooses                        t   =0
and      t   = 0.

       Proof. The value to the soldiers when they choose not to attempt a coup and not repress,
 t   = 0 and        t   = 0, is V M (E j no repression) = V M (T D), since, without repression, soldiers
receive no wage and the regime in the next period will be transitional democracy where they
receive the value V M (T D) given in (29). When they choose to attempt a coup,                 t   = 1, they
obtain the value V          M   (E j coup) given in (36), and since this value is equal to V   M   (T D) (see
footnote 18), we have that V M (E j coup) > V M (E j no repression). This implies that in
oligarchy there exists a strategy giving the soldiers a strictly higher equilibrium payo¤ than no
coup and non-repression.

3.6          Equilibrium Dynamics

We now combine the results from the previous four subsections, complete the analysis of the
elite’s decisions in oligarchy, and present a full characterization of MPE.
       Two observations facilitate this analysis. First, a direct comparison of V H (E; S) in (32)
and V H (E; N ) in (33) shows that V H (E; S) is always greater, so the elite will never choose
the non-prevention strategy. Thus the choice of the elite in oligarchy boils down to allowing
smooth transition to democracy versus building a strong military and dealing with the political
moral hazard problem by paying the required e¢ ciency wage. Second, whether the elite prefer
smooth transition to repression (with prevention) can be determined in a simple manner. For
this purpose, let us de…ne the threshold ^ 2 [0; 1] as the unique solution between 0 and 1 to

                                         V H (E; S) = V H (E; P j   = ^)                                    (43)

when such a solution, ^ , exists. When a solution exists, it is uniquely de…ned.21 When such a
  21
     As noted above, V H (E; P j ) is strictly decreasing in , whereas V H (E; S) does not depend on . Thus,
if ^ 2 (0; 1), then V H (E; S) S V H (E; P j ) whenever S ^ .


                                                        26
solution to (43) does not exist, then either we have V H (E; S) > V H (E; P j ) for all                    2 [0; 1]
or V H (E; S) < V H (E; P j ) for all               2 [0; 1]. In the former case, we set ^ = 0 and in the
latter case, ^ = 1. These observations enable us to provide a full characterization of MPE.

Proposition 4 Let ^ be de…ned as in (43) and suppose that                    6= ^ . Then, the political game
described above has a unique MPE, where

     1. if       2 [0; ^ ), then whenever s = E the elite build an army for repression (i.e., a = 1), set
             =    P   and w = wP , and prevent military coups. The military chooses               = 0 and     =1
           (no coup and repression). Transitional democracy arises with probability p (T D j E) = ,
           while oligarchy persists with probability p (E j E) = 1        . Proposition 3 characterizes the
           unique MPE of starting in any subgame s = T D, so that we have q (D) = 1 when
             2 [ ; ^ ] and q (D) = 1        and q (M ) =      when   2 (^ ; 1];

     2. if       2 (^ ; 1], the elite do not build an army (i.e., a = 0). Transition to consolidated
           democracy occurs with probability p (D j E) = 1, and in the long run consolidated democ-
           racy obtains with probability q (D) = 1 with allocations as described in Proposition 1.

     Proof. The argument preceding the proposition establishes that the elite never choose non-
prevention, so their choice depends on the comparison of S and P (i.e., between V H (E; S)
and V H (E; P j )). Next, as noted above (recall also footnote 21), V H (E; P j ) de…ned in
(35) is a continuous and strictly decreasing function of               , and V H (E; S) does not depend
on     . Therefore, with the conventions adopted in the de…nition of (43), there exists ^ 2
[0; 1] such that we have V H (E; P j ) R V H (E; S) whenever                      Q ^ (that is, there will be
repression only when              < ^ ). Moreover, ^ 2 (0; 1) if only if V H (E; P j       = 0) > V H (E; S)
and V H (E; P j             = 1) < V H (E; S). The …rst condition is equivalent to            P   <     D.    The
second condition is equivalent to           P   >    V H (T D)   V H (D) =AH (when there is no coup in
the subgame obtaining in state s = T D, this condition is equivalent to                   P   >        D      TP

with       TP    given in Proposition 3). It can also be veri…ed that if V H (E; P j       = 0)       V H (E; S),
i.e., if     P         D,   then V H (E; P j ) < V H (E; S) for any     > 0, which implies that ^ = 0.

Remark 1 When ^ is not interior— i.e., ^ = 0 or ^ = 1— only one of the two parts of
Proposition 4 is relevant. The necessary and su¢ cient conditions that guarantee that ^ is
interior, i.e., ^ 2 (0; 1), are speci…ed in the proof of Proposition 4. It can be veri…ed that
the set of parameters that satis…es both of these conditions is nonempty (for example, both
conditions are satis…ed when AL is su¢ ciently small).

                                                         27
    Note also that the requirement      6= ^ is only introduced to make the statement of the
proposition simpler. When      = ^ , the elite have two best responses, thus the equilibrium is
not unique, but either part of Proposition 4 could apply in this case.

    Proposition 4 shows that the elite will choose to set up an army only when repression is
su¢ ciently e¤ective, i.e.,   < ^ . When this happens, oligarchy will persist, recurring with
probability 1      in each period. Moreover, as long as oligarchy persists, the military receives
high (e¢ ciency) wages so that it aligns itself with the elite. When repression fails (probability
 ), the society becomes a transitional democracy. Proposition 3 then implies that, in this
case, the democratic government pays the cost of the oligarchy having established a powerful
military previously. It either has to make signi…cant concessions to the military or risk a coup
by the military. In contrast, when repression is not very e¤ective, i.e.,   > ^ , the elite do not
…nd it pro…table to set up an army and pay the high wages necessary to co-opt the soldiers.
In this case there is a smooth transition to a consolidated democracy.
    Another important observation follows from the comparison of (32) and (35), which shows
that ^ is increasing in . This implies that repression is more likely in a more unequal society
(proof omitted):

Corollary 3 Higher inequality (higher ) increases ^ and makes repression in oligarchy more
likely.

    Now putting the results of Proposition 3 together with those of Corollaries 1-3, we summa-
rize the e¤ects of inequality on equilibrium political dynamics and economic choices. Corollary
2 shows that greater inequality makes coups against transitional democracy more likely, so that
(conditional on a democratic regime emerging) greater inequality makes military dictatorships
more likely. Moreover, Corollary 3 shows that greater inequality also makes democracy more
costly for the elite and thus encourages repression. Consequently, greater inequality has three
related e¤ects on political dynamics. First, it makes repression and the formation of a large and
powerful military more likely. Second, by encouraging repression, it leads to a longer duration
of oligarchic regimes (rather than a smooth transition to democracy). Third, it makes military
dictatorships more likely both because it leads to the presence of a powerful military in the
early stages of a democratic regime and also because it makes it more di¢ cult for democracy
to convince the military not to undertake a coup. In addition, however, inequality also a¤ects
…scal policies. As noted in Corollary 1, once a fully consolidated democracy emerges, greater
inequality leads to higher taxes and greater public good expenditures. The combination of

                                               28
the e¤ect of inequality on redistribution in consolidated democracy and its e¤ects on regime
dynamics implies a novel pattern for the relationship between inequality, taxes and the compo-
sition of spending. When inequality is low, a consolidated democracy is likely to emerge, and
thus a small increase in inequality starting from a low base leads to higher taxes and greater
public good provision. When inequality increases further, oligarchic repression becomes more
likely. In such an environment, taxes are lower and all tax revenue is spent on the military (and
there is no public good provision). Therefore, the e¤ect of inequality on taxes and public good
provision is nonmonotonic. Furthermore, because greater inequality makes military dictator-
ships more likely, it also increases the likelihood of a regime that will set high taxes and spend
all the proceeds on the military (again with no public good provision). These implications
might account for the lack of a monotonic relationship between inequality and redistribution
across countries (e.g., Perotti, 1996, Bénabou, 2000).


4      Subgame Perfect Equilibria

The analysis so far has focused on Markov Perfect Equilibria, which make strategies depend
only on the payo¤-relevant states. MPE is a natural equilibrium concept since it captures the
political-economic commitment problem that is at the heart of our theory in a simple manner.
Nevertheless, it is useful to know whether implicit promises between social groups that may
be possible in subgame perfect equilibria might prevent some of the ine¢ ciencies of MPE and
lead to signi…cantly di¤erent results. In this section, we brie‡y discuss the Subgame Perfect
Equilibria (SPE) of the above-described political game. Recall that ht;k is the history of play
of the game up to time t and stage k within the stage game. A strategy pro…le for all the
players in the game can be represented by a mapping ~ : H t;k ! [0; 1]         R2+   f0; 1g3 , where
the range of the strategy pro…les again refers to the tax rate       t   2 [0; 1], the military wage
wt 2 R+ , the level of the public good Gt 2 R+ , the decision of whether to create or reform
the military at 2 f0; 1g, and the coup and repression decisions of the military,      t   2 f0; 1g and
 t   2 f0; 1g. A strategy pro…le ~ is a SPE if it is a best response to itself for all ht;k 2 H t;k
(i.e., if it is sequentially rational ).
     The next proposition shows that in our political game the MPE and the SPE coincide, thus
there was no loss of generality in focusing on Markovian equilibria.

Proposition 5 Suppose that            6= ^ . The political game described above has a unique SPE
identical to the MPE described in Proposition 4.


                                                  29
    Proof. First consider some history ht;0 (i.e., at the beginning of the stage game at t) where
st = M . Since military rule is absorbing, it is clear that the unique sequentially rational play
will involve the military maximizing their own utility, thus Proposition 2 applies. Next consider
a similar history where st = D. Now democracy is absorbing and the same argument implies
that the unique sequentially rational play after this history is identical to that described in
Proposition 1. Next consider a similar history with st = T D. Since there are no strategies that
can be used to punish former soldiers in democracy and the continuation play after a successful
coup is already pinned down uniquely, this implies that the unique sequentially rational play
after any history involving st = T D will be the same as that characterized in subsection 3.4,
and in particular, soldiers will undertake a coup if the no-coup constraint, (23) is violated.
Given this behavior, the unique best response of low-skill agents is provided by Proposition
3. Now since sequentially rational play after any history ht;0 involving either of st = M , D
and T D is uniquely pinned down, the behavior after histories where st = E is also unique.
In particular, if the no-coup constraint in this case, (38), is not satis…ed, it is a unique best
response for soldiers to undertake a coup. If it fails, they receive exactly the same value as in
(12), since the regime will be st = D, and if it succeeds, they receive the unique continuation
value associated with subgames that start with st = M . Finally, the value to the elite from S
is also unchanged, which implies that the results of Proposition 4 hold as the unique subgame
perfect equilibrium in this case.


5    Extensions

In this section we provide a number of extensions that are useful to map our theory of military
dictatorships to the data. First, recall that in Proposition 4 military dictatorships only emerge
during transitions to democracy. In practice, there are many cases of military dictatorships
that result from coups against oligarchic regimes, such as those discussed in footnote 6 in the
Introduction. Our …rst extension shows how a slight modi…cation of the baseline framework
leads to coups both against democratic and oligarchic regimes. This possibility is studied
in the next subsection. Second, we introduce rents from natural resources and provide a
number of comparative statics about how natural resource abundance a¤ects regime dynamics.
This extension is empirically relevant because many military dictatorships emerge in resource-
abundant societies and we would like to understand whether the model has clear predictions
about the role of the military in politics when natural resources play a more important role
in the economy. This is investigated in subsection 5.2. Third, we show how incorporating


                                               30
the national defense role of the military a¤ects our results. The key …ndings here is that
when the army has a national defense role, it becomes easier for democracy to commit to not
reforming the military, making transition to democracy easier and more likely. Finally, we
brie‡y illustrate that stronger oligarchic regimes may sometimes choose less repression and
make democracy more likely.
      Throughout the rest of this section we simplify the notation and the analysis by focusing
on MPE and also adopting a simpler form for the tax distortion function C. In particular,
we assume that there exists ^ > 0 (not the same as ^ de…ned in (6)) such that C ( ) = 0 for
all       ^ and C ( ) = 1 for all    > ^. This implies that there are no costs of taxation until
  = ^ and that taxation above ^ is prohibitively costly. Furthermore, we assume the following
restriction on the fundamental parameters of the model

                                           Y > (1 + x) AL :                                  (44)

We maintain these assumptions throughout without stating them explicitly.
      Faced with the new cost schedule for taxation, the elite still prefer zero taxes (except for
paying the military wages when they have to); moreover, by condition (44), both democratic
and military regimes would set taxes equal to ^. Consequently, the value functions now take
simpler forms. For example, the value to the elite in military dictatorship, in consolidated
democracy, and in transitional democracy are
                                                         (1       ^ ) AH
                                 V H (M ) = V H (D) =                      ;                 (45)
                                                              1
and
                                            ) 't + ) (1 ^) AH
                                            ((1
                             V H (T D) =                         :                      (46)
                                                1
The military wage and the instantaneous payo¤s to low-skill producers in consolidated democ-
racy are also modi…ed similarly and become
                                 ^ Y       xAL
                          wM =                    and aL = (1      ^) AL + ^Y:               (47)
                                       x
      Also throughout these extensions, Assumption 1 is in e¤ect and is su¢ cient to ensure that
the participation constraint of soldiers is always satis…ed (except with non-prevention in the
next subsection, which is discussed separately).

5.1     Coups Against Oligarchy

We now modify the basic setup and continue to assume that the absence of a military leads
to a smooth transition to democracy. When instead the oligarchic regime chooses to create a

                                                   31
military, there are two additional states of the world, denoted by the variable                                            2      I ; NI   . In
                                                                                                                       t

state       I,      the elite are insulated from both the threat of a coup and from possible transitions to
democracy. In contrast, in state                    NI ,   both types of transitions away from oligarchy can occur.
In particular, the military can attempt a coup and, if it does not, transition to democracy is
possible and the probability of this event depends on the repression decision of the military
as in the baseline model. The additional state variable                                  t   evolves according to an exogenous
stochastic process, whose realizations are identically and independently distributed over time
with Pr                  =    NI   = . The elite have to decide military wage at time t before the realization
                     t

of    t   and this wage cannot be conditioned on                           t.   We also assume that the soldiers can leave
the military only before the realization of                          t.

     It can be veri…ed that Lemma 1 applies without any change in this modi…ed model. In
particular, in any MPE starting in a subgame with st = E and                                           =       NI ,   the military never
                                                                                                   t

chooses             t    = 0 and    t   = 0.
     As in the baseline model, coups against oligarchy can be prevented only if the appropriate
no-coup constraint is satis…ed. This constraint is binding only when                                           =    NI     because in state
                                                                                                           t

     =     I       the elite are insulated from coups and transitions to democracy and it is still given by
 t

(38), that is, by V M (E j repression)                         V M (E j coup), where V M (E j coup) is still de…ned in
(36) and V M (E j repression) is the value of a soldier when the state variable                                            t   takes the value
 NI       and the military repress. This is a consequence of the fact that coups are only possible
when               =     NI   and conditional on this event, they succeed with probability                             as in the baseline
               t

model. The value of a typical soldier when                                =     NI   and the military repress is
                                                                      t


                              V M (E j repression) = wP +                  V M (T D) + (1          ) V M (E; P )                           (48)

where V M (T D) is still given by (29) and V M (E; P ) is the value of soldiers under prevention
before they know the realization of                       t.   This value is de…ned recursively as

           V M (E; P ) = wP +                  (1        ) V M (E; P ) +              V M (T D) + (1               ) V M (E; P )

and it is therefore given by

                                                                     wP +          V M (T D)
                                               V M (E; P ) =                                 :                                             (49)
                                                                       1         (1      )

Combining (48) and (49), we obtain

                                                    (1          (1         )) wP +   (1           (1           )) V M (T D)
                    V M (E j repression) =                                                                                         :       (50)
                                                                               1   (1            )

                                                                          32
From (50), (36) and the no-coup constraint (38),22 the military wage consistent with coup
prevention has the same expression of the e¢ ciency wage wP necessary to prevent coups
against oligarchy as in the baseline model, (39), with the only di¤erence that, because of the
change in the …scal technology, the expressions for wM and aL are now given by (47). With
these changes, the tax rate for the oligarchy to be able to …nance the military wages necessary
to prevent coups becomes:23

                                           P                              aL x
                                               =      ^+     (1      )         :                                  (51)
                                                                         Y xAL
       The net present discounted value of the elite from prevention, starting with st = E, is
recursively de…ned as

                V H (E; P ) = 1            P
                                                AH +        (1        ) V H (E; P ) +        V H (T D) ;

and can then be rewritten as
                                                       1     P  AH +           V H (T D)
                              V H (E; P ) =                                                                       (52)
                                                              1    (1           )

where V H (T D) is given by (46).
       The net present discounted value of the elite from non-prevention, starting with st = E, is
then given by
                      V H (E; N ) = a
                                    ^H +               (1        ) V H (E; N ) + V H (coup) :

                                  ^H
The …rst term in this expression, a                    (1         ) AH , is the expected ‡ow payo¤ to the elite,
which takes into account that with non-prevention there will be coups when possible and
thus income disruption. The probability that a coup will take place is                             , because a coup
can take place only when               =       NI .   In addition, V H (coup)           (1     ) V H (D) + V H (M )
                                   t

denotes the expected future value to the elite in case there is a coup. From (45), we have that
V H (coup) = (1       ^) AH = (1           ). In addition, with probability (1               ), the elite are insulated
from political change today and the same political state recurs tomorrow, i.e. st+1 = E.
Therefore,
                                                            ^H +
                                                            a            V H (coup)
                                       V H (E; N ) =                                :                             (53)
                                                              1          (1     )
       The following conditions on the set of parameters are useful for the characterization of the
equilibrium of the model.
  22
    Recall that V M (T D) = V M (E j coup) =      V M (M ) + (1     ) V L (D) (see footnote 18 for details).
  23
    The participation constraint of soldiers under prevention is V (E; P ) V L (E; S) and it is always satis…ed.
                                                                  M

This follows by combining the no-coup constraint, (38), V M (E j repression)      V M (E j coup), which implies
wP    (1    ) V M (E j coup), and Assumption 1, which implies that V M (T D) V L (D).


                                                             33
Condition 2          <        ^= ( + ^).

      Condition 2 ensures that the elite strictly prefer non-prevention to smooth transition, that
is, V H (E; N ) > V H (E; S), where V H (E; S) is de…ned in (32), with V H (D) now given by
(45). If this condition did not hold, the elite would prefer S to N for any value of                   (or would
be indi¤erent between them when             = ). This follows since both V           H     (E; N ) and V H (E; S)
are independent of        . Therefore, when Condition 2 fails to hold, the MPE in any subgame
starting in s = E would be identical to that in Proposition 4 in the previous section and would
not feature coups against oligarchy.24
      The participation constraint of soldiers under non-prevention is

                                        V M (E; N )        V L (E; S) ;                                     (54)

where V M (E; N ) is the value of soldiers under non-prevention before the realization of the
variable    t.   This value is de…ned recursively as

                         V M (E; N ) = (1      ) V M (E; N ) + V M (E j coup)

where V M (E j coup) is still de…ned in (36), and it is equal to

                              V M (E; N ) =                       V M (E j coup) :                          (55)
                                              1       (1      )

      Using (55) and V L (E; S) = AL + V L (D) in (54), we obtain that the participation con-
straint of soldiers under non-prevention is satis…ed if and only if the following condition is
satis…ed.

Condition 3
                                    1                 (1     ) AL + a L
                                                                                       :
                                              (wM      aL ) + (1   ) (aL        AL )
      If this condition does not hold, the participation constraint of soldiers under non-prevention
is violated and this means that this strategy is not feasible for the elite. Moreover, notice that
this condition is always satis…ed when            is high enough, and it can be easily veri…ed that the
set of parameters where Conditions 2 and 3 both hold is not empty.
      Let us next de…ne      2 [0; 1] in a similar fashion to ^ in the previous section. In particular,
let    be the solution to the equation

                                   V H (E; P j      = ) = V H (E; N ) ;                                     (56)
   24
      Notice that < 1 and also that, except the simpli…cation in the …scal technology, the baseline framework
is a special case of this extended model with = 1.


                                                      34
when such a solution exists, with the value of prevention for the elite de…ned as in (52).
By the same argument as in the previous section, V H (E; P j ) is strictly decreasing in
and V H (E; N ) is independent of            , so that when a solution              2 (0; 1) to (56) exists, it is
uniquely de…ned and V         H   (E; P j ) ? V      H   (E; N ) for any       7    . When (56) does not have
any solution        2 [0; 1], then we set          = 0 (when V H (E; P j           = 0) < V H (E; N )) or       =1
(V H (E; P j       = 1) > V H (E; N )).
   Finally, notice also that the MPE in transitional democracy is still given by Proposition 3
(again with the only di¤erence that the threshold ^ in (25) now features wM and aL de…ned
by (47)). Using these observations, we obtain:

Proposition 6 Consider the extended model presented in this subsection and suppose that
  6=   , where          is de…ned in Condition 2. If Condition 2 or 3 does not hold, the MPE is
identical to that in Proposition 4. If Conditions 2 and 3 hold and                      6= , where         is de…ned
above, then there exists a unique MPE as follows:

  1. If      2 [0; ), then whenever s = E, the elite build an army for repression (i.e., a = 1),
       set     =    P    and w = wP , and prevent military coups. The military chooses                          = 0
       and      = 1 (no coup and repression). Transitional democracy arises with probability
       p (T D j E) =        , while oligarchy persists with probability p (E j E) = 1               . Proposition
       3 characterizes the unique MPE starting in any subgame s = T D, so that q (D) = 1 when
           2 [ ; ^ ], and q (D) = 1         and q (M ) =        when       2 (^ ; 1].

  2. If      2 ( ; 1], the elite build an army for repression (i.e., a = 1), set                = 0 and w = 0,
       and do not prevent coups. The military chooses                      = 1 (coup) in state      NI .    Military
       dictatorship arises with probability p (M j E) =                , consolidated democracy arises with
       probability p (D j E) =         (1      ), while oligarchy persists with probability p (E j E) =
       1      . Consequently, the long-run likelihood of regimes are given by q (D) = (1                      ) and
       q (M ) = .

   Proof. See the Appendix.

Remark 2 The requirement that                 6=     plays an identical role to the assumption that             6= ^
in Proposition 4 above. When                is equal to      , then the elite will have two best responses,
so that the equilibrium is not unique, but its nature is unchanged from that described in
Proposition 6. Also, the case where V H (E; N j                 = 0) = V H (E; P j        = 0) is not covered in
Propositions 6 since it emerges when               =      = 0; which is ruled out by the restriction           6= .

                                                           35
Finally, the requirement that    6=    rules out the case where the elite obtain the same value
from non-prevention and smooth transition.

    The important additional result in Proposition 6 is that now coups against oligarchy also
arise along the equilibrium path. Previously, the threat of coups against oligarchy a¤ected
the equilibrium allocations, but such coups never took place in equilibrium (and military
dictatorships always emerged from coups against democracy). The introduction of such coups
is important for two reasons. First, coups against oligarchy provide a clearer demonstration of
the political moral hazard problem facing the elite in building a strong army— that the army
can turn against them. Second, the model can now potentially account for why the military
dictatorships we observe in practice have di¤erent origins; some resulting from coups against
democracy, while others are preceded by non-military oligarchy regimes.

5.2    Natural Resources

In this section, we extend the baseline model by assuming that there is a natural resource,
which generates income equal to R       0 in each period. The natural resources are owned by the
elite (high-productivity agents) and all of the natural resource rents initially accrue to them.
Since there are now two sources of income, we allow for two di¤erent …scal instruments; a tax
rate on income at the rate    (with tax distortions speci…ed as in the beginning of this section
with the function C, so that there are no distortions until       = ^) and a tax rate on income from
natural resources    2 [0; 1]. We assume that the taxation of natural resources generates no
distortions. This is reasonable, in view of the fact that natural resources are typically supplied
inelastically.
    The characterization of the MPE is similar to before (in particular, the elite never choose
N since it gives a smaller equilibrium payo¤ than S), and we provide fewer details. The
main observation that simpli…es the analysis is that both a military regime and a democratic
regime will choose    = 1, thus taxing all income from natural resources. Consequently, an
analysis identical to that in Section 3 implies that military wages in a military dictatorship
and instantaneous payo¤s to low-skill agents in democracy are

                                             ^ Y        xAL + R
                                      ~M =
                                      w                         ;                               (57)
                                                        x

and
                                      ~L = (1
                                      a                     ~D;
                                                   ^ ) AL + G                                   (58)



                                                   36
      ~ D = ^Y + R. These expressions exploit the fact that
where G                                                                          = ^ and       = 1, and thus they
incorporate the additional revenues coming from natural resource rents either directly in the
military wage or in the amount of public good provided in democracy.
       Let us start with a subgame where s = T D. An analysis identical to that leading to
Proposition 3 immediately implies that low-skill producers are always better-o¤ by preventing
coups. In fact, now retaining political power has become more valuable because of the addi-
tional source of revenues coming from natural resources. However, natural resources also make
military coups more attractive for the soldiers. In particular, as in Section 3 a military coup
can be prevented only if given the …scal instruments and natural resource rents, democracy
can raise enough revenues to pay soldiers a su¢ cient amount to satisfy the no-coup constraint.
This feasibility constraint now takes the form

                                          wT D x        ^ Y    xAL + R:                                          (59)

In this expression, the revenues include the income raised by taxing production at rate ^ and
from the taxes on natural resource rents at the rate                   = 1. The military wage necessary to
prevent coups is no longer equal to wT P (de…ned as the wage satisfying (23) as equality), but
is instead
                                          ~T P =
                                          w                    ~M
                                                               w      ~L ;
                                                                      a                                          (60)
                                                    1
     ~ M and a
with w       ~L now de…ned by (57) and (58). It is straightforward to verify that w
                                                                                  ~ T P > wT P ,
making coup prevention more di¢ cult. In particular, the combination of (59) and (60) shows
that the prevention of coups is now possible if                satis…es the following condition, which is a
simple generalization of (25),
                                              1           ~M
                                                          w
                                                                      ~ (R) :                                    (61)
                                                        ~M
                                                        w      ~L
                                                               a
With this threshold replacing ^ , Proposition 3 continues to apply.25 The proof of Proposition
7 in the Appendix shows that the threshold ~ (R) is strictly decreasing in R. This is intu-
itive; greater natural resource rents raise the political stakes and make military coups more
attractive for soldiers (and the additional revenue available to democracy is not su¢ cient to
compensate soldiers for the prospect of dividing natural resources among themselves). Con-
sequently, transitional democracy is less likely to consolidate in natural resource abundant
societies.
  25
     It can again be veri…ed that the participation constraint of soldiers is satis…ed in this case as well. In partic-
ular, this constraint in transitional democracy with natural resources is V~ M (T D) V~ L (D), where V~ M (T D) =
V~ M (T D j coup) =      V~ M (M ) + (1      ) V~ L (D), V~ L (D) = a
                                                                    ~L = (1    ) and V~ M (M ) = w  ~ M = (1    ), and
holds under Assumption 1.


                                                          37
    We next turn to subgames starting with s = E. Natural resources will again raise political
stakes, though in this case their e¤ects will be somewhat more complex. Recalling that the
value to the elite in the subgames starting with s = M and s = D are given by (45) above, we
obtain the value to the elite from smooth transition as
                                         (1          ) AH + R=n +          (1    ^ ) AH
                           V~ H (E; S) =                                                  ;                    (62)
                                                            1
which is identical to (32) in Section 3 above, except that the elite enjoy the rents from natural
resources for one period. If, on the other hand, they build a strong army and choose coup
prevention, their value, as a function of                 , will be given by the solution to the following
program

                                                     (1    ~) AH + (1      ) R=n +        V~ H (T D)
               V~ H (E; P j ) =         max                                                            ;       (63)
                                   ~2[0;^]; 2[0;1]                 1       (1    )
subject to the government budget constraint, which written as an equality takes the form

                                       ~ Y      xAL + R = w
                                                          ~ P (R) x:                                           (64)

Expression (63) is obtained from the solution of a recursive equation analogous to (34), but
uses (46) and incorporates the fact that to prevent coups the elite have to pay the now higher
               ~ P (R). This e¢ ciency wage has the same expression as in (39), except that
e¢ ciency wage w
wM and aL are now replaced by their counterparts w
                                                 ~ M and a
                                                         ~L in (57) and (58), so that

                                      ~ P (R) =
                                      w                   ~ M + (1
                                                          w              ~L :
                                                                        )a                                     (65)

                                                                                                                  P
    Let us also denote the tax levels that solve the maximization problem in (63) by ~P and                           .
Comparing the maximized value of this program to (62), we obtain a threshold ~ (R) replacing
^ in Proposition 4. The rest of this proposition continues to apply.26 Consequently, we have
the following characterization of equilibrium in the presence of natural resource rents.

Proposition 7 The extended model with natural resources has a unique MPE, identical to
that in Proposition 4 (except that ~ (R) replaces ^ and ~ (R) replaces ^ ). Moreover:

       a higher level of R makes democratic consolidation starting in state s = T D less likely;

       there exists R > 0 and x
                              ^ > 0, such that an increase in natural resources makes repres-
       sion, starting in state s = E, more likely if x > x
                                                         ^, for any initial R > R .
   26
      The participation constraint of soldiers in oligarchy under prevention is now given by V~ M (E j repression)
V~ L (E; S), where V~ M (E j repression) = V~ M (E j coup), V~ M (E j coup) =     V~ M (M ) + (1      ) V~ L (D), and
V~ L (E; S) = AL + V~ L (D). Assumption 1 again ensures that this constraint is always satis…ed.


                                                           38
       Proof. See the Appendix.
       The new results in this proposition are the comparative statics with respect to the size
of natural resource rents. As already discussed above, greater natural resource abundance
increases the political stakes and makes democratic consolidation more di¢ cult, because the
military has more to gain from taking control and democracy is not always able to compensate
soldiers for forgoing these returns.
       The second part of the proposition shows that greater natural resource abundance also
a¤ects the likelihood of repression in oligarchy. Nevertheless, the e¤ect is, in general, am-
biguous, because of two opposing e¤ects. On the one hand, greater natural resources make
the elite more willing to use repression in order to prevent a transition to democracy again
because of the greater political stakes. On the other hand, natural resources also intensify the
political moral hazard problem because the military, once formed, will have stronger incentives
to undertake a coup. Which e¤ect dominates depends on the size of the army and the size of
natural resource rents. With a larger army, per soldier rents in military dictatorship are lower
and thus when the size of the army is larger than a threshold x
                                                              ^ > 0 and R > R , an increase
in natural resource rents makes repression more likely.27

5.3      National Defense and Democratic Consolidation

The baseline model analyzed in Sections 2 and 3 was simpli…ed by two assumptions; …rstly
and more importantly, the only role of the military was repression in domestic politics; and
secondly, the transitional phase in democracy lasted for one period, i.e., the military could
be reformed after one period. We now relax both of these assumptions. Our substantive
objective is to investigate the impact of international threats and defense role of the military
on democratic politics. We will also use this extension to investigate the claim by O’Donnell
and Schmitter (1986) that a weaker military is always good for democratic consolidation.
       The model is identical to our baseline model in Section 2, except that we are still using the
simpli…ed …scal technology introduced at the beginning of this section, and more substantively,
we assume that there is an international threat (e.g., a threat of invasion from another country).
If the army is present, that is, xt = x, such an invasion is not possible. If, on the other hand,
xt = 0, the invasion would succeed and all agents (including low-skill producers) receive a lower
payo¤ than even in the military dictatorship. This implies that all agents would like to prevent
an invasion if possible. To capture the role of international threats in the simplest possible way,
  27
    Here the threshold R , provided in the Appendix, is such that when R > R , the elite will use both taxes
on production income and natural resource rents to …nance military wages.


                                                    39
we assume that the foreign power posing the threat of invasion may reform its own military
and when this happens, the international threat disappears. We do not model the behavior
of the foreign power explicitly, and instead assume that such reform happens with probability
     2 (0; 1) in each period. Until the foreign threat disappears (due to reform of the foreign
military), a transitional democratic government cannot reform the military. After this threat
disappears, the transitional democratic government will choose to disband the military (since
there is no longer any foreign threat). In this light, the current model is also a generalization
of the baseline setup in Section 2, since reforming the military takes potentially longer than
one period. Finally, returning to the discussion in footnote 3 and to O’Donnell and Schmitter’s
(1986) conjecture,      can be interpreted as another (inverse) measure of the relative strength of
the army, since when        is low, there is greater need for the military because of national defense
purposes and the military is stronger.28
       The analysis of the MPE in this case is very similar to that in Section 2, except that
whether the foreign threat is still active is now an additional state variable. Let us start in a
subgame with s = T D and with the foreign threat active (the analysis of the case where there
is no foreign threat is identical to that in Section 2 and is omitted). The value to the military
from attempting a coup, V M (T D j coup), is still given by (21), whereas the return from not
attempting a coup is

             V M (T D j no coup) = wT P +          (1        ) V M (T D j no coup) + V L (D) ;

where we again use wT P to denote the military wage in transitional democracy when there is
coup prevention. Note, however, that the expression for this wage is no longer the same as in
Section 3 (see below). This value function also takes into account that the same state will recur
with probability 1         (when the foreign threat remains active and there is no opportunity to
reform the military). Rearranging this expression, we obtain

                                                         (1      ) wT P +        aL
                            V M (T D j no coup) =                                    ;
                                                        (1      ) (1    (1        ))

where aL is now de…ned in (47). The expression for wT P in this extended environment can be
obtained by solving the incentive compatibility equation, V M (T D j coup) = V M (T D j no coup),
as
                            1        (1   )             (1      (1       )) (1     )
                   wT P =                      wM +                                      aL ;              (66)
                                 1                                   1
  28
    Naturally, an even starker measure is whether xt = 0 or x, and we have already investigated the implications
of this measure of military strength on democratic consolidation.


                                                        40
where wM is the soldiers’wage in a military dictatorship given by (47).
          As in our analysis in Section 3, transitional democracies will prevent coups if two conditions
are satis…ed: …rst, low-skill producers should prefer to prevent coups; second, they should be
able to pay high enough wages to the military to achieve this. Let us start with the second
requirement. The necessary condition for the transitional democracy to pay high enough wages
to the military again takes the form wT P              wM . Using the expressions for these two wage
levels, the condition for the prevention of coups in transitional democracy can be written as
                                       (1     ) wM      (1   ) aL
                                                                           ^( ):                             (67)
                                         (1     (1     )) (wM aL )
          Condition (67) is generalization of condition (25) and shows that transitional democracies
can prevent coups as long as the probability that coup attempts will be successful is not too
high. Moreover, it can be veri…ed that ^ ( ) is a strictly decreasing function of                and that ^ ( )
! ^ as          ! 1. This implies the interesting result that condition (67) becomes more di¢ cult
to satisfy as        increases (in the limit as    ! 1, this condition coincides with (25)).
          We next verify that low-skill producers prefer to prevent coups when this is feasible. If
they prevent coups, their value in transitional democracy is

            V L (T D j no coup) = (1     ^) AL + GT P +       (1     ) V L (T D; P ) + V L (D) ;             (68)

where V L (T D; P ) = V L (T D j no coup) and GT P = ^ Y                   xAL       wT P x incorporates the
fact that taxes will be equal to ^ (given the tax distortion technology adopted at the beginning
of this section), and whatever is left over from paying soldiers the e¢ ciency wage goes into
public good expenditures.29 Alternatively, without prevention, the value to low-skill producers
is

            V L (T D j coup) = (1   ^) (1     ) AL + G T N +        V L (M ) + (1        ) V L (D) ;         (69)

where GT N            ^ (1    ) Y      xAL , since in this case zero wages are paid to soldiers (i.e.,
wT N = 0). This expression also takes into account that, as before, when a coup attempt fails,
there is an immediate transition to fully consolidated democracy.
          The comparison of V L (T D j no coup) and V L (T D j coup) shows that the low-skill pro-
ducers are better-o¤ preventing military coups by o¤ering a wage to the army equal to wT P
if and only if               , where      2 [0; 1) and is de…ned in the proof of Proposition 8 in the
Appendix. The next proposition states the main result of this subsection.30
     29
     The hypothesis that coup prevention is possible, that is, wT P   wM , ensures that GT P     0.
     30
     It is again straightforward to verify that Assumption 1 ensures that the military participation constraint is
satis…ed.


                                                       41
Proposition 8 In any subgame beginning with s = T D, there exists          2 [0; 1) and a unique
MPE such that the transitional democratic government prevents coup attempts if and only if
      ^ ( ) and        .

   Proof. See the Appendix.
   This proposition has two interesting implications, both following from the fact that ^ ( ) is
decreasing in     (which implies that transitional democracy is more likely to prevent coups and
consolidate when      is low). The …rst and more important implication is that when there is a
stronger foreign threat and thus a more important role of the army in national defense, which
here corresponds to lower , democratic consolidation is more likely. This is intimately related
to the key economic force emphasized in this paper: when the army has an important national
defense role, it is less threatened by reform in transitional democracy and this translates
into more credible commitments by transitional democracy to compensate soldiers for not
undertaking a coup. In contrast, when         is close to 1 (meaning that there are no serious
foreign threats and no important role of the army in national defense), concessions by the
transitional democratic regime are not credible for the military because they foresee imminent
reform and are more willing to attempt coups. This result therefore highlights a new and
potentially important interaction between international and domestic politics.
   The second implication of Proposition 8 is that, somewhat paradoxically, the model sug-
gests that over a certain range, democratic consolidation may be more likely when the military
is stronger (since a lower    corresponds to a stronger military). Therefore, the logic of com-
mitment emphasized by our approach shows that O’Donnell and Schmitter’s (1986) conjecture
about stronger militaries always making the survival of transitional democracies less likely
need not be true. Note that a version of this conjecture was true in our baseline model, when
comparing xt = 0 to xt = x. However, our extended model here shows why this conjecture
may not capture the complete set of interactions between the strength of the military and
transitional democracies because commitments to a strong military are more credible.

5.4    Persistence in Oligarchy

Finally, we can also incorporate persistence in oligarchy into the baseline model. The sub-
stantive purpose of this exercise is to see whether better organized democratic movements (or
conversely less strong oligarchies) are always likely to lead to more rapid democratization. Our
main result in this section shows why this may not be the case.
   Suppose that in the absence of repression, oligarchy persists with probability      2 (0; 1).

                                                42
If, instead, there is repression and it fails, democratization happens only with probability
(1       )   < . Thus, in this extension            represents a direct measure of the degree of consoli-
dation of the power of the elite in oligarchy. The analysis of the interactions between the elite
and the military in oligarchy are similar to our analysis in Section 3. Brie‡y, the value to be
an elite agent from smooth transition can be computed using the expressions in (46) as

                                           (1       ) AH + (1           ) (1      ^ ) AH
                           V H (E; S) =                                                    ;                    (70)
                                                       (1  ) (1            )

and the value from prevention, as a function of , is

                                                1    P     AH +      (1         ) V H (T D)
                        V H (E; P j ) =                                                     .                   (71)
                                                         1    (1      (1          ))

A similar analysis again shows that non-prevention is dominated by smooth transition (in
fact, the persistence of oligarchy without repression makes smooth transition more desirable
for the elite relative to non-prevention). Consequently, we immediately obtain the analog of
Proposition 4: the elite choose prevention if             is below some threshold              and smooth transition
otherwise, and it is straightforward to verify that                2 (0; 1). The main new result, described
in the next proposition, concerns the comparative statics of regime transitions with respect to
the persistence parameter .

Proposition 9 Let          be de…ned by V H (E; S) = V H (E; P j ). If no coups take place in the
subgame beginning in state s = T D, then                 is strictly decreasing in         . If coups take place in
the subgame beginning in state s = T D, then                is strictly decreasing in           for any   <    , and
     is strictly increasing in   for any        >    , where        2 (0; 1].

      Proof. See the Appendix.
      Proposition 9 implies that the elite are less likely to choose repression when their power is
more consolidated (greater ) under two related conditions: …rst, when coups do not happen
in transitional democracy; second, when coups take place in transitional democracy but they
do not cause too much income disruption ( small). This result is intuitive; as                            increases,
both the value to the elite from smooth transition and from prevention increase. Whether
the threshold       increases (and thus whether repression becomes more likely) depends on two
opposing forces. Whether coups take place in transitional democracy and what their costs for
the elite are ( ) determine the balance of these two forces. When coups do not take place, then
they are more likely to choose repression when their power is less consolidated (corresponding
to a lower value of ). When coups are possible after democratization, then the trade-o¤ for the

                                                          43
elite depends on how disruptive these coups are. When they are not very disruptive ( <           ),
then a lower   (less consolidation of elite power in oligarchy) encourages repression. However,
when coups are highly disruptive ( >       ), then a lower   makes transitional democracy more
likely after repression and the elite prefer smooth transition in order to avoid the potential
costs of coups in the future.
    The substantive implication of Proposition 9 is that, somewhat paradoxically, democratic
regimes are not necessarily more likely to emerge in societies where the citizens are better
organized politically and the oligarchy is weaker. In particular, a lower value of    in this model
corresponds to a weaker oligarchy (and thus to a stronger democratic movement). Proposition
9 shows that smooth transition to democracy may be more likely when                  is high, which
corresponds to societies where the democratic movement is weak and the power of the elite is
su¢ ciently consolidated, so that they feel less need to create an army for additional repression.


6     The Role of the Military in Recent History

In this section we brie‡y discuss a number of salient cases of military dictatorships to provide
empirical context for our theory. We …rst contrast the role played by the military in various
Central American nations. This highlights both how economic inequality a¤ects regime dy-
namics and the role that the military plays in politics. At the end of this section, we provide
a brief discussion of the impact of natural resource rents on the behavior of the military.

6.1   Military and Democracy in Central America

The case of Central America, and of Costa Rica in particular, provides an interesting illustra-
tion of the ideas emphasized by our theory. This case both highlights the role of the military
in explaining regime dynamics and also shows how the initial distribution of income a¤ects the
subsequent evolution of political institutions.
    Among Latin American countries, Costa Rica stands virtually alone for the very limited
role played by the army in politics, since the country gained independence in 1821 (e.g., Yashar,
1997). During the 19th century, Costa Rica did not experience predatory caudillos (who were
typically in‡uential in the political and economic life in much of the rest of Latin America).
Between 1891 and 1948, there was a single coup in Costa Rica, followed by a brief dictatorship.
After this episode, in 1949, the Costa Rican military was demobilized and essentially disbanded.
    The relative absence of external and internal con‡icts during the history of Costa Rica is
a major factor in the limited role that the military has played in this country’s politics. Even


                                                  44
before its demobilization, the Costa Rican army was small and weak, and did not possess
the professional traditions and strength typical of many other South American militaries. A
key factor that has led to the presence of a weak military in Costa Rica is that historically
social con‡icts in this country have been relatively limited. This is because of a combinations
of factors, including the structure of the economy consisting of many small landholders; the
absence of a large indigenous population at the time of colonization, which prevented the
Spaniards from setting up major plantations in this area; the poor endowment of natural
resources such as gold; and the high agricultural wages resulting from the scarcity of labor
due to the absence of a large (indigenous) population. Moreover, the relative homogeneity of
Costa Rica’s society appears to be an important reason why Costa Rican ruling elites have
shown limited interest in the creation of a large and powerful military.31 The tradition of low
militarization of Costa Rica culminated with the formal demobilization of the armed forces
in 1949, after these were decimated during a short civil war.32 This decision has not been
reversed ever since.
       Consistent with the predictions of our model, the demobilization of the Costa Rican army
appears to have contributed signi…cantly to the stability of its nascent democratic institutions.
Consequently, Costa Rica has become the most stable democratic country in Latin America.
This is in part because of the absence of the military necessary for the formation of an e¤ective
“coup threat,” perhaps in coalition with the economic elites.33 Roquié (1987 p. 192), for
example, relates the success of Costa Rican democracy directly to the absence of a military
and writes: “No doubt because it corresponded to deeper motivations linked to the social
equilibrium of the Costa Rican nation, a nonmilitary state has become today one of the bases
of its democratic consensus.”
       The successful democratic consolidation of Costa Rica since the mid-twentieth century
  31
      For instance, describing the economic and institutional reforms promoted during the “liberal” era (the
period of Latin American history roughly going from 1870 to 1930, following the phase of caudillo politics),
Mahoney (2001 p. 266) writes that, “In Costa Rica, where the reform period was launched at the time of
independence, liberals were not faced with the kinds of political threats that led reformers elsewhere to build
large standing armies...The pattern of reformist liberalism that had developed by the early twentieth century
saw neither the creation of a powerful military coercive branch that commanded a prominent position in the
state nor an associated rural economy marked by polarized class structures and a high potential for lower-class
agrarian revolts.”
   32
      The economic elite did oppose the abolition of the armed forces, but they were overruled.
   33
      As emphasized in Bowman (2004), the abolition of the army in Costa Rica has helped to stabilize democratic
institutions not only directly, but also indirectly, by allowing the government to spend more in welfare and
public education. Indeed, the broad programs of income redistribution and of provision of goods and services
implemented by the National Liberation Party (the preeminent party in Costa Rican politics in the second half
of the 20th century) have further alleviated income inequality over time, and thereby reduced the scope of social
and political con‡icts.



                                                       45
stands in contrast to the di¤erent political development paths pursued by other Central Amer-
ican nations. For example, highly repressive military dictatorships were established in the
1950s both in Guatemala and in El Salvador. These regimes persisted until the 1980s. In
Honduras and Nicaragua, instead, traditional oligarchic regimes led by the civilian elite, but
supported by a signi…cant military element, emerged during this time period.
       Consistent with our model, in both Guatemala and El Salvador power militaries, initially
created by the elite in order to ensure the repression of the lower strata in these highly polarized
societies, later became strong enough to seize power and establish their own dictatorships.34
These military regimes lasted for extended periods of time in both countries and were highly
authoritarian and autonomous. Their policies also led to the reproduction, or even the ampli-
…cation, of the high income inequality present in these societies at the time of the coups.35
       Honduras and Nicaragua have also been ruled by nondemocratic governments through-
out the 20th century. However, in contrast to the military dictatorships in El Salvador and
Guatemala, these were personalistic or oligarchic regimes, in which the military, though actively
involved in repression, did not have autonomous power. In fact, the survival of nondemocratic
regimes in Honduras and Nicaragua depended more on the distribution of political patronage
through the expansion of state bureaucracy rather than the harsh repression of opponents and
“state terror,” which have been part of the experience in Guatemala and in El Salvador over
the same period.36
       The di¤erent path of political development that Honduras and Nicaragua followed since
1930s (relative to Guatemala and El Salvador) may be traced back to the economic and insti-
tutional evolution of the two countries since the previous period of liberal reforms. Whereas
  34
      In Guatemala, the liberal era started in 1871 with the triumph of General Justo Ru…no Barrios, and was
characterized by a further increment of the concentration of land ownership (also through a new major wave
of expropriation of communal lands cultivated by the indigenous population). “Except for a brief democratic
interlude in the early 1920s, Liberal military dictators ruled with an iron hand on behalf of the co¤ee oligarchy
and foreign investors for over seventy years,” (Vanden and Prevost, 2002 pp. 255-256).
   35
      An indication of the di¤erences in the underlying socioeconomic conditions is provided by the average
number of economically active individuals in the agricultural sector relative to the number of farms around
1950 (see Needler, 1987, Table 5, p. 98). This ratio was 10.9 in Costa Rica, 38.2 in El Salvador and 48.1 in
Guatemala. This comparison therefore suggests a much more equal distribution of income in the agricultural
sector in Costa Rica than in El Salvador and Guatemala.
   36
      Overall, there was some variation in the military policies implemented in Honduras and Nicaragua. It
is possible that this variation might have contributed to the di¤erent timing of democratization in these two
countries. In Honduras, the army was not a bastion of support of the Carías regime, and militarization in
Honduras remained very limited until the late 1950s. In contrast, in Nicaragua the Somoza regime promoted
the development of the National Guard as an important pillar of its control over the society. Consequently,
though a typical oligarchic regime, Nicaragua was signi…cantly more militarized than Honduras. Nonetheless,
the army in Nicaragua did not develop into an autonomous institution, but rather into “a separate military
casta, loyal only to their own leader, not to the nation as a whole,” (Millet, 1977 p. 198).



                                                       46
in Guatemala and in El Salvador, o¢ cers had both the political incentives and the institu-
tional capacity to attempt coups and to setup their own rule, in Honduras and Nicaragua a
structural basis for military authoritarianism was lacking. Indeed, while the liberal period
saw a further entrenchment of the co¤ee elites, as well as the creation of powerful militaries
capable of independent political action in Guatemala and in El Salvador, in both Honduras
and Nicaragua the liberal era left behind a relatively weak agrarian class and a military that
was largely controlled by the ruling elite or dictator (for example, as in the case of the National
Guard of the Somoza García regime in Nicaragua).37

6.2    Natural Resources and Military Dictatorships

Our model’s predictions on the role of the military in natural resource abundant societies is also
broadly consistent with the historical evidence. In her authoritative work on natural resource
booms, Karl (1997) argues that the two oil price hikes in the early 1970s and 1980s exacer-
bated political instability and regime transitions toward more repressive forms of government
in many “petro-states,” in particular, in Iran, Nigeria, Venezuela and Algeria. Nigeria, for
example, experienced growing economic and ethnic tensions after the oil price increases and
witnessed the reemergence of military rule in 1983. This was followed by a new transition
to a fragile democracy between 1986 and 1991, but was again interrupted by a military coup
in 1993. Algeria experienced a severe crisis in the early 1990s, which lead to the assassina-
tion of the president, Mohammed Boudiaf, to the cancellation of elections, and to frequent
switches between military rule and weak civilian rule. Further evidence that oil and abun-
dant endowments of other natural resources may adversely a¤ect democratic consolidation is
o¤ered by the empirical evidence presented in Ross (2001), and by Jensen and Wantchekon
(2004). In particular, Ross (2001) presents evidence consistent with the notion that increases
in natural resource rents lead to increased repressive e¤orts by nondemocratic governments
in order to prevent or delay democratization. Jensen and Wantchekon (2004) show that in
African countries, the abundance of natural resources tends to make both the transition to,
and the consolidation of, democracy less likely. In fact, many of the more successful examples
of democratic transitions in sub-Saharan Africa are by relatively natural resource poor na-
  37
     While, during the liberal period, the Zelaya autocracy had implemented economic and institutional reforms
setting Nicaragua on a development path similar to that of Guatemala and El Salvador, things changed abruptly
in 1909, following a US intervention which lead to the creation of an informal protectorate. After the fall of
Zelaya’s regime, the conservative elite, which took over power relying on the support of US Marines for security,
showed little interest in preserving the coercive apparatus created by the previous regime. The Nicaraguan
army was eventually disbanded, putting an end the militarization e¤ort of Zelaya.



                                                       47
tions such as Benin, Madagascar and Mali. Instead, natural resource abundant countries have
experienced greater political turmoil and have not been successful in establishing democratic
regimes. Examples include Gabon, Cameroon, Togo, Zambia, Algeria, Nigeria, Congo and
Sierra Leone.
    Naturally, there are exceptions to this pattern. Botswana, which is a natural resource
abundant country, has been the most successful democracy in sub-Saharan Africa. The oil
boom was also signi…cant for Norway, but does not seem to have led to any military action
or nondemocratic movements in this country. This likely re‡ects the fact that there is a
major interaction between the strength of underlying institutions and the e¤ect of natural
resources. Botswana had one of the most participatory indigenous institutions in Africa and
a very successful transition to democracy before diamonds were discovered (see Acemoglu,
Johnson and Robinson, 2003). Norway is clearly a very strong, consolidated democracy. In
such societies, greater natural resource wealth increases the income of the citizens, relaxes the
government budget constraint, and may contribute to more productive spending.38 This is
also consistent with the prediction of our model regarding the e¤ect of a positive shock to R
in consolidated democracy, which increases the level of public good provision without a¤ecting
political institutions.


7      Concluding Remarks

In this paper, we presented the …rst analysis of the emergence of military dictatorships and
the conditions under which the military will act as an e¤ective agent of the elite (as opposed
to acting in its own interests and against those of the elite). These questions are relevant
for research in political economy for a number of reasons. First, most nondemocratic regimes
survive with signi…cant support from the military, so understanding the objectives of the
military is important in the study of political transitions. Second, many nondemocracies in
practice are military regimes, and we need to understand whether military dictatorships emerge
and persist for di¤erent reasons than oligarchic regimes and what their economic consequences
are.
    An investigation of these questions necessitates a model in which the military consists of
a set of individuals who act in their own interests (though they can be convinced to align
themselves with the elite if this is consistent with their interests). We introduced this feature
  38
     See Ross (2001 pp. 343-344) for more evidence that major oil discoveries have not had discernible adverse
e¤ects on democracy in such countries as Norway, Britain and the US. See also Mehlum, Moene and Torvik
(2006) for evidence of a signi…cant interaction between institutions and natural resources in growth regressions.


                                                       48
by assuming that the means of violence in the society are in the monopoly of the military, and
if the elite decide to form a strong military, then they have to live with the political moral
hazard problem that this causes. In particular, a strong military may not simply work as an
agent of the elite, but may instead turn against them in order to create a regime more in line
with their own objectives. One immediate implication of the political moral hazard problem
is that the cost of using repression in nondemocratic regimes is now higher, because the elite
need to pay “e¢ ciency wages” to soldiers to prevent coups (or make other social or policy
concessions to the military).
   An important consequence of the presence of a strong military is that once transition
to democracy takes place, the military poses a coup threat against the nascent democratic
regime until it is reformed. Precisely, the anticipation that the military will be reformed in the
future acts as an additional motivation for the military to undertake coups against democratic
governments. Consequently, societies where the elite form a strong military in order to prevent
democratization are more likely to later lapse into military dictatorships because the military
retains some of its power during transitional democracy and can attempt a successful coup
against democracy. This leads to a speci…c (and to the best of our knowledge, novel) channel
for the emergence of military dictatorships, which appears to be consistent with the historical
evidence. It also highlights how repression during a nondemocratic era can have important
e¤ects on the economic and political success of a later democratic regime.
   Our analysis also showed how, under certain circumstances, military coups against nonde-
mocratic elites are also possible, thus creating another channel for the emergence of military
dictatorships. In light of these results, one might wish to distinguish between three di¤erent
types of nondemocratic regimes. The …rst is oligarchies where the rich elite are in power and
the military acts as an agent of the elite. This type of regime emerges endogenously in our
model depending on the technology and the incentives of the elite. The second is a military
dictatorship that emerges as a result of a coup against a democratic regime. The examples
from Central America discussed in Section 6 ensure the relevance of this type of military dicta-
torships. The third is a military dictatorship that results from coups against oligarchic regimes.
The examples of this type of military dictatorship were also discussed in the Introduction.
   Our model also provides a range of comparative statics about when such dictatorships are
more likely. In particular, we show that greater inequality makes the use of the military in
nondemocratic regimes more likely and also makes it more di¢ cult for democracies to prevent
military coups. Both of these e¤ects make military regimes following brief democratic episodes


                                               49
more likely. In addition, greater inequality also makes it more likely that nondemocratic
regimes are unable to solve the political moral hazard problem and thus creates another channel
for the emergence of military dictatorships. We also show that greater natural resource rents
make military coups against (unconsolidated) democracies more likely and have ambiguous
e¤ects on the political equilibrium in nondemocracies, which become more valuable for the
elite, but also more expensive to maintain because of the more severe political moral hazard
problem resulting from the high natural resource rents. More importantly, the model also
implies that democratic consolidation is more likely when there is a potential foreign threat,
making the military necessary for national defense. This is a new and interesting link between
international politics and domestic politics. The logic of the result is very related to the main
economic force in our model; when there is an international threat, concessions from democratic
regimes to the military become more credible, because democracy also needs the military.
   We view our paper as a …rst step in the study of military dictatorships and the political
agency problems that are ubiquitous between branches of the state that control the means
of violence and the economic elite, especially in nondemocracies. Many topics in this broad
area deserve further study. First, a systematic empirical analysis of policy and economic
performance di¤erences between di¤erent types of nondemocratic regimes is necessary. Second,
the current framework can be extended so that an alliance between the military and the elite
can be formed during democratic periods as well. Finally, the current framework already
highlighted the important interactions between international and domestic politics. However,
we did not endogenize the political economy equilibrium in other countries. A fruitful area for
future research appears to be the international relations aspects of the interactions between
the military and democratic regimes. In particular, it would be interesting to investigate how
military or democratic reforms in one country a¤ect politics in other countries.




                                               50
Appendix
7.1    Proof of Proposition 3

By Assumption 1,            . If   > ^ , then the feasibility constraint, (24), is necessarily violated
and there will be a coup attempt in equilibrium (                      = 1). Thus we only have to show that
when    2 [ ; ^ ], (28) is satis…ed.
   When transitional democracy chooses prevention, then st+1 = D and thus the soldiers
must be paid wT P that satis…es (23) as equality. Thus the only relevant decisions concern the
choice of   TP   and GT P , which can be determined as the solution to the following maximization
program

                            uL (T D j no coup)                 max          (1        ) AL + G                   (72)
                                                          2[0;1];G2R+

                            subject to G        (        C ( )) Y           xAL         wT P x:

Next, using the expressions (16) and (23), wT P can be written as
                                      "                              #
                         TP             (^ C (^)) Y xAL            L
                       w    =                                     a :                                            (73)
                               1                  x

Provided that the solution to (72) involves GT P > 0, taxes are set at the level                         TP    de…ned
implicitly by the …rst-order condition of the program, which implies

                                    AL = 1          C0 ( )         Y    xAL ;                                    (74)

and moreover the utility of low-skill producers during the transitional period will be

                             TP
                        1          AL +     TP
                                                     C        TP
                                                                       Y        xAL      wT P x:

If, on the other hand, the solution to (72) involves GT P = 0, then taxes are determined by the
government budget constraint (8) as

                                       TP        wT P x                    TP
                                            =           +C                       ;                               (75)
                                                Y xAL

and the utility of low-skill producers in the transitional period will be 1                        TP   AL .
   If, instead, coups are not prevented, the tax rate and the level of public good provision are
chosen to maximize the utility of a representative low-skill producer in the transitional period,
with no additional constraint, but taking into account the output disruption caused by the



                                                         51
coup, which will be forthcoming in this case. In particular, the tax                               TN   and the level of public
good provision GT N in question, are the solution to the maximization program

                                 uL (T D j coup)                 max        (1      ) (1        ) AL + G                    (76)
                                                            2[0;1];G2R+

                                 subject to G          (1     )(       C ( )) Y              xAL :

The low-skill producers bene…t from prevention when V L (T D j no coup)                                         V L (T D j coup),
where V L (T D j no coup) = uL (T D j no coup)+ V L (D) and V L (T D j coup) = uL (T D j coup)+
      V L (M ) + (1          ) V L (D) as given by (26) and (27) above. Rearranging these expressions,
we can write the condition for prevention to be preferred, when GT P > 0, as

                                            TP
                   (1        )        1           AL +      TP
                                                                   C    TP
                                                                                    Y        xAL        (1      ) wT P x    (77)
                   (1        ) uL (T D j coup)                   aL    (1        ^ ) AL :

     Now the result follows from three observations. First, from (73), (1                                    ) wT P is linear and
increasing in . This observation, and the facts that uL (T D j coup) does not depend on ,
and that      TP   does not depend on                  when GT P > 0, imply that both the right-hand-side and
the left-hand-side of (77) are strictly decreasing linear functions of                               : Therefore, there is at
                                 0
most one value of ,                  , such that the left- and the right-hand sides are equal. Second, (77) is
satis…ed at        = 1, since in this case this condition can be written as

                        (^       C (^)) Y         (^     C (^)) xAL         aL x        aL    (1     ^ ) AL ;

where (^       C (^)) Y              aL    (1    ^) AL . Third, condition (77) also holds when                     = 0, because
in this case wT P = 0 and thus prevention is for free. These observations imply that there exists
      0
no        2
          = [0; 1] such that the right-hand-side and the left-hand-side of (77) are equal, thus this
condition is always satis…ed and we have V L (T D j no coup) > V L (T D j coup) for any value of
    2 [0; 1]. This establishes that, if GT P > 0, coup prevention is always better for transitional
democracy.
     We next consider the case where GT P = 0. It is straightforward to show that this case
applies when        2[       ; 1], where          is de…ned as the minimum value of                  such that the constraint
G     0 in problem (72) is binding (this constraint is implicit in G 2 R+ ). Observe that wT P is
a strictly increasing function of                 and the tax rate de…ned by (74) does not depend on , hence
the constraint G             0 is slack for                 and binds for           >         . The equivalent of condition
(77) in this case can be rewritten as

                        TP
                             AL           AL     uL (T D j coup) +                      aL    (1     ^) AL .                (78)
                                                                       1

                                                                 52
We now show that (78) holds for any                 in the range [    ; 1]. Note that the last term on the
right-hand side is positive by the de…nition of aL in (14) and AL                         uL (T D j coup) does not
depend on . Therefore, the right-hand side is linear (increasing) in b                           = (1     ), whereas
from (75) and (73)         TP   is a strictly convex function of b. Clearly, condition (78) holds as
     ! 1. Moreover, since the payo¤ to the citizens is a continuous function of                         over [0; 1] by
Berge’s Maximum Theorem (e.g. Stokey, Lucas and Prescott, 1989 Chapter 3), condition (77)
also holds at     , where the set of active constraints in program (72) changes. Finally, observe
that if a convex function is less than a linear function at two end points of an interval in the
extended real line, b            = (1      ) and b1        1, then it is also less than the same function
at any b 2 (b   ; b1 ).   This establishes that (78) also holds for any              2[      ; 1] and completes the
proof.

7.2      Proof of Proposition 6

First, note that, because both V H (E; S) and V H (E; N ), given in (32) and in (53) respectively,
are independent of , either V H (E; S) > V H (E; N ) or V H (E; S) < V H (E; N ) for any value
of     (the case where V H (E; S) = V H (E; N ) is ruled out by the assumption that                          6= ). If
Condition 2 does not hold, then V H (E; S) > V H (E; N ) and non-prevention is never chosen
by the elite. In this case, the equilibrium is the same as in Proposition 4. When Condition 3
does not hold, the participation constraint of soldiers under non-prevention cannot be satis…ed,
thus this strategy is not feasible and again the equilibrium from Proposition 4 applies.
      Let us then focus on the case where both Conditions 2 and 3 hold. In this case, V H (E; S) <
V H (E; N ) and non-prevention is feasible and preferred by the elite to smooth transition. By
the argument in the text and the de…nition of , we have that V H (E; P j ) ? V H (E; N ) for
any      7 , which establishes the result.

7.3      Proof of Proposition 7

We begin by showing that the threshold ~ (R) de…ned in (61) is strictly decreasing in R.
Straightforward di¤erentiation of ~ (R) gives

                                                    1         ~M
                                                             xw      ~L
                                                                     a
                                        ~ 0 (R) =                            ;
                                                              ~M
                                                           x (w      ~L )2
                                                                     a

      ~ M and a
where w       ~L are de…ned in (57) and in (58). Next, observe that taking into account the
expressions of wM and aL de…ned in (47), we obtain

                           ~M
                          xw       ~L = xwM
                                   a                aL =     ^xAL     (1         ^ ) AL     0:

                                                        53
Therefore, ~ 0 (R)   0, with equality if and only if AL = 0.
   Next consider the decision of the elite. First, de…ne R as the level of natural resources
such that
                                          ~ P (R ) x = ^ Y
                                          w                       xAL :                                             (79)

In other words, R is the level of natural resources such that when R = R , total military
wages necessary for coup prevention can be …nanced by taxing production income only at the
                                             ~ M and a
maximum possible rate ^. By substituting for w       ~L in (65), we obtain
                                                              + (1        )x
                                  ~ P (R) = wP +
                                  w                                            R.                                   (80)
                                                                  x
Combining this expression with (79), we have

                                                         wM wP
                                          R =x                      .                                               (81)
                                                        ( + (1 ) x)
Claim 1 Suppose that R is given by (81) and R > R . Then in any MPE with coup pre-
                                                    P
vention, the elite set ~P = ^ and choose                  0 to balance the government budget constraint,
which implies
                                  P                                  wM        wP
                                      =      ( + (1       ) x)   x                  :                               (82)
                                                                          R
   Proof. The expression of the government budget constraint provided by (64) implies that

                                                    ~ P (R) x
                                                    w           R
                                             ~P =             L
                                                                  :
                                                      (Y xA )
Using this expression, the per period utility of the elite in oligarchy can be written as

                                      ~ P (R) x
                                      w         R
                              1                               AH + (1          ) R=n.
                                         Y xAL

This expression is everywhere decreasing in              provided that nAH + xAL < Y , which is always
the case, since x < (1    n) by assumption, and since Y                    nAH + (1              n) AL . Therefore, ~P
will be set at the maximum possible level ^, and              will be determined to satisfy the government
                              P
budget constraint, that is,       as given in (82).
                                                                      P
   Using the fact that in equilibrium ~P = ^, and that                    is given by (82), we have that (63)
can be written as
                         (1           ) (1     ^ ) AH + 1     P
                                                                R=n + (1                         ) V~ H (T D)
        V~ H (E; P j ) =                                                                                        :
                                                     (1   ) (1   (1  ))
We also have
                                     (1             ) AH + R=n +           (1       ^ ) AH
                       V~ H (E; S) =                                                         :
                                                           1

                                                         54
Moreover, using (62), the threshold ~ (R) at which V~ H (E; S) = V~ H (E; P j ) is given by
                                                                    P
                                             1           1                  R=n                   (1       ^ ) AH
                             ~ (R) =                                                                                ;
                                                                              (1         ) V~ H (T D)
                                                                                                              P
where        (1        ) AH + R=n + (1                           ^) AH . Now since @                   1            R =@R = 1              ( + (1          ) x),
we have
                                                                                                   h                                i
                             1          [1        ( + (1                    ) x)    (1        )]        (1              ) V~ H (T D)
            ~ 0 (R) =                                                   h                                i2
                                                                   n               (1        ) V~ H (T D)
                                                         P
                                 1           1                   R=n                    (1 ^) AH (1                     )
                                                                 h                              i2                          :
                                                             n              (1      ) V~ H (T D)

The numerator of this expression is decreasing in V~ H (T D) and V~ H (T D)                                                     (1    ^) AH = (1      ).
Therefore,
                  [1        ( + (1               ) x)]             (1            ^) AH > (1                ) 1          P
                                                                                                                                R=n                (83)

is su¢ cient for ~ 0 (R) > 0. Using the fact that                                            (1        ^) AH = (1                    ) ^AH + R=n ;
                       P
substituting for           and rearranging terms, (83) is equivalent to

                                 n [1        ( + (1                 ) x)] ^AH > x wM                        wP ;

which in turn is the same as the following condition:

                                                         ^ (1                ) (1 n)
                                     x>                                                                     x
                                                                                                            ^:
                                             ^ (1           )+              (1    ) (1         n^)

                                         ^, ~ 0 (R) > 0 and thus higher resource rents make
This establishes that when R > R and x > x
repression more likely. This completes the proof of the proposition.

7.4     Proof of Proposition 8

Using the expressions of V L (D) = aL = (1                                  ), of V L (M ) in (18), of aL in (47), and the fact
that GT N      ^ (1         ) Y         xAL , the value to low-skill producers when they do not prevent
coups V L (T D j coup), given by (69), can be rewritten as

                                                   (1             (1          )) aL           ^Y
                   V L (T D j coup) =                                                                      ^ (1         ) xAL :
                                                                        1

   Similarly, using the facts that V L (D) = aL = (1                                         ), V L (T D; P ) = V L (T D j no coup),
that GT P = ^ Y            xAL           wT P x              0, that wT P is given by (66) and that wM and aL are


                                                                            55
given by (47), the value to low-skill producers when they prevent coups V L (T D j no coup),
(68), can be rewritten as

                               aL            ^Y               ^xAL                          ^xAL      (1          ) xaL                             xaL
V L (T D j no coup) =                                                          +                                                   +                                         :
                                    1                 1         (1         )            1                    1                         (1      ) (1    (1               ))
Assuming that coup prevention is a feasible strategy, low-skill producers prefer to prevent
coups if V L (T D j no coup)                 V L (T D j coup). Combining the previous two expressions, this
condition is equivalent to

                  ^xAL f        (        + (1         ) (1          ))         (1           ) [ (1         ) + (1                  ) ]g                  (84)
                  + xaL [(1              +       )         (1           ) (1            )] + (1           ) (1            +         ) aL        0:

The left-hand-side of this inequality is a strictly increasing function of                                                and it is strictly positive
at     = 1. Therefore, there exists a unique                               2 [0; 1) such that (84) holds for all                                             . If
     > 0, then (84) does not hold for all                        <        , V L (T D j no coup) < V L (T D j coup) and the
low-skill producers prefer not to prevent coups.

7.5     Proof of Proposition 9

Using (70) and (71), the threshold                        (de…ned as V H (E; S) = V H (E; P j )) can be written as
                                                                P          ^+    ^                   P       AH
             1
        =                                                                                                                                                .
             (1      ) [(1          ) V H (T D)            (1               H
                                                                        ^) A ] +   [(1                    ^ ) AH              (1        ) V H (T D)]

     If there is no coup in transitional democracy, (46) implies V H (T D) = (1                                                             ^) AH = (1         )
and
                                                                         (1              ) P
                                                           =1                                ;
                                                                          (1            ) ^
which is strictly decreasing in .
     If coups take place along the equilibrium path in transitional democracy, then (46) yields

                               V H (T D) = (1                 ^) (1        ) AH +                    (1          ^ ) AH :
                                                                                             1
Using this expression, the threshold                          becomes
                                                           P            ^+   ^                   P
                                         =                                                                            :
                                                 (1        )[           (1 ^) ^                      (1      ^)]

Since    P   does not depend on                   , we obtain that the derivative of this expression d =d                                                      is
proportional to

                           P                                        P                        P                            2                                                  P
B( )          (1      )             (1       )            ^                         ^                (1          ^)                (^ + (1      ^) ) (1             )            ;

                                                                         56
where B ( ) is the numerator of d =d . This expression is linear in , and is negative when
  = 0. Therefore, it has at most one root     =      over the interval [0; 1]. This implies that for
any     <    , B ( ) < 0 (so that   is strictly decreasing in ) and for any    >    , B ( ) > 0 (so
that     is strictly increasing in ). Moreover, if B ( ) has no root in [0; 1], then B ( ) < 0 for
all    2 [0; 1] and we set   = 1. This establishes all the claims in the proposition.




                                                57
References

   Acemoglu, Daron (2005) “Politics and Economics in Weak and Strong States,” Journal of
Monetary Economics, 52, 1199-1226.
   Acemoglu, Daron, Michael Golosov and Aleh Tsyvinski (2008) “Political Economy of Mech-
anisms,” forthcoming Econometrica.
   Acemoglu, Daron and James A. Robinson (2000) “Why Did the West Extend the Fran-
chise? Democracy, Inequality, and Growth in Historical Perspective.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 115(4), 1167-1199.
   Acemoglu, Daron and James A. Robinson (2001) “A Theory of Political Transitions,”
American Economic Review, 91, 938-963.
   Acemoglu, Daron and James A. Robinson (2006) Economic Origins of Dictatorship and
Democracy, New York; Cambridge University Press.
   Acemoglu, Daron and James A. Robinson (2006) “Persistence of Power, Elites and Insti-
tutions,” forthcoming American Economic Review.
   Acemoglu, Daron, James A. Robinson and Thierry Verdier (2004) “Kleptocracy and Divide-
and-Rule: A Model of Personal Rule,” Journal of the European Economic Association Papers
and Proceedings, 2, 162-192.
   Acemoglu, Daron, Davide Ticchi and Andrea Vindigni (2006) “Emergence and Persistence
of Ine¢ cient States,” NBER Working Paper No. 12748.
   Alesina, Alberto and Guido Tabellini (2007) “Bureaucrats or Politicians? Part I: A Single
Policy Task,” American Economic Review, 97(1), 169-179.
   Barro, Robert (1973) “The Control of Politicians: An Economic Model,” Public Choice,
14(1), 19-42.
   Bénabou, Roland (2000) “Unequal Societies: Income Distribution and the Social Contract,”
American Economic Review, 90(1), 96-129.
   Besley, Timothy (2006) Principled Agents? The Political Economy of Good Government.
Oxford University Press.
   Besley, Timothy and Anne Case (1995) “Does Electoral Accountability A¤ect Economic
Policy Choices? Evidence from Gubernatorial Term Limits,”Quarterly Journal of Economics,
110(3), 769-798.
   Besley, Timothy and Stephen Coate (1997) “An Economic Model of Representative Democ-
racy,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 108, 85-114.



                                            58
   Besley, Timothy and James A. Robinson (2007) “A Theory of Military Politics,” work in
progress.
   Bowman, Kirk S. (2004) Militarization, Democracy, and Development: The Perils of Prae-
torianism in Latin America, University Park PA; Pennsylvania State University Press.
   Brooker, Paul (2000) Non-Democratic Regimes. Theory, Government and Politics, New
York; Palgrave Macmillan.
   Debs, Alexandre (2007a) “The Wheel of Fortune: Agency Problems in Dictatorships,”MIT
mimeo.
   Debs, Alexandre (2007b) “Political Strength and Economic E¢ ciency in a Multi-Agent
State,” MIT mimeo.
   Dixit, Avinash K. (2006) “Predatory States and Failing States: An Agency Perspective,”
Princeton Research in Political Economy Working Paper.
   Egorov, Georgy and Konstantin Sonin (2004) “Dictators and Their Viziers: Agency Prob-
lems in Dictatorships,” CEPR Discussion Paper No. 4777.
   Ferejohn, John (1986) “Incumbent Performance and Electoral Control,”Public Choice, 50,
5-25.
   Finer, Samuel A. (1976) The Man on Horseback: The Role of the Military in Politics,
Piscataway NJ; Transaction Publishers.
   Huntington, Samuel P. (1968) Political Order in Changing Societies, New Haven CT; Yale
University Press.
   Jensen, Nathan and Leonard Wantchekon (2004) “Resource Wealth and Political Regimes
in Africa,” Comparative Political Studies, 37(7), 816-841.
   Karl, Terry L. (1997) The Paradox of Plenty: Oil Booms and Petro-States, Berkeley CA;
University of California Press.
   Luebbert, Gregory (1991) Liberalism, Fascism, or Social Democracy: Social Classes and
the Political Origins of Regimes in Interwar Europe, New York; Oxford University Press
   Mahoney, James (2001) The Legacies of Liberalism: Path Dependence and Political Regimes
in Central America, Baltimore, MD; The Johns Hopkins University Press.
   Mehlum, Halvor, Karl Moene and Ragnar Torvik (2006) “Institutions and the Resource
Curse,” Economic Journal, 116, 1-20.
   Meltzer, Allan H. and Scott F. Richard (1981) “A Rational Theory of the Size of Govern-
ment.” Journal of Political Economy, 89(5), 914-927.
   Millet, Richard (1977) Guardians of the Dynasty: A History of the U.S. Created Guardia


                                              59
Nacional de Nicaragua and the Somoza Family, Maryknoll NY; Orbis Books.
   Moore, Barrington (1966) Social Origins of Dictatorship and Democracy: Lord and Peasant
in the Making of the Modern World, Boston, MA; Beacon Press.
   Mosca, Gaetano (1939) The Ruling Class, New York; McGraw-Hill.
   Mulligan, Casey, Ricard Gil and Xavier Sala-i-Martin (2004) “Do Democracies Have Dif-
ferent Public Policies than Nondemocracies?,”Journal of Economic Perspectives, 18(1), 51-74.
   Needler, Martin C. (1987) The Problem of Democracy in Latin America, Lexington MA;
Lexington Books.
   Nordlinger, Eric A. (1977) Soldiers in Politics: Military Coups and Governments, Upper
Saddle River NJ; Prentice-Hall.
   O’Donnell, Guillermo A. (1973) Modernization and Bureaucratic-Authoritarianism: Studies
in South American Politics, Berkeley CA; University of California Press.
   O’Donnell, Guillermo A. and Philipp C. Schmitter (1986) Transitions from Authoritarian
Rule: Tentative Conclusions about Uncertain Democracies, Baltimore, MD; The Johns Hopkins
University Press.
   Perlmutter, Amos (1977) The Military in Politics in Modern Times: On Professionals,
Praetorians, and Revolutionary Soldiers, New Haven CT; Yale University Press.
   Perlmutter, Amos (1981) Modern Authoritarianism. A Comparative Institutional Analysis,
New Haven CT; Yale University Press.
   Perotti, Roberto (1996) “Growth, Income Distribution, and Democracy: What the Data
Say,” Journal of Economic Growth, 1(2), 149-87.
   Persson, Torsten and Guido Tabellini (2000) Political Economics: Explaining Economic
Policy, Cambridge MA; The MIT Press.
   Persson, Torsten and Guido Tabellini (2003) The Economic E¤ ects of Constitutions, Cam-
bridge MA; The MIT Press.
   Persson, Torsten, Gérard Roland and Guido Tabellini (1997) “Separation of Powers and
Political Accountability,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(4), 1163-1202.
   Persson, Torsten, Gérard Roland and Guido Tabellini (2000) “Comparative Politics and
Public Finance,” Journal of Political Economy, 108(6), 1121-1161.
   Poulantzas, Nicos (1978) Political Power and Social Classes, London, Verso.
   Roberts, Kevin (1977) “Voting over Income Tax Schedules,”Journal of Public Economics,
8, 329-340.
   Romer, Thomas (1975) “Individual Welfare, Majority Voting, and the Properties of a Linear


                                             60
Income Tax,” Journal of Public Economics, 7, 163-185.
   Roquié, Alain (1987) The Military and the State in Latin America, Berkeley CA; University
of California Press.
   Ross, Michael (2001) “Does Oil Hinder Democracy?,” World Politics, 53(3), 325-61.
   Skocpol, Theda (1979) States and Social Revolutions: A Comparative Analysis of France,
Russia, and China, New York; Cambridge University Press.
   Stokey, Nancy L., Robert E. Lucas and Edward C. Prescott (1989) Recursive Methods in
Economic in Economic Dynamics, Cambridge MA; Harvard University Press.
   Ticchi, Davide and Andrea Vindigni (2003) “Democracy and Armies,” Faculty of Eco-
nomics, University of Urbino, Working Paper 83.
   Vanden, Harry E. and Garry Prevost (2002) Politics of Latin America: The Power Game,
New York; Oxford University Press.
   Yashar, Deborah J. (1997) Demanding Democracy: Reform and Reaction in Costa Rica
and Guatemala, 1870’s - 1950’s, Stanford CA; Stanford University Press.
   Welch, Claude E. Jr. and Arthur K. Smith (1974) Military Role and Rule: Perspectives on
Civil-Military Relations, North Scituate MA; Duxbury Press.
   Wintrobe, Ronald (1998) The Political Economy of Dictatorship, New York; Cambridge
University Press.




                                            61
