                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    THE DYNAMIC BEHAVIOR OF THE REAL EXCHANGE RATE IN STICKY PRICE
                               MODELS

                                            Jón Steinsson

                                        Working Paper 13910
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13910


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2008




I would like to thank Kenneth Rogoff for invaluable advice and encouragement. I would also like to
thank Marianne Baxter, Philippe Bacchetta, Gita Gopinath, Mico Loretan, Anna Mikushava, Emi Nakamura,
Maurice Obstfeld, Thorarinn Petursson, John Rogers, James Stock and seminar participants at Harvard
and the Federal Reserve Board for helpful comments and discussions. I would like to thank the Icelandic
Center for Research for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Jón Steinsson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
The Dynamic Behavior of the Real Exchange Rate in Sticky Price Models
Jón Steinsson
NBER Working Paper No. 13910
April 2008
JEL No. F31,F41

                                             ABSTRACT

Existing empirical evidence suggests that real exchange rates exhibit hump-shaped dynamics. I show
that this is a robust fact across nine large, developed economies. This fact can help explain why existing
sticky-price business cycle models have been unable to match the persistence of the real exchange
rate. The recent literature has focused on models driven by monetary shocks. These models yield monotonic
impulse responses for the real exchange rate. It is extremely difficult for models that have this feature
to match the empirical persistence of the real exchange rate. I show that in response to a number of
different real shocks a two-country sticky-price business cycle model yields hump-shaped dynamics
for the real exchange rate. The hump-shaped dynamics generated by the model are a powerful source
of endogenous persistence that allows the model to match the long half-life of the real exchange rate.


Jón Steinsson
Department of Economics
Columbia University
1026 International Affairs Building
420 West 118th Street
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
jsteinsson@columbia.edu
1    Introduction

Since the breakdown of the Bretton Woods system of fixed exchange rates, the real exchange
rates of the world’s largest economies have been highly volatile. Furthermore, swings in these
real exchange rates have been highly persistent. A large recent literature has studied whether
the volatility and persistence of real exchange rates can be understood in the context of sticky
price models with staggered price setting. This literature was pioneered by V.V. Chari, Patrick
J. Kehoe and Ellen R. McGrattan (2002). They concluded that such models can explain the
volatility of the real exchange rate but that they can not match its persistence. A number of
subsequent papers have sought to address this “persistence anomaly” by introducing various forms
of strategic complementarity and asymmetry as well as sticky wages and persistent monetary policy
(Paul Bergin and Robert C. Feenstra, 2001; Gianluca Benigno, 2004; Jan J.J. Groen and Akito
Matsumoto, 2004; Jens Sondergaard, 2004; Hafedh Bouakez, 2005). While these features increase
the persistence of the real exchange rate considerably, they are not sufficient to match the half-life
of the real exchange rate seen in the data.
    Existing empirical evidence suggests that real exchange rates exhibit hump-shaped dynamics
(John Huizinga, 1987; Martin S. Eichenbaum and Charles L. Evans, 1995; Yin-Wong Cheung and
Kon S. Lai, 2000). I show that this is a robust empirical fact for nine large, developed economies. I
estimate an autoregressive model for the real exchange rate of each economy. The estimated short
term dynamics cause impulses to be amplified for several quarters before they start dying out.
Figure 1 illustrates this by plotting the estimated response of the U.S. real exchange rate to a unit
sized impulse. After the impulse, the real exchange rate keeps rising for over a year. It takes the
real exchange rate 10 quarters to fall below the initial size of the impulse. After this short term
amplification, the real exchange rate mean reverts quite rapidly; falling below 1/2 the size of the
impulse in 18 quarters and below 1/4 of the size of impulse in less than 26 quarters.
    These hump-shaped dynamics can help explain why existing sticky-price business cycle models
have been unable to match the persistence of the real exchange rate. Following Chari, Kehoe and
McGrattan (2002), the literature has mostly focused on the response of the real exchange rate to
monetary shocks. I present a two country sticky-price model with staggered price setting and show
that in response to a monetary shock the model implies an exponentially decaying response for the
real exchange rate. Even with very large amounts of strategic complementarity, the rate of decay of

                                                  1
the real exchange rate is such that the model is nowhere close to matching the empirical persistence
of real exchange rates.
    Empirical work on vector autoregression models suggests that only a small fraction of the vari-
ability of most macroeconomic aggregates is due to monetary shocks (Lawrence J. Christiano,
Eichenbaum and Evans, 1999). I show that in response to several different types of real shocks—
productivity shocks, labor supply shocks, government spending shocks, shocks to the world demand
for home goods and cost-push shocks—my model implies hump-shaped dynamics for the real ex-
change rate. These hump-shaped dynamics are a powerful source of endogenous persistence that
allow it to easily generate a half-life equal to the estimated half-life of the U.S. real exchange rate.
Contrary to conventional wisdom, I show that these real shocks generate slightly more real ex-
change rate volatility in the model than does the monetary shock. My model is therefore able to
match the persistence of the real exchange rate, its humped dynamics as well as the volatility of
the HP-filtered real exchange rate relative to HP-filtered output.
    The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 presents the empirical analysis. Section 3 presents the
model. Section 4 presents the theoretical results. Section 5 concludes.



2    Empirical Evidence

In this section, I extend the analysis of Cheung and Lai (2000) by studying the dynamics of the
trade weighted real exchange rate of nine large, developed economies. I obtain data on these
trade weighed real exchange rates from the Bank of International Settlements.1 I also use data on
aggregate consumption for the 9 economies I study. I obtain data on aggregate consumption from
the International Financial Statistics database published by the International Monetary Fund. The
empirical specification I adopt is an AR(p) model with an intercept but no time trend. This model
may be written in augmented Dickey-Fuller regression form as
                                                         p
                                                         X
                                     qt = µ + αqt−1 +          ψj ∆qt−j + t ,                                 (1)
                                                         j=1

where qt is the log of the real exchange rate, µ, α and ψj are parameters and t is an error term. I
calculate median unbiased estimates of µ, α and ψj using the grid-bootstrap method described in
   1
     These real exchange rates are trade weighted using manufacturing trade for 27 economies. They are published at
a monthly frequency. I constructed a quarterly series by using the first month of each quarter. My sample period is
1975:1 to 2006:3. Marc Klau and San Sau Fung (2006) describe how these real exchange rate series are constructed.

                                                        2
Bruce E. Hansen (1999).2 Point estimates of other statistics—such as the half-life—are calculated
from the point estimates for α and ψj . I calculate confidence intervals and P-values using a
conventional bootstrap.
       My primary interest is the extent to which the impulse response of the real exchange rate is
hump-shaped. It is useful to define scalar measures of how hump-shaped an impulse response func-
tion is. As building blocks toward such measures, I calculate the “up-life”, half-life and “quarter-
life” of the real exchange rate series I study. I follow the recent empirical literature on the real ex-
change rate in defining the half-life as the largest time T such that IR(T −1) ≥ 0.5 and IR(T ) < 0.5,
where IR(T ) denotes the impulse response of the real exchange rate at time T .3 I define the up-life
and the quarter-life analogously. The up-life is the largest time T such that IR(T − 1) ≥ 1 and
IR(T ) < 1. The quarter-life is the largest time T such that IR(T − 1) ≥ 0.25 and IR(T ) < 0.25.
Just as the half-life is meant to measure the time it takes for the impulse response to fall below
half (the size of the impulse), the up-life is the time it take for the impulse response to fall below
one and the quarter-life is the time it take for the impulse response to fall below a quarter.
       I consider an impulse response that dies out at a constant exponential rate as the benchmark
“no hump” case. Such a process will have an up-life of zero. A non-zero up-life can, therefore, be
viewed as evidence that the process has a hump-shaped impulse response. This fact suggests that
one sensible measure of the degree of hump in the impulse response is the ratio of the up-life to
the half-life (UL/HL). The UL/HL is a measure between 0 and 1. It measures the fraction of time
before the impulse response falls below 1 out of the total time before it falls below 1/2.
       Another feature of an impulse response that dies out at a constant exponential rate is that it
takes the process the same amount of time to fall from 1/2 to 1/4 as it take to fall from 1 to 1/2.
In other words, the half-life is equal to the quarter-life minus the half-life (HL = QL - HL). For a
process that has a hump-shaped impulse response, the half-life is larger than the quarter-life minus
the half-life (HL > QL - HL). Or written slightly differently 2HL - QL > 0. These facts suggest
that 2HL - QL, or equivalently the difference between HL and QL - HL, can be viewed as a measure
   2
     Hansen (1999) uses the grid-bootstrap method to calculate confidence intervals, i.e., to estimate the 5th and 95th
quantile of the distribution of the statistics of interest. I use this same method to estimate the 50th quantile of the
statistics I am interested in. These estimates of the 50th quantile are median unbiased point estimates. Hansen’s
grid-bootstrap method is closely related to the method proposed by Donald W.K. Andrews and Hong-Yuan Chen
(1994).
   3
     The impulse response is defined as IR(t) = ∂(Es qt − Es−1 qt )/∂s , where Es denotes the expectations operator
conditional on information known at time s. It is the moving average representation of the process estimated for the
real exchange rate.

                                                          3
of the degree of hump in the impulse response.
   The first issue that arises in estimating equation (1) is the choice of lag length. I considered a
range of values for p from 1 to 8. For values of p smaller than 4, the shape of the estimated impulse
response function is quite sensitive to the chosen lag length. However, for values of p between 4
and 8 the estimated impulse response is virtually identical. From this I conclude that a lag length
of at least 4 is needed to flexibly estimate the impulse response. I choose to set p = 5.
   Table 1 presents results for the U.S. real exchange rate. The half-life estimate I obtain is
consistent with the results of Christian J. Murray and David H. Papell and the earlier literature
surveyed by Kenneth Rogoff (1996). The point estimate is 4.5 years and therefore within the
“consensus range” of 3 to 5 years. Also, consistent with Murray and Papell (2002), the 90%
confidence interval for the half-life is very wide. Even 30 years after the breakdown of Bretton
Woods, it is not possible to estimate the half-life of the real exchange rate with much precision.
   Figure 1 plots the impulse response of the U.S. real exchange rate. It exhibits a pronounced
hump. Rather than dying out exponentially, the impulse response rises further—peaking at about
1.2—before it starts dying out. The impulse response doesn’t fall below 1 (the size of the impulse)
until 10 quarters after the impulse. Table 1 reports that the up-life of the U.S. real exchange rate
is 2.4 years, which implies that the UL/HL is 0.53. In other words, 53% of the time that it takes
the real exchange rate to fall below 1/2 it is actually above one.
   A comparison of the quarter-life and the half-life shows that once the real exchange rate starts
reverting towards its mean it does so quite quickly. I estimate the quarter-life of the U.S. real
exchange rate to be 6.4 years. This implies that the QL - HL—the time it takes the real exchange
rate to fall from 1/2 to 1/4—is only 1.9 years. The literature on the dynamics of the real exchange
rate has tended to interpret the half-life as its rate of mean reversion. The results discussed above
show that this is misleading. The rate of mean reversion of the real exchange rate is far from being
constant. The half-life measures the rate of mean reversion in the short run. It is therefore heavily
affected by the short term dynamics of the real exchange rate. The QL - HL, however, measures
the rate of mean reversion further out, when the short term dynamics have mostly died out. The
results in table 1 show that the rate of mean reversion of the real exchange rate is very slow initially
but becomes substantially faster after the short term dynamics die out.
   Table 2 reports results for trade weighted real exchange rates of Canada, the Euro Area, France,


                                                   4
Germany, Italy, Japan, Switzerland, the U.K. as well as the U.S. For all 9 of these economies, the
half-life is larger than QL-HL. The median half-life is 3.7 years while the median QL-HL is 1.9
years. For 8 of these 9 economies, UL/HL is positive. The median UL/HL is 0.44. Table 2 reports
P-values for three sets of hypothesis tests. The null hypotheses tested for each economy are: α = 1,
UL/HL = 0 and HL < QL-HL. The statistical significance of all three hypotheses varies greatly
from economy to economy. The median P-value for α = 1 is 5%, while the median P-value for
UL/HL = 0 and HL < QL-HL are 18% and 8%, respectively.
    Earlier evidence of hump-shaped dynamics in the real exchange rate includes Eichenbaum and
Evans (1995) and Cheung and Lai (2000). Eichenbaum and Evans (1995) estimate an identified
VAR that includes the real exchange rate. They show that the real exchange rate exhibits hump-
shaped dynamics in response to their identified monetary policy shocks. They refer to this result
as “delayed over-shooting”. Jon Faust and John H. Rogers (2003) estimate VARs under a range of
alternative identifying assumptions. They argue that the delayed over-shooting result is sensitive
to the choice of identifying assumptions. Cheung and Lai (2000) estimate ARMA models for four
bilateral U.S. real exchange rates and find evidence hump-shaped dynamics in all four cases. My
results differ from Cheung and Lai (2000) in two ways. First, I consider trade weighted real exchange
rates for 9 economies. Second, I employ median unbiased estimation methods.



3    The Model

The model I employ to understand the dynamics of the real exchange rate is a two country model
in the tradition of Maurice Obstfeld and Rogoff (1995). It incorporates a number of features that
have been developed in the subsequent literature such as staggered price setting, local currency
pricing, home biased preferences and heterogeneous factor markets. The core of the model consists
of five equations. Aggregate consumption in each country evolves according to consumption Euler
equations:
                                   ct = Et ct+1 − σ(it − Et πt+1 ),                              (2)

                                   c∗t = Et c∗t+1 − σ(i∗t − Et πt+1
                                                                ∗
                                                                    ).                           (3)

The dynamics of inflation in each country are governed by New Keynesian Phillips curves:

                                                        M∗
                         πt = βEt πt+1 + κζ[φH cM
                                                t + φF ct ] + κγq qt − ηt ,                      (4)
                                                   5
                              πt∗ = βEt πt+1
                                         ∗
                                             + κζ[φF cM       M∗              ∗
                                                      t + φH ct ] − κγq qt − ηt ,                 (5)

and international risk-sharing implies that

                                                   ct − c∗t = σqt .                               (6)

Here ct denotes home consumption, πt denotes home CPI inflation, it denotes the home short-term
nominal interest rate, qt denotes the real exchange rate and ηt is a composite of five different types
of shocks: productivity shocks, labor supply shocks, government spending shocks, shocks to the
world demand for home goods and cost-push shocks. All variables denote percentage deviations
from a steady state with balanced trade. Foreign variables are denotes with asterisks. Superscript
M and M ∗ denote the following weighted averages: cM               ∗      M ∗ = φ c + φ c∗ ,
                                                   t = φH ct + φF ct and ct      F t   H t

where φH is the steady state fraction of total spending allocated to domestic goods and φF is the
corresponding fraction allocated to imports.
      A fully microfounded model that yields these equations up to a log-linear approximation is
presented in detail in the Appendix to this paper.4 This model features a continuum of household
types each of which consumes and supplies labor. Each type of household consumes a basket
of all goods produced in the world economy but supplies a differentiated labor input. Household
preferences are biased in favor of home goods. There is a continuum of monopolistically competitive
firms. Each firm demands labor and produces a differentiated good. Goods prices are sticky. The
opportunity to revise prices arrives randomly as in Guillermo Calvo (1983). Firms are able to price
to market and their prices are sticky in the local currency. Households have access to complete
financial markets. The government in each country finances spending though lump-sum taxation
of households.
      To close the model, one must specify a monetary policy for each country. Recent work has
stressed the importance of the systematic component of monetary policy as opposed to monetary
shocks in shaping macroeconomic dynamics. I assume that the central bank in each country sets
nominal interest rates according to John B. Taylor (1993) type rules:

                                it = ρi it−1 + (1 − ρi )ψc ct + (1 − ρi )ψπ πt + t ,             (7)

                               i∗t = ρi i∗t−1 + (1 − ρi )ψc c∗t + (1 − ρi )ψπ πt∗ + ∗t ,         (8)
  4
      This appendix is available on my website.


                                                           6
where t and ∗t denote home and foreign monetary policy shocks, respectively. In keeping with
recent empirical work, I include a lagged interest rate term in the central banks’ interest rate rule
(Richard H. Clarida, Jordi Galı́ and Mark Gertler, 1998, 2000).
        Finally, I assume that all four exogenous shocks—ηt , ηt∗ , t and ∗t —follow AR(1) processes.
Given initial conditions, equations (2)-(8) and the processes for the exogenous shocks constitute a
fully specified general equilibrium model of the world economy.



4        Theoretical Results

The theoretical question that I address in this section is whether the model described above can
replicate the stylized facts about the dynamics of the real exchange rate discussed in section 2. The
model consists of a set of linear equations with expectations terms. This type of model may be
solved using standard methods based on the work of Olivier J. Blanchard and Charles M. Kahn
(1980).5 To aid comparison with earlier work, I use values for the parameters of the model that
correspond closely values used in the recent literature. I list the values of the parameters in table
3.6
        My main theoretical results are presented in table 4. The first row of this table repeats, for
convenience, the key empirical features of real exchange rates established in section 2. The second
row reports results for the model presented in section 3 under the assumption that there exists a
perfectly frictionless economy-wide labor market in each country and business cycles are due to
monetary policy shocks.7 This “homogeneous labor market” specification of the model is designed
to correspond to the benchmark model in Chari et al. (2002). The results in table 4 confirm that
it does. The real exchange rate is much less persistent than in the data. This is true whether
one measures persistence by the half-life of the impulse response—0.6 years versus 3.7 years in
the data—or by the autocorrelation of the series after it as been HP-filtered—0.49 versus 0.78 in
the data. As Chari et al. (2002) emphasize, this model can, however, match the volatility of the
    5
     I use code described in Christopher A. Sims (2001).
    6
     Let me briefly describe the rationale behind a few of the parameter values: I follow Chari et al. (2002) in choosing
σ = 1/5. This value is chosen to roughly match the relative volatility of the real exchange rate and consumption. The
value ω = 3 results from assuming a Cobb-Douglas production function with a labor share equal to 2/3, disutility of
labor that yields a Frisch elasticity of labor supply equal to 1/5 and a steady state labor supply of 1/4. The value
φH = 0.94 is chosen to roughly match the fraction of total spending allocated to domestic goods in the U.S.
   7
     The structure of the labor market affects the model through the parameter ζ. This is discussed in more detail
below and in the Appendix to this paper.


                                                           7
HP-filtered real exchange rate relative to HP-filtered consumption.8
    A large number of papers have in recent years argued that one reason why simple, largely
frictionless models—such as the model used by Chari et al. (2002)—are unable to match the per-
sistence of key business cycle variables is that they seriously underestimate the degree of strategic
complementarity in price setting (Taylor, 1999; Bergin and Feenstra, 2000; Michael Woodford,
2003). In the model presented above, the parameter ζ is a measure of the average degree of strate-
gic complementarity of firm pricing decisions. If ζ < 1, the pricing decisions of firms are strategic
complements on average. If, however, ζ > 1, firm pricing decisions are strategic substitutes on
average. Under the assumption of homogeneous labor markets, ζ = ω + σ −1 = 8. This specification
of the model therefore implies a substantial degree of strategic substitutability.
    Bergin and Feenstra (2001) and Sondergaard (2004), attempt to solve the problem of generating
persistence in the real exchange rate by increasing the degree of strategic complementarity in the
model. They find that increasing the degree of strategic complementarity increases the persistence
of the real exchange rate somewhat. But they are unable to match the persistence seen in the
data. The third row of table 4 reports results for my model under the assumption that the labor
market in each country is highly segmented. All other assumptions are the same as before. In this
“heterogeneous labor market” case, ζ = (ω + σ −1 )/(1 + ωθ) = 0.26, implying a large degree of
strategic complementarity. In this respect this specification is meant to resemble the models used
in Bergin and Feenstra (2001) and Sondergaard (2004). The results for this model confirm that
increasing the degree of strategic complementarity in the model increases the persistence of the
real exchange rate. However, the real exchange rate is still substantially less persistent than in the
data.
    The fourth row in table 4 reports results for a calibration of the model that I have dubbed
“extreme”. It is extreme in that I have set ζ = 0.01. As the name suggests, this is not meant
to be a realistic calibration. Rather, I have included it to illustrate that even given very extreme
assumptions about the degree of strategic complementarity the model does not fit the empirical
features of the real exchange rate. In this case, the half-life of the real exchange rate is only 1.4
and the autocorrelation of the HP-filtered real exchange rate is only 0.65.
   8
     I study the volatility of the real exchange rate relative to consumption because consumption plays a more central
role in the model than output. However, in the model, the volatility of consumption and output are very similar.
For an extensive discussion of the HP-filter and other filtering methods, see Marianne Baxter and Robert G. King
(1999). I use code written by Baxter and King to filter the data.

                                                          8
       Another striking shortcoming of the three specifications of the model discussed above is the
fact that they totally fail to capture the humped shape of the impulse response the real exchange
rate. For all three of these specifications, UL/HL is 0.00 and QL - HL and HL are almost identical.
Figure 2 plots the impulse response of the real exchange rate to a home monetary policy shock
in the heterogeneous factor markets model. The impulse response dies out exponentially like an
AR(1) processes.
       Next consider the behavior of the model in response to Phillips curve shocks. In the Appendix
to this paper, I show that at least five different types of disturbances appear in the model as shocks
to the Phillips curve. These are productivity shocks, labor supply shocks, government spending
shocks, shocks to the world demand for home produced goods and cost-push shocks. The fact
that all these different disturbances enter the model in the same way—as shocks to the Phillips
curve—implies that they all have the same implications regarding the dynamics of consumption,
inflation, interest rates and the real exchange rate. For the purpose of analyzing the dynamics of
the real exchange rate, I therefore need not make any assumptions about the relative importance
of these five types of disturbances.9
       The fifth and sixth row of tables 4 report results for the model with homogeneous and hetero-
geneous labor markets, respectively, when business cycles are driven by Phillips curve shocks. The
dynamics of the real exchange rate differ in two ways from what they are when business cycles are
driven by monetary policy shocks. First, in this case the model is able to match the persistence
of the real exchange rate in the data quite well. The half-life of the real exchange rate is between
3.3 and 4.1 years depending on the degree of strategic complementarity, while it is 3.7 years in the
data. The autocorrelation of the HP-filtered real exchange rate is between 0.82 and 0.84 compared
with 0.78 in the data.
       Second, the model also generates a hump-shaped response of the real exchange rate to Phillips
curve shocks. The UL/HL is roughly 0.40 in the model, while it is 0.44 in the data, and the difference
   9
    It is important to note that, while the five shocks that I lump together as Phillips curve shocks imply the same
dynamic behavior for consumption, inflation, the interest rate and the real exchange rate, they don’t all imply identical
behavior for other variables such as output. For example, a positive productivity shock and a negative government
spending shock both imply that inflation will fall and consumption will rise but they have different implications for
output. Output will rise in response to a positive productivity shock but fall in response to a negative government
spending shocks. By writing the model the way I have, I have been able to solve for the dynamics of the real exchange
rate without making any reference to the dynamics of output. The impulse response of the real exchange rate in
response to a Phillips curve shock is therefore consistent with a wide range dynamics for output (and other variables)
depending on the relative importance of the five shocks that make up the Phillips curves shock in my model.


                                                           9
between QL-HL and HL is between 1.2 and 1.5 years, while it is 1.8 years in the data. Figure 3
plots the response of the real exchange rate to a home Phillips curve shock in the heterogeneous
labor markets case. The response of the real exchange rate to a monetary policy shock is plotted
as well for comparison. Clearly the qualitative feature of the impulse response are very different
and much more in line with the empirical impulse response in figure 1.
       Conventional wisdom says that real shocks cannot generate the same level of volatility in the
real exchange rate as monetary shocks can. This notion—while intuitively appealing—is not sup-
ported by models such as the model I analyze in this paper. In these models, the volatility of
the real exchange rate relative to consumption is determined largely by the households’ elasticity
of intertemporal substitution. The last column in table 4 shows that the real exchange rate is
actually slightly more volatile relative to consumption when business cycles are due to real shocks
than when they are due to monetary policy shocks.
       Chari et al. (2002) emphasize the fact that their model is able to match the volatility of the
HP-filtered real exchange rate relative to HP-filtered output if the coefficient of intertemporal
substituion is assumed to be 1/5. The last column in table 4 shows that my model also matches
this statistic regardless of which shocks drive the business cycle. The fact that this class of models is
able to match this particular statistic has been interpreted to mean that they can explain the large
volatility of the real exchange rate. This interpretation ignores the fact that the HP-filter assigns
the vast majority of the volatility of the real exchange rate to its “trend”. Figure 4 plots the U.S.
real exchange rate along with its HP-filter “trend”. According to the HP-filter, most of the large
movements in the U.S. real exchange rate over the last 30 years—such as the large appreciation
and subsequent depreciation in the 1980’s—have been movements in the “trend”.10


4.1      Understanding the Humped Dynamics of the Real Exchange Rate

To understand why Phillips curve shocks yield a hump-shaped impulse response for the real ex-
change rate while monetary policy shocks do not, it is helpful to take a closer look at the structural
equations of the model. If the home consumption Euler equation—equation (2)— is “solved for-
  10
    Diego Comin and Gertler (2006) find that conventional business cycle filters assign a sizable amount of cyclical
variation to the trend when they are applied to macroeconomic quantities such as output and consumption.




                                                        10
ward”, it yields
                                                  ∞
                                                  X
                                     ct = −σEt        (it+j − Et+j πt+1+j ).                                   (9)
                                                  j=0

       Risk-sharing implies that qt = σ −1 (ct − c∗t ). Due to the large amount of home-bias that I have
assumed (in order to match the empirical ratio of imports to consumption), home shocks have very
muted effects on foreign variables and vice versa.11 This implies that the impulse response of the
real exchange rate is close to being a scaled version of the impulse response of home consumption
when the impulse in question is a shock to the home country. Shocks that imply hump-shaped
impulse responses for consumption will therefore also imply hump-shaped impulse responses for
the real exchange rate.12
       If consumption is to be hump-shaped, the sum on the right hand side of equation (9) must be
hump-shaped. Considering for concreteness a shock that raises home consumption, this means that
while the sum on the right hand side of equation (9) must become negative on impact the first few
elements of the sum must be positive. This pattern implies that the sum will become more negative
for a few periods as the positive terms drop out of the sum. In other words, for consumption to be
hump-shaped, the impulse response of the real interest rate must be shaped roughly as in figure 5.
       The crucial difference between monetary policy shocks and Phillips curve shocks is that mone-
tary policy shocks lead inflation and consumption to move in the same direction on impact while
Phillips curve shocks lead these variables to move in opposite directions on impact. This is illus-
trated in figures 6 and 7. Figure 6 plots the response of home consumption and home inflation
to a home monetary policy shock. A positive monetary policy shock increases consumption. The
boom in consumption, in turn, causes inflation to rise. As the shock dissipates, consumption and
inflation return to their steady state values monotonically.
       Figure 7 plots the response of home consumption and home inflation to a home Phillips curve
shock. A positive Phillips curve shock, in contrast, increases consumption and decreases inflation
on impact. As the shock dissipates, inflation rises above trend due to the boom in consumption.
  11
     My results are not very sensitive to the high degree of home-bias I assume. Decreasing the degree of home-bias
weakens my results somewhat—i.e., makes the real exchange rate less volatile and less hump-shaped. But even if I
calibrate the home-bias to match the import share in consumption for a small country such as Sweden my results
don’t change significantly.
  12
     In a model in which utility is not time separable or not separable between consumption and leisure, the risk-
sharing condition would become qt = σ −1 (λt − λ∗t ), where λt = ∂U/∂Ct . This is why adding habit formation to the
model does not yield a hump-shaped response of the real exchange rate to monetary shocks. In such a model, the
response of consumption to a monetary shock is hump-shaped but the response of marginal utility is not hump-shaped.


                                                        11
Both series then return to steady state. The Phillips curve shock therefore causes a non-monotonic
impulse response for inflation which yields a similar non-monotonic impulse response for the real
interest rate. It is this non-monotonic impulse response of the real interest rate that causes con-
sumption and the real exchange rate to be hump-shaped.
    In my model—as in most other models in the literature—relative consumption and the real
exchange rate are highly correlated. In the data, however, these variables are roughly uncorrelated.
At present there are no fully satisfactory solutions to this problem in the literature. However, my
main results regarding the hump-shaped response of the real exchange rate to Phillips curve shocks
carry over to a model with habit formation in which the correlation of relative consumption and
the real exchange rate is substantially lower (around 0.45). In the model with habit formation, the
real exchange rate is proportional to the ratio of marginal utility in the two countries but marginal
utility is no longer proportional to consumption. My results also carry over to a model in which
international trade in financial assets is limited to non-contingent one period bonds.



5    Conclusions

I document empirically that the real exchange rates of nine large, developed economies have exhib-
ited hump-shaped dynamics in the post Bretton Woods era. I argue that this fact can help explain
why existing sticky-price business cycle models have been unable to match the persistence of the
real exchange rate. I present a two country sticky price model with staggered price setting and
show that in response to a monetary shock the model implies an exponentially decaying dynamics
for the real exchange rate. Even with very large amounts of strategic complementarity, the rate of
decay is such that the model is unable to matching the empirical persistence of real exchange rates.
I then show that in response to several different types of real shocks the model implies humped
dynamics for the real exchange rate. The hump-shaped dynamics generated by the model are a
powerful source of endogenous persistence that allow it to easily generate a half-life equal to the
estimated half-life of the U.S. real exchange rate.




                                                 12
A     Household Behavior and Market Structure

The world consists of two countries. In each country there is a continuum of household types
indexed by x. The home country households have indexes on the interval NH = [0, 1]. The foreign
country households have indexes on the interval NF = (1, 2]. Home households of type x seek to
maximize a discounted sum of utilities represented by
                                                (∞                                                 )
                                                 X
                                                                  t
                                         E0                   β [u(Ct ) − v(Lt (x), ξt )] ,                                                    (10)
                                                     t=0

where β is a discount factor, ξt is a country specific vector of shocks to the household’s preferences,
Ct denotes household consumption of a composite consumption good, Lt (x) denotes the house-
holds’ supply of differentiated labor input x. The function u(Ct ) is increasing and concave while
v(Lt (x), ξt ) is increasing and convex in Lt (x). There are an equal (large) number of households of
each type x.
    The consumption index in equation (10) is
                                                                                              η
                                                             1       η−1        1   η−1    η−1
                                                              η        η         η    η
                                         Ct = φH,t CH,t + φF,t CF,t                                 ,                                          (11)

where η > 0 denotes the elasticity of substitution between home and foreign goods and the φj,t ’s
are preference parameters that determines households’ relative preference for home versus foreign
goods. If φH,t > φF,t , households preferences are biased toward home produced goods. It is
analytically convenient to normalize φH,t + φF,t = 1. I allow the home bias in preferences to vary
exogenously over time and refer to such variation as shocks to the world demand for home goods. I
assume for simplicity that households in both countries have the same degree of steady state home
bias, i.e., φ∗H = φF .
    The subindices, Cj,t , are in turn CES indices of the differentiated goods produced in the two
countries. These indices are given by
                                                                                                                                    θt∗
                                                               θt                                               θt∗ −1            θ ∗ −1
                                                                                         "                                  #
                                             θt −1            θt −1                                                                t
                 CH,t =
                           R
                                    ct (z)    θt     dz               , and CF,t =
                                                                                               R
                                                                                                       ct (z)     θ∗
                                                                                                                    t    dz                .   (12)
                               NH                                                              NF


Here the differentiated goods are indexed by z. The consumption by the representative household
in the home country of good z in period t is denoted by ct (z) and θt > 1 and θt∗ > 1 denote the
elasticity of substitution at time t between the differentiated goods produced in the home country
and foreign country, respectively. I assume that θt and θt∗ vary exogenously. These variations may
                                                                            13
be interpreted as variation in the monopoly power of firms in the two countries. In the recent
literature on monetary policy, these shocks have been referred to as “cost-push” shocks.
   All goods produced in the economy are non-durable consumption goods purchased and con-
sumed immediately by households. Investment and capital accumulation play no role in the model.
To the extent that capital is used in production, each firm in the economy is endowed with a
fixed amount of non-depreciating capital. Labor is immobile and there are a fixed number of firms
operating in each country.
   Each country has a government. These governments operate fiat currency systems denominated
in “home currency” and “foreign currency”, respectively. There are independent central banks that
conduct monetary policy in each country by controlling the short term nominal interest rate in the
domestic currency. The governments finance spending by lump sum taxes.
   Households face a decision in each period about how much to consume of each of the differen-
tiated goods produced in the world. The representative household seeks to maximize the value of
the composite consumption good, Ct , that it can purchase given its income and given the prices
it faces. Prices in the home country are denominated in home currency and are denoted by pt (z).
Prices in the foreign country are denominated in foreign currency and are denoted by p∗t (z). The
demand for home produced good z that results from this optimization by the home and foreign
households is
                                                                                                       −θt
                                            pt (z) −θt                                        p∗t (z)
                                                 
                       ct (z) = CH,t        PH,t               and   c∗t (z)   =    ∗
                                                                                   CH,t          ∗
                                                                                              PH,t             ,                         (13)

where
                                                                                                   ∗
                                                                                                         −η
                                             PH,t −η                                              PH,t
                                                
                      CH,t = φH,t Ct                                ∗ = φ∗ C ∗
                                                               and CH,t                                            .                     (14)
                                              Pt                         H,t t                     Pt∗

Demand for foreign produced goods is given by analogous expressions. In these equations PH,t ,
 ∗ , P and P ∗ are price indexes given by
PH,t  t     t

                           hR                       i    1                     hR                          i    1
                  PH,t =                 1−θt dz        1−θt       ∗ =                 ∗     1−θt dz           1−θt
                                                                                                                                         (15)
                                NH pt (z)                       , PH,t             NH pt (z)                           ,

                  h                             i    1                         h                                           i    1
                       1−η         1−η                                      ∗1−η          ∗1−η
            Pt = φH,t PH,t + φF,t PF,t              1−η
                                                           and Pt∗ = φ∗H,t PH,t  + φ∗F,t PF,t                                  1−η
                                                                                                                                     .   (16)

Pt and Pt∗ will be referred to as the home and foreign country price levels, respectively. For
simplicity, I assume that the demand of the home and foreign governments—denoted by gt (z),
gt∗ (z), Gj,t , G∗j,t , Gt and G∗t —is given by analogous equations to equations (13) and (14).


                                                                14
       Agents in both countries have access to complete financial markets. There are no impediments to
international trade in financial securities. Home households of type x face a flow budget constraint
given by
                                                                               Z
                  Pt Ct + Et [Mt,t+1 Bt+1 (x)] ≤ Bt (x) + Wt (x)Lt (x) +             Φt (z)dz − Tt ,              (17)
                                                                                NH

where Bt+1 (x) is a random variable that denotes the state contingent payoff of the portfolio of
financial securities held by households of type x at the beginning of period t + 1, Mt,t+1 is the
stochastic discount factor that prices these payoffs in period t, Wt (x) denotes the wage rate received
by home households of type x in period t, Φt (z) is the profit of firm z in period t and Tt denotes
lump sum taxes.13
       A necessary condition for equilibrium in this model is that there exist no arbitrage opportunities.
It follows from the absence of arbitrage opportunities that all portfolios of financial securities that
pay off in period t + 1 may be priced in period t using a unique stochastic discount factor, Mt,t+1 ,
as in equation (17). In order to rule out “Ponzi schemes,” households’ portfolios of financial wealth
must always be large enough that future income suffices to avert default.
       Home households choose Ct , Lt (x) and Bt (x) in order to maximize expression (10) subject to
equation (17). An optimal plan must satisfy

                                                  uc (Ct ) = Pt Λt ,                                              (18)

                                                Mt,T Λt = β T −t ΛT ,                                             (19)

                                            vl (Lt (x), ξt ) = Wt (x)Λt ,                                         (20)

where Λt denotes the marginal utility of nominal income of households at time t, that is, the
Lagrange multiplier of the constrained optimization and subscripts on the functions u and v denote
partial derivatives. These three equations should hold for all periods t and all subsequent periods
T . The optimal plan must also satisfy a standard trasversality condition.
       Foreign households solve an analogous problem. Their optimal plan must satisfy

                                                 uc (Ct∗ ) = Pt∗ Λ∗t ,                                            (21)
  13
    In equation (17) financial assets are denominated in the home currency and Mt,t+1 denotes the home currency
nominal stochastic discount factor. It is important to note that the financial assets in equation (17) cannot generally
be denominated in “goods”. If goods are not freely traded internationally and don’t have the same exchange rate
adjusted price in the two countries, as will be assumed below, the same good in different countries must be viewed
as two different goods. Financial assets can in this case be denominated in “goods for delivery in home country” or
“goods for delivery in foreign country” but not “goods”.

                                                          15
                                                      Λ∗t         Λ∗
                                               Mt,T       = β T −t T ,                             (22)
                                                      Et          ET
                                            vl (L∗t (x), ξt∗ ) = Wt∗ (x)Λ∗t ,                      (23)

as well as a trasversality condition. Here Et denotes the nominal exchange rate, i.e., the home
currency price of foreign currency. Notice that the stochastic discount factor in equation (22) is
the same stochastic discount factor as in equation (19). This simply reflects the fact that assets
are traded on global markets in which all agents face the same prices.
      From equation (18)-(19) and (21)-(22) it follows that

                              uc (CT )  Mt,T PT                 uc (CT∗ )   Mt,T ET PT∗
                                       = T −t           and               =               .        (24)
                              uc (Ct )  β     Pt                uc (Ct∗ )   β T −t Et Pt∗

Combining these equations yields
                                                           uc (Ct∗ )
                                                    Qt =                                           (25)
                                                           uc (Ct )
where Qt = Et Pt∗ /Pt is the real exchange rate at time t and for simplicity Q0 = 1.



B       Firm Behavior

In each country there is a continuum of firm types indexed by z. The home country firms have
indexes on the interval NH = [0, 1]. The foreign country firms have indexes on the interval NF =
(1, 2]. Firms of type z specializes in the production of a differentiated good, yt (z). There are an
equal (large) number of firms of each type.
      In the following two subsections, I will describe two environments and the resulting firm behavior
in each environment. I will refer to these two environments as the heterogeneous factor markets
model and the homogeneous factor markets model. In both the heterogeneous factor markets model
and the homogeneous factor markets model, I assume that firms are able to price discriminate
between consumers in the two countries. In other words, they price-to-market (see, e.g., Krugman,
1987). Furthermore, firms denominate the price of their good in the home and foreign country in
the local currency of each country. In other words, they practice local-currency pricing (see, e.g.,
Devereux, 1997). Prices are sticky in both countries. Price setting is assumed to be synchronized
within each firm type but staggered between firm types.14 In each period firms of type z can change
their prices with probability 1 − α. With probability α they must keep their prices unchanged.
 14
      See Woodford (2003, section 3.1.) for an argument for why this assumption is reasonable.

                                                           16
This model of price stickiness was first proposed in Calvo (1983). The fact that a firm’s ability to
change its prices is independent of the state of the economy makes this model simple and tractable.


B.1     The Heterogeneous Factor Market Model

All inputs to production except labor are fixed for each firm. Firms of type z must hire labor of
type x = z. Other types of labor are not useful in the production of goods of type z. In other
words, the labor market is highly segmented. This may be due to the fact that specific skills are
required to produce each type of good. In this case, x denotes the skills each type of household is
endowed with or has invested in. The production function of firms of type z is

                                                 yt (z) = At f (Lt (z))                                            (26)

where At denotes an exogenous technology factor and Lt (z) denotes the amount of labor input
used by firms of type z in period t. The function f is increasing and concave. It is concave because
there are diminishing marginal returns to labor given the fixed amount of other inputs employed
at the firm. Firms act to maximize their value in domestic currency.
   In order to maximize profits a home country firm of type z that is able to change its prices at
time t chooses pt (z), p∗t (z) and LT (z) to maximize
                                                 ∞
                                                        αT −t Mt,T ΦT (z),
                                                 X
                                            Et                                                                     (27)
                                                 T =t

where
                                           !−θT                                               !−θT
                              pt (z)                                         p∗t (z)
 ΦT (z) = pt (z)(CH,T +GH,T )                      +ET p∗t (z)(CH,T
                                                                ∗
                                                                    +G∗H,T )    ∗                    −WT (z)LT (z) (28)
                              PH,T                                           PH,T

subject to the constraint that it produces at least as much as it sells,
                                          !−θT                                       !−θT
                                 pt (z)                ∗                   p∗t (z)
            (CH,T       + GH,T )                 +   (CH,T   +   G∗H,T )      ∗             ≤ AT f (LT (z)).       (29)
                                 PH,T                                      PH,T

Necessary conditions for an optimal plan are
                   ∞
                                                    θT                                  θT
                          αT −t Mt,T (CH,T + GH,T )PH,T
                   X
              Et                                        (1 − θT )[pt (z) −                   ST (z)] = 0,          (30)
                   T =t
                                                                                      θT − 1

                 ∞
                                                   ∗θT                                   θT
                        αT −t Mt,T (CH,T
                                     ∗
                                         + G∗H,T )PH,T (1 − θT )[ET p∗t (z) −
                 X
            Et                                                                                ST (z)] = 0,         (31)
                 T =t
                                                                                       θT − 1

                                                            17
for each period t at which firms of type z are able to change their prices,

                                        Wt (z) = At fl (Lt (z))St (z)                                  (32)

for all t and equation (29) with equality for all t. Here St (z) is the marginal cost of production,
i.e. the Lagrange multiplier of the firm’s constrained optimization problem. Foreign firms solve an
analogous optimization problem.
   Combining equations (18), (20) and (32) in order to eliminate Λt (z) and Wt (z) gives

                                       St (z)       vl (Lt (z), ξt )
                                              =                        .                               (33)
                                        Pt      At fl (Lt (z))uc (Ct )
Notice that Lt (z) = f −1 (yt (z)/At ). Using this relation, St (z)/Pt can be written without reference
to Lt (z) as
                                  St (z)       vl (f −1 (yt (z)/At ), ξt )
                                         =                                   .                         (34)
                                   Pt      At fl (f −1 (yt (z)/At ))uc (Ct )
Here the marginal costs of firms of type z have been written in terms of their level of output and
the level of domestic consumption. This is useful since it simplifies the model by eliminating both
Wt (z) and Lt (z).


B.2    The Homogeneous Factor Markets Model

There exists a fixed amount of non-depretiating capital in the economy that is owned by the firms.
For simplicity, I assume that firms can rent their capital stock to other firms but not sell it. All
workers are identical from each firm’s perspective. Firms are therefore indifferent regarding which
workers they hire and all workers receive the same wage Wt in equilibrium. The production function
of firms of type z is
                                        yt (z) = At f (Lt (z), Kt (z))                                 (35)

where At denotes an exogenous technology factor and Lt (z) denotes the amount of labor input
used by firms of type z in period t and Kt (z) denotes the amount of capital used by firms of type
z in period t. The function f is increasing in both its arguments and homogeneous of degree one.
Firms act to maximize their value in domestic currency.
   In order to maximize profits a home country firms of type z that are able to change its prices
at time t chooses pt (z), p∗t (z), LT (z) and Kt (z) to maximize (27) where
                                                 !−θT                                           !−θT
                                        pt (z)                                        p∗t (z)
        ΦT (z) = pt (z)(CH,T   + GH,T )                 + ET p∗t (z)(CH,T
                                                                      ∗
                                                                            + G∗H,T )    ∗
                                        PH,T                                          PH,T
                                                      18
                                                                        −WT LT (z) − RT (KT (z) − K(z))           (36)

subject to the constraint that it produces at least as much as it sells,
                                     !−θT                                       !−θT
                            pt (z)                ∗                   p∗t (z)
           (CH,T   + GH,T )                 +   (CH,T   +   G∗H,T )      ∗             ≤ AT f (LT (z), KT (z)),   (37)
                            PH,T                                      PH,T
where RT denotes the rental rate on capital in period T and K(z) denotes the capital endowment
of firms of type z.
    Necessary conditions for an optimal plan are equations (30)-(31) for each period t at which
firms of type z are able to change their prices,

                                        Wt = At fl (Lt (z), Kt (z))St (z)                                         (38)

                                        Rt = At fk (Lt (z), Kt (z))St (z)                                         (39)

for all t and equation (37) with equality for all t. Notice that equations (38)-(39) imply that
                                            Wt   fl (Lt (z), Kt (z))
                                               =                     .
                                            Rt   fk (Lt (z), Kt (z))
Since f is homogeneous of degree one, this implies that all firms choose the same labor-capital ratio
in period t even though they produce different amounts. This, in turn, implies that equation (38)
can be rewritten as
                                                            Wt
                                                 St =                  ,
                                                        At fl (ht , 1)
where ht denotes the common labor-capital ratio of all firms. Notice that this equation implies that
the marginal cost of all firms is equal. I have denoted this common marginal cost as St .
    Combining this last equations with equations (18), (20) and (38) in order to eliminate Λt (z)
and Wt yields
                                            St        vl (Lt , ξt )
                                               =                        ,                                         (40)
                                            Pt   At fl (ht , 1)uc (Ct )
where Lt is the amount of labor supplied by the representative household. Unlike in the hetero-
geneous markets case, all households supply the same amount of labor when the labor market is
homogeneous.



C     Log-Linearization of Heterogeneous Factor Markets Model

In this section, I work out a log-linear approximation of the heterogeneous factor markets model. A
log-linear approximation of the homogeneous factor markets model may be derived in an analogous
fashion.
                                                            19
   First, consider the left equation in (24). The expectation of the T = t + 1 version of this
equation may be written
                                                  1 uc (Ct ) Pt+1
                                                                 
                                    It = Et                       ,
                                                  β uc (Ct+1 ) Pt
since the gross short term nominal interest rate is given by It = 1/Et Mt,t+1 . A log-linear approxi-
mation of this equations is
                                   ct = Et ct+1 − σ(it − Et πt+1 ),                             (41)

where σ = −uc /ucc C, lower case letters denote percentage deviations from steady state of the same
upper case letters unless otherwise noted, uppercase letters without a time subscript denote steade
state values and πt = log(Pt /Pt−1 ). The foreign consumption Euler equation yields an analogous
log-linear approximation.
   A log-linear approximation of equation (25) is

                                           ct − c∗t = σqt .                                     (42)

   Log-linear approximations of the equations in (16) are

                                       φH pH,t + φF pF,t = 0,                                   (43)

                                       φF p∗H,t + φH p∗F,t = 0,                                 (44)

where pj,t = log(Pj,t /Pt ) and I have made use of the fact that the normalization φH,t + φF,t = 1
implies that all relative prices are 1 in steady state. Notice that these last two equations imply
that
                                       πt = φH πH,t + φF πF,t                                   (45)

                                       πt∗ = φF πH,t
                                                 ∗         ∗
                                                     + φH πF,t                                  (46)

A log-linear approximation of equation (15) is

                                              1−α
                                     πH,t =       (ph,t − pH,t ).                               (47)
                                               α
                                              1−α
                                     πF,t =       (pf,t − pF,t ).                               (48)
                                               α
where πj,t = log(Pj,t /Pj,t−1 ).




                                                     20
     Define cM      M ∗ as cM = φ c + φ c∗ and cM ∗ = φ c + φ c∗ , respectively and M and
             t and ct       t    H t   F t      t      F t   H t

M ∗ superscripts on other variables denote the analogous weighted averages. Given this notation,
a log-linear approximation of (29), (34) and their foreign counterparts are
                                                                                                         T
                                                                                                         X
                        yt,T = cM    M           M       M
                                T + gT + (θ − η)pH,T − θph,t + θ                                                πτM + φM
                                                                                                                       H,T ,
                                                                                                     τ =t+1

                                                                                                          T
                        ∗              ∗
                                                gTM ∗                        ∗              ∗
                                                                                                                  πτM ∗ + φM ∗
                                                                                                          X
                       yt,T     =   cM
                                     T     +             + (θ −         η)pM
                                                                           F,T     −   θpM
                                                                                         f,t    +θ                         F,T ,
                                                                                                         τ =t+1
                         vll Y     Ψy Y          ucc C      vlξ        vll Y     Ψy Y
                                                                                                                                
             st,T =              +        yt,T −       cT +     ξT −           +      + 1 aT ,
                         vl fl A   ΨA             uc        vl         vl fl A   ΨA
                         vll Y     Ψy Y          ucc C ∗    vlξ ∗      vll Y     Ψy Y
                                                                                      
             s∗t,T   =           +         ∗
                                          yt,T −       cT +     ξT −           +      + 1 a∗T .
                         vl fl A   ΨA             uc        vl         vl fl A   ΨA
where st,T denotes the percent deviation from steady state of the real marginal cost in period T of
the firms that set their prices in period t, yt,T denotes the percent deviation from steady state in
period T of the level of output of firms that set their prices in period t and Ψ = 1/fl (f −1 (y/A)).
Also, I assume that C = C ∗ = Y .
                                                                ∗ yields
     Combining these last four equations to eliminate yt,T and yt,T
                                                                                                 T
                                                                                                                        −1
                                                                                                 X
         st,T =   ω(cM
                     T     +    gTM )   + ω(θ −          η)pM
                                                            H,T         −   ωθpM
                                                                               h,t     + ωθ               πτM + φM
                                                                                                                 H,T + σ cT − ãT ,    (49)
                                                                                                τ =t+1

                                                                                               T
      s∗t,T = ω(cM ∗  M∗             M∗       M∗
                                                                                                         πτM ∗ − φM      −1 ∗    ∗
                                                                                               X
                 T + gT ) + ω(θ − η)pF,T − ωθpf,t + ωθ                                                            H,T + σ cT − ãT ,   (50)
                                                                                             τ =t+1
where
                                                                   
                                               vll Y         Ψy Y                                                    vlξ
                                    ω=         vl fl A   +   ΨA             and ãt = (ω + 1)at −                    vl ξt

and where we use the fact that φM       M∗
                                H,t = −φF,t .

     Log-linear approximations of equations (30) and (31) and their foreign counterparts are given
by
                                                     ∞
                                                     X                                                   ∞
                                                                                                         X
                        pht = (1 − αβ)                    (αβ)j Et (st,t+j − θ̂t+j ) +                       (αβ)j Et πt+j ,           (51)
                                                     j=0                                                 j=1
                                               ∞                                                               ∞
                     p∗ht = (1 − αβ)                                                                                         ∗
                                               X                                                               X
                                                    (αβ)j Et (st,t+j − qt+j − θ̂t+j ) +                            (αβ)j Et πt+j ,     (52)
                                               j=0                                                             j=1
                                                     ∞                                                   ∞
                        p∗f t                                           Et (s∗t,t+j          ∗                           ∗
                                                     X                                                   X
                                                                    j
                                = (1 − αβ)                 (αβ)                        −   θ̂t+j )   +         (αβ)j Et πt+j ,         (53)
                                                     j=0                                                 j=1
                                               ∞                                                               ∞
                                                     (αβ)j Et (s∗t,t+j + qt+j − θ̂t+j
                                                                                  ∗
                                               X                                                               X
                     pf t = (1 − αβ)                                                  )+                             (αβ)j Et πt+j ,   (54)
                                               j=0                                                             j=1
                                                                              21
where θ̂t = (θ/(θ − 1)2 )θt .
   Combining equations (47), (49) and (51) yields
                            ∞                                                            t+j
              1−α          X                                                            X
     πH,t +       pH,t = κ    (αβ)j Et ω(cM
                                          t+j + g M
                                                 t+j ) + ω(θ − η)p M
                                                                   H,t+j − ωθpM
                                                                              h,t + ωθ        πτM
               α           j=0                                                         τ =t+1
                                                                                              ∞
                                                                                         1−α X
                         +σ −1 cM         −1 R     M
                                t+j + φF σ ct+j + φH,t+j − ãt+j − θ̂t+j +                      (αβ)j Et πt+j (55)
                                                                                           α j=1

Notice that
                                    ∞             t+j                    ∞
                                    X             X                 1   X
                                        (αβ)j            πτM =             (αβ)j πt+j
                                                                                  M
                                                                                      .
                                    j=0         τ =t+1
                                                                 1 − αβ j=1

Using this and equations (42), (47) and (55) may be written
                                                           ∞
                      1−α                     1−α R
                                                                         
                                                             (αβ)j (ω + σ −1 )Et cM
                                                          X
                                        R
      (1 + ωθ) πH,t +     pH,t − φF ωθ πH,t +    pH,t = κ                         t+j
                       α                       α          j=0
                 ∞
                 X                                                                                        
            +κ       (αβ)j Et ω(θ − η)pM                   R        M                 M
                                       H,t+j + φF (qt+j + t+j ) + φH,t+j − ãt+j + ωgt+j − θ̂t+j
                 j=0
                                ∞                          ∞
                            1−α X     j                1−α X
                  +(1 + ωθ)       (αβ) Et πt+j − φF ωθ       (αβ)j Et πt+j
                                                                       R
                             α j=1                      α j=1

Now, using the fact that pH,t − pH,t−1 = πH,t − πt and defining

                                                (1−α)(1−αβ)                ω+σ −1
                                          κ=         α           and ζ =    1+ωθ ,


this equation can be rewritten as

                                       ωθ  R             R
                                                                         
     πH,t − βEt πH,t+1 + κpH,t − φF           πH,t − βEt πH,t+1 + κpRH,t
                                     1 + ωθ
                            ω(θ − η) M        φF                   κ
               = κζcM
                    t    +κ         p +κ           (qt + R
                                                          t )−         (ãt − ωgtM − φM
                                                                                      H,t+j + θ̂t ).
                             1 + ωθ H,t     1 + ωθ              1 + ωθ
                                          ∗
A similar set of manipulations involving πH,t yields

      ∗          ∗                     ωθ  R                            
     πH,t − βEt πH,t+1 + κp∗H,t + φH                      R
                                              πH,t − βEt πH,t+1 + κpRH,t
                                     1 + ωθ
                            ω(θ − η) M      1 − φF                 κ
               = κζcM
                    t    +κ         p −κ           (qt + R
                                                          t )−         (ãt − ωgtM − φM
                                                                                      H,t+j + θ̂t ).
                             1 + ωθ H,t     1 + ωθ              1 + ωθ

Combining the last two equations yields

                                           R          R
                                          πH,t = βEt πH,t+1 + κqt − κpR
                                                                      H,t ,


     M          M                             1 + ωη M        2φH φF         κ
    πH,t = βEt πH,t+1 + κζcM
                           t −κ                      pH,t + κ        qt −        (ãt − ωgtM − φM
                                                                                                H,t+j + θ̂t ),
                                              1 + ωθ          1 + ωθ      1 + ωθ
                                                              22
                                1 + ωη M                             κ
 πH,t = βEt πH,t+1 + κζcM
                        t −κ           pH,t − κφF pR
                                                   H,t + κφF qt −        (ãt − ωgtM − φM
                                                                                        H,t+j + θ̂t ),
                                1 + ωθ                            1 + ωθ
  ∗          ∗                  1 + ωη M                             κ
 πH,t = βEt πH,t+1 + κζcM
                        t    −κ        pH,t + κφH pR
                                                   H,t − κφH qt −        (ãt − ωgtM − φM
                                                                                        H,t+j + θ̂t ).
                                1 + ωθ                            1 + ωθ
                                                       ∗ yields
And a similar set of manipulations involving πF,t and πF,t

                                 R          R
                                πF,t = βEt πF,t+1 + κqt − κpR        R
                                                            F,t − κθ̂t ,


    M∗         M∗           ∗    1 + ωη M ∗       2φF φH          κ
   πF,t = βEt πF,t+1 + κζcM
                          t   −κ         pF,t − κ        qt −          (ã∗ − ωgtM ∗ + φM           ∗
                                                                                          H,t+j + θ̂t ),
                                 1 + ωθ           1 + ωθ       1 + ωθ t
                         ∗    1 + ωη M ∗                             κ
πF,t = βEt πF,t+1 + κζcM
                       t   −κ        p − κφH pR   F,t + κφH qt −           (ã∗ − ωgtM ∗ + φM            ∗
                                                                                             H,t+j + θ̂t ),
                              1 + ωθ F,t                          1 + ωθ t
 ∗          ∗            ∗    1 + ωη M ∗                             κ
πF,t = βEt πF,t+1 + κζcM
                       t   −κ        pF,t + κφF pRF,t − κφF qt −           (ã∗ − ωgtM ∗ + φM            ∗
                                                                                             H,t+j + θ̂t ).
                              1 + ωθ                              1 + ωθ t
   These equations along with equations (45) and (46) imply that

                                   M∗            1 + ωη                M∗
    πt = βEt πt+1 + κζ(φH cM
                           t + φF ct ) − κ              (φH pM                          R      R
                                                             H,t + φF pF,t ) − κφH φF (pH,t + pF,t )
                                                 1 + ωθ
                                           κ
                      +κ2φH φF qt −           (ãM − ω(φH gtM + φF gtM ∗ ) − (φH − φF )φM      M
                                                                                        H,t + θt ),
                                        1 + ωθ t

                                                1 + ωη
   πt∗ = βEt πt+1
              ∗
                  + κζ(φF cM       M∗
                           t + φH ct ) − κ             (φF pM         M∗               R      R
                                                            H,t + φH pF,t ) + κφH φF (pH,t + pF,t )
                                                1 + ωθ
                                          κ
                     −κ2φH φF qt −           (ãM ∗ − ω(φF gtM + φH gtM ∗ ) − (φF − φH )φM      M∗
                                                                                         H,t + θt ).
                                       1 + ωθ t

Using equations (43) and (44), these equations may be simplified:

                                     M∗           (φH − φF )ω(θ − η) M ∗
      πt = βEt πt+1 + κζ(φH cM
                             t + φF ct ) − κ                        pF,t + κ2φH φF qt
                                                       1 + ωθ
                                          κ
                                   −         (ãM − ω(φH gtM + φF gtM ∗ ) − (φH − φF )φM      M
                                                                                       H,t + θt ),
                                       1 + ωθ t

                                                  (φH − φF )ω(θ − η) M ∗
     πt∗ = βEt πt+1
                ∗
                    + κζ(φF cM       M∗
                             t + φH ct ) + κ                        pF,t − κ2φH φF qt
                                                       1 + ωθ
                                         κ
                                  −         (ãM ∗ − ω(φF gtM + φH gtM ∗ ) − (φF − φH )φM      M∗
                                                                                        H,t + θt ).
                                      1 + ωθ t

Notice, furthermore, that if θ = η the pM ∗
                                        F,t terms drop out of these equations.




                                                    23
References
Andrews, Donald W. K. and Hong-Yuan Chen, “Approximately Median-Unbiased Estima-
   tion of Autoregressive Models,” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 1994, 12 (2),
   187–204.

Baxter, Marianne and Robert G. King, “Measuring Business Cycles: Approximat Band-Pass
   Filters for Economic Time Series,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 1999, 81 (4), 575–593.

Benigno, Gianluca, “Real Exchange Rate Persistence and Monetary Policy Rules,” Journal of
   Monetary Economics, 2004, 51, 473–502.

Bergin, Paul R. and Robert C. Feenstra, “Staggered Price Setting, Translog Preferences, and
    Endogenous Persistence,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 2000, 45, 657–680.

     and       , “Pricing-to-Market, staggered contracts, and Real Exchange Rate Persistence,”
    Journal of International Economics, 2001, 54, 333–359.

Blanchard, Olivier J. and Charles Kahn, “The Solution of Linear Difference Equations under
    Rational Expectations,” Econometrica, 1980, 48, 1305–1311.

Bouakez, Hafedh, “Nominal Rigidity, Desired Markup Variations and Real Exchange Rate Per-
   sistence,” Journal of International Economics, 2005, 61, 49–74.

Calvo, Guillermo A., “Staggered Prices in a Utility-Maximizing Framework,” Journal of Mon-
    etary Economics, 1983, 12, 383–398.

Chari, V.V., Patrick J. Kehoe, and Ellen R. McGrattan, “Can Sticky Price Models Gen-
   erate Volatile and Persistent Real Exchange Rates,” Review of Economic Studies, 2002, 69,
   533–563.

Cheung, Yin-Wong and Kon S. Lai, “On the Purchasing Powever Parity Puzzle,” Journal of
   International Economics, 2000, 52, 321–330.

Christiano, Laurence J., Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles L. Evans, “Monetary Policy
    Shocks: What Have We Learned and to What End,” in John B. Taylor and Michael Woodford,
    eds., Handbook of Macroeconomics, Elsevier Amsterdam, Holland 1999, pp. 65–148.

Clarida, Richard, Jordi Gali, and Mark Gertler, “Monetary Policy Rules in Practice: Some
    International Evidence,” European Economic Review, 1998, 42, 1033–1067.

    ,    , and      , “Monetary Policy Rules and Macroeconomic Stability: Evidence and Some
    Theory,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2000, 115, 147–180.

Comin, Diego and Mark Gertler, “Medium-Term Business Cycles,” American Economic Re-
   view, 2006, 96 (3), 523–551.

Devereux, Michael B., “Real Exchange Rates and Macroeconomics: Evidence and Theory,”
   Canadian Journal of Economics, 1997, 30, 773–808.

Eichenbaum, Martin and Charles L. Evans, “Some Empirical Evidence on the Effects of
    Shocks to Monetary Policy on Exchange Rates,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1995, 110
    (4), 975–1009.
                                              24
Faust, Jon and John H. Rogers, “Monetary Policy’s Role in Exchange Rate Behavior,” Journal
    of Monetary Economics, 2003, 50, 1403–1424.

Groen, Jan J.J. and Akito Matsumoto, “Real Exchange Rate Persistence and Systematic
   Monetary Policy Behavior,” 2004. Bank of England Working Paper No. 231.

Hansen, Bruce E., “The Grid Bootstrap and the Autoregressive Model,” Review of Economics
   and Statistics, 1999, 81 (4), 594–607.

Huizinga, John, “An Empirical Investigation of the Long-Run Behavior of Real Exchange Rates,”
   Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 1987, 27, 149–214.

Klau, Marc and San Sau Fung, “The New BIS Effective Exchange Rate Indices,” BIS Quarterly
    Review, 2006, March 2006, 51–65.

Krugman, Paul R., “Pricing to Market When the Exchange Rate Changes,” in S. W. Arndt
   and J. D. Richardson, eds., Real-Financial Linkages Among Open Economies, MIT Press
   Cambridge, Mass. 1987, pp. 49–70.

Murray, Christian J. and David H. Papell, “The Purchasing Power Parity Persistence
   Paradigm,” Journal of International Economics, 2002, 65, 1–19.

Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth Rogoff, “Exchange Rate Dynamics Redux,” Journal of Po-
   litical Economy, 1995, 103 (3), 624–660.

Rogoff, Kenneth, “The Purchasing Power Parity Puzzle,” Journal of Economic Literature, 1996,
   34, 647–668.

Sims, Christopher A., “Solving Linear Rational Expectations Model,” Journal of Computational
   Economics, 2001, 20, 1–20.

Sondergaard, Jens, “Variable Capital Utilization, Staggered Wages and Real Exchange Rate
   Persistence,” 2004. Working Paper, Georgetown University.

Taylor, John B., “Discretion Versus Policy Rules in Practice,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference
    Series, 1993, 39, 195–214.

    , “Staggered Price and Wage Setting in Macroeconomics,” in John B. Taylor and Michael
    Woodford, eds., Handbook of Macroeconomics, Elsevier Amsterdam, Holland 1999, pp. 1009–
    1050.

Woodford, Michael, Interest and Prices, New Jersey: Princton University Press, 2003.




                                             25
              Table 1: Empirical Properties of the Trade Weighted U.S. Real Exchange Rate

                  Panel A: Point and Interval Estimation
                  Statistic                MU point estimate     90 % Confidence Interval
                  α                               0.954                [0.879, 1.000]
                  Half-life                        4.46                  [2.05, ∞]
                  Up-life                          2.37                  [0.00, ∞]
                  Quarter-life                     6.36                  [2.85, ∞]
                  UL/HL                            0.53                 [0.00, 0.74]
                  QL - HL                          1.91                 [0.64, 14.45]
                  2HL - QL                         2.55                 [0.01, 7.14]
                  ρ1,hp                            0.78                 [0.64, 0.85]
                  St.Dev(Q)/St.Dev(C)              5.51


                  Panel B: Hypothesis Testing
                  Hypothesis                     P-value
                  α=1                              0.05
                  UL/HL = 0                        0.15
                  HL < QL - HL                     0.05



An AR(5) model was estimated for the trade weighted log real exchange rate for each country. α denotes the
sum of the AR coefficients (see equation (1)). HL, UL, and QL, denote the half-life, up-life and quarter-life
of the real exchange rate, respectively. These statistics are measured in years. ρ1,hp denotes the first order
autocorrelation of the HP-filtered real exchange rate. St.Dev(Q)/St.Dev(C) denotes the ratio of the standard
deviation of the HP-filtered real exchange rate to HP-filtered consumption. For each statistic, I report a
point estimate, a 90% confidence interval and a P-value. Median unbiased point estimates for the parameters
in equation (1) were calculated using the grid-bootstrap method of Hansen (1999) with parameters G = 80
and B = 249. Confidence intervals and P-values were calculated using a conventional bootstrap with sample
size 1000. Confidence intervals for UL/HL and 2HL-QL were calculated conditional on there statistics being
defined.
                  Table 2: Empirical Properties of Trade Weighted Real Exchange Rates

                     Panel A: Point Estimates
                                    HL     QL-HL    UL/HL        ρ1,hp       St.Dev(Q)
                                                                             St.Dev(C)
                     Canada         7.44    3.58      0.54        0.83          3.83
                     Euro Area      2.69    1.22      0.53        0.80
                     France         3.23    2.66      0.35        0.79          1.89
                     Germany        3.84    2.20      0.44        0.77          2.72
                     Italy          3.76    3.57      0.00        0.73          2.38
                     Japan          3.69    1.92      0.46        0.80          6.01
                     Switzerland    1.59    0.85      0.37        0.76          2.82
                     UK             2.02    1.40      0.28        0.76          3.92
                     US             4.46    1.91      0.53        0.78          5.51


                     Panel B: Hypothesis Testing
                                                     α=1      UL/HL=0       HL<QL-HL
                     Canada                           0.15        0.03          0.01
                     Euro Area                        0.02        0.12          0.08
                     France                           0.06        0.18          0.24
                     Germany                          0.06        0.22          0.08
                     Italy                            0.12        0.60          0.38
                     Japan                            0.05        0.04          0.08
                     Switzerland                      0.00        0.29          0.15
                     UK                               0.01        0.34          0.24
                     US                               0.05        0.15          0.05



An AR(5) model was estimated for the trade weighted log real exchange rate for each country. α denotes the
sum of the AR coefficients (see equation (1)). HL, UL, and QL, denote the half-life, up-life and quarter-life
of the real exchange rate, respectively. These statistics are measured in years. ρ1,hp denotes the first order
autocorrelation of the HP-filtered real exchange rate. St.Dev(Q)/St.Dev(C) denotes the ratio of the standard
deviation of the HP-filtered real exchange rate to HP-filtered consumption. For each statistic, I report a
point estimate, a 90% confidence interval and a P-value. Median unbiased point estimates for the parameters
in equation (1) were calculated using the grid-bootstrap method of Hansen (1999) with parameters G = 80
and B = 249. Confidence intervals and P-values were calculated using a conventional bootstrap with sample
size 1000. Confidence intervals for UL/HL and 2HL-QL were calculated conditional on there statistics being
defined.
                                             Table 3: Parameter Values

                      Benchmark Calibration:
                         Discount factor                            β = 0.99
                         Elast. of intertemporal substitution       σ = 1/5
                         Marginal cost elasticity                   ω=3
                         Elasticity of demand                       η = θ = 10
                         Fraction of firms that change prices       1 − α = 0.25
                         Home bias parameters                       φH = 0.94, φF = 0.06
                         Taylor rule paremeters                     ρi = 0.85, ψc = 0.5, ψπ = 2
                         Monetary policy shocks                     ρi = 0.9, corr(νt ,νt∗ ) = 0.5
                         Phillips curve shocks                                            ∗ ) = 0
                                                                    ρη = 0.9, corr(νa,t ,νa,t
                      Composite parameters:
                              (1−α)(1−αβ)
                         κ=        α        = 0.086                 γq = 2φH φF = 0.113
                                                                                  ω+σ −1
                         ζhomog. = ω + σ −1 = 8                     ζheterog. =    1+ωθ     = 0.26



                            Table 4: Behavior the Real Exchange Rate in the Model

                                                      HL    UL/HL    QL - HL        ρ1,hp     st.dev(qt )
                                                                                              st.dev(ct )

                 1.     Median Empirical
                        Value for 9 Countries         3.7    0.44        1.9        0.78         3.3

                 2.     Homog. Labor Market
                        Money Supply Shocks           0.6    0.00        0.7        0.49         5.1

                 3.     Heterog. Labor Market
                        Money Supply Shocks           1.3    0.00        1.3        0.64         3.7

                 4.     Extreme Model
                        Money Supply Shocks           1.4    0.00        1.4        0.65         3.3

                 5.     Homog. Labor Market
                        Phillips Curve Shocks         3.3    0.41        2.1        0.82         6.9

                 6.     Heterog. Labor Market
                        Phillips Curve Shocks         4.1    0.40        2.6        0.84         4.2


The table reports median unbiased estimates and 95% confidence intervals. HL denotes half-life (measured
in years), UL/HL denotes up-life divided by half-life, ρ1,hp denotes the first order autocorrelation of the
HP-filtered series and st.dev(qt )/st.dev(ct ) denotes the standard deviation of HP-filtered qt divided by the
standard deviation of HP-filtered ct . Point estimates of HL, UL/HL and QL - HL were calculated by
estimating equation (1) with p = 5 using the grid-bootstrap method described in Hansen (1999) with
parameters G = 80 and B = 249. The point estimates for ρ1,hp and st.dev(qt )/st.dev(ct ) were calculated by
simulating 1000 data series from each model—each of length 127 (corresponding to the length of my data
set). The point estimate is the median value of the resulting distribution.
           Figure 1: Impulse Response of the U.S. Real Exchange Rate
       %
           1.6

           1.4

           1.2

            1

           0.8

           0.6

           0.4

           0.2

            0

        -0.2
                     5          10        15          20         25          30
                                         Quarters
The figure plots an estimated impulse response function for the trade weighted log U.S.
real exchange rate. The impulse response is based on median unbiased estimation of an
AR(5) model on quarterly data from the period 1975:1-2006:3. The dotted lines denote a
90% bootstrap confidence interval.
     Figure 2: Response of the Real Exchange Rate to a Monetary Shock


                1

              0.8

              0.6

              0.4

              0.2

                0

             -0.2
                    0         5           10           15               20


This figure plots the response of the real exchange rate to a home monetary policy shock
in the model with heterogeneous labor markets (ζ = 0.26).


   Figure 3: Response of the Real Exchange Rate to a Phillips curve shock

              1.6
                                                 Phillips curve shock
              1.4                                Money supply shock

              1.2

                1

              0.8

              0.6

              0.4

              0.2

                0

             -0.2
                    0    5        10      15      20         25         30



This figure plots the response of the real exchange rate to a shock to the home Phillips
curve in the model with heterogeneous labor markets (ζ = 0.26). Also reported is the
response of the real exchange rate to a home monetary policy shock.
       Figure 4: The U.S. Real Exchange Rate and its HP-Filter Trend
         log Q
             -4.35

              -4.4

            -4.45

              -4.5

            -4.55

              -4.6

            -4.65

              -4.7

            -4.75

              -4.8

            -4.85
                1975      1980   1985    1990    1995    2000        2005


This figure plots the log of the trade weighted U.S. real exchange rate and a trend line
from the HP-filter with bandwidth 1600.



                     Figure 5: Desired Path of the Real Interest Rate


            1

          0.8

          0.6

          0.4

          0.2

            0

         -0.2

         -0.4

                0         5       10       15       20          25          30
Figure 6: Response of Consumption and Inflation to a Monetary Policy Shock

                                                     Consumption
             1                                       Inflation


           0.8

           0.6

           0.4

           0.2

             0

           -0.2

           -0.4

                  0   5       10      15      20      25           30




 Figure 7: Response of Consumption and Inflation to a Phillips Curve Shock

           1.5                                     Consumption
                                                   Inflation

             1


           0.5


             0


           -0.5


            -1
                  0   5       10      15      20      25           30
