                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          INNOCENTS ABROAD:
THE HAZARDS OF INTERNATIONAL JOINT VENTURES WITH PYRAMIDAL GROUP FIRMS

                                           Susan Perkins
                                           Randall Morck
                                           Bernard Yeung

                                        Working Paper 13914
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13914


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2008




 The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
 National Bureau of Economic Research.

 NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
 reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
 NBER publications.

 © 2008 by Susan Perkins, Randall Morck, and Bernard Yeung. All rights reserved. Short sections
 of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
 credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Innocents Abroad: The Hazards of International Joint Ventures with Pyramidal Group Firms
Susan Perkins, Randall Morck, and Bernard Yeung
NBER Working Paper No. 13914
April 2008
JEL No. G3,G34,L96,M16,O54

                                              ABSTRACT

The fundamental unit of production in microeconomics is the firm, and this mirrors reality in the United
States and United Kingdom. But elsewhere, business groups can be the more important unit, for business
strategy is often formulated at the business group level, not the firm level. In many countries, this is
legally enshrined in corporate governance codes that assign officers and directors a duty to act for
their business group, not their firm or its shareholders. Even where a duty to individual firms' shareholders
exists, business groups often have pyramidal structures of intercorporate blockholdings that entrench
controlling shareholders, usually wealthy families, who run their groups to maximize their utility.
This can impose exacerbated agency problems. In either case, foreign joint venture partners who expect
domestic firms to maximize shareholder value can be sorely disappointed. We explain agency behavior
in business groups and how controlling insiders can divert resources between firms they control, including
joint ventures, to enrich themselves; and highlight differences between this behavior and agency problems
in freestanding firms. We then examine the telecoms industry in Brazil, a country in which most large
businesses belong to pyramidal business groups controlled by wealthy families. We find that joint
ventures between Brazilian telecoms firms and partners from countries where business groups are
rarer have significantly elevated failure rates; while joint ventures with foreign partners from countries
where pyramidal groups are more common are more likely to succeed. We then present clinical examples
illustrating the mechanisms that drive such divergent performance in joint venture partnerships. While
our results are based on a single industry in a single country, we believe they highlight a previously
unexamined important issue in international business strategy.


Susan Perkins                                         Bernard Yeung
Northwestern University                               Stern School of Business
Kellogg School of Management                          New York University
2001 Sheridan Road, 3100 LEV,                         44 West 4th Street, Room 7-87
Evanston, Illinois 60208                              New York, NY 10012
s-perkins@kellogg.northwestern.edu                    byeung@stern.nyu.edu

Randall Morck
Faculty of Business
University of Alberta
Edmonton, CANADA T6G 2R6
and NBER
randall.morck@ualberta.ca
Introduction

        The traditional strategy literature assumes the conventional viewpoint of microeconomics that the

basic unit of business is the value-maximizing firm (Samuelson, 1947). More recently, the literature

encompasses corporate governance issues formalized by Jensen and Meckling (1976), who highlight

deviations from value maximization associated with hired managers’ utility maximization. This

framework may adequately characterize large listed American and British firms, which are almost always

freestanding – they neither control nor are controlled by other listed firms, and are typically also widely

held – predominantly owned by small shareholders, either directly or via institutional investors, such as

mutual funds or pension funds.

        Recent studies on international governance, including La Porta et al., (1999); Claessens et al.,

(2000); Faccio and Lang, (2002); Barca and Becht, (2001), and many others, reveal that the

aforementioned governance structure as almost unique to the U.S. and U.K. Elsewhere, large listed

corporations more typically belong to business groups.         These usually have a pyramidal form: a

controlling owner, usually a wealthy family, votes control blocks in one or more listed firms, which each

votes control blocks in many other listed firms, which each votes control blocks in still more listed firms,

and so on. These pyramidal groups are the tiered structures that let small handfuls of wealthy families

control the greater parts of the large corporate sectors of many economies in Latin America and

elsewhere. See Morck, Wolfenzon & Yeung (2005) for a review of the finance and economics based

literature on pyramids.

        The importance of pyramidal groups to strategy lies in the relationships between corporate

control structures, institutional environments, firm behavior, and firm performance. In the strategy

literature, initial steps towards exploring these relationships include Khanna & Rivkin (2001), Khanna &

Palepu (2000) and Chang and Hong (2002), who report a positive link between business group control

and individual firm performance. 1 This paper’s stance is different. We demonstrate how a pyramidal



1
 For a comprehensive survey on the relationship between pyramiding and firm and economy wide performance, see
Morck, Wolfenzon, and Yeung, 2005.
                                                     3
group’s governance structure can pose an expropriation risk to uninformed outsiders, including foreign

managers guiding their freestanding firms into joint ventures with pyramidal group member firms.

           Multinational enterprises (MNEs) frequently enter joint venture partnerships with local firms as a

competitive strategy to internationalize; that mitigates their unfamiliarity with local ground rules, culture,

and business practices, and their lack of local “connections” – which sum to their so-called “liability of

foreignness.” 2 However, this strategy can be a double-edged sword if the MNE fails to anticipate the

governance issues that arise in business groups. If the local partner firm belongs to a business group, it

may be governed in the interest of the group as a whole or of the ultimate controlling shareholder, not the

firm’s own shareholders. The controlling shareholder can sacrifice the interests of a group member firm

to advance those greater goals, and a foreign joint venture partner innocent of this can be blindsided by

inexplicably devastating non-value maximizing behavior by its local partner. But the forewarned MNE

manager is forearmed and can protect the joint venture accordingly.

           This means the under informed MNE’s ex post returns from joint ventures can be far lower than

its managers expected ex ante. Once this risk becomes clear, the MNE may opt to abandon the joint

venture.      Thus, joint venture failure should correlate with managerial blind spots regarding the

governance of partner firms belonging to pyramidal groups. Indeed, this may constitute an explanation,

previously insufficiently explored in the strategy and international business literatures, for international

joint ventures’ remarkably high failure rates. 3

           As a first pass exploration of this possibility, we examine data on 96 multinational subsidiaries’

entries into the Brazilian telecommunications industry from 1997 through 2004, and find evidence

consistent with our conjecture that unfamiliarity with pyramidal groups leads to failure. Our data show

that joint ventures between firms with certain combinations of governance structures are especially apt to


2
  Liabilities of foreignness, a term coined by Zaheer (1995) and Zaheer & Mosakowski, (1997), captures the cost
inefficiencies foreign firms face in host nations. This builds on the earlier foreign investment research by Hymer
(1976) and Buckley and Casson (1976), which points out such liabilities of MNE’s and calls the ensuing advantage
of indigenous firms their home court advantage.
3
  Common explanations for joint ventures’ remarkably high failure rates (see Kogut, 1989; Park, 1997) are:
competitive pressure from outside the joint venture agreement (Park and Russo, 1996), concerns about protecting
intellectual property rights (Kogut, 1989), and dissolution once organizational learning ends, or when the general
usefulness of the joint venture ends (Nakamura et al., 1996).
                                                        4
underperform and fail. For example, joint ventures of widely held freestanding firms with pyramidal

group firms are the most at risk and ultimate failure 4 . In contrast, joint ventures of pyramidal group firms

with other pyramidal group firms have the highest incidence of survival. We conclude that the latter pairs

better understand their partner firms’ governance, and employ such counter-measures as are necessary.

           We then describe our field research. This entails case studies illustrating how freestanding widely

held firms’ unfamiliarity with pyramidal groups can lead to their losing control rights, suffering wealth

expropriation by their joint venture partner, and ultimately exiting the underperforming joint venture. We

then explore how foreign pyramid firms, which obviously understand governance issues inside pyramids,

employ safeguards for their joint venture arrangements, and elaborate on the tactics they use.

           This paper proceeds as follows. The next section defines pyramidal groups and discusses how

pyramidal group firms differ from other corporate ownership structures, and why such a control structure

is particularly problematic for a partnering firm unfamiliar with pyramidal groups. The third section

presents empirical results linking joint ventures’ statistical hazard rates in the Brazilian

telecommunications industry to foreign managers’ unfamiliarity with pyramidal groups. The fourth

section uses case analyses and executive interviews to explore the underlying economics and confirm our

interpretation of the causal relationships. Techniques for liberating wealth from foreign joint venture

partners are described. Alternatively, countermeasures adopted by joint venture partners familiar with

pyramidal groups are described and again hazard rate analysis is used to gauge their effectiveness. We

conclude with implications for strategy scholars and foreign investment practitioners.




The Mystery of the Pyramid

The Nature and Purpose of Pyramids

Pyramidal groups are collections of firms with corporate governance structures that differ markedly from

those of freestanding widely held firms in three primary ways.



4
    Failure is defined as exit not due to acquisitions, regulatory shifts, geographic consolidation, etc.
                                                              5
         First, pyramidal groups have one apex firm, or very rarely a few apex firms, with one dominant

owner controlling the apex firm and a group of tiered firms. Most often, the dominant owner is a wealthy

family (La Porta et. al, 1999); and the literature refers to this corporate governance structure as a family

pyramid (Morck, Wolfenzon & Yeung, 2005; Faccio and Lang, 2002; Claessens, Djankov & Lang, 2000)

like the Carlos Slim Helú (the Mexican billionaire) pyramidal group. 5

         Second, the controlling owner typically effects control through chains of intercorporate equity

blocks connecting the apex firm to each member firm in the group. The outcome is that pyramiding

exponentially leverages a controlling owner’s wealth into a vast amount of controlled corporate assets

while having only limited equity participation in many of the controlled units, especially at the lower

tiers. Let us illustrate: a rich family can split $1 billion family money into two and let each be the equity

participation of a public company of $1 billion. Assuming that 50% of equity shares is enough for

control, the family now controls two public corporations with a total of $2 billions corporate assets.

Repeating the act once the family leverages the $1 billion family wealth to control four $1 billion

corporations while maintaining only 25% equity participation in each. Repeating the act multiple times,

the family creates N layers of firms leverages the $1 billion to control in consolidation $2N-1 billion

corporation assets while maintaining only 1/2N-1 equity participation in the Nth layer, 1/2N-2 in the N-1th

layer, etc. 6 The more tiers added, the greater the number of firms controlled and the smaller the equity

participation in the firms on the added tiers. Clearly, public shareholders supply additional equity to

listed firms in each tier, allowing each tier to have a total capitalization much greater than the one above




5
   Although the controlling shareholder is usually a wealthy family, pyramidal groups exist that are ultimately
controlled by financial institutions, like the Deutsche Bank group in Germany. In Germany, public shareholders in
German firms routinely sign over their voting rights to the banks that manage their stock accounts. Thus, large
banks serve as de facto apex firms of pyramids. The large German banks are all widely held. Many listed Japanese
firms belong to keiretsu, in which firms with no controlling shareholders each hold small stakes in one another that
collectively sum to control blocks. Canada, France, and Italy also contain, or did contain, pyramidal groups without
family firms at their apexes. In some cases the apex firm is widely held. In others, it is state-controlled, e.g., the
Caisse de Dépôt et Placements du Québec in Canada. For more details, see the survey in Morck, Wolfenzon, and
Yeung (2005). See also Fan et al. (2005) on SOE controlled groups in China.
6
  As an illustration, Tian (2007) describes the Edper Bronfman group in Canada in the mid 1990s comprising sixteen
tiers of firms controlling firms, in chains of control culminating at the apex family trusts.
                                                          6
it. These injections of public equity at each tier are critical, and justify the term pyramidal. At each layer,

an upper tier firm controls a multitude of lower tier firms, thence the word pyramidal group. 7

         For most group firms, the dominant shareholder’s control is thus indirect: he controls a firm that

controls another firm that controls another and so on. The family can expand its voting power relative to

its actual ownership stake by holding super-voting shares (more than one vote per share), golden shares

(single shares carrying 51% of all votes), corporate charters limiting shareholders’ voting rights

(specifying, for instance, that the family appoints over half the directors), and other control enhancing

mechanisms can further leverage control. Cross-holdings – firms holding equity blocks in other firms at

equivalent or higher tiers – can make the position (or membership) of a firm in a pyramidal group hard for

outsiders to gauge, and its mangers’ actions hard to predict.

         Third, pyramidal groups differ from widely-held firms and other forms of business groups in that

the dominant owner of the apex firm essentially appoints the top management of every firm in his group.

This is because the board of every firm is appointed by the board of its parent firm in the tier above.

These appointees are usually the dominant shareholder himself, his close relatives, or his loyal associates.

To further secure control throughout the pyramid, the dominant owner typically also appoints trusted

associates and family members to key executive management positions in all significant firms.               In

essence, this means that the interest of the dominant owner of apex firm is effectively represented at all

level.

         Figure 1 illustrates these three distinct characteristics of pyramidal structures in the seven-tiered

pyramid controlled by the Carlos Slim Helú and his family which includes seemingly unrelated firms

spanning auto parts manufacturing and distribution, transportation, water treatment plants, commercial

retail (such as Sears Roebuck of Mexico), music shops, eateries, and fixed line and wireless

telecommunications services throughout the Americas. The top tiers are majority owned, controlled, and

managed by the family members, while lower tiers have more outside investors with significantly higher

equity participation and low voting stakes. The second tier firm Grupo Carso is managed by Slim Helú’s


7
 Clearly, we should not confuse pyramids with firms having many 100% owned subsidiaries, like real estate
businesses in the US (which often incorporate properties separately for liability reasons).
                                                       7
three sons (Carlos, Marco Antonio, and Patrick Slim Domit) 8 . La Porta et al. (1999) document such

family management in 69% of the pyramidal groups in their sample. More rarely, outside blockholders in

pyramid member firms negotiate contracts with the dominant shareholder specifying a division of

management positions. The third tier firms (Orient Star and Carso Global Telecom) are merely holding

companies controlled by the Slim family. Via these holding companies set near the pyramid’s apex, the

family controls lower tier firms through dominant direct and indirect equity blocks.


                                         INSERT FIGURE 1 HERE


Group Structures Other than Pyramids

Although La Porta et al. (1999) show pyramidal groups to be by far the most prominent governance

structures in most countries, other sorts of business groups also exist. The most well-known are the

Japanese keiretsu – constellations of major firms, each holding tiny equity stakes in all the others.

Collectively, these stakes sum to control blocks, so each firm is “controlled” by all the others, with no

wealthy family or other single controlling owner in the picture. The major firms in the keiretsu then each

serve as apex firms for their own pyramidal groups (Morck and Nakamura, 2005).

        Pyramidal groups, plus other such corporate groups, are commonly denoted “business groups”

(Khanna & Rivkin, 2001; Khanna & Palepu, 2000; Chang and Hong, 2002), and their inter-firm ties

“group affiliations” (Chang, 2003). Business groups should not be confused with “conglomerates,”

which is a single freestanding firm with divisions active in many industries. 9 Conglomerates thus do not

provide the scope for leveraging substantial family fortunes into undisputable control over corporate

assets worth vastly more, as pyramids do. In fact, large conglomerates in the United States are generally

widely held and professionally managed, not controlled by wealthy families. Our focus is on pyramidal

groups, and all of our arguments may not apply fully to other less usual sorts of business groups.


8
 Sourced from Hoovers online and company SEC filings, 2006
9
  A very recent innovation, so-called tracking stocks issued by US conglomerates, can cause them to resemble
pyramidal groups in some ways. Tracking stocks are shares issued by one division of a conglomerate that pay
dividends based on the earnings of that division. However, the owners of tracking stock are entitled to the same
voting rights as the owners of ordinary common shares. This prevents a dominant shareholder from exercising
control in the manner possible in a pyramidal group. See Hass (1996) for more detail.
                                                       8
Pyramids Everywhere

        Recent empirical studies show widely held freestanding firms are common in only the United

States, the United Kingdom, the Netherlands and Ireland (see the survey by Morck, Yeung, Wolfenzon

2005). Elsewhere, controlling shareholders prevail – usually very wealthy families and occasionally

state-owned enterprises (SOE). 10 La Porta et al. (1999) examine 27 high-income countries and, using a

20% definition of control and, taking worldwide averages, find only 36% of large firms widely held, but

54% in pyramidal groups. Of these, two thirds are controlled by families and one third by SOEs. Morck,

Stangeland, and Yeung (2000) report a high incidence of pyramidal group control in large Canadian

firms. Claessens, Djankov and Lang (2000), examining 2,980 firms in nine East Asian countries, find a

controlling shareholder in over 67% of the firms and report that pyramidal groups are commonplace.

Faccio and Lang (2002) find similar results studying 5,323 Western European firms: 37% are widely held

firms and 44% family controlled and pyramidal groups are again commonplace. Fogel (2006) confirms

the preponderance of wealthy family control over the ten largest business entities (groups or freestanding

firms) in most countries. 11      In Brazil, Portugal, Mexico, and Argentina, the top ten entities are

predominantly pyramidal groups, while in the U.S., U.K., and Australia, the top ten entities are

predominantly widely held firms. Table 1 reproduces her results. 12

        Understanding this variation in corporate governance across countries is important for firms

considering international joint ventures. Unfamiliarity with the host country’s institutional environment –

its regulations, laws, and business practices – has negative implications on firm performance (Perkins,

2008, Henisz, 2000). Corporate governance norms are an important part of a country’s institutional

10
   While families are important as dominant shareholders, pension funds also register as the largest owners of many
of these firms. Pension funds typically avoid direct involvement in day-to-day management to avoid being
classified as “insiders” for stock trading purposes.
11
   Fogel (2006) combines all the major firms in each pyramidal group into one composite entity. She then ranks
these entities by their employment for each country.
12
   The table shows that Germany, Japan, and Demark have small family control. In Germany, small investors buy
shares through banks, and banks vote on their behalf. Hence, many firms are de facto controlled by banks. In
Japan, seemingly diffuse ownership obscures keiretsu groups, in which each firm holds tiny stakes in all other group
firms, and these stakes sum to control blocks. In Denmark, charitable foundations control many large firms, since
controlling shareholders can minimize taxes by bequeathing their wealth to a charity, which can employ their
children, though not subsequent generations.
                                                         9
environment and often reflect other institutional constraints like property rights protections and capital

market development (La Porta et al., 1999).        If joint venture partners misunderstand each other’s

governance, they are likely to misconstrue each other’s behavior as well, and perhaps unwittingly expose

themselves to avoidable expropriation risks.      In the following sub-sections, we describe the basic

corporate governance problems associated with pyramidal groups.

                                        INSERT TABLE 1 HERE



Pyramids and their Secrets

         The key in pyramiding is the leveraging of small cash flow rights into dominant and entrenched

control rights of a multitude of firms. Berle and Means (1932) show that pyramids often generate far

more extreme separations of ownership from control than occur in widely held freestanding firms. A

string of literature (Berle and Means, 1932; Bonbright and Means, 1932; Bebchuk et al., 2000, Morck,

Wolfenzon, Yeung 2005) shows that such leveraged ownership structures induce corporate governance

problems unfamiliar in countries whose corporate sectors are populated by freestanding widely-held

firms.

         Pyramiding modifies our basic framework (e.g., Jensen and Meckling, 1976) for understanding

agency problems in several critical ways:

1.       Agency problems arise. Despite each firm in the pyramid having a large shareholder in one (or

more) firm in the tiers above, actual control vests with the dominate owner of the apex firm, whose real

ownership stake in lower tiered firms can be miniscule (Bebchuk et al., 2000).

2.       Shareholders are heterogeneous. Agency problems arise because of conflicts between a firm’s

public and controlling shareholders, and these overshadow the more standard agency problems between

generic shareholders and hired managers described by Jensen and Meckling (1976).

3.       The insiders are entrenched. The controlling shareholder, the agent in the principal-agent

problem in a pyramidal group, is usually entrenched. In the US and UK, freestanding firms may have

insider ownership of 5% or more, which Morck et al. (1988) argue can induce an economically significant

alignment of their interests with public shareholder value. More critically, even these insiders do not have
                                                    10
indisputable control over the board and firm because of the market for corporate control, which is

comprised of takeover threats, proxy challenges at shareholder meetings, or any of the other mechanisms

that occasionally depose underperforming professional managers of widely held firms (Morck et al.

1989). In contrast, in pyramids the controlling insider and his appointed managers cannot be dislodged

by these mechanisms because the controlling shareholder votes a control block in each firm in his

pyramid (Morck, Shleifer, and Vishny, 1988). 13 Without the external pressures, the insiders of pyramid

member firms are essentially immune to challenges from minority shareholders that constrain the self-

interest of professional mangers in widely held freestanding firms.

         A logical strategic response to supervene a change in control in a pyramid member firm would

require buying out the controlling shareholder. However, this rarely occurs because of the following

point.

4.       Insiders reap private benefits of control. The controlling shareholder of a pyramidal group can

glean as private benefits not only perks akin to those extracted by professional managers of widely held

firms, but also tangible and intangible rewards uniquely attainable by controlling a vast group of firms.

Since he extracts private benefits of control as well as the normal returns due a shareholder, buying him

out costs more than buying shares on the open market. In fact, the more astute the controlling shareholder

is at extracting private benefits, the more expensive it is to buy him out. This adds an adverse selection

problem to the already hearty brew of governance problems in pyramidal groups. Bebchuk, Kraakman,

and Triantis (2000) argue that an ensuing race to the bottom ultimately entrusts the governance of

pyramid member firms to “the most efficient thieves”.

         What are these private benefits of control that pyramidal groups can provide to their ultimate

controlling shareholder, but not to other shareholders? They are clearly substantial (Bebchuk, Kraakman,

and Triantis, 2000; Dyck and Zingales, 2004; Nenova, 2000). While other shareholders benefit from

dividends and rising share prices, the controlling shareholder can also appropriate corporate assets for

private use by simply directing firms he controls, but in which his real financial stake is slight, to pay for


13
 In extreme cases, the entrenched managers are locked into coveted control position through umbrella agreements,
which we explore further in section 3.5.
                                                      11
jets, country club memberships, extravagant accommodation in attractive locations, and the like. Also,

intangible private benefits range from using corporate assets to advance the controlling shareholder’s

political or social agenda to enjoyment of the social status commensurate with membership in a tight

oligarchy. The line between tangible and intangible private benefits can be blurred too as, for example,

when firms low in the pyramid spend money to lobby politicians for policies beneficial to firms near the

apex.

        The extraction of private benefits of control by the controlling shareholder often requires that a

given pyramidal group member firm deliberately pursue policies other than value maximization. In

countries where officers and directors have a duty to act for the controlling shareholders of their firm,

such behavior must be secret. In some countries, officers and directors’ fiduciary duty is to their business

group, not to any particular firm (Johnson et al. 2000). In any case, the tight links of member firms’

officers and directors to the pyramid’s controlling shareholder, the complex web of cross holdings that

often obscures the identity of the controlling shareholder, and the use of unlisted firms as intermediaries,

can effectively obscure such policies; all these vastly facilitate self-dealing when compared to free

standing firms.

        The controlling shareholder at the pyramid apex then often shunts wealth away from outside

investors, which could be joint venture partners. To this end, the controlling shareholder can direct group

firms mainly owned by joint venture partners to enter disadvantageous agreements with firms in which

his real ownership stake is large. Such transactions between seemingly independent firms that actually

share a common ultimate controlling shareholder are called tunneling 14 in the finance literature (Johnson

et al. 2000) and self-dealing in corporation law.



Unforeseen Danger for Joint Venture Partners




14
   Tunneling tactics include transfer pricing, opportunistically adjusting invoice prices in intra-group trading of
goods and services; as well as other forms of income shifting, such as providing artificial financial or insurance
services.
                                                        12
Multinational’s managers may optimize foreign direct investment decisions by calculating risks and

returns prior to entry; yet expropriation risks of the above sort could be unknown to them ex ante. We

conjecture that this is especially likely if the multinational partners are from locations with little

pyramidal groups.

        Decision theorists (March & Simon, 1958) show managers to be bounded rationally by

unforeseeable information voids. A substantial body of empirical work demonstrates that bounded

rationality problems affect strategic decision making. Examples include disruptive technologies (Bower

& Christensen, 1996), competitive decision making (Zajac & Bazerman, 1991), and misperceiving

competition (Porac et al, 1995). Porter (1980; pg 59) dubs such perceptual limitations strategic blind

spots, and argues they occur where a competitor “will either not see the significance of events at all, will

perceive them incorrectly, or will perceive them only very slowly”.           Zajac & Bazerman (1991)

analogously link blind spots and judgment errors in managerial decision making. We posit that strategic

blind spots not only distort managers’ perceptions of reality, but can also undermine their strategic plans

and cause suboptimal performance. If managers from countries of freestanding firms, like the US, do

have such blind spots regarding agency problems in pyramidal groups, Porter’s (1980) logic predicts that

joint venture parents with managers unaware of typical corporate governance in pyramidal groups are

likely to suffer unexpected wealth expropriation at the hands of their partners from pyramidal groups.



The Double Edged Sword of Joint Venturing

FDI theory advises foreign firms to seek local partners to reduce their “liability of foreignness” – their

risk of misstep, or even government expropriation, due to unfamiliarity with local institutions (Henisz,

2000; Zaheer and Mosakowski, 1997).          This advice is most urgently proffered to firms entering

economies with weak or corrupt institutions, where missteps are likely more costly and government

expropriation is a more serious risk. However, this strategy may be a double edged sword. The modified

agency problems intrinsic to pyramids are more extreme in economies with weaker legal systems (Morck,




                                                    13
Wolfenzon and Yeung, 2005), and especially in those with legal systems less protective of outside

investors’ property rights (Bebchuk, Kraakman and Triantis, 2000; Burkart, Panunzi and Shleifer, 2003).

        Thus, joint venturing with local partners is advocated most energetically in precisely the

environments that expose the foreign firm to another set of expropriation risks – by the controlling

shareholder of the pyramidal group to which the local partner firm belongs. This trade-off may still

render joint venturing economically sensible in many circumstances, especially given sufficient care to

constrain or incentivize the controlling shareholder. But, multinational managers need to anticipate the

pitfalls of partnering with a pyramid member firm.

        Since joint venture partners are assumed sophisticated, the caveat emptor applies and the

expropriation is generally perfectly legal. Foreign joint venture partners, unaware of these risks ex ante,

surprised by unfamiliar agency problems, and unable to protect their interests ex post, are likely to exit

prematurely. Since no laws are broken, the foreign partner has little recourse but to cut its losses. Fully

informed foreign firms would, of course, avoid these problems by avoiding such joint ventures or

rationally negotiating contractual safeguards in advance. But if enough ill-informed foreign firms enter

joint ventures with pyramid member firms, and if enough of the latter take advantage of that ignorance,

we might detect performance distortions in overall joint venture statistics. To study this, we examine

joint ventures between foreign firms and pyramidal group member firms in Brazil.



Warning of Prevalent Unfortunate Partnering

        Before we proceed further we need to advance further warnings. Foreign firms unfamiliar with

the governance problems intrinsic to pyramidal groups are likely to offer better joint venture deals to local

firms in pyramid-rich economies, and are thus likely to be overrepresented in observed samples of joint

venture partners.

        In addition, official government mandates can require joint ventures with pyramid member firms.

In many countries, foreign multinationals must comply with national regulations and laws restricting

foreign ownership or stipulating the conditions of foreign entry. A foreign entrant may thus be forced to


                                                     14
enter a joint venture with a local partner firm as a stipulation for entry into the local market. For example,

the Brazilian Ministry of Communications restricted foreign ownership in the first privatization auction of

state controlled mobile phone operators in mid-1997. Foreign firms thus had to form joint ventures to

enter that market. 15

           If restrictions of this sort were imposed randomly across industries, there would be no additional

upward bias in the likelihood of a foreign multinational partnering with a pyramid member firm.

However, Morck and Yeung (2004) posit that pyramid controlling owners are especially adept at political

rent-seeking – investing in political connections to distort regulations in ways that benefit them.

Particularly troubling for managers from countries not familiar with pyramidal groups, privatizations and

liberalizations necessarily affect industries with histories of state intervention – such as

telecommunications, banking, and energy.               Consequently, multinationals entering newly deregulated

sectors may be especially likely to encounter pyramid group firms.

           These considerations further raise the likelihood that foreign firms partner with pyramid member

firms in situations where expropriation by controlling shareholders is likely. This consideration makes

the following exposition of the governance related problems in partnering with pyramidal group members

particularly meaningful.



Empirical Evidence from Brazil

We present empirical findings from both statistical and clinical analyses of joint ventures with pyramidal

group members, the former in this section and the latter in the next section. We collect data on foreign

investment in the Brazilian telecommunication industry; our field research includes interviews of senior

executives at key multinational subsidiaries in Brazil and at their parent headquarters (in the US, Canada,

Spain and Portugal). The sharp sectoral focus reduces the scope of our study, but also greatly cuts our

information costs and lets us collect detailed clinical information on multiple companies in comparable

situations. Results from one industry in one country clearly cannot generalize without careful caveats.


15
     In 1998, the Brazilian government lifted this restriction for subsequent privatizations auctions and licenses.
                                                             15
Joint Venture Data

Our data include the full population of foreign firms entering the Brazilian telecommunications industry

from 1997 to 2004. These provide records for 96 joint ventures in which 66 foreign parents and 25

Brazilian parents participate. Since some parent firms take stakes in joint ventures that are already

formed and others withdraw from on-going joint venture subsidiaries, our 96 joint ventures have 141

parent combinations in which both domestic and foreign firms participate. Joint ventures solely between

Brazilian firms are excluded.

        These concepts of parent combinations and parent firms’ participation in joint ventures clearly

miss many important aspects of joint venture formations, dynamics, and terminations. However, they are

well suited to our purpose – to study how parent firms’ differing governance structures affect their

continued participation in joint venture combinations.

        Joint ventures usually have a clear set of parent firms, well defined beginnings, and unambiguous

termination dates. However, ambiguities occasionally arise, so we require a clear set of rules for dealing

with them. The following example encompasses all the sorts of ambiguity we encounter, and explains

their resolutions. Consider three parent companies, A, B, and C that jointly own a subsidiary S in 1998.

Suppose C sells its stake to B in 2002, and B sells its stake to A in 2003. Then, A exits the market in

2005. We record the joint venture’s parent combination ABC as formed in 1998 and ended in 2002, the

parent combination AB as formed in 2002 and ended in 2003, and (for completeness) the parent

combination A (wholly owned) as formed in 2003 and ended in 2005.

        We further record the participations of the parent companies A, B, and C in the joint venture S as

lasting from 1998 to 2005, 1998 to 2003, and 1998 to 2002, respectively. Note that if S was formed prior

to 1997 (the first year of our data), we record it as beginning in 1997. This only affects three observations




                                                     16
because almost all the entries occur after the privatization and liberalization policies were implemented. 16

Before that, the telecommunications industry was entirely state owned enterprises.

        We further assemble all company press releases, analyst reports, and public press articles (from

ISI Emerging Markets, Lexis-Nexis, and Factiva) that mention any of our joint ventures to determine the

beginning and end of each parent firm’s participation, and the parent combinations in effect at each point

in time. In almost all cases (88%), we can assign precise dates. In the remaining cases, we can determine

only the month in which the parent firm’s participation begins or ends; we therefore take the last day of

that month as the relevant date. The news records often also provide explanations of why each firm

exited, which let us double check the explanations we obtain from executive interviews. This is useful

because not all exits indicate failures (Headd, 2003). This procedure identifies ten observations as exits

not clearly due to failures of the joint venture, which we drop. In five out of these, one parent firm is

replaced by another that is a member of the same business group due to intra-group equity crossholding

restructurings. Since both the old and new parent firms have the same ultimate controlling shareholder,

these are not clearly exits. We therefore drop these observations 17 . Three exits are induced by the

Brazilian telecom regulator, ANATEL, which limits ownership in each of twelve geographic regions to

forestall potential monopoly problems. In these three cases, the regulator orders a parent firm to reduce

its ownership in one region as a precondition to expanding in another. While these forced withdrawals

may be failures in that the parent failed to foresee and block the regulatory action, they are also arguably

qualitatively different from all the others, which result from strategic decisions by the parent firms’

managers as regards to the joint venture in question. Finally, we drop two cases where the parent firm

divests in what appear to be profit-taking sales. Deleting these observations leaves us with 131 parent

combinations. In the remaining cases, our searches through public news records and interviews with

executives concur that the early withdrawal of a parent firm reflects its managers’ disappointment

regarding its share of earnings, control rights, or intellectual property utilization.


16
   Those three firms are Primus Telecommunications Group – entered in 1994; Matrix – entered in 1996; and Global
One – entered in 1996.
17
   We drop these cases to be conservative. The other alternative is to keep them as continuing joint ventures with
the same parent combinations. Doing so, our results are not changed.
                                                       17
Descriptive Statistics

Figures 2 and 3 summarize these data, indicating the distributions of joint venture parent combinations

and of parent firm participation longevities.

                                   INSERT FIGURES 2 AND 3 HERE



Parent Firms

We classify parents firms as freestanding, members of pyramidal groups, or members of other sorts of

business groups (such as Japanese keiretsu). To be designated a pyramidal group member, a parent firm

must belong to a business group having the key characteristics detailed in section two: tiers of listed

firms controlled by other listed firms culminating at an apex firm. We follow La Porta et al. (1998) in

inferring control from an equity block of 10% or more in the absence of a larger equity block. The apex

firm can be a wealthy family, government agency, financial institution, or widely held firm. Most

Brazilian pyramidal groups are controlled by wealthy families, though a few are controlled by state-

owned banks and pension funds. Ultimate controlling shareholder identities are obtained from public and

private company records and from interviews with executives.

        Table 2 summarizes parent firm control descriptive statistics. All freestanding firms’ parents are

foreign. This is consistent with La Porta et al. (1998), who find pyramidal business groups more common

in countries with weaker investor property rights protection, like Brazil; and with Leal and Carvalho da

Silva (2005) and Fogel (2006) who document the rarity of dispersed ownership in Brazil.

                                         INSERT TABLE 2 HERE



Parent Firms Combinations

The parent ownership combinations of our joint ventures are classified into five categories: (1) joint

ventures between pyramidal group member firms (PG/PG), (2) joint ventures between pyramidal group

member(s) and freestanding firm(s) (PG/ FS), (3) joint ventures between pyramidal group member(s) and

                                                   18
members of other business groups (PG/OG), (4) joint ventures among freestanding firms (FS/FS), and (5)

Brazilian subsidiaries wholly owned by a single foreign parent (WO). None of our joint ventures have

parents that are all members of “other business groups” nor that are “other business groups” and

freestanding firms.

                                          INSERT TABLE 3 HERE



        To proxy for each parent firm’s experience with pyramidal groups, we use the value of Dv, from

Table 1, for the firm’s home country – the value weighted fraction of that country’s ten largest business

entities that are family controlled. Fogel (2006) notes that family control in her data is almost always

effected via pyramiding, so this is a plausible proxy for familiarity with pyramidal group member firms

and their attendant governance issues. We replicate our tests using the other columns of Table 1 instead,

and all generate qualitatively similar results.

        We classify a parent firm as among the most experienced with pyramids if its home country Dv is

75% or higher, among the second most experienced if its home country’s Dv lies between 50% and 74%,

among the third most experienced if Dv falls between 25% to 49%, and among the parents least

experienced with pyramiding if its home country’s Dv is below 25%. More elaborate proxies for a firm’s

exposure to pyramidal group governance problems can be defined – for example, tracking the parent

firm’s past foreign investment experiences in other countries. Such firm specific institutional measures

are explored in Perkins (2006, 2008).



Methodology

Empirically, our primary focus is to examine the categorical variations in failure rates among differing

combinations of ownership structure.         The empirical specifications most widely used to examine

organizational failure are parametric duration models (e.g., log logistic model, Hannan & Freeman, 1989)

because of the strong assumptions related to the distribution of time to failure and the inclusion of

relevant covariates. However, we specify a non-parametric cumulative hazard rate analysis for two


                                                     19
primary reasons: 1) the emphasis on the count-data interpretations of the risk of hazard between differing

types of ownership structure combinations and 2) the limited ability to include exhaustive covariates (e.g.,

dummy variable for fixed effects) given the inter-organizational relationship within a relatively small

sample size of 131 observations. The inclusion of these variables significantly reduces the degrees of

freedom which jeopardizes the reliability of the empirical results. However, for robustness, we also

conduct parametric survival analysis (using log-logistic, Weibull and Gompertz specifications) to rule out

duration dependence and distribution of failure concerns that could be problematic in interpreting

cumulative hazard rate (see appendix I). In addition, we also examine the impact of environmental

variables (e.g., cultural distance, Hofestede, 1980; political hazards, Henisz, 2000; technology) and find

that the results remain significant controlling for these effects.

           We estimate cumulative hazard rates for joint ventures with each parental combination category

by summing the total number of failures (in our time window between July 1997 and Dec 2004) in the

category, and then dividing this by the category’s total time-to-failure – the sum of the years survived of

all parent combinations in the category. For comparison, we report analogous statistics for the full

sample, for joint ventures whose parents are partly Brazilian, and for joint ventures whose parents are all

foreign.

Statistical Observations

           Our data show parents whose home countries feature less pyramiding experience higher joint

venture failure rates when partnering with pyramidal group members.

           Table 4 examines parent combination failure rates, given the parents’ differing ownership

structures. 18 Columns 3 and 4 report successes (survivals) and failures (exits), with the total number of

cases in the last column. Column 2 reports the implied cumulative hazard rates. The descriptive statistics

reveal 53 of the 131 subsidiaries failing within our 1997 – 2004 window, implying a cumulative 11%

hazard rate. A few other points merit note.




18
   Appendix I reports parametric regression based relation between joint venture survival and parent firm pyramidal
status.
                                                        20
           First, joint ventures, with a 16% hazard rate, are four times more likely to fail than wholly owned

subsidiaries, with a mere 4% hazard rate, and the difference is highly statistically significant. 19 This is

consistent with the well known joint venture instability (Kogut 1988) and is also sensible, since stronger

foreign parents are perhaps more likely to self-select to establish wholly owned subsidiaries. Hence their

subsidiaries expectedly have a higher survival rate.

                                                   INSERT TABLE 4 HERE

           Pyramidal group members partnering with other pyramidal group members (PG/PG parental

combinations) have the lowest failure rate, only 8%, among all joint venture ownership structures; and

this is statistically indistinguishable from wholly owned subsidiaries’ hazard rate of 4%. This suggests

that pooling resources lets weaker foreign entrants overcome their liabilities of foreignness enough to

compensate for their infirmity relative to foreign firms strong enough to enter alone.

           Interestingly, however, all other parent combinations feature markedly higher hazard rates: 26%

for FS/FS combinations, 27% for PG/FS combinations, and 20% for PG/OG combinations.

           The elevated hazard rate for FS/FS combinations is perhaps unsurprising. All freestanding

parents but three are from the US and UK (two from Canada and one from Japan). These parents’ home

countries have stable public policy regimes and high property rights protection, which is not the case in

Brazil. These institutional discrepancies are the sources of the liabilities of foreignness well known in the

international business literature (Zaheer, 1995).

           However, parents that are PG types themselves ought to be familiar with such institutional

environments. The law and finance literature, e.g., La Porta et al. (1998), Morck et al (2005), and Stulz

(2005), points out that pyramidal groups are prevalent in locations with poor property rights. Indeed,

some of these PGs type owners are local Brazilian firms. The PG/FS combination, however, has the most

alarming hazard rates of .27 (almost 4 times the rate of PG/PG partnerships). Their cumulative hazard

rate is very similar to the FS/FS joint ventures.




19
     Throughout, we test for statistically significant hazard rates as in Blossfeld and Rohwer (2002, pg 76-78).
                                                            21
        These results show that firms may well form joint ventures to pool capabilities, including to deal

with poor local institutions, but that need not always end well. In particular, joint venturing with a

pyramidal group member firm may expose the partner to a different problem – a set of corporate

governance problems – and unfamiliarity with those problems can portend failure. Parents belonging to

pyramidal groups clearly ought to be familiar with pyramiding, and thus ought not to be surprised by the

strategies of other pyramidal group member firms. The low hazard rates of PG/PG combinations thus

indicate that partners familiar with pyramiding can effectively counter potential problems, and thus

realize the benefit of joint ventures – pooling capabilities and leveraging complementary strengths.

         Finer parsing of the sample of joint ventures in which a non-pyramiding parent matching with a

pyramiding parent shows that having a Brazilian firm in the parental combination does matter. Note that

all Brazilian parents are pyramidal group members; hence the comparison reveals the impact of the

presence of a Brazilian parent given the matched parents are pyramidal vs. non-pyramidal.                       The

combinations that include a Brazilian parent have hazard rates of only 22% versus 44% for those that do

not. 20 The 22% figure also significantly exceeds (p < 1%) the 12% hazard rate for PG/PG combinations

with a Brazilian parent. 21 This suggests that although the Brazilian parent can help in countering poor

local institutions, the foreign non-pyramiding parent’s unfamiliarity with pyramidal corporate governance

problems is another source of liabilities.

         We also gauge the relationship between a parent’s prior exposure to pyramiding by the corporate

governance structures prevalent in its home economy, as set forth in Table 1, to the failure rates of joint

venture partnership with pyramidal groups in Brazil. The results are reported in Table 5.

                                           INSERT TABLE 5 HERE

         The table shows substantially lower hazard rates for parent firms whose home countries’ big

business sectors are more fully controlled by wealthy families, something virtually always accomplished

20
   Using the Blossfeld and Rohwer (2002, pg 76-78) suggested methodology to compare hazard rate statistical
significance, we compare the standard errors and confidence intervals of the two categorical stratified groups’
hazard functions. Additional log-rank homogeneity test for survival analysis revealed a similar result of statistical
significance at the .01 level.
21
   In contrast, PG/PG combinations containing no Brazilian parents have failure rates of only 2% while similar
combinations containing a Brazilian parent post 12% hazard rates. However, these are not significantly different,
and neither differs significantly form the 4% hazard rate for wholly owned subsidiaries.
                                                        22
via extensive pyramiding (La Porta et al., 1998; Morck et al. 2005; Stulz, 2005). Parent firms from

countries whose wealthiest families control three fourths or more of their big business sectors exhibit the

lowest hazard rate – only 2%. At the other extreme, those from countries whose wealthy families control

less that a quarter of the big business sector have the highest hazard rate – 19%.    Hazard rates for the

other categories increase monotonically across groups of parent firms from countries with decreasing

family domination of big business. Thus, parent firms from economies dominated by pyramidal groups –

like Mexico, Argentina and Portugal – have low hazard rates and their participations in joint ventures in

Brazil tend to endure. In contrast, parent firms from the US, where pyramidal groups are virtually absent,

exhibit high hazard rates and their participation tends to be brief.

        Finally, agency problems in pyramidal group firms should be greater the lower the cash flow

rights of the controlling shareholder (Bebchuk et al. 2000; Claessens et al. 2002), and this usually occurs

in firms in a pyramid’s lower tiers.       Consequently it would be useful to see if foreign firms exit

partnerships with lower tier pyramidal group firms more frequently or sooner. Unfortunately, our sample

precludes testing this because all our freestanding and non-pyramidal group foreign firms, without

exception, partner with firms in the bottom-most layers of pyramids.      Joint ventures between member

firms of pyramidal groups present more variety, and we make use of this in the following section.



Clinical Evidence

Our statistical results suggest that parent firms with less prior exposure to pyramidal groups who enter a

joint venture with a pyramidal group member firm tend to exit from these ventures earlier. We conjecture

that the former are taken by surprise when governance problems associated with pyramidal groups occur,

reevaluate their likely returns from continuing the joint venture, and decide to cut their losses by

withdrawing. However, the hazard rate correlations do not necessarily imply this chain of causation. For

example, joint ventures between freestanding firms and pyramidal group members might perform

abnormally well, accomplishing their objectives sooner and thus permitting an earlier exit.




                                                      23
        Standard techniques to detect such chains of causation are inherently ineffective. They are

thwarted by the fact that contextual information is hard to thoroughly collect and codify for all the

involved cases; using only limited observations makes traditional statistical techniques ineffective. We

resort to clinical studies to reveal causal mechanisms in our hazard rate observations.

        Our interviews with senior executives and industry experts generate illuminating information.

The clinical information shows that parents from host countries where pyramidal groups are rare or absent

indeed have blind spots and misjudge the likely strategies of their partners from pyramidal groups.

Innocent of the links between their immediate partner firm and other seemingly independent firms that

actually all belong to the same group, and have the same ultimate controlling shareholder, foreign parents

misgauge the agency problems and fail to anticipate their partner firm sacrificing its own joint venture’s

interest for its pyramidal group, or its controlling shareholder. In many cases, they are vulnerable to

partners’ expropriation of their contributions to a joint venture because they fail to protect their control

rights and in some case even fail to comprehend the importance of control rights at the outset. 22 Finally,

we also learn how parents familiar with pyramidal groups mitigate these risks. We report these cases in

the following.



TIW and Opportunity

Telesystem International Wireless (TIW), a Canadian telecommunications firm entered a joint venture

with a member of a Brazilian pyramidal group, Opportunity, controlled by the Brazilian financial tycoon

Daniel Dantas and his family. Dantas and his group acted as general partners and managers for several

private equity funds set up in Brazil and the Cayman Islands. The Brazilian partnerships had as their

investors, various pension funds for state-owned enterprises. In 1998, when this joint venture was formed,

TIW was controlled by its founder Charles Sirois with a 40% voting stake and an actual ownership stake

of 18%. TIW’s other major shareholder, the Caisse de Depot et Placement du Quebec, a government



22
   Each of the cases presented (except case 4) highlights the unscrupulous behaviors of the pyramidal partners in the
joint venture. What remains a challenge to disentangle is whether the pyramidal owners’ unscrupulous behavior is
endogenous to the pyramidal structure or vice versa. This causal chain is unclear.
                                                        24
controlled pyramidal group, owned 11% stake and voted 8%. Although the Caisse had a prior history of

imposing value-destroying political agenda on its listed member firms, this had largely ended by 1998,

after a series of highly publicized scandals forced the Caisse to become a largely passive sovereign

investment fund (Arbour, 1993). We classify TIW as freestanding firm (FS) because the largest voting

block holder controls no other firms of consequence. 23

        Canada’s big business sector is a mixture of pyramidal groups firms and freestanding widely held

firms, with Dv= 45% in Table 1. 24       However, the country also has a highly efficient Common Law

judiciary overseeing business law (though a Civil Code governs most other legal areas in Québec).

Canadian pyramidal groups must disclose all their intercorporate equity blocks and the identities, voting

stakes, and ownership stakes of their ultimate controlling shareholders. Transactions between group

member firms must be disclosed promptly, and large intragroup transactions, in which significant

tunneling might be possible, require the approval of a majority of disinterested public shareholders. The

officers and directors of Canadian pyramidal group member firms have an unambiguous fiduciary duty to

their firm, not its pyramidal group or controlling shareholder. Canadian firms entering Brazil might

naively expect analogous checks and balances and thus misjudge the actual business environment there.

        TIW established the joint venture Telpart Participaçoes (Telpart for short) amidst the Brazilian

telecommunications privatization from former assets of Telebras. The initial joint venture agreement

deemed TIW the largest shareholder, with a stake just under 49% and joint control of the board. The

Brazilian partner, Opportunity, had a clear minority position – a 27% equity stake, and pension funds for

state-owned companies owned the remaining 24%. According to TIW’s company reports, their equity

block put them at the helm of the joint venture and thus in charge of a multitude of controlled Brazilian

subsidiaries. Figure 4 sketches this structure.

                                        INSERT FIGURE 4 HERE




23
   TIW was a pyramid member firm in 1998, but by 2002 was freestanding. Re-classifying TIW as a pyramidal
group does not materially change the statistics reported in Table 2.
24
   Table 1 here and in Fogel, K. 2006
                                                    25
        Then within weeks of the privatization, the Brazilian ground suddenly shifted beneath TIW.

Opportunity used a holding company, Newtel, to acquire and consolidate control over Telpart.

Opportunity convinced the pension funds to exchange their 24% in Telpart for a 49% holding in Newtel.

As a result of the transfer the pension funds would hold 49% and Opportunity would own 51% of Newtel

which would in turn hold 51% of Telpart. This transfer was made in secret; TIW was not informed of the

terms and substance of the arrangement until December 1998. The terms were remarkable, for the pension

funds delegated their voting rights to Opportunity appointees and relinquished any veto rights and

liquidity rights which they would have had had they remained direct investors in Telpart. 25 Newtel was

now firmly ensconced in the Opportunity pyramidal group’s control structure. This pyramidal structure

gave Opportunity a majority voting block (51%) controlling Telpart despite its minority ownership stake,

which is 27% in terms of equity participation. As soon as this restructuring was complete, Opportunity

inserted its own people into Telpart as top managers, ignoring TIWs protests. The joint venture was now

a fourth tier member firm in the Opportunity pyramid, and TIW was now a minority shareholder of a

pyramidal group member firm.

        TIW took Opportunity to court in Brazil repeatedly, but to no avail. 26 According to the Gazeta

Mercantil, “After no success with battling Opportunity over the new structure, TIW … secured an

injunction annulling Newtel, forcing the re-instatement of the original Telpart contract”. The Toronto

Star reported “Over the next two years, as many as 20 lawsuits in and outside of Brazil were launched.

Walkouts became common at the Telpart board meetings. Opportunity repeatedly made offers to TIW

[but] were rebuffed as inadequate. Meanwhile, Dantas [the controlling shareholder of Opportunity’s

apex firm] was calling the shots. The Brazilian was choosing management, appointing directors and

approving questionable non-operating expenses. TIW’s influence was quickly waning”. TIW’s top

managers clearly did not expect their erstwhile partner to seize control and shut TIW out. Further, TIW

did not expect the weak protection local judiciaries offered it. TIW, Opportunity and the pension funds

had a Memorandum of Understanding outlining certain rights and obligations, including rights of first

25
   Interestingly, the heads of the pension funds were replaced within weeks after the agreement was signed. The
ease with which Opportunity manipulated the state pension, however, remains unexplained.
26
   Two major pension funds also took legal action.
                                                      26
refusal, tag-along rights, veto rights and rights to proportional representation, all supplemental to the

original agreement between TIW and Opportunity. TIW’s management was astounded that the Brazilian

courts were not on its side to enforce these rights.

         With TIW thus disconnected, Opportunity sent Telpart down a radically new path seemingly not

in the best interest of the joint venture. Amid the ongoing court battles, the joint venture’s performance

deteriorated rapidly. From 1998 through 2000, under TIW control, all the joint venture’s subsidiaries

posted positive net incomes. But as soon as Opportunity seized control, profits evaporated from R$13

million in the black to $R7 million in the red in less than a year. By 2002, their combined losses

bottomed out at $R30 million. One insider suspected tunneling; note though we obtained no concrete

proof that wealth was transferred from Telpart to Opportunity or to Dantas, its new controlling

shareholder.    In 2003, TIW’s main shareholders, fed up with the draining of energy and capital,

discontinued its capital infusions to the joint venture, and negotiated an exit – it sold its stakes to

Opportunity for US$70 million, a fraction of its total capital infusions estimated at US$390 million.27

         Some executives at competing telecommunications firms were willing to comment on the TIW

dispute with Opportunity. One interviewee, an executive at another firm successfully operating a joint

venture in Brazil explained that “It is always about ownership structures. It is all about how to structure

the deals. Telemig (one of TIW’s Brazilian subsidiaries) failed in Brazil because they did not know how to

work with the Brazilians. They did not understand the ownership laws and how to work this system.” A

second executive offered the following perspective: “TIW chose the wrong partner and got ripped off …

They did not know how to fight for control the right way like Telecom Italia, who took their battle to the

government and the telecom regulators for control [of Telecom Italia’s Brazilian subsidiary]” 28 . A third

interviewee stated that, “TIW was squeezed out by their partner, Opportunity. Wrestling control of




27
   The estimated initial investment is derived from total price paid for the joint venture – $813 million at the time of
privatization. Source: Reuters News Agency, TIW snares Brazil cell phone deal leads consortium that wins control
of two companies spun off as part of $19 billion privatization, July 30, 1998. Had TIW held out, they might have
done better, for a new government took power later that year and the pension funds ultimately succeeded against
Opportunity in the Brazilian courts.
28
   The sources of the above information: Gazeta Mercantile, Toronto Star and TIW company annual report.
                                                          27
Telpart from Dantas [Opportunity’s owner] has become too costly, and the uncertainty around the battle

was hurting TIW.”

        This case clearly illustrates the direction of causation and the reasons for the joint venture’s

failure. TIW, an otherwise seemingly well managed firm, failed to appreciate the complex machinations

and obscure chains of control manipulations possible for pyramidal groups in Brazil. Once it lost control,

TIW found that the Brazil judiciary offered no effective redress, despite terms in its agreements with

Opportunity that it had relied upon. Again, this illustrates that TIW was under informed and made

judgment based on its home experiences. The sharp deterioration of Telpart’s financial performance after

Opportunity’s stealth attack suggests that some form of tunneling might have occurred.



Citigroup and Opportunity

Our second case is another joint venture involving Opportunity – this time with the American Citibank.

The U.S. bank, through its wholly owned subsidiary, International Equity Investments, Inc. (IEII)., sunk

US$748 million into a consortium organized by Opportunity, and jointly owned by Citibank, Opportunity

and several large Brazilian pension funds. Citibank’s money is contributed by Citigroup Venture Capital

International Brazil, L.P. (CVC Fund), an offshore fund wholly owned by Citibank. 29 A Brazilian entity

based in the Azores, Investidores Institucionais – Fundo de Investimento em Ações (II-FIA), contributed

capital on behalf of the pension funds. The Opportunity pyramidal group contributed its share of the joint

venture’s capital through its member firm, Opportunity Equity Partners, LTD.                  The consortium

supposedly owned and controlled Brasil Telecom, the country’s third largest telecommunication

company. The original ownership structure of the consortium was a single class of securities with voting

rights proportional to capital invested. The investments of Citibank and the pension funds, 44.86% and

45.85%, respectively, dwarfed Opportunity’s 9.29% stake. However, the consortium was a partnership,

in which Citibank and the pension funds delegated control to Opportunity, the general partner. 30


29
   IIFIA was formerly named the CVC/Opportunity Equity Partners Fundo de Investimento em A v.es – Carteira
Livre.
30
   According to the Limited Partnership Agreement, the CVC Fund was governed by the general partner, Equity
Partners, an Opportunity family firms, which was responsible for “management, control, operation, and policy” of
                                                      28
        From the outset, the joint venture was remarkably opaque. Neither Citibank’s managers nor the

Brazilian telecommunications regulatory authority, ANATEL, fully understand the six tiers of holding

companies, obscured by various crossholdings that hid Brasil Telecom’s ultimate controlling shareholder.

The control chain begins with Zain S.A., a holding company owned by the three contributors of the joint

venture’s capital as mentioned above. A U.S. District Court ultimately unraveled the chain, noting that

Zain “holds 68.28% of the voting shares in Invitel S.A., which in turn holds 99.99% of the voting shares

in Techold, which owns 61.98% of the equity stakes in Solpart. Of the remaining shares in Solpart, 38%

are held by Telecom Italia and .02% by Timepart. Solpart holds 51% of the voting shares in Brasil

Telecom Participaçoes (BTP) and BTP, the preferred and common shares of which are traded publicly in

Brazil, holds 99.07% of the voting shares in Brasil Telecom”. 31 This cumbersome structure is reported in

Figure 5.

                                       INSERT FIGURE 5 HERE


        Unbeknownst to Citibank and the other partner, II-FIA, Opportunity controlled Brasil Telecom

via a 62% voting stake of Solpart owned by Timepart, despite the fact that Timepart owns only .02% of

Solpart’s equity. In 2004, the Brazilian telecommunications regulatory authority ANATEL ordered Brasil

Telecom to disclose the ownership structure of Timepart because they suspected the company was

indirectly controlled by Citibank’s CVC Fund. 32      In fact, the investigation revealed that Timepart was

owned by the father of Daniel Dantas, the controlling shareholder of the Opportunity pyramidal group;

Luiz Dantas, a business partner of Dantas, and a third apparently related company. 33 A senior pension

fund investor reported “None of us knew that our partner [Opportunity] had additional control through

another route. The people running Brasil Telecom are not the people that invested money in it”. 34




the fund and acknowledged its status as a fiduciary for the limited partner (US District Court for the Southern
District of New York, 2005).
31
   United States District Court for the Southern District of New York, Case 407F Supp 2d 483, 2005 U.S. Dist.,
Lexis 10468, page 4; Decided June 2, 2005.
32
   “Regulator seeks clarification on BrT shareholding”, Business News Americas, March 9, 2004.
33
   Wheatley, Jonathan. 2004. “Citigroup faces more pressure in Brazil”, Financial Times, March 7, 2004.
34
   Wheatley, Jonathan. 2004. “Funds enter ownership dispute”, Financial Times, March 8, 2004.
                                                      29
        Not only did Dantas maintain effective control through his opaque shareholding structure 35 (and

his managerial responsibilities for the other funds), he also called the shots through family members and

close associates appointed to the boards of strategically placed holding companies. For example, the

three person boards of the pyramid group member firms Zain, Invitel and Techold all include Daniel

Dantas, his sister Verônica Valente Dantas, and an Opportunity employee, Maria Amalia Delfim de Melo

Coutrim. Four of the six Brasil Telecom Participaçoes board members have Dantas family ties: Dantas’

sister, Veronica Valente Dantas; his brother-in-law, Arthur Joaquim de Carvalho; his former brother-in-

law, Carlos Bernardo Torres Rodenburg; and an Opportunity attorney, Luis Carvalho de Motta Veiga, the

Chairman. 36 Four out of the seven Brasil Telecom directors are similarly affiliated with Opportunity. In

general, Opportunity controlled its pyramid with a dense network of strategically placed voting blocks

that summed to control blocks wherever necessary. An Opportunity manager explained that Dantas

strategy was “Simply to stage large battles between his partners to squeeze out value for himself. He was

the swing vote on the top of the pyramid. He took advantage of this position as the controlling general

manager of the chain. He would run from one side to the other to maneuver control”.

        Citibank, by then the world’s largest bank, was entirely unprepared. On March 9, 2005, the bank

tried to remove Dantas as the consortium’s managing partner, citing inappropriate use of funds and other

irregularities. According to one report, Citibank alleged that “Mr. Dantas and Opportunity engaged in

self-dealing and wrongful conduct in order to misappropriate (Citibank’s) CVC/Opportunity Fund assets

and enrich themselves at IEII’s [a Citibank subsidiary] expense”. 37 Citibank found the Brazilian courts

reluctant to eject Dantas, who quickly set up an umbrella agreement, whereby “if either the CVC Fund

(Citibank) or II-FIA (the Brazilian pension funds) removed Opportunity as general partner or manager,

that fund would lose its voting rights in Zain” 38 . Dantas remained in control of Brasil Telecom until May

2005.



35
   “Citigroup does not control operator”, Business News Americas, March 14, 2004.
36
   United States District Court for the Southern District of New York, Case 407F Supp 2d 483, 2005 U.S. Dist.,
Lexis 10468, page 4; Decided June 2, 2005.
37
   Wheatley, Jonathan. 2005. “Citigroup in $300m Brazilian lawsuit”, Financial Times, April 13, 2005.
38
   Mimeo
                                                     30
        During this period, and without Citibank’s consent, Opportunity arranged extensive tunneling that

depleted the value of Citibank’s investment in Brasil Telecom. Even as Citibank attempts to dismiss him,

Dantas sought to sell the joint venture’s cellular assets to Telecom Italia, another Brasil Telecom minority

shareholder, at an allegedly inadequate price; while simultaneously brokering a deal to sell Opportunity’s

stakes in Brasil Telecom to Telecom Italia for “hundreds of millions of dollars in excess of the actual

value”. 39 He also allegedly signed agreements, as the general partner of Citibank’s CVC Fund and

without the knowledge of Citibank, containing provisionary clauses proscribing the fund (Citibank’s CVC

Fund) from selling 5% or more of its interest in Zain unless the purchaser bought all Brasil Telecom

Participaçoes shares held by Opportunity entities as well.           This agreement, effective until 2028,

effectively reallocated any prospective buyer’s gains from acquiring Citibank’s CVC Fund stake to

various member firms of Opportunity’s pyramidal group.

        On March 10 2005, the day after its unsuccessful attempt to fire Dantas, Citibank sought an

injunction from the U.S. District Court in New York to bar him from stripping the joint venture’s assets.

A preliminary injunction was granted on March 17, and the courted granted Citibank a restraining order

to remove Dantas from the business on March 17. The Brazilian courts originally followed, granting a

preliminary injunction on May 11, 2005 to suspend the umbrella agreement. Citibank obtained a further

injunction in the U.S stopping further asset sales and equity transfers. Even armed with all these rulings,

Citigroup fought an uphill battle to remove Dantas’ board of directors from the joint venture and the

various holding companies, but succeeded in effectively installing new boards by August 23, 2005.

        U.S. District Court Judge Kaplan, ruling for Citibank, agreed that “the defendants, without

[Citibank’s] knowledge or approval, commenced an attempt to auction off simultaneously equity in the

holding company with indirect control [over other assets owned by Citibank’s CVC Fund];” that “the

auction was a gambit by Opportunity to reap for itself ... a control premium that rightfully belonged to the

CVC Fund;” and that “It strongly appears that Opportunity is attempting to use advantages that it enjoys


39
   United States District Court for the Southern District of New York, Case 407F Supp 2d 483, 2005 U.S. Dist.,
Lexis 10468; Decided June 2, 2005. According to this court proceeding on page 28, the monetary values of the
Opportunity shares planned buyout from Telecom Italia was $443 million and the value of the cellular assets was
also overvalued at $198 million.
                                                      31
purely because of the former fiduciary responsibility to reap enormous gains for itself at the expense of

those whom it owes fiduciary duties.” 40

        This case is instructive because it highlights one of the governance problems discussed above that

tempt the controlling shareholder of any pyramidal group – tunneling wealth from one firm in the group

to another to benefit the controlling shareholder at the expense of other investors.                Citibank sued

Opportunity for US$300 million for siphoning wealth from the Brasil Telecom joint venture to other

members of the Opportunity pyramidal group. 41 One part of the complaint claims Opportunity used the

joint venture’s assets to pay for Opportunity employees, furniture, legal fees totaling $48 million in

unrelated disputes, and even to finance the “purchase and inappropriate use of three private airplanes

valued at $30 million.” To facilitate further tunneling and rights to assets of Citibank’s CVC Fund,

Opportunity “transferred custody of share registers relating to shares owned by the CVC Fund from a

bank recognized for custodial services to an Opportunity entity”. 42

        The case also highlights the importance pyramidal groups’ controlling shareholders attach to

control, as opposed to ownership, in countries where public investors have little protection. In court,

Opportunity conceded that its goal was to retain control and, failing this, it desired to extract over US$1

billion – its valuation of Opportunity’s stake in the joint venture plus a US$544 million “control

premium” for managing Citibank’s CVC Fund, despite Opportunity not holding a de jure control block. 43

The ambiguities in Brazilian law regarding such “control premiums” are evident in the abundance of

unaddressed complaints to the CVM, the Brazilian counterpart to the SEC.                    American courts are

unambiguous in deeming such behavior “blatant self-dealing”. 44 Opportunity was also accused by their

former partners of making side deals with major suppliers worth over $1 billion. To date, the court has

yet to rule on these claims.

40
   DeJuana, Carlos 2005. U.S. Judge favors Citigroup in Opportunity dispute, Reuters News, June 2, 2005.
41
   Wheatley, Jonathan. 2005. “Citibank in $300 million Brazilian lawsuit”, Financial Times, April 13, 2005.
42
   United States District Court for the Southern District of New York, Case 407F Supp 2d 483, 2005 U.S. Dist.,
Lexis 10468, page 7; Decided June 2, 2005.
43
   United States District Court for the Southern District of New York, 2006 U.S. Dist. Ct. Motions, 2006 U.S. Dist.,
Lexis 6776, page 9-10; Motion of Temporary Restraining Order, May 16, 2006; United States District Court for the
Southern District of New York, 441 F. Supp. 2d 552., Lexis 50884, page 13-14; July 26, 2006
44
   United States District Court for the Southern District of New York, 2006 U.S. Dist. Ct. Motions, 2005 U.S. Dist.,
Lexis 6776, page 2; Motion of Temporary Restraining Order, May 16, 2006.
                                                        32
        In general, the disputes remain far from resolved. In April 2006, the Brazilian courts overturned

their prior decision to annul the umbrella agreement, letting Opportunity reassert control over Brasil

Telecom. 45 The U.S. District courts then ruled in favor of Citibank again by definitively voiding the

umbrella agreement on July 26, 2006. 46 The U.S. Courts have yet to enforce their ruling in Brazil.

        Again in this example, what causes what is abundantly clear. Citibank entered Brazil thinking the

rules would resemble those in America, and found itself battling unfamiliar governance problems.

Citibank’s victory in American courts may accomplish little more than subtracting lawyers’ fees from the

bank’s bottom line. Unless the Brazilian courts enforce the US ruling, which they show no sign of doing,

Opportunity retains de facto control and Citibank can do little about it.



Bell South and Safra Family

The freestanding widely held American firm Bell South and Verbier, a holding company in Brazil’s Safra

pyramidal group established a joint venture, called BCP, to provide cellular service in the Sao Paulo

region, one of the most competitive markets in Brazil. Bell South held 45.4% of BCP, leaving the Safra

firm with 44%. By its shareholder agreement, Bell South delegated control to Moises and Joseph Safra,

the controlling shareholders of the Safra pyramid’s apex firm. An internal Bell South document reveals a

remarkable internationalization strategy that intentionally granted decision-making authority to foreign

partners, apparently in the naïve hope that a consensus would always emerge. The Safra brothers were to

“approve business plans and agree upon decision making as to the timing and amount of cash

disbursements.” 47

        Former top executive at Bell South Brazil recalled that “[at] first we started off as the decision

maker in the partnership. But then, things started to reveal that we did not have the right partner. This
                                                                                               48
was a problem we were nervous about because things all of a sudden started to change.”              The Safras


45
   Stewart, A. and Jelmayer, R. 2006.“Brazil’s Opportunity wins ruling in Brasil Telecom case”, Dow Jones
International News, April 11, 2006.
46
   Valentti, Graziella. 2006. “ Justica de NY volta do Opportunity ao Comando da BrT”, Agencia Esado, July 26,
2006.
47
   Source : Bell South 1999 Annual report
48
   Extracted from an executive interview with the former Bell South President of Brazil.
                                                     33
routinely rejected Bell South’s plans for enhancing BCP’s value; nixing, for example, a mass marketing

strategy for recouping the $2.6 billion telecom license cost. Instead, Safra explored niche markets, which

forestalled the need for additional capital. Bell South proposed a consolidation after the 1999 Real

devaluation; but the brothers refused. The joint venture grew ever more inefficient, running up an

overwhelming $R4.8 billion in losses. Bell South proposed a 95% equity offering to recapitalize BCP;

but the Safras arranged debt financing – adding over $R4.8 billion in debt by 2001.

        In each case, the Safras’ focus was control. Accepting outside equity financing or further

injections from the parent firms would have imperiled their control rights. A capital conserving strategy,

augmented by debt financing, ran no such risk.

        The importance to Brazilian controlling shareholders of extracting private benefits from the

businesses they control readily explains this strategy. Following Bebchuk, Kraakman, & Triantis (2000),

the Safras can be thought of as maximizing their wealth, W = αV(s) + B(s) where V is the joint venture’s

value, B is the private benefit they obtain from controlling it, α is their ownership stake, and s is a vector

of feasible strategy choices. Their optimal strategy is to choose s* to maximize W; and this clearly need

not maximize V.       An outside capital injection to raise V would lower α, and even if the Safra’s

investment, αV, ended up larger, a lower voting stake α imperiled their control and risked cutting B to

zero. Unfamiliar with this reasoning, Bell South’s managers remained mystified by their partner’s

seemingly economic irrationality.

        Unsurprisingly, trust between the partners eroded quickly, but Bell South had few options. It

offered to buy all of BCP in 2001, but the brothers declined each of the increasingly generous offers.

Clearly, Bell South failed to appreciate the magnitude of B in the brothers’ calculations, and may well

have failed to account for it at all.

        In 2002, when BCP fortuitously missed a $R375 million debt payment, Bell South seized the

opportunity to force it into bankruptcy. The Financial Times reported in April 2002 that the default

occurred after a disagreement between shareholders over future capitalization plans. In 2003, BCP was

liquidated and its assets sold to America Movil of Mexico. The final agreement, stated that “Bell South


                                                     34
will transfer its entire 45.4% stake in BCP (to creditors), while Brazil-based Verbier [a Safra’s holding

company] will retain an undisclosed minority stake in the wireless operator.” 49

           This example highlights two issues. First, Bell South, worse than TIW and Citibank, failed to

value control – assuming that all the partners would gain by running the joint venture efficiently. Second,

when the pyramids seized control, they ran the joint ventures in ways perfectly rational from their

controlling shareholders’ perspectives, but incomprehensible to the managers of a freestanding firm. To

them, the value of the private benefits controlling shareholders can extract via tunneling or other

mechanisms in a developing economy was, in Donald Rumsfeld’s words, an “unknown unknown.”



Sunkyong and Algar

In 1998 SunKyong (SK) Telecom partnered with a bottom tier firm of the Algar Group, a Brazilian

pyramid, as illustrated in Figure 6. The joint venture, ATL, was to bring SK’s CDMA-based cellular

technology to Brazil.

                                             INSERT FIGURE 6 HERE

           SK provided technology and capital, but held only 30% of the joint venture, effectively delegating

control to Algar. SK executives apparently assumed that Algar’s would seek to maximize the value of its

stake in ATL by applying SK’s technology quickly, widely and efficiently, and so saw no need for a

majority stake. SK executives subsequently learned that Algar’s controlling shareholder was involved in

another joint venture to bring TMDA, a rival cellular technology, to Brazil. SK not only wasted its

capital, but found its joint venture partner’s true financial incentives to be diametrically opposed to the

success of its technology in Brazil. Deprived of information about the joint venture’s operations and

profits, SK withdrew by early 2000.

           While this case is extreme, several other examples feature seemingly sophisticated foreign firms –

such as SBC and Bell Canada – signing joint venture agreements with Brazilian pyramidal group firms

leave control rights tenuously defined.


49
     Source: Espicom online, “BellSouth, Verbier hand over control of Brazilian venture to banks”, April 15, 2003
                                                          35
Countermeasures

Not all joint ventures with pyramidal group member firms fail. We find the most lasting joint ventures to

be those formed by higher tier firms of two pyramidal groups. In these cases, both parent firms’

managers presumably understand corporate governance issues associated with pyramids. In such cases,

the parents often build safeguards into the joint venture to prevent the sorts of problems described in the

previous cases. One way of doing this is to arrange “multiple points of competition and interaction.”

These instill both parents with ongoing incentives to be trustworthy partners by giving each multiple

opportunities to retaliate if the other acts opportunistically. Thus forewarned and forearmed, the partners

maintain a high level of reciprocal trust.

        This is consistent with Harrigan (1988), who suggests joint venture partnerships are more

effective when their parents’ bargaining power is evenly matched. It also exemplifies the reasoning of

Bernheim and Whinston (1990), who show multiple simultaneous games to heighten the players’

incentives to cooperate by raising both the punishment for cheating and the reward for cooperation.



Telefonica and Portugal Telecom

An illustrative case is the success of Spain’s Telefonica and Portugal Telecom in Brazil, Both are

members of formerly state-controlled pyramidal groups established long before telecoms privatizations in

their respective home countries and both based in countries where pyramiding is commonplace. Three

key distinctions differentiate their joint ventures: (i) cash flow and voting rights are always split exactly

50/50, and both parents always had equal say in the joint venture’s strategy; (ii) decision making control

is assigned to each parent, property-by-property, not allocated overall to one parent or the other; and (iii)

each parent takes equity stakes in several firms in the other’s pyramidal group. This strategy creates

multiple points of contact between the two pyramidal groups and provides each with abundant

ammunition to retaliate if the other breaks faith.



                                                     36
        Portugal Telecom and Telefonica have eight joint venture subsidiaries in Brazil, including the

Vivo brands and Brasilcel. Combined, these have a 60% market share. As each joint venture expanded,

both parents injected capital in step to preserve precisely their 50/50 ownership split. Each parent also

appointed direct representatives in each joint venture’s management team. And each pyramidal group

acquired and held equity blocks in the other, as illustrated in Figure 7.

                                             INSERT FIGURE 7 HERE

        In each case, control was split – for example, their 2001 joint venture Brasilcel had a Portugal

Telecom appointed CEO and a Telefonica appointee chaired its board. As part of the joint venture

agreement, Telefonica upped its stake in Portugal Telecom to 10% and Portugal Telecom increased its

stakes in Telefonica to total 1.5%.



Quantifying Trust

To see if joint ventures between two pyramidal groups are less prone to failure when their parents

make matching commitment, we require a measure of relative commitment intensity. In this

section, we thus restrict our attention to joint ventures all of whose parents are pyramidal group

member firms. As a rough first pass, we measure this by the difference in the positions of the two

parents in their respective pyramidal groups.

        To illustrate, the joint venture between Algar Group of Brazil and SK Telecom sits in the

bottom tier of the Algar pyramid, five tiers below the apex firm, but rests only one tier below the

apex firm in the SK Telecom pyramid. The tier difference between the two parents is thus four

(five minus one), and is the most extreme disparity in commitment intensity in our sample.

        We calculate this measure for each joint venture, and find those whose parents have a

greater commitment disparity have higher cumulative hazard rate. Joint ventures whose parents

make matching commitment have the lowest hazard rate – one percent – and those with the

greatest disparity in commitment have the highest. Table 6 displays these findings.

                                             INSERT TABLE 6 HERE


                                                      37
        We next explore the multiple points of contact reciprocity strategy. We say two parent firms’

pyramids have multiple points of contact if any of their member firms hold equity blocks in member firms

of the other pyramid, or if the two pyramidal groups have joint ventures in other markets.

        Table 7 summarizes our findings. Multiple points of contact are associated with a hazard rate of

only 1%, while joint ventures whose parents lack multiple points of contact confront a 21% hazard rate.

Joint ventures whose parents have more points of contact are more likely persist.

                                            INSERT TABLE 7 HERE

Conclusions and Discussion

        This paper explores corporate governance problems in pyramidal group member firms, and shows

how under informed and under prepared managers of freestanding firms can run afoul of them in joint

ventures. Pyramidal groups are structures in which a controlling shareholder, usually a wealthy family,

controls an apex firm, which holds control blocks in several lower tier listed and unlisted firms, each of

which holds control blocks in a even lower tier firms, and so on – ad valorem. Pyramidal groups are

prevalent globally, while freestanding firms (unlisted subsidiaries do not count as pyramiding) are

virtually the only game in the United States. While governance problem in both cases arise from

information asymmetry and incentive misalignments between insiders and public shareholders, there are

important differences in the way these play out.

        In both pyramidal group firms and freestanding firms, insiders often have miniscule equity

holdings.   But in the former, these problems are compounded by the insiders typically having

uncontestable control over all the firms in the pyramidal group. Governance in pyramidal groups is

further complicated by a single controlling shareholder ruling many distinct and separately listed firms.

This creates opportunities for tunneling – shifting resources between pyramidal member firms via transfer

pricing or other income shifting techniques – to shift profits away from firms mainly owned by outside

investors and into firms mainly owned by the group’s controlling shareholder.

        The coupling of impregnable control to miniscule real ownership by the controlling shareholder

makes pyramidal group firms prime territory for exploiting naïve outside investors. Local shareholders

                                                    38
appear to anticipate these governance problems, and discount the public floats of controlled firms more

heavily in countries that provide public shareholders little legal protection against controlling

shareholders (Dyck and Zingales, 2004).

        However, otherwise sophisticated top managers of foreign firms based in countries where

pyramiding is rarer or public shareholders are better protected can be blindsided by these governance

problems when entering joint ventures with pyramidal group firms.           We argue that this failure to

appreciate local partners’ likely governance problems constitutes an economically significant “liability of

foreignness.” We demonstrate this by analyzing joint ventures in the Brazilian telecommunications

industry, and showing that failure rates are higher if a foreign parent’s managers are less likely to have

past experience with the governance problems of pyramidal groups – either because their firms are not in

such groups or because their home countries either feature few such groups or protect public shareholders

strongly enough to curb these governance problems.

        If our findings prove more generally applicable, they may provide a new explanation for the

markedly high failure rates of international joint ventures, and perhaps even suggest useful refinements to

our current theories of foreign investment. Those theories currently view international joint ventures as

strategies to reduce a foreign firm’s “liability of foreignness” (e.g., Kogut and Singh, 1988) and, in

particular, to mitigate expropriation risks in institutional environments where those risk are high (Henisz,

2000). Our findings show that, while joint ventures can indeed accomplish these objectives, they can also

expose naïve foreign parents to unfamiliar agency problems. Blindsided by these, and hemorrhaging

money, the foreign parents may, with some justification, view these agency problems as expropriation by

their foreign partners. A more cynical view, also not entirely without justification, is that they should

have done their homework better and should view their losses as tuition for remedial learning, rather than

expropriation.

        Therefore, we risk belaboring the obvious to state the following warnings:

1.      Pyramidal group firms, in countries with weak public shareholder protection, are run to maximize

     the wealth and wellbeing of the pyramidal group’s controlling shareholder. Pyramidal groups firms


                                                    39
     do not maximize firm value, nor even the wealth and well-being of their top managers. A clear

     distinction must thus be drawn between the corporate governance problems common in pyramidal

     group firms and those in freestanding firms.

2.       Foreign partners thus cannot blindly rely on a local partner to maximize the value of a joint

     venture. Rather, foreign partners need to understand their local partners’ incentives, protect their

     control rights over the joint venture, and arrange opportunities to retaliate. If these are credible, they

     ensure trustworthy behavior by the local partner and need never be used.

         More specific constructive recommendations are difficult because our analysis covers only one

industry (telecommunications) in one country (Brazil). Further work is needed to confirm the generality

of both our results and the mitigating strategies we find to be effective in this setting. Thus, we offer the

following as discussion points only for freestanding firm managers contemplating joint ventures with

pyramidal group firms.

1.       Know your partner. The local partner is not the immediate local parent firm of the joint

venture, but that firm’s ultimate controlling shareholder. This is usually a politically connected

and very wealthy local family.

2.       Know what else your partner controls. In one of the cases reviewed above, the local partner’s

controlling shareholder controlled several minority investors in the joint venture, and seized control by

consolidating these stakes. In another, the local partner’s controlling shareholder entered joint ventures

with two rival cellular technology providers, and thus had financial incentives to undermine one to

advance the other. These cases underscore the importance of appreciating the local partner’s true span of

control. In many countries, the full sweep of a wealthy old-moneyed family’s control can be astounding.

3.       Focus on control rights. Pyramidal groups are first and foremost about subjecting a huge

constellation of seemingly distinct firms to the control of a single ultimate controlling

shareholder. That controlling shareholder is thus necessarily highly savvy at strategically seizing

and locking in control. The foreign partner should always make its control rights explicit. If a

majority voting stake cannot be secured, a 50/50 split can be made to work. Accepting a minority
                                                      40
voting interest is risky unless the local partner’s incentives to make the joint venture a success

are unambiguous.

4.         Find alternative mechanisms for corporate control. There is more than one way to control a

joint venture. In many cases, majority equity ownership is not an option because of local ownership

regulations. In such cases, one interviewee from Portugal Telecom stated: “when we do not have equity

control, we obtain management control through separate management contracts. We never just forfeit to

be financial investors”. The agreement establishing the joint venture can allocate rights to appoint the

CEO or chair, or a majority of directors, regardless of the equity stakes held by the joint venture’s parents.

5.         Escalate commitment through reciprocity. We find joint ventures between pyramidal group

member firms to persist longer if their partners are more equally committed and if each has opportunities

to retaliate for any bad faith shown by the other. How freestanding firms can achieve this when

partnering with pyramidal group member firms is less clear. In industries where highly specialized

“know-how” is a critical competitive advantage, a freestanding foreign parent can withhold critical

knowledge to elicit trustworthy behavior from its local pyramidal group partner.            This was not a

significant factor in Brazilian telecoms, perhaps because rival foreign technology providers were anxious

to secure market shares. But this and like strategies might nonetheless have been useful in this and other

settings

           We acknowledge that our findings are preliminary, and offer these suggestions in hope of

stimulating more extensive debate in the strategy literature on the implications of dissonant corporate

governance regimes.      We enthusiastically invite further work along these lines, and welcome both

supporting evidence and alternative explanations of our findings.




                                                     41
REFERENCES

Arbour, Pierre. 1993. Quebec Inc and the Temptation of State Capitalism. Robert Davies Press.

Attig N, Gadhoum Y, Lang, L. 2003. Bid-Ask Spread, Asymmetric Information and Ultimate Ownership.
    working paper.

Bae K, Kang J, Kim J. 2002. Tunneling or value added? Evidence from mergers by Korean business
   groups. Journal of Finance 57(6): 2695-2741.

Barca F, Becht M. 2001. The Control of Corporate Europe. Oxford University Press: Oxford, UK.

Bebchuk L, Kraakman R, Triantis G. 2000. Stock Pyramids, Cross-Ownership, and Dual Class Equity:
   the Mechanisms and Agency Costs of Separating Control from Cash-flow Rights. In Concentrated
   Corporate Ownership, Randall Morck (ed). National Bureau of Economic Research Conference
   Volume, University of Chicago Press. (Also circulated as National Bureau of Economic Research
   working paper #6951.)

Berle AA, Means GC. 1932. The Modern Corporation and Private Property. The McMillan Company:
    New York, NY.

Bertrand M, Mehta P, Mullainathan S. 2002. Ferreting out tunneling: An application to Indian business
    groups. Quarterly Journal of Economics 117(1): 121–48.

Blossfeld H, Rohwer G. 2002. Techniques of Event History Modeling: New Approaches to Causal
   Analysis (Second ed). Lawrence Erlbaum Associates: Mahwah, NJ.

Bonbright JC, Means GC. 1932. The Holding Company, Its Public Significance and Its Regulation.
   McGraw-Hill: New York, NY.

Bower JL, Christensen CM. 1995. Disruptive Technologies: Catching the Wave. Harvard Business
   Review 73(1): 43-53.

Bernheim BD, Whinston MD. 1990. Multimarket Contact and Collusive Behavior. Rand Journal of
   Economics 21(1): 1-26.

Buckley PJ, Casson MC. 1976. The Future of the Multinational Enterprise. Homes and Meier: London.

Burkart M, Panunzi F, Shleifer A. 2003. Family Firms. Journal of Finance 58(5): 2167-2201.

Carroll GR. 1983. Dynamic analysis of discrete dependent variables: A didactic essay. Quality and
    Quantity 17(6): 425-460.

Caselli F, Gennaioli N. 2003. Dynastic Management. National Bureau of Economic Research working
   paper 9442 (January).

Chang S. 2003. Ownership structure, expropriation and performance of group affiliated companies in
   Korea. Academy of Management Journal 46(2): 238-253.

Chang S, Hong J. 2002. How much does the business group matter in Korea? Strategic Management
   Journal 23(3): 265-274.


                                                  42
Claessens S, Djankov S, Lang L. 2000. The Separation of Ownership and Control in East Asian
    Corporations. Journal of Financial Economics 58(1-2): 81-112.

Claessens S, Djankov S, Fan J, Lang L. 2002. Disentangling the Incentive and Entrenchment Effects of
    Large Shareholdings. Journal of Finance 57(6): 2741–2771.

De Jong A, Röell A. 2005. Financing and Control in the Netherlands: A Historical Perspective. In A
    History of Corporate Governance around the World: Family Business Groups to Professional
    Managers, R. Morck (ed). University of Chicago Press: Chicago, IL; 467-506.

Dyck, A. and L. Zingales, 2004. Private Benefits of Control: An International Comparison. Journal of
   Finance 59(2): 537-600.

Dhanaraj C, Beamish P. 2004. Effect of equity ownership on the survival of international joint ventures.
   Strategic Management Journal 25(3): 295-305.

Faccio M, Lang L. 2002. The Ultimate Ownership in Western European Corporations. Journal of
   Financial Economics 65(3):365-395.

Fogel K. 2006. Oligarchic Family Control and the Quality of Government. Journal of International
   Business Studies 37(5): 578-25.

Gedajlovic E, Shapiro D. 1998. Management and ownership effects: Evidence from five countries.
   Strategic Management Journal 19(6): 533-553.

Hannan MT, Freeman J. 1989. Organizational Ecology. Harvard University Press: Cambridge, MA.

Hass JJ. 1996. Directorial Fiduciary Duties in a Tracking Stock Equity Structure: The Need for a Duty of
   Fairness. Michigan Law Review 94(7): 2089-2177.

Headd B. 2003. Redefining business success: Distinguishing between closure and failure. Small Business
   Economics 21(1): 51-61.

Henisz W. 2000. Institutional Environments for Multi-National Investment. Journal of Law, Economics,
   and Organizations 16(2): 334-364.

Henisz WJ, Delios A. 2002. Learning about the Institutional Environment. In The New Institutionalism in
   Strategic Management, Ingram, Paul & Brian Silverman (ed). JAI Press: New York, NY.

Hoffman AU, Ocascio W. 2001. Not all events are attended equally: Toward a middle range theory of
   industry attention to external events. Organization Science 12(4): 414-434.

Hymer S. 1976. The International Operations of National Firms. MIT Press: Cambridge, MA; Chapters
   1-3.

Jensen M, Meckling W. 1976. The theory of the firm: Managerial behavior, agency costs and ownership
    structure. Journal of Financial Economics 3(4): 305-360.

Johnson S, La Porta R, Lopez-de-Silanes F, Shleifer A. 2000. Tunneling. American Economic Review
   Papers and Proceedings 90(2): 22-27.



                                                   43
Khanna T, Palepu K. 2000. Is Group Affiliation Profitable in Emerging Markets? An Analysis of
   Diversified Indian Business Groups. Journal of Finance 55(2):867-891. (Formerly titled Corporate
   Strategy and Institutional Context: An Empirical Analysis of Diversified Indian Business Groups.
   Harvard Business School Working Paper #96-051.)

Khanna T, Rivkin JW. 2001. Estimating the Performance Effects of Business Groups in Emerging
   Markets. Strategic Management Journal 22(1): 45-74.

Kogut B. 1988. Joint ventures: Theoretical and empirical perspectives. Strategic Management Journal
   9(4): 319-332

Kogut B, Singh H. 1988. The effect of national culture on the choice of entry mode. Journal of
   International Business Studies 19(3): 411-432.

La Porta R, Lopez-de-Silanes F, Shleifer A, Vishny R. 1999. Corporate Ownership around the World.
    Journal of Finance 54(2): 471-517.

Leal R, Carvalho da Silva A. 2005. Corporate Governance and Value in Brazil (and in Chile). BALAS
   Conference Proceedings.

March J, Simon H. 1958. Organizations. John Wiley & Sons: New York, NY.

Morck R. 2005. A History of Corporate Governance around the World. University of Chicago Press:
   Chicago, IL.

Morck R, Yeung B. 2004. Family Control and the Rent-Seeking Society. Entrepreneurship: Theory and
   Practice 28(4): 391-409.

Morck R, Wolfenzon D, Yeung B. 2005. Corporate Governance, Economic Entrenchment and Growth.
   Journal of Economic Literature 43(3): 655–720.

Nakamura M, Shaver M, Yeung Y. 1996. An Empirical Investigation of Joint Venture Dynamics:
   Evidence from U.S. - Japan Ventures. International Journal of Industrial Organization 14(4): 521-
   541.

Nenova T. 2000. The Value of Corporate Votes and Control Benefits: A Cross-Country
   Analysis. Harvard University Economics Working Paper.

Perkins S. 2006. Defining institutional similarity: Comparative dimensions of government industry
    regulation. working Paper.

Perkins S. 2008. When Does Prior Experience Pay? Institutional Experience and the Case of the
    Multinational Corporation, SSRN. working Paper.

Porac J, Thomas H, Wilson F, Paton D, Kanfer A. 1995. Rivalry and the industry model of Scottish
    knitwear producers. Administrative Science Quarterly 40(2): 203-227.

Porter M. 1980. Competitive strategy: Techniques for Analyzing Industries and Competitors. The Free
    Press: New York, NY.

Roe M. 2003. Political Determinants of Corporate Governance. Oxford University Press: Oxford, UK.


                                                  44
Samuelson, P. 1947. Foundations of Economic Analysis, Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

Shaver M, Mitchell W, Yeung B. 1997. The Effect of Own-Firm and Other-Firm Experience on Foreign
   Direct Investment Survival in the United States, 1987-1992. Strategic Management Journal 18(10):
   811-824.

Stulz R. 2005. The Limits of Globalization. Journal of Finance 60(4):1595-1638.

Thomsen S, Pedersen T. 2000. Ownership structure and economic performance in the largest European
   companies. Strategic Management Journal 21(6): 689-705.

Tobin, James, 1970, Money and Income: Post Hoc Ergo Propter Hoc? Quarterly Journal of Economics,
   Vol. 84, No. 2. (May), pp. 301-317.

Volpin PF. 2002. Governance with Poor Investor Protection: Evidence from Top Executive Turnover in
   Italy. Journal of Financial Economics 65(1): 159-160.

Weston JF, Mitchell ML, Mulherin JH. 2003. Takeovers, Restructuring, and Corporate Governance,
   Fourth Edition. Prentice Hall: New Jersey.

Zaheer S. 1995. Overcoming the liability of foreignness. Academy of Management Journal 38(2): 341-
   363.

Zaheer S, Mosakowski E. 1997. The Dynamics of the Liability of Foreignness. Strategic Management
   Journal 18(6): 439-464.

Zajac EJ, Bazerman MH. 1991. Blind spots in industry and competitor analysis: Implications of
    interfirm (mis)perceptions for strategic decisions. Academy of Management Review 16(1): 37-56.

Zhao M. 2006. Conducting R&D in Countries with Weak Intellectual Property Rights Protection.
   Management Science, 52:1185.




                                                  45
    Table 1. Family Control Indexes
Family control indices are based on the largest ten private sector business entities (freestanding
firms or business groups) in each of 41 economies. Size is total employees, allowing unlisted
firms, for which assets, sales and other financial data are unavailable, to be included. The data
are fractions of these entities controlled by families in 1996. DV and DE are based on the largest
ten domestically controlled entities, and are labor and equal-weighted, respectively. PV and PE
include foreign subsidiaries in the top ten list, and are analogously weighted.
                   DV     DE       PV        PE                      DV      DE      PV       PE
Argentina         85.2   70.0     74.9      60.0    Mexico         100.0   100.0    88.7     90.0
Australia         6.1    10.0     0.0       0.0     Netherlands     19.8    30.0    19.8     30.0
Austria           83.9   80.0     58.8      60.0    New             39.1    50.0    14.1     20.0
Belgium           89.5   90.0     73.8      70.0    Norway          33.4    50.0    28.6     40.0
Brazil            91.3   90.0     55.1      50.0    Pakistan       100.0   100.0   100.0    100.0
Canada            41.5   60.0     41.5      60.0    Peru           100.0   100.0    32.4     50.0
Chile            100.0   100.0    53.0      60.0    Philippines    100.0   100.0    68.1     70.0
Colombia          85.2   80.0     73.2      70.0    Portugal        96.0    90.0    86.9     70.0
Denmark           6.3    10.0     6.3       10.0    Singapore       15.8    30.0    0.0      0.0
Finland           25.0   30.0     25.0      30.0    South Africa    56.8    50.0    55.5     50.0
France            38.2   40.0     38.2      40.0    South Korea     61.4    50.0    61.4     50.0
Germany           6.6    10.0     6.6       10.0    Spain           46.8    50.0    41.4     40.0
Greece           100.0   100.0    95.9      90.0    Sweden          73.2    60.0    73.2     60.0
Hong Kong         42.7   70.0     36.7      60.0    Switzerland     14.5    30.0    14.5     30.0
India             96.3   90.0     91.7      80.0    Taiwan          72.8    70.0    65.5     60.0
Indonesia         69.9   90.0     65.1      80.0    Thailand       100.0   100.0    72.7     60.0
Ireland           27.9   20.0     27.9      20.0    Turkey         100.0   100.0   100.0    100.0
Israel            78.6   70.0     78.6      70.0    United          15.9    20.0    15.9     20.0
Italy             67.1   50.0     67.1      50.0    United          18.8    10.0    18.8     10.0
Japan             0.0     0.0     0.0       0.0     Venezuela      100.0   100.0    70.3     70.0
Malaysia         100.0   100.0    94.8      90.0
Source: Fogel (2006)




                                               46
Table 2. Parent Firm Control
Incidence of parent firms classified as freestanding, pyramidal group members, or other group
member firms.

      Control classification       Symbol            Brazilian                    Foreign                Total
         Freestanding 50             FS                 0                           37                    37
     Pyramidal group member          PG                 25                          22                    47
       Other group member            OG                 0                            7                     7
              Total                                     25                          66                    91

Table 3. Parent Combination Control Structures

 Parent Combination                                         Symbol            Foreign       Mixed           Total
 All parents are freestanding firms                          FS/FS                7            0              7
 All parents belong to pyramidal groups                       PG/PG               17          25             42
 Freestanding and pyramidal group parents                     PG/FS               6           22             28
 Pyramidal and ‘other group’ parents                          PG/OG               4            2              6
 Total joint venture parent combinations                                          34          49             83
 Wholly owned subsidiaries of a foreign parent                 WO                 48           0             48
 Total parent combinations                                                        82          49             131

 Table 4: Categorical Hazard Rate Estimates
 Relationship to the Joint Venture’s Parent Firm Combination Control Structure

                                                                    Hazard
 Ownership Structure                                                 Rate         Successes     Failures      Totals
 All parents are pyramid members (PG/PG)                             0.08            31            12          43
      Brazilian and foreign parents                                   0.12             15           10            25
      All parents are foreign                                         0.02             16           2             18
 All parents are freestanding (and foreign) (FS/FS)                   0.26              2           4             6
 Freestanding and pyramid member parents (PG/FS)                      0.27              2           26            28
 Pyramid and other group member parents (PG/OG)                       0.20              2           4             6
 Brazilian PG and foreign non-PG parents                              0.22              3           21            24
 Foreign PG and foreign non-PG parents                                0.44              1           9             10
                                                                             51
 All joint ventures                                                   0.16             36           47            83
 Wholly Owned Subsidiary (WO) of foreign parents                      0.04             41           7             48
 Total (joint ventures & wholly owned subsidiaries)                   0.11             78           53           131


50
   Note that freestanding firms include both widely held firms, like MCI, and firms with controlling shareholders.
This is because our focus is the problems that arise in a joint venture when one parent is unaware that the other
belongs to a business group or the possibility of the other’s controlling shareholder tunneling wealth out of the joint
venture. Of the 37 freestanding parents, 34 are American and all have only one-vote-per-share common equity. Of
the others, one Canadian and one Japanese parent are private, and one Canadian parent is listed and has multiple
classes of common shares. Dropping observations involving these few firms does not qualitatively change our
results. Sixteen out of the 66 parent firms are widely held (14 are stand alone firms and 2 are part of groups).
51
   This figure represents the hazard rate for all joint ventures combined (PG/PG, PG/FS, PG/OG, and FS/FS).
                                                         47
Table 5 – Categorical Hazard Rates
Wealthy families typically exercise control over very large business entities via pyramiding, and
so is a plausible proxy for familiarity with pyramiding.

Control of home country’s top ten                        Hazard
business entities 52                                     Rates          Successes        Failures           Total
75% or more family controlled                             0.02             31                2               33
50 to 74% family controlled                               0.03                  20                3           23
25 to 49% family controlled                               0.11                  17            13              30
Below 25% family controlled                               0.19                  21            31              52
Total parent level observations                           0.11                  89            49             138
                                                                53
Brazilian parent(s)                                      0.13                   36            29              65
Foreign parents                                            .09                  53            20              73



Table 6. Cumulative Hazard Rates by Parental Commitment Disparity
Parental commitment disparity is proxied by the difference in the number of tiers of pyramided
firms between the joint venture’s immediate parents and their pyramids’ apex firms.

          Tier Difference                 Hazard Rate                Successes         Failures            Total
                 0                             0.01                      25                   1              26
                 1                             0.14                         6                10              16
                 2                             0.28                         1                17              18
                 3                             0.32                         0                 9               9
                 4                             1.00                         0                 1               1
Total parent-level observations                                          32                  38              70


Table 7. Cumulative Hazard Rates by Multiplicity of Pyramids’ Points of Contact
We say two parent firms’ pyramids have multiple points of contact if any of their member firms
hold equity blocks in member firms of the other pyramid, or if the two pyramidal groups have
joint ventures in other markets.

      Multiple Points of Contact           Hazard Rate               Success         Failures              Total
                   No                           0.21                   14                37                 51
                  Yes                           0.01                   19                1                  20
     Total parent level observations                                   33                38                 71




52
   Countries with % top ten firms are controlled by a pyramid; Source: Table 1 here and obtained from Fogel, 2006.
53
   Using the Blossfeld and Rohwer (2002, pg 78) suggested methodology to compare hazard rate, there is no
statistically significant difference between the hazard rates of firms with at least one Brazilian joint venture partner
versus firms with all non-Brazilian joint venture partners.
                                                          48
Figure 1. The Slim Helu Pyramidal Group in Mexico
Each box represents a pyramidal firm. Lines and percentages indicate equity control block held by the firm above in the firm below.




                                                                    49
Figure 2. Joint Venture Parent Combination Survival Rates
Histogram showing the proportion of joint venture parental combinations surviving, by year, and
underlying data.




               Beginning        Joint
                of year        Venture       Observations        Proportion       Standard       95% confidence
     Year       total 54       deaths            lost             surviving         error           interval
       1            131             7               10              0.9444          0.0204        0.887       0.9731
       2            114             7                7              0.8846          0.0291        0.8128        0.93
       3            100            13                6              0.7661          0.0396        0.6772      0.8334
       4             81             8               16              0.6821           0.045        0.5847      0.7613
       5             57             9               11              0.5629          0.0518        0.4554      0.6572
       6             37             7               12              0.4358          0.0583        0.3202      0.5456
       7             18             2                8              0.3735          0.0645        0.2495      0.4974
       8             8              0                8              0.3735          0.0645        0.2495      0.4974




54
   In Figures 2 and 3, ‘Beginning of year total’ represents the number of observations at the beginning of the time
interval. This number of episodes, N, is recursively defined across intervals t such that Nt = Nt-1 – Et-1 – Zt-1, where Et
equals the ‘Joint venture deaths’ or failures in interval t and Zt represents the ‘Observations lost’ or censored
observations in interval t. We treat censored observations with the standard methodological assumption that the
observations were withdrawn half way through the interval. Thus, one half of the censored observations should be
contained (Blossfeld and Rowher, 2002; pg 58). Therefore, the risk set in interval t noted as Rt = Nt - .5Et and the
conditional probability, p, of surviving the interval equals 1-Et/Rt. For example, in year 1, the survival rate equals 1-
7/126 - .9444, where 126 is 131, the beginning of the year total minus half to the 10 lost observations. Further, the
cumulative survival function Gt = pt-1 x pt-2x….xpl, where Gt=1.
                                                           50
Figure 3. Parent Participation Survival Rates
Histogram showing the parent firms participation longevities, by year, and underlying data.




        `

            Beginning
             of year    Parent firm   Observations    Proportion    Standard    95% confidence
 Year         total     withdrawals       lost         surviving      error        interval
   1           138           3              14          0.9771       0.0131     0.9307    0.9926
   2           121          13              12          0.8666       0.0311     0.7914    0.9162
   3           96           13              15          0.7393        0.042     0.6461    0.8116
   4           68            5              18          0.6767       0.0469     0.5752    0.7589
   5           45            9              5           0.5334       0.0563     0.4176    0.6361
   6           31            5              11          0.4288       0.0617     0.3069        0.545
   7           15            1              11          0.3837       0.0698     0.2491    0.5167
   8            3            0              3           0.3837       0.0698     0.2491    0.5167




                                                 51
Figure 4. Structure of TIW’s Joint Venture with Opportunity in 1998




Source: Company accounts.




                                       52
Figure 5: Structure of Citibank’s Joint Venture with Opportunity in 1998




Source: Company reports. Note: Equity stakes are denoted by E or no notation; voting stakes are
denoted by V.




                                                 53
Figure 6. The position of the joint venture ATL within the Algar pyramid.



          Tier 1



          Tier 2




          Tier 3



          Tier 4



          Tier 5




          Tier 6



Source: Valores Grandes (2002)




                                           54
Figure 7. Inter-pyramidal equity blocks associated with Brazilian joint ventures between
Portugal Telecom pyramidal group and Spain’s Telefonica pyramidal group.




Source: ANATEL.




                                          55
APPENDIX I

Parametric hazard models
We can more formally examine the relationship between survival in joint venture partnership and joint
venture partner’s pyramidal structure. For example, we can determine the likelihood of a parent’s
survival if it is a pyramidal group itself, if its partner is a pyramidal group, or if its partner is a Brazilian
firm. We could specify a log-logistic accelerated time to failure (AFT) model to estimate the
instantaneous hazard rates. This model is appropriate because of its monotonically increasing and
decreasing distributional assumptions fit most well with dynamic industry lifecycle effects suggested by
Hannan & Freeman (1989). Using the model, we have a direct interpretation of the sign of the regression
coefficients β for covariate Xi. E[ln(t)/Xi] = Xi’β, where t is the expected duration of survival, hence a
significant negative sign means a covariant lowers the expected duration of survival. Given the
comparability among time dependent parametric methodologies and the possible distribution assumptions
of organizational lifetimes, we also test our theory of pyramiding with two other commonly explored
distributions of time dependence used by organizational theorists: the Gompertz model, which assumes a
monotonically decreasing transition rate with time (Freeman, Carroll and Hannan, 1983; Carroll and
Delacroix, 1982) and the Weibull model which assumes either monotonic increasing or falling rates of
survival (Carroll and Hannan, 2000). Counter to the log-logistic (AFT) model, both of these proportional
hazard models, Gompertz and Weibull, coefficient interpretation is opposite the direction of the sign;
meaning a positive and significant coefficient has a negative effect on the hazard (risk of an event).
         To use these methodologies properly, we need to include enough firm level information, e.g.,
explicit measures for a firm’s financial, marketing, and general managerial strengths. Also, we need to
deal with the correlations among observations issue as some parent have multiple investment in Brazil.
For example, if a parent A has subsidiaries I and II, the failure or success of I and II are correlated.
Moreover, if these subsidiaries have other parents, these other parents’ successes and failures as
subsidiary owners are also all correlated. Currently, we do not have enough firm level information and a
large enough sample to handle the problems. Hence, such investigation is relegated to future work.
         However, if we are willing to turn a blind eye to these problems and just proceed, we find the
following: (i) the dummy variable indicating having a Brazilian joint venture partner and the dummy
variable indicating that the parent itself is a pyramidal unit do not affect the expected duration of survival;
(ii) a dummy variable indicating that a joint venture partner is a pyramidal unit reduces the expected
duration of survival; (iii) a cross term dummy variable capturing that both parents are pyramidal units
more than nullifies the effect (ii) and in the net raises the expected duration of survival. These results are
shown below.




                                                       56
Parametric Survival Analysis
                               Log-logistic            Weibull            Gompertz
Variables                      Model                   Model              Model
Brazilian Partner                 0.0065229              -0.3263057           -0.3257365
                                (.0203397)              (.3673564)         (.3670746)
Pyramidal Partner                -0.0698812   *             1.643532 **         1.638878 **
                                (.0357184)              (.6305797)         (.6306209)
Pyramid                          -0.0618063               0.7594624            0.7588693
                                 -0.0457457             (.9217228)         (.9218289)
Pyramidal Partner x Pyramid       0.1046112   *            -2.293742 *         -2.292532 *
                                (.0496432)              (.9687336)         (.9690163)
Technology                        0.0056977              -0.1023779           -0.1026776
                                (.0035069)              (.0575719)         (.0575978)
Cultural Distance -IDV            0.1145917   ***         0.1320579            0.1335201
                                (.0371605)              (.3606151)         (.3601898)
Cultural Distance -MAS           -0.1167081   ***           1.147808            1.141406
                                (.0311216)              (.6117619)         (.6107732)
POLCON 2002                       -1.718116   ***           4.710626            4.739197
                                (.4111745)              (2.677625)         (2.678417)
Constant                           3.941704                -66.87184           -20.31247
                                (.0643231)              (14.71537)          (4.16843)
/ln_gam/ln_p/gamma                -3.338775                 2.828083           0.3747882
                                (.1832736)              (.2258434)          (.090238)
gamma/p                           0.0354804                 16.91301
                                                        (3.819691)
1/p                                                       0.0591261
                                                        (.0133532)
No. of observations                    138                       138               138
No. of failures                         49                        49                49




                                                  57
