                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        INSTITUTIONS, TECHNOLOGY, AND TRADE

                                           Wolfgang Keller
                                           Carol H. Shiue

                                        Working Paper 13913
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13913


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2008




An earlier draft of this paper circulated under the title "Tariffs, Trains, and Trade: The Importance
of Institutions versus Technology in the Expansion of Markets". We thank Lee Alston, Jörg Baten,
Brad DeLong, Price Fishback, Rainer Fremdling, Murat Iyigun, Michael Kopsidis, Larry Neal, Nathan
Nunn, Florian Ploeckl, Steve Redding, Kevin O.Rourke, John Sutton, Je¤ Williamson, Randy Wright,
and the audiences at Berkeley, Colorado, Harvard, Yale, the 2006 NBER/CEPR conference in Lund,
the 2007 NBER Spring ITI meeting, the 2007 North American Cliometrics meeting, the 2008 NBER-Philly
Fed Macroeconomics in Time and Space conference, and the 2008 CEPR ERWIT conference for useful
comments, and Michael Kopsidis as well for providing us with data. NSF support under grant number
SES 0453040 is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Wolfgang Keller and Carol H. Shiue. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Institutions, Technology, and Trade
Wolfgang Keller and Carol H. Shiue
NBER Working Paper No. 13913
April 2008, Revised December 2008
JEL No. F1,F3,N10,O24,O3

                                               ABSTRACT

We study the importance of technology and institutions in determining the size of markets in five different
countries and fifteen different German states. The setting of 19th century Europe presents a unique
opportunity to address this issue, since it witnessed fundamental change in both dimensions. At the
beginning of the century, numerous customs borders, separate currencies with different monetary systems,
and poor transportation facilities were major obstacles that held back trade. Important institutional
change, through the Zollverein customs treaties and currency unification, and major technological
innovations in the steam train all had a role in increasing market size as measured in terms of the spatial
dispersion of grain prices across 68 markets. However, we find that the impact of steam trains is substantially
larger than the effects from customs liberalizations and currency agreements in increasing market size,
where correcting for the potential endogeneity in institutional and technological changes are crucial
for this result. We also find that a state's institutions influence the rate of adoption of steam trains,
thereby identifying an important indirect effect from institutions on economic performance. The institutional
and technological changes account for almost all of the decline in price gaps over this period.


Wolfgang Keller
Department of Economics
University of Colorado at Boulder
Boulder, CO 80309-0256
and NBER
Wolfgang.Keller@colorado.edu

Carol H. Shiue
University of Colorado at Boulder
Department of Economics
Boulder, CO 80309
and NBER
carol.shiue@colorado.edu
1         Introduction

The growth of Europe, and indeed of the world, has been linked to the scope of market trans-

actions. In fact, it has been said that economic development is the spread of markets.1 As

the market size increases, trade raises economic welfare due to the e¢ ciency gains of greater

specialization, the division of labor, and potential additional gains through scale economies.

Moreover, the welfare gains from increases in market size can be compounded manifold if they

usher in an era of higher sustained per-capita growth for an economy.

        Institutions that reduce transactions costs are one obvious factor that determines the size

of the market, yet little is known about the importance of institutions relative to other means

by which market expansion occurs.2 This paper analyzes these issues by examining the spatial

dispersion of grain prices in 68 European markets. These markets are located in …ve di¤erent

countries and …fteen di¤erent German states, including Prussia. The area corresponds approx-

imately to the location of today’s Austria, Belgium, Czech Republic, France, Germany, Italy,

the Netherlands, Poland, and Switzerland (See Figure 1). The goal of this paper is to assess

the contributions of the key institutional and technological innovations to trade in 19th century

Europe, when the scope of markets was increasing at a speed faster than at any point in the

past.

        The …rst question we ask, and answer, is how much of an impact did institutional agreements

have on market size compared to that of a key transport technology of the 19th century,

the steam train. Transactions costs to trade were high in the late 18th century. The steam

train dramatically altered the transportation system in which overland transport was often

    1
    Braudel (1992, 225).
    2
    We borrow North’s (1990, 3) notion of institutions; they are "the rules of the game in a society or, more
formally, are the humanly devised constraints that shape human interaction".


                                                     1
achieved by horsedrawn carriages. There were about 1,800 customs borders in Germany alone

at this time.3 Moreover, a vast number of di¤erent currencies existed, which had the e¤ect of

reducing market size even further. Fundamental change arrived in the 19th century. The main

mechanism bringing down customs borders was an institution called the Zollverein, the "classic

example of a customs union".4 Starting in the year 1828, the Zollverein treaties successively

liberalized trade among some thirty-…ve member states that would later become Germany. The

…rst half of the 19th century witnessed also the creation of the …rst major monetary agreements

in Europe. The institutional framework provided by these laws governing commodity and

foreign exchange transactions was a clear break from centuries of relatively chaotic conditions,

and so one would expect their impact to be large. We show, however, that accounting for

the endogeneity of these changes is critical for obtaining proper estimates of the impact of

institutions on the size of the market.

      Secondly, we consider whether the timing of the adoption of technology could be an indirect

outcome of the di¤erent institutions that prevailed in 19th century Europe. Over the last several

years the literature has emphasized fundamental institutions in bringing about a major impact

on economic outcomes (Hall and Jones 1999, Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson 2001, Rodrik,

Subramaniam and Trebbi 2002). In this line of research, institutions may have a direct e¤ect

on economic outcomes, as well as an indirect e¤ect, because they in‡uence the form and rate of

technological progress and they shape the incentives of agents (Helpman 2008). We shed new

light on this question by examining whether the impact of steam trains on market size is a¤ected

either by proximate or by more fundamental institutional factors. As a proximate determinant,

we ask whether trains have a stronger impact when they are run by private agents, as opposed

  3
      Henderson (1959, 21).
  4
      Viner (1950, 97).


                                                 2
to the state.5 We also examine whether steam trains had a stronger impact on market size in

states that abolished serfdom relatively early, hypothesizing that early abolition of serfdom is

a general sign of institutional quality.6

    Our setting has a number of advantages. First, by covering the entire 19th century, we

can observe many episodes of change. Moreover, the economies are going through both insti-

tutional and technological change, so that the impacts for the same set of economies can be

compared. Second, the economies of 19th century Europe also proceeded at di¤erent speeds in

the implementation of customs, currency, and transportation changes. This is crucial since one

can look for corresponding e¤ects on market size at di¤erent times across economies. Third,

these economies also had di¤erent institutional fundamentals, and this allows us to make some

headway towards separating the direct and indirect e¤ects of institutions on market size.

    We …nd that both institutional change through currency agreements and customs liber-

alizations and technological change through the adoption of steam trains were important in

increasing the size of the market in 19th century Europe, accounting for almost all of the

decline in price gaps. However, the impact of steam trains is found to be larger than the

customs and currency e¤ects. We also …nd support for both proximate and fundamental in-

stitutions a¤ecting technological change, thereby providing some initial evidence for indirect

e¤ects of institutions via their impact on the rate technological change.

    Transportation technology improvements have often been seen as a crucial factor for reshap-

ing the geography of trade. The arrival of more e¢ cient transatlantic shipping led to important

   5
     This question is often emphasized in the literature, with the general presumption that private railways
would be more e¢ cient; for the case of Germany, see, e.g., Fremdling (1975, 109-132).
   6
     Acemoglu, Cantoni, Johnson, and Robinson (2008) study the impact of the French Revolution, showing
that the existence of serfdom, as one of the core feudal institutions, is a good indicator for institutional quality,
and negatively correlated to economic outcomes.




                                                         3
changes in the late 19th century (Harley 1988, O’Rourke and Williamson 1999), while container

shipping and air freight may have increased o¤shoring during the late 20th century (Hummels

2007). While many writers would agree that steam railways revolutionized transport technology

during the 19th century, not all earlier studies bear out the large impact of rails (Fogel 1964,

Fishlow 1965, and Williamson 1980).7 One advantage of our approach to transport technology

is that it employs economy pair-speci…c information on the establishment of rail connections,

and moreover, this includes crucial geographic factors a¤ecting steam train availability.8 This

analysis is unique in comparing causal e¤ects from customs liberalization, currency agreements

and transportation innovations using economy-speci…c information on all three mechanisms.

       Even if there is general agreement that declining transport costs, both now and in the 19th

century, have a bearing on world trade, the recent emphasis has shifted to non-transport cost

factors, especially payment frictions (Alesina and Barro 2002, Eichengreen and Irwin 1995,

Flandreau and Maurel 2001, Frankel and Rose 2002, and Rose 2000).9 Several authors have

also simultaneously examined, as do we, the impact of customs liberalizations.10 In this respect,

our work is closely related to Estevadeordal, Frantz, and Taylor (2003) and Lopez-Cordova and

Meissner (2003), who estimate that bilateral trade in the late 19th century was substantially

higher if both partners were signatories of a monetary agreement, the gold standard, than if

   7
      Cameron and Neal (2003, 199); they go on to write "[Railroads] were both the symbols and the instruments
of industrialization. Before the railways inadequate transportation facilities constituted a major obstacle to
industrialization in both continental Europe and the United States."
    8
      Estevadeordal, Frantz, and Taylor’s (2003) main information on transport cost is Isserlis’ (1938) freight
cost index, which is based on British rates. For a global sample, this introduces measurement error; as noted in
Isserlis, e.g., British ships carried less than 10% of trade between two foreign ports at the time (p.139). Jacks
and Pendakur (2008) suggest to combine the maritime trade cost information with overland rates, noting that
O’Rourke and Williamson (1994) show that much of the decrease in price di¤erentials between the UK and US
after 1850 was due to lower transport costs between the Midwest and the East Coast of the US.
    9
      Glick and Taylor (2008) document the disruptive e¤ects of wars on trade. See also Jacks (2005, 2006) who
studies a broad range of transportation and non-transportation factors.
   10
      On customs liberalizations, see also Baier and Bergstrand (2007), Rose (2004), and Subramanian and Wei
(2006).



                                                       4
they were o¤ the gold standard. Our study di¤ers from theirs in that we consider a period

starting 70 years earlier. We also conduct an instrumental variable analysis that is compelling,

we believe, in picking up on key historical facts to establish that the timing of institutional

change in 19th century Europe was systematically related to the economies’speci…c costs and

bene…ts. The results are substantively di¤erent from what comes out of treating institutional

change as exogenous.11

       The remainder of the paper is as follows. Section 2 highlights the convergence of prices

in 19th century Europe, and presents preliminary evidence on the importance of institutional

and technological change in this. We also provide some historical background for customs

liberalization, currency agreements, and steam train adoption during this period. Our data is

decribed in section 3. The empirical results on their importance for increases in market size

are presented in section 4, where we also report evidence for the impact of institutions on the

rate of technological change. The concluding section 5 summarizes our results and suggests

directions for future research.




2        Price Convergence in 19th Century Europe: the Zol-

         lverein, Currency Agreements, and Steam Trains

Consider the European cities Berlin, Brussels, and Munster. The …rst was the capital of Prussia,

and later, of the German Reich. The second is the capital of Belgium (founded in 1830), and

  11
    Estevadeordal, Frantz, and Taylor (2003) …nd instrumental variable (IV) estimates that are similar to OLS
estimates, while Lopez-Cordova and Meissner’s (2003) …nd no evidence for endogeneity. Ritschl and Wolf’s
(2003) focus is on showing that a high propensity to trade leads to currency agreements rather than estimating
the causal impact of them on trade. For the later part of the 20th century, Barro and Tenreyo’s (2004) IV
analysis shows that the strong e¤ect of currency unions on trade found in Rose (2000) and others is not subject
to endogeneity bias.


                                                      5
Munster was the capital of the Prussian province of Westfalia. Figure 1 shows the location of

all three cities on a map. Between Berlin and Munster, customs borders were removed in the

year 1831, while between Berlin and Brussels, customs borders remained. Does this customs

liberalization explain why between 1830 and 1855, the Berlin-Munster relative price gap for

wheat fell by 0.12, while for Berlin-Brussels it fell only by about 0.02?

   A priori, it is plausible that customs liberalization did indeed play a role. However, the

period 1830-55 witnessed not only customs liberalization, but also, in the year 1848, the arrival

of a steam train connection between Berlin and Munster, while a train connection between

Berlin and Brussels was not available until 1859. Hence, it would be hard to argue that the

di¤erence in price gap reduction of 0.10 (0.12 minus 0.02) is due to customs liberalization alone.

   There are also the German cities of Nurnberg, and Parchim. The former is a major city in

Bavaria, while Parchim was a smaller town in the state of Mecklenburg-Schwerin, in Germany’s

far North (see Figure 1). Between Berlin and Nurnberg, it was possible to transport wheat on

trains from the year 1851 on, while between Berlin and Parchim, such transport was possible

only from the year 1880 on. Does this di¤erence in the transport options explain why between

1830 and 1855, the Berlin-Nurnberg relative price gap for wheat fell by 0.18, while for Berlin-

Parchim it fell only by about 0.01?

   Trains may have brought down the Berlin-Nurnberg price gap faster than for Berlin-Parchim.

However, Berlin and Nurnberg also became members of the Zollverein in 1834, while Parchim

joined it only in 1867. Moreover, it is surely no accident that trains connected the relatively

important cities of Berlin and Nurnberg three decades before it was possible to transport grain

by steam train from Berlin to the less important town of Parchim. The marginal contribution

from trains on relative price gaps may therefore be di¤erent than what these …gures indicate.


                                                6
      As a …rst cut, then, the evidence is consistent with customs liberalization, train transport,

and also currency agreements each expanding market size. At the same time, it is also instruc-

tive to review what is known about the perceptions of those who lived in these areas at the

time.

      It was recognized early on that internal trade in Germany was hampered by the multiple

customs borders. The economist Friedrich List, head of the Union of Merchants (der Deutsche

Handels- and Gewerbeverein), expressed this in a petition to the German parliament in the

year 1819 as follows: the numerous customs barriers


        “cripple internal trade and produce the same e¤ect as ligatures which prevent the

        free circulation of blood. The merchants trading between Hamburg and Austria,

        or Berlin and Switzerland must traverse ten states, must learn ten customs tari¤s,

        must pay ten successive transit dues. Anyone who is unfortunate enough as to live

        on the boundary line between three or four states spends his days among hostile

        tax-gatherers and customs house o¢ cials. He is a man without country.”12


      The customs situation in Germany was also unfavorably compared with that in other major

countries, such as France. In the words of List, the situation is


        “depressing for [German] men who want to act and trade. With envious eyes they

        look across the Rhine river, where a large nation, from the Canal to the Mediter-

        anean Sea, from the Rhine to the Pyrenees, from the border with the Netherlands to

        Italy, engages in trade on open rivers and roads without ever encountering a single

        customs o¢ cial.”13
 12
      The petition is printed in German in von Eisenhart Rothe and Ritthaler (1934, 320-324).
 13
      Ibid.

                                                       7
       The support for a removal of customs borders was broad and went beyond merchants,

agriculturalists and industrialists.14 For example, Goethe emphasized both the importance of

currency agreements as well as customs liberalization. He said that he would look forward to

a time when

         “the German Thaler and Groschen will have the same value throughout the entire

         country and my luggage may pass unopened through all thirty-six German states.”15

       There were also some voices opposing economic liberalization in Germany, especially in the

early 1800s. They included political progressives, who would however typically not oppose

liberalization per se, but liberalization under the leadership of Prussia, which they considered

as politically undesirable.16 These views waned over time, with the increasing recognition that

there was no way to German economic liberalization other than under Prussia’s leadership.

       Also the nobility leading the smaller and mid-sized German states was often hesitant about

economic liberalization in Germany, mostly because they feared the possibly accompanying

political changes that would result in a loss in their personal power. However, at times the

economic imperatives were overwhelming. For example, Ludwig I, the king of Bavaria, strongly

supported customs liberalizations with Prussia in the year 1833, because he expected that

the economic costs imposed by customs borders would fuel political unrest in the population,

thereby leading to a revolution and a loss of his legitimacy (Hahn 1984, 73-75).

       The following gives a brief overview of how customs and currency agreements as well as

steam trains changed the economic landscape in 19th century Central Europe.
  14
     See Henderson (1959), Hahn (1984). This is not to say that merchants, agriculturalists and industrialists
everywhere were in favor of customs liberalization. For example, industrial producers in the South German
states of Baden, Bavaria, and Wurttemberg complained about the new competition from Prussian and Saxon
products after the 1834 Zollverein treaty (Hahn 1984, 94).
  15
     Goethe in conversation with Eckermann in the year 1828; see Goethe (1828).
  16
     Several of the Southern German states had by then adopted constitutions, which Prussia had not.

                                                      8
2.1    The Zollverein

The Zollverein was the most important institutional development in the move towards trade

liberalization in 19th century continental Europe. Other treaties can be found, but none were

as encompassing or long-lived. The main economic impact of the Zollverein treaties was the

abolishment of tari¤ barriers among member states, and the implementation of a single external

tari¤ for non-members. As of 1815, Germany’s political structure was divided into the thirty-

nine states of the German Confederation (Deutscher Bund), see Figure 1. The confederation

consisted of sovereign states in which joint action depended upon unanimity. Austria was

initially the most powerful of the German states, followed by Prussia. Individual states tended

to be highly protectionist and the tari¤s that were imposed were complicated. There is no

reliable information on enforcement, but it was likely that it was costly especially for the many

small states to each monitor its own borders.

   In the aftermath of debts from a decade of war, and new tari¤s raised by Britain, Russia,

Austria, France, and the Netherlands, Prussia sought to negotiate treaties with her neighbors

while reforming internal tari¤s. This was particularly pressing because Prussia’s territories were

divided into two, an eastern portion consisting of seven provinces, and a western portion that

included the Rhineland provinces and the Ruhr area. In the year 1818, the Prussian Customs

Union was formed. With few exceptions, internal dues were abolished, and by 1821 only a

single tari¤ for the entire Kingdom was levied, while transit dues on goods passing through

Prussia were reduced. The importance of the Prussian Customs Union stems from the fact that

it served as a model for most of the Zollverein treaties that followed.

   Enclaves within Prussia were the …rst to develop agreements with Prussia on how its pay-

ment of duties were to be treated— with Prussia deciding to treat the enclaves as her own

                                                9
territory rather than as foreign states required to pay import duties. As with all of the follow-

ing treaties, these were based on the principle that states that adopted the Prussian system of

tari¤ received a share of the joint revenue based on population size. Their rights as sovereign

states were maintained.17

       Hesse-Darmstadt was the …rst territorially separate state to join the Prussian Customs

Union in the year 1828, while Hesse-Cassel became the next to join in 1831. The latter was

signi…cant because it meant that the East and West Prussian provinces were joined without

a customs border for the …rst time. It also meant that British goods could no longer reach

Frankfurt and Germany’s south without crossing a Prussian external tari¤ border; see Figure

1. In the year 1834, the Thuringian states, the Kingdom of Saxony, and the 1828 formed

South German Customs Union (consisting of Wurttemberg and Bavaria) joined the augmented

Prussian Customs Union to become the German Zollverein. At that point the Zollverein had

an area of about 163,000 square miles and a population of about 23.5 million people.

       By stages, other states entered. Three other German states joined the Zollverein between

mid-1835 and early 1836: Baden, Hesse-Nassau, and the Free City of Frankfurt. The entry

of Baden was signi…cant because it meant that the two separate areas of Bavaria were joined

without custom borders. The entry of Frankfurt meant that it was possible to trade manu-

facturing goods from Frankfurt up the Main River to Northern Bavaria in exchange for grain

without paying customs duties. Later on, Brunswick became a member of the Zollverein in

1841, Hanover in 1851, Oldenburg in 1852, and Mecklenburg as well as the Free City of Lübeck

in 1867. Two states became members of the Zollverein only after Germany became politically

uni…ed in 1871, namely the Free Cities of Bremen and Hamburg in 1888. Thus, the process

  17
   Throughout, Prussia reserved the right to negotiate with foreign countries such as France, Belgium, and
England for itself.


                                                   10
of customs union enlargement materialized over a large part of the century (the years 1828 to

1888). Austria-Hungary did not become member of the Zollverein.

   There are a number of possible reasons for states wanting to join the Zollverein. Market

access was certainly a major motive. For any state considering whether or not to join the

Zollverein, one advantage was tari¤-free access to the large market of Prussia, which included

the leading industrial areas of Germany at this time. In general, however, the states located

in Germany’s South joined the Zollverein earlier because not joining implied having to pay

hefty tolls in order to reach the Baltic or North Sea coast. This was important, …rst, because

it gave access to trade with the emerging industrial powers, in particular England. Moreover,

it was the Southern states’main access to sea ports, since the Alps e¤ectively blocked o¤ trade

to southern ports. Thus, the Southern German states of Baden, Württemberg and Bavaria

had all joined the Zollverein by 1836, whereas the Mecklenburg states, located directly on the

Baltic coast, joined only in 1867, and the city states of Hamburg and Bremen, which relied

particularly heavily on international trade, joined only in 1888.

   Fiscal reasons may well have also been part of the calculus, but it is di¢ cult to …nd general

patterns. For many of the relatively small states, it was prohibitively costly to establish and

enforce tari¤ borders, and they preferred joining the Prussian-led customs union in exchange

for a fraction of the joint tari¤ revenue (Dumke 1976, Chapter 1). At the same time, this cannot

be the full explanation since there were several highly indebted and small states that joined

the Zollverein relatively late. Some of the smaller and mid-sized German states may also have

hesitated to join the Zollverein because they preferred more trade protection than the external

tari¤ preferred by Prussia provided. However, Prussia’s tari¤s on a range of goods, especially

Kolonialwaren such as tobacco, tea, and sugar, were actually higher than the tari¤s of other


                                               11
German states before they joined the Zollverein, so the desire for more protection can hardly

be the main reason for not joining the Zollverein.18 Other reasons for joining the Zollverein

were idiosyncratic. For example, Hanover joined relatively late in part because it was governed

in personal union with England, which had no interest in an all-inclusive Prussian led customs

union in the center of Europe. Overall, the key motive for joining the Zollverein was likely

market access, and we will return to this question in the empirical analysis below.

      Since the Zollverein was a customs union, joining it was not identical to a move towards

multilateral free trade. Trade diversion was a possible outcome. However, most of trade of the

German states at the time was with other German states, and a substantial share of imports

were consumption goods that were hardly produced in Europe (such as tobacco, sugar, and

spices). Therefore, the trade diversion e¤ect of the Zollverein was rather limited, and thus the

basic character of the Zollverein was trade-liberalizing..



2.2       Currency Agreements

In the …rst decades of the 19th century, Germany was replete with coins issued by its many

di¤erent states. The diversity was immense, in sharp contrast to the uni…ed monetary conditions

in Great Britain and France, for example.19 In the Southern states, the dominating currency

was the Gulden, as it was also called in the empire of Austria-Hungary, while in the Northern

states the currency was typically called Thaler. Irrespective of the name, each state minted

its own currency, and initially currencies did not have legal-tender status outside of a given

state. The currencies were linked to silver by the currency unit expressed in equivalent to a

certain quantity of silver weighted in Cologne Mark. Comparability of coins even of the same

 18
      See Dumke (1976) for more details.
 19
      Holtfrerich (1989, 1993).

                                               12
denomination, like Gulden, was di¢ cult because the mints in di¤erent states had di¤erent

coinage fees. This meant that the net silver weight of Gulden from di¤erent states would

actually di¤er. During the 1820s, the state of Hesse-Nassau for example went as far as to melt

down high-silver content coins issued in Bavaria to produce its own low-silver content coins,

and pocket the di¤erence (Holtfrerich 1993). The dividing line between full-value specie money

and debased coins was therefore ‡uid.

       The South German states put an end to this through the Munich Coin Treaty of 1837.20

It stipulated that the silver content of the Gulden should be the same (nine-tenth of face

value), no matter which state minted it. This e¤ectively meant the …xing of exchange rates

among the Southern states’ currencies from this date on. Importantly, Gulden coins minted

in any of the Southern states would have legal-tender status in all signatory states. One year

later, the Dresden Coin Convention in 1838 e¤ectively led to …xed exchange rates between all

Zollverein currencies by requiring that each state was obliged to mint coins according to the

common metal-content speci…cations. However, the 1838 Dresden agreement did not give legal

tender status to all currencies throughout the Zollverein. This created an important barrier to

commercial exchange. The Dresden agreement left the Northern Thaler bloc and the Southern

Gulden bloc intact, even though currencies in both blocs were linked to the Cologne Mark at

a …xed exchange rate of 1 Thaler = 1.75 Gulden.

       It was recognized at the time that a generally accepted medium of exchange is important for

facilitating trade. In fact, the states agreed on the minting of a common coin worth 2 Thaler

or 3.5 Gulden that would have full legal tender status throughout (called the "Vereinsthaler").

In part because its denomination was too large for everyday small-scale business, the coin

  20
    These Southern states are Bavaria, Baden, Württemberg, Hesse-Nassau, Hesse-Darmstadt, and the Free
City of Frankfurt.


                                                 13
never played the role for which it was introduced.21 Instead, the Prussian one-Thaler piece was

increasingly used for commercial transactions after 1838, and even gained de facto acceptance in

the Gulden states of Southern Germany. The need for a generally accepted medium of exchange

was remedied only twenty years later, in the Vienna Coin Treaty of 1857, where all Zollverein

currencies were given full legal tender status throughout the Zollverein (even retrospectively

to those coins minted between 1838 and 1857). The states that remained outside the Vienna

currency agreement of 1857 in our sample are Mecklenburg-Schwerin and the Free Cities of

Bremen, Hamburg, and Lübeck (Willis 1896).

       Monetary uni…cation was achieved with political uni…cation of Germany soon after the year

1871. The newly created Reichsmark had full legal tender status in all German states. Also,

Germany moved from the silver to the gold standard after the year 1871, in line with the

international trend at the time.22



2.3       The Introduction of Steam Trains

European economic growth from the 19th century on also coincided with a series of innovations

in transportation.23 These innovations included paved roads, improvements in waterways,

railways, in materials such as iron and steel, and later on, steam power, but the rapid increase

of railway construction was particularly important. In the 1830s and 1840s British suppliers

of locomotives dominated the market, and railway iron exports were an important export for

Britain, while countries on the continent started to produce their own railway inputs at a later

  21
      The signatories expected that by the year 1842, the Vereinsthaler would account for 1.2% of the total coin
circulation in Germany. In fact, the Vereinsthaler circulation fell well short of this; Holtfrerich (1993).
   22
      In our sample, the Netherlands was on the gold standard by 1875, while Belgium and France were on the
gold standard by 1880 (Lopez-Cordova and Meissner 2003).
   23
      A good survey is O’Brien (1983). On the debate concerning the contribution of railways in the United
States, see Fogel (1964), Fishlow (1965), and Williamson (1980).


                                                      14
stage.

   The …rst German railway was opened in December 1835. With only 4 miles of tracks, it was

a short suburban line located in Bavaria, between Nurnberg and Fürth. The …rst longer route

(70 miles) was built in Saxony in 1839, some 5 years after the initial Zollverein treaties came

into e¤ect. Thereafter, additional miles of rail were laid down swiftly. By 1847, there were over

2,000 miles of rail in Germany (Henderson 1959, 147), and almost all main railway lines were

completed by 1877 (Milward and Saul 1977, 42).

   Railway building in the …ve sample countries other than Germany, namely Austria-Hungary,

Belgium, France, the Netherlands, and Switzerland, proceeded in quite di¤erent ways. In

France, railway construction began as early as 1828 with 23 kilometers of track opened, but

its pace fell behind that of Germany in part because of resistance to the new technology

from owners of other means of transportation. It has been argued that railway building in

Germany has been particularly fast because the various politically independent states competed

for transport routes through their territitories (Fremdling et al. 1995). At the same time,

railway building in Belgium was also very swift. The Belgium railways were designed as a

means of international transport from the beginning. This meant that negotiations among

di¤erent states were necessary. In 1834, the Belgium Parliament planned for a network that

allowed connections to Prussia, France, England, and the sea at Anvers, and later, an extension

to Holland (La¤ut 1983). In Switzerland, both the di¢ cult geography as well as the highly

federalistic (cantonal) system slowed down railway building. Also in Austria-Hungary, railway

building proceeded at a moderate pace; major reasons for that include relatively little interest

in the new technology among the empire’s leaders, as well as empty state budgets and lost wars

starting around the mid-19th century.


                                               15
       How important were railways as a means of transportation for grain? Generally, railways

were important for low value-to-weight ratio good such as coal, construction materials, metal

goods, and also grain (O’Brien 1983, 1-2). At the same time, the importance of railroads for

transporting grain varied greatly. While it was cheaper to transport grain by railroads than

by other means of land transport, trains could not compete with transport by ship. In the

late 19th century, for example, sending grain from Posen (in East Prussia) to Cologne by train

was at least three times as expensive as shipping it to Rotterdam or Antwerp and then up the

Rhine river (Köttgen 1890, 64).

       Consequently, long distance grain trade in the southeast direction, parallel to the major

rivers (Elbe, Rhine, and Danube), was hardly ever done by rail. At the same time, transporta-

tion of grain on railways was of utmost importance when it connected the drainage areas of the

main rivers.24 Grain transportation on railways was also of major signi…cance whenever sea or

river transport, even if indirect, was not an option. For example, the great majority of all grain

exported from Bavaria to Switzerland in the early 1850s was transported on railways (Seu¤ert

1857, Chapters 5, 6). The attractiveness of transporting grain on railways was not only a¤ected

by geographic features. Also the freight rates per ton-kilometer mattered, and while we do not

have fully detailed information on this, we know that they di¤ered both across states as well as

over time (Hohorst and Fremdling 1979, 64-65). The existence of a train connection therefore

does not say everything on the importance of a particular train track for grain trade. The

signi…cance of railways for grain trade varied for a number of reasons between di¤erent market

pairs, and the estimation will take this into account.

  24
     For example, the completion of the Köln-Mindener railway in the year 1847 was crucial for transporting
the relatively cheap Prussian grain to the emerging industrial areas of the Rhine-Ruhr (Fremdling and Hohorst
1979, 64). At the same time, the availability of paved roads and canals also in‡uenced how important steam
railroads were.


                                                     16
       We now turn to a description of the data.




3        Data

This study employs the price for wheat across markets in Europe to analyze trade and the size

of the market. We have compiled a data set consisting of sixty-eight market locations; Table 1

provides an overview. There are 16 markets, or about 24% of the sample, in Austria-Hungary,

Belgium, France, the Netherlands, and Switzerland. The remaining 52 wheat price series are

for markets located in …fteen di¤erent German states.25 The prices are averages for an entire

year, which is appropriate since we are interested in low-frequency changes of price gaps over

an entire century. All prices are quoted in terms of Bavarian Gulden per Bavarian Schae¤el

(about 223 liter of wheat). To arrive at a comparable set of prices we have converted the

many di¤erent quantity and monetary units that were used in 19th century Europe using the

conversion rates given in Seu¤ert (1857) as well as in the original sources.26

       The overall sample period is 1800 to 1899, but data availability varies greatly across the

series. For example, there are all 100 annual price observations for the city of Brugge during

the 19th century, while for the market in Wiesbaden, there is only one single observation. Since

the goal is to rely on important time-series variation (before-after comparison), it is clear that

  25
     These German states are the Grand Duchy of Baden, The Kingdom of Bavaria, the Duchy of Brunswick,
the Free City of Bremen, the Free City of Frankfurt/Main, the Free City of Hamburg, the Free City of Lübeck,
the Kingdom of Hannover, the Electorate of Hesse-Cassel, the Grand Duchy of Hesse-Darmstadt, the Duchy of
Hesse-Nassau, the Grand Duchy of Mecklenburg-Schwerin, the Kingdom of Prussia, the Kingdom of Saxony,
and the Kingdom of Württemberg. Some of these territories changed their name during the 19th century, for
instance the Kingdom of Hannover, which was an Electorate until 1814. All of these territories became part of
the German Reich after the year 1871.
  26
     The rates of in‡ation might have di¤ered across markets, but information on in‡ation rates or exchange
rates for all currencies and all years are unfortunately not available. Both the levels as well as di¤erences in
in‡ation rates across states have tended to fall over the 19th century, and the currency agreements have likely
played a role in this. We include state-pair …xed e¤ects in the analysis to reduce any bias.




                                                      17
more weight should be placed on markets where prices are observed for a long time. Table

1 reports the number of observations for each market as well as the year of the earliest price

observation during the 19th century.

       Grain prices in Europe at the time generally increased from the South (the Black Sea

area) and East (Eastern Prussia) to the Northwest (Northern Germany, the Canal region, and

England). The average percentage price gap between two markets in our sample is about 0.18

over the entire 19th century. For the subset of price gaps for which we have information for

the entire century, the average price gap in the …rst decade of the 19th century is about 0.32,

while in the last decade of the 19th century it is, with 0.10, less than one third of that. This

decline re‡ects that dramatic extent of price convergence over the 19th century.

       To understand the roles of customs liberalization, currency agreements, and steam railways

in price convergence, we coded data on each. For each city-market, we have recorded the

year in which it became part of the Zollverein; this year is listed in Table 1.27 Important

accession dates are 1834 and 1836, as well as the years 1841 (Brunswick), 1854 (Hanover),

1867 (Mecklenburg and Lübeck), and 1888 (Bremen and Hamburg). Generally, joining the

Zollverein meant that barriers for grain trade between any two of its markets would be equal

to zero. Unfortunately, there is no comprehensive information on the levels of tari¤s on grain

before liberalization. Some available …gures suggest that the duties on wheat may have been on

average the equivalent of about 10 percent ad valorem.28 Instead of exploiting the size of the

tari¤ change, we rely on the timing of the move towards zero trade barriers through Zollverein

  27
    Customs liberalizations that did not involve Zollverein accession are discussed in section 4.
  28
    At the time, mostly speci…c duties were charged, so that the ad valorem duty varied with the price of wheat.
In the year 1831, the augmented Prussian customs union charged a speci…c duty equivalent to about 7% for
wheat. The ad valorem equivalents for "products of agriculture" before the formation of the Zollverein in 1834
were about 16% in Prussia, 9% in Bavaria and Wurttemberg, 8% in Baden, and 3% in Saxony (Dumke 1976,
Tables 3.16, 3.17).



                                                      18
membership.29

       Even though within states tari¤s were generally abolished in the very early 1800s, there

could still have been customs borders faced by agents trading within the same state. This is

in part because the territory of several states consisted of several non-contiguous parts, such

as the Eastern and Western provinces of Prussia, or the Bavarian Palatinate area that was

separate from core Bavaria around Nurnberg and Munich. For each market pair in our sample,

we have established using historical maps whether a direct trade route would involve passing

any customs borders. If the number of customs borders to be crossed is greater than or equal

to one, CUijt is coded as 0, otherwise it is 1, for each market pair ij and year t. For any

relationship between a German and a non-German market, or between two markets in di¤erent

European countries, CUijt is equal to 0 for all years. For example, the customs variable CUijt

turns to 1 for the pair Berlin-Nurnberg in 1834 (the year of the Zollverein foundation), it

changes from 0 to 1 for Berlin and Parchim in 1867 (with Mecklenburg-Schwerin’s Zollverein

accession), and between Berlin and Brussels, CUijt takes on the value 0 throughout the sample

period (see Figure 1).

       Turning to monetary agreements, a major step was for currencies to have full legal tender

status in other states. As discussed above, this occurred between the Southern states in 1837

with the Munich Coin Treaty. For all Zollverein currencies, full legal tender status was agreed

upon with the Vienna Coin Treaty of 1857. Thus, for example, the variable LTijt for the pair

of Munich (in Bavaria) and Stuttgart (Wurttemberg) up to the year 1837 is equal to 0 and 1

afterwards. In contrast, the variable LTijt for the pair Berlin (Prussia) and Stuttgart is 0 up to

  29
    In a few cases, the time of the Zollverein accession does not coincide with the year in which tari¤s on
grain were eliminated. For example, the tari¤s between Bavaria and the augmented Prussian customs union
were eliminated in 1829, four years before the initial Zollverein treaty. We focus nevertheless on the Zollverein
accession date, because this played the key role in terms of commitment.


                                                       19
the year 1857, and 1 afterwards. For relations between a German and a non-German market,

LTijt is always 0. Table 1 gives the year in which the currency used in a particular city had for

the …rst time full legal tender status in another state.30

       Table 1 gives also the year in which a particular city-market had its earliest bilateral rail

connection in our sample. For example, the rail track between the Saxony cities of Dresden

and Leipzig was completed in the year 1839, and since this was the earliest connection in the

sample for both cities, Table 1 lists this year for Dresden and Leipzig. The trains variable T Rijt

for the Dresden-Leipzig pair is 0 until the year 1839, and 1 thereafter.

       This coding is not based on when a particular city became part of the railway network

by getting its railway station, which in itself may not be particularly important. Instead,

we code the T R variable speci…c to bilateral connections in our sample. Moreover, since it

clearly matters for the choice between di¤erent modes of transport how circuitous the route

between two markets is, we have set T Rijt only equal to one once a direct and non-circuitous

train connection existed. This has been determined by analyzing historical maps that give the

precise geographic location of the historical train tracks in Europe. For example, Figure 2 shows

the train connections in the year 1850, as well as the four cities Strassbourg, Munich, Hamburg,

and Cologne. In the following year, 1851, the North-South connection between Munich and

Hamburg was established, and the variable T Rijt switches from 0 to 1 in our analysis.

       The T R variable also incorporates other relevant elements of Europe’s topography, such

as the existence of bridges across rivers. For example, the railway line between Cologne and

  30
    The two Alsatian cities of Mulhouse and Strassbourg are special cases, since they were part of France until
1871 and part of Germany from 1871 to 1918. Thus, the value of LTijt between Mulhouse and Toulouse, e.g.,
goes from 1 to 0 after 1871. Moreover, we could in principle take into account the fact that the uni…ed Germany
and other countries in our sample went on the gold standard in the 1870s. We have not done so mainly because
being on the same commodity standard is not identical to mutually agreed upon legal tender status. We have
also considered the e¤ects of …xing exchange rates on the price gaps. Incorporating this into our analysis does
not qualitatively change our …ndings.

                                                      20
Aachen was an early one in Europe, completed in the year 1841, and as early as 1843 this

line connected internationally to the Belgian cities of Brussels and Brugge. Grain from the

relatively low-price areas of Prussia could be shipped via Hanover to the emerging industrial

areas of Cologne by the year 1847 via the Köln-Mindener line. But that was only the Cologne-

Deutz part of Cologne, located on the east side of the Rhine— the railway bridge across the

Rhine was completed only in the year 1859, and until then, Aachen as well as the Belgian

markets could e¤ectively not be supplied by rail with the relatively cheap Eastern European

grain.31

       Below we also employ information on when states formally abolished serfdom as an indicator

of institutional quality. Late abolition of serfdom is taken as a sign of institutions that are not

conducive to economic e¢ ciency and growth, consistent with Acemoglu, Cantoni, Johnson,

and Robinson (2008) who show that prosperity in 19th century Europe was lower when the

prevalence of feudal institutions increased. Such institutions might also a¤ect the e¢ ciency of

steam trains. Table A6 of the appendix reports the year of the initial decree abolishing serfdom

is presented for our markets. The average year is 1809, with the earliest year being 1783 (Grand

Duchy of Baden) and the latest year being 1848 (Austria-Hungary).

       Finally, we analyze whether state and private railways had di¤erent impacts on trade and

the size of the market. On the one hand, private railways might emerge whenever e¢ ciency

gains outweigh the cost of adoption, whereas state railway might serve also purposes other than

economic e¢ ciency. On the other, there might be market failures, for example imperfect capital

  31
    We have also experimented with another railway variable that incorporates information on how much freight
tra¢ c was present on a given rail line in a given year, based on information in Fremdling et al. (1995). This
takes into account di¤erences in the relative importance of rail connections for freight tra¢ c. Moreover, the
actual freight tra¢ c …gures also re‡ect di¤erences across rail lines and over time in terms of freight charges per
ton-kilometer. Results with this alternative variable were found to be similar.




                                                        21
markets, that the state railways might be able to overcome. We have evaluated the historical

record to determine whether state or private railways were most important for each of the 68

markets in our sample, and the result is shown also in Table A6 of the appendix.32


Data sources Major sources for the wheat price data are Shiue and Keller (2007) as well as

Seu¤ert (1857). The information on trains comes mainly from IEG (2008) and Putzger (1997).

The customs liberalization and currency agreement variables are based on the accounts in Hen-

derson (1959), Hahn (1984), and Willis (1896), as well as historical maps at IEG (2008). For

population data, we draw on Bairoch et al. (1988), de Vries (1984), Kunz (2008) and Mitchell

(1980). The institutional variables are based on Blum (1978) and Fremdling, Federspiel, and

Kunz (1995) for the abolition of serfdom and state versus private railways, respectively. Addi-

tional details can be found in the appendix.

       We now turn to the empirical analysis.




4        Empirical Results

To assess the importance of customs liberalization in bringing down price gaps between markets,

consider the following regression:


                                                                     0
                                  pdifijt =    0   +   1 CUijt   + X + "ijt                                (1)

  32
     The key criteria is whether the state had an important role in …nancing and in operating the railway early
on. Since private operators typically needed a concession (license) awarded by the government, the state had
always some role in the decision to adopt steam trains. While typically states adopted either private or state
railway systems, this is not the case for Prussia and Bavaria, which had mixed systems. Our analysis takes this
into account.




                                                       22
which relates the log absolute bilateral price gap between markets i and j in year t to the

dichotomous customs liberalization variable CUijt and a vector of control variables X. We are

interested in estimating   1.   The concern is that customs liberalizations were not exogenous,

so that CUijt is correlated with "ijt and OLS estimates are inconsistent. To address this, we

adopt an instrumental variable (IV) approach:


                                                                       0
                  pdifijt =                    0   +   1 CUijt   + X + "ijt

                                                                                               (2)

                   CUijt   =     0   +   1 DistCoastij      +   2 ZollP opijt   + X 0 + vijt


where DistCoastij and ZollP opijt are two instruments for customs liberalization. The …rst

captures the distance of markets to the coast. Almost all of the customs liberalizations between

cities in this sample were due to the enlargement of the Zollverein. Moreover, the date of a

state’s accession to the Zollverein is clearly related to the distance to the coast, with more

distant markets joining earlier. Not being a member of the Zollverein mattered more for the

states in the South of Germany, since the external tari¤ of the Zollverein prevented customs-

free access to the coast, which gave relatively low-transport access to distant markets. It is thus

not surprising that by the year 1836, all German states to the south of Prussia had joined the

Zollverein, see Figure 3. As one would expect, based on this there is a strong cross-sectional

relationship between the distance to the coast and the year of Zollverein accession (R2 of 0.48,

see Figure A1 in the Appendix).

   The bilateral variable DistCoastij equals the minimum of the distance to the coast for

market i and for market j. If at least one of the markets is located near the coast, customs

between i and j would tend to be not liberalized. To gain precision, we add a second instrument


                                                       23
based on the distance-weighted Zollverein population in that particular year, ZollP opijt ; it is

de…ned as the log average of the distance-weighted Zollverein populations in market i and j,

ZollP opit and ZollP opjt , respectively, where


                                                      X I ZV        P opst
                                                             st
                                       ZollP opit =                          ; 8i; t:               (3)
                                                      s S
                                                                  dis


Here, P opst is the population of state or country s in year t; dis is the geographic distance

                                                 ZV
between market i to the capital of state s, and Ist is an indicator variable that is equal to one

if state s in year t was part of the Zollverein, and zero otherwise. A larger Zollverein population

means a larger customs-free internal market in the customs union, and thus the greater is the

incentive to join. Note that this variable changes over time while the distance-to-coast variable

does not.

   We adopt analogous IV approaches for trains and currency agreements, with the following

instrumental variables. The size of the markets that the railway would connect was an important

consideration for rail construction. There is a strong cross-sectional relationship between city

population in the year 1800, which pre-dates railway construction anywhere, and the earliest

date at which a city-market had a railway connection (shown in the Appendix, Figure A2).

This indicates that on average, larger cities adopted railways earlier than smaller cities. The

…rst bilateral instrumental variable for T R is the average of the population sizes in city i and

city j in the year 1800 (denoted Size1800 ij ).

   Also the market potentials of locations i and j are employed to predict whether there

exists a train connection between them, where the market potential of location i is de…ned as
          P       P opst
M Pit =     s S    dis
                         ,   8i; t.   A stylized fact in regional economics is that a location’s market



                                                            24
potential is a strong predictor of its economic potential (Harris 1954). Since a city’s market

potential is computed from the distance-weighted sizes of all states in the sample, the in‡uence

of the city’s size itself on its market potential is negligible. This is relevant for the exclusion

restriction, because it reduces the likelihood that the instrument varies systematically with

characteristics that determine the price gap between markets i and j: The market potential

of markets i and j at time t, M arket_P otentialijt ; is de…ned as the log average of M Pit and

M Pjt , for all pairs ij and years t.

       We construct also two instruments for the currency agreement variable. The …rst is based on

the extent to which monetary systems imposed di¤erential transactions costs for trade between

market pairs. In the Southern German states, transactions costs were particularly high because

coins from di¤erent states had highly varying silver contents even though they had the same

face value, one Gulden. These states had relatively more to gain from currency agreements,

and the Southern German states formed currency agreements before other states did. The

instrument for the bilateral LTijt variable is a dichotomous variable that is equal to one if both

markets i and j belong to the Gulden area, and zero if at least one of the markets is not part

of the Gulden area (the instrument is denoted by Gulden1754 ). This Gulden area was formed

about half a century before the sample period begins, in the year 1754. A second instrument for

currency agreements is created as the distance-weighted log average population covered by full

legal tender status, denoted by CurrP opijt : It is de…ned as the Zollverein population variable

                                                                             CA
above, except that an indicator variable for currency agreement membership, Iijt , plays the

                                  ZV
role of the Zollverein indicator Iijt in equation (3).33

  33
    Both of our currency agreement instrumental variables are related to the factors that raise the gains from a
currency union stressed by Alesina and Barro (2002). First, the reason why the gains from currency agreements
for the Southern German states (of the Gulden1754 bloc) were relatively high had to do with these states
…nancing the wars following the French Revolution in ways that were more detrimental to the value of their


                                                      25
    We employ only a subset of the data in the empirical analysis, namely observations at …ve-

year intervals (1800, 1805, ..., 1895). Since in the case of wheat, shocks to prices often a¤ect the

crop for several years, using annual information would yield relatively little additional informa-

tion while at the same time creating serial correlation.34 Table 2 presents summary statistics of

the data. The average price gap in our sample is 0.15, with a standard deviation of 0.12. The

table also shows that the fraction of observations where customs was liberalized is somewhat

higher than the fraction where a train connection existed (30% versus 21%, respectively). This

re‡ects the fact that the customs liberalizations started in the late 1820s, which is at least a

decade before the building of railway tracks gained momentum in Germany. About 13% of the

sample had the Gulden currency in the year 1754, and the smaller distance to the coast of the

two locations in a market-pair is on average 181 kilometers. The …nal row of Table 2 shows

that the average number of observations per market-pair is 11.4, or an equivalent period of 57

years during the 19th century. We now turn to estimating the e¤ect of customs liberalizations,

train connections, and currency agreements on bilateral price gaps.

currencies than the Middle and Northern German states (see Rittmann 1975, 467-469; Holtfrerich 1993, 521).
Thus, the commitment value of currency agreements for the Southern states was relatively high. And the
CurrP op variable re‡ects in part the idea that the propensity to join an existing currency agreement rises, the
larger is the size of the economy governed by the currency agreement.
   34
      For the most part, we also restrict our attention to observations that lie in a window of twenty-…ve years
before or after the institutional and technological changes that we consider; this gives 6,990 observations. Results
from employing all available observations are presented in the Appendix, Table A1.




                                                        26
4.1       Market Expansion and the Relative Costs versus Bene…ts of

          Change

In Table 3, speci…cation (1) presents results for the following two-stage least squares (TSLS)

regression
                         pdifijt =                      s(i)s0 (j)   +    t   +   1 CUijt   + "ijt

                                                                                                                 ;

                          CUijt   =    s(i)s0 (j)   +   t   +   1 DistCoastij       +   2 ZollP opijt   + vijt

where       s(i)s0 (j)   are state-pair …xed e¤ects, and              t   are time …xed e¤ects.35 Our sample includes

68 markets in 20 states and countries. Each of the more than two thousand market pairs

ij belongs to a particular state-pair, with the corresponding bilateral …xed e¤ect denoted by

             36
 s(i)s0 (j) .     These …xed e¤ects control for unobserved heterogeneity at the state-pair level: for

example the geographic distance between states which typically will a¤ect transport costs, and

the location of rivers, which may a¤ect the importance of steam trains in bringing price gaps

down.37

       The …rst three speci…cations in Table 3 are included to assess the performance of the in-

strumental variables; the …rst-stage results are shown in Panel B, while the second-stage results

are presented in Panel A. In column (1), the positive coe¢ cient on the distance to the coast

  35
      Reported are robust 2-step e¢ cient GMM standard errors, which are clustered at the state-pair level. This
is preferred since customs liberalizations typically occur at the state-pair level, so that trade barriers between
any markets for a given state-pair often fall away in the same year. The analogous is often the case for currency
agreements as well. Also train connections were frequently established so that the opening of a particular train
connection also connected other markets for the same pair of states.
   36
      With 20 states and countries, there are up to 400 state-pair …xed e¤ects. In the regressions, we estimate
close to 300 of those (not reported); the remaining ones cannot be estimated since such state-pairs are not
observed in the sample.
   37
      For some of the larger states, such as Prussia, state pair …xed e¤ects imperfectly control for bilateral distance
between markets. We address this by showing that the results are similar using market-pair instead of state-pair
…xed e¤ects. The regressions are also weighted by the number of bilateral price gap observations for a particular
pair; unweighted regressions yield quite similar results. See Table A2 in the appendix.



                                                                     27
indicates that markets in states that are relatively far away from the seaboard joined the Zol-

lverein relatively early. This was expected, given the strong positive cross-sectional relationship

mentioned earlier, but the …rst-stage regression produces this result controlling for unobserved

heterogeneity. We also …nd that Zollverein membership became more attractive as the Zol-

lverein population grew (coe¢ cient of 0:022 on ZollP op). In the train regression of column (2),

the market potential and the population in the year 1800 enter positively. This is consistent

with the idea that both raise the likelihood that a train connection between markets exists,

though only the market potential variable is signi…cant at standard levels. In the currency

agreement speci…cation (3), being in the Gulden area early on (Gulden1754 ) is a good predic-

tor of whether currency agreements exist, and moreover, the larger is the population covered

by currency agreements, the more likely it is that additional states join the agreement.

      To sum up, the instrumental variables have the expected impact. What about the power

of the instruments? Given the poor performance of instrumental variable estimation with weak

instruments (Bound, Jaeger, and Baker 1995, Staiger and Stock 1997), we use two statistics to

gauge the power of the instruments. Table 3 reports the p-values of the F-test of the excluded

instruments, as well as Shea’s partial R2 for the excluded instruments. The R2 values are

relatively low, ranging from about one to three percent. Moreover, the p-value for the F-test

of the train …rst-stage is one percent, which also suggests that power is limited.38 However, it

is plausible that there is variation in these IV e¤ects. France, for example, was never o¤ered

Zollverein membership, and thus it is not clear that the Zollverein population has the same

impact on the propensity of France to join as it does for German states. Thus, we allow the

instrumental variables’in‡uence to vary by state. The equations for the customs e¤ect then

 38
      This F-statistic is 5.25, below the rule of thumb of a minimum of 10 suggested by Staiger and Stock (1997).



                                                        28
become
                  pdifijt =                            s(i)s0 (j)   +    t   +   1 CUijt   + "ijt

                                                                                                                  ;   (4)

                  CUijt      =    s(i)s0 (j)   +   t   +   1s DistCoastij         +   2s Zoll_P opijt   +   ijt


where      1s   and   2s   are the …rst-stage parameters varying by state.39 The results are shown

in columns (4), (5), and (6) of Table 3.40 The additional instruments raise the explanatory

power of the …rst stage by at least a factor of three, and also the F-tests’p-values are now all

lower than 0.001. The possibility that our inferences are strongly a¤ected by weak instruments

appears to be remote now.

       Looking at the second-stage results, one sees that customs liberalization, trains, and cur-

rency agreements all increase market size as evidenced by lower price gaps. The trains e¤ect is

the largest, at about -0.22, followed by the customs impact at about -0.13, but also the currency

estimate is substantial, at about -0.10. These results are preliminary since the relative impact

of institutional and technological change can best be gauged by including both into the same

regression, something we will turn to below. For now, it is instructive to compare the IV results

with the corresponding OLS results, which are shown in Panel C of Table 3.

       According to the OLS estimates, neither customs liberalization nor currency e¤ects have

a signi…cant impact on price gaps, which is in sharp contrast to the IV estimates. Moreover,

even though both the OLS and the IV estimate point to a signi…cant price-gap reducing e¤ect

from steam trains, the IV estimate is more than eight times as large as the OLS estimate.

It is thus not surprising that for all three variables speci…cation tests strongly reject the null

  39
     With S = 20 states and countries, the maximum number of instruments here is 40. The actual number of
instruments that are employed depends on the available price data; it is listed in the table.
  40
     From now on, the …rst-stage estimates ^1s and ^2s are not shown to conserve space; they are available from
the authors upon request.


                                                                    29
hypotheses of exogeneity (second to last line in Table 3).41 This is the …rst main result of our

paper: accounting for the endogeneity of institutional and technological change is crucial for

the estimation results.

       There are a number of key questions. First, why are our OLS estimates relatively close

to zero whereas others have recently found sizable impacts in OLS regressions? One reason

might be that in our sample, there are many factors that a¤ect institutional and technological

change, and they outweigh each other to a substantial degree.42 Second, why are our IV results

larger (in absolute value) than the OLS estimates? Take the trains impact, for example. If

endogeneity of train adoption induces selection such that those market-pairs expecting large

price gap reductions adopt trains before other market-pairs anticipating smaller reductions, the

IV estimate would be smaller (in absolute value), not larger than the OLS estimate. However,

this is not what we …nd. Instead, the results suggest that many of the late train-adopting

market-pairs are those that would have bene…ted relatively strongly, and those late-adopters

tend to be relatively small cities. In that case, the relatively large e¤ect of trains on shrinking

price gaps becomes apparent only once the IV estimation un-does the relation between timing

of adoption and market size. In addition, the IV estimation might also address measurement

error issues that could bias the OLS estimate towards zero. Speci…cally, the 0/1 trains variable

  41
      These Hausman-style tests are based on the di¤erence between IV and OLS estimates. Since only IV is
consistent in the presence of endogeneity, a large di¤erence between IV and OLS results supports endogeneity.
The large di¤erence between OLS and IV results also gives another perspective on the possibility of weak
instruments. Weak instruments would bias the IV results towards the OLS estimates (Bound, Jaeger, and
Baker 1995). Given the substantial di¤erences between OLS and IV estimates in (4) to (6), that appears to be
unlikely.
   42
      We know from the historical record, for example, that personal animosity between rulers a¤ected the
likelihood of institutional change in form of currency or trade agreements between them. Also, the leader
of some states were more interested in steam trains than others. See Henderson (1959), Hahn (1984), and
Fremdling, Federspiel, and Kunz (1995) on this. Another reason for the OLS estimates close to zero might lie
in the bilateral …xed e¤ects we include, which goes beyond sets of importer and exporter …xed e¤ects that are
often employed.




                                                     30
is likely measuring the trains impact with error, since as noted above the trains e¤ect would

have been dependent also on the train freight tari¤ structure, among other factors. Similarly,

the actual Zollverein accession date of certain states was occasionally a¤ected by the personal

preferences of the states’leaders.43 Because the IV estimation, in contrast, predicts Zollverein

accession with the distance to the coast and Zollverein population, it is not prone to this type

of measurement error.

       Another important issue is whether the instruments are exogenous to price gaps. As usual,

there can be no direct test of the exclusion restrictions. Exogeneity of the instruments is

however plausible for a number of reasons. First, on a priori grounds, DistCoast is based

on exogenous geographic factors while Gulden1754 and P op1800 are based on pre-sample

information. And as noted above, the market potential, Zollverein population, and currency

agreement population measures by construction do not depend critically on characteristics of

the market-pair ij itself. Second, we have employed overidenti…cation tests that ask whether

the instruments as a set appear to be valid. The p-value of Hansen’s J test statistic is shown in

the last row of Table 3, and in none of these tests can we reject the null of instrument validity

at standard levels of signi…cance. Third, we have conducted some informal analysis on the

exclusion restrictions by computing the sample correlation between price gap, the dependent

variable, and the instruments. These correlations are typically quite low. For example, the

correlation of pdif with P op1800; DistCoast; and Gulden1754 is equal to                    0:017; 0:013; and

  0:024; respectively. Moreover, in exploratory regressions of the price gap on the instrumental

variables, the latter are typically not signi…cant.

  43
    Or, for that matter, by the preferences of foreign leaders. The decision of Hanover to delay its accession to
the Prussian-led Zollverein, for example, was to a signi…cant extent determined by the preferences of the King
of England, who ruled Hanover in personal union.



                                                       31
   The following section turns to estimating the impact of institutional and technological

change in direct comparison to each other.



4.2    Institutional and technological change compared

We …rst consider customs liberalizations and the establishment of train connections. In Table

4, column (1), the customs e¤ect is estimated at about 7% and the trains e¤ect at about

13%. These estimates are lower by about 40% compared to the results in Table 3, where one

variable at a time is included. This suggests that, quite plausibly, customs liberalization and

train adoption explain to some extent the same variation in changing price gaps. The …rst-stage

regressions are strong and the Hansen J test indicates that exogeneity of the instruments cannot

be rejected at standard signi…cance levels. Comparing the impact from currency agreements

with the introduction of steam trains, the former lowers price gaps by about 6% while trains

have a 16% e¤ect (column (2)).

   How about the impact of trains relative to both customs liberalization and currency agree-

ments? It turns out that it is di¢ cult to estimate jointly the e¤ect from customs liberalization

and currency agreements, since markets that bene…ted from one typically also bene…ted from

the other (the correlation of CU and LT is 0.75). In order to be able to compare the impact

from steam trains with a broad institutions e¤ect, we construct a new variable, IN STijt that

incorporates both currency and customs information:

                      8
                      >
                      >
                      >
                      > 0 if CUijt = 0 and LTijt = 0
                      >
                      >
                      <
         IN STijt =     1 if CUijt = 1 and LTijt = 0 or CUijt = 0 and LTijt = 1              (5)
                      >
                      >
                      >
                      >
                      >
                      >
                      : 2 if CUijt = 1 and LTijt = 1



                                               32
Speci…cation (3) in Table 4 gives an impact for this institutions variable of about 3%, while the

trains e¤ect is estimated at about 13%. The estimate of 3% for IN ST might appear somewhat

low in the light of 7% for customs and 6% for currency agreements. At the same time, given

that CU and LT are correlated, one would expect that CU in column (1) and LT in column

(2) pick up part of the e¤ect from the other institutional variable, and, if one compares the

CU and LT estimates for the impact for IN ST = 2 (both CU and LT ), they are similar,

namely 6%. Moreover, also diminishing returns to institutional change might explain part of

the …nding. To sum up, with train estimates of around 14% and customs or currency impacts

of about 6.5%, the impact of technological change on market size in the 19th century was about

twice as large as that of institutional change. This is our second major …nding.

   We now turn to a number of important robustness checks, see Table 5. While the baseline

results from Table 4 are repeated on the left in columns (3) and (4), the sample is restricted

to the years from 1820 to 1880. It is during these 60 years that most of the train connections

were established, and when customs borders were liberalized, and currency agreements were

formed. Moreover, this period also excludes the early 1800s, where prices and trade may be

particularly strongly a¤ected by wars (the Napoleonic Wars ended in 1815). Next, we show

results from trimmed price gap samples. Speci…cally, there we drop the observations that

exhibit the 2.5% highest and 2.5% lowest price di¤erences during the sample period. This

enables us to see whether our results are strongly driven by a small number of unusual but

in‡uential observations. We see that for the years 1820-80, the impact of institutions is slightly

larger than in the baseline, and for the trimmed price gap sample, it is somewhat smaller, but

overall these results are not very di¤erent.

   We also examine the robustness of the results in terms of focusing on the customs lib-


                                               33
eralizations associated with Zollverein accession treaties, because there were other customs

liberalizations, and these might a¤ect our results through direct or third-country e¤ects. First,

there were customs liberalizations among German states outside of the Zollverein liberaliza-

tions. Second, the Zollverein as a whole liberalized trade for some years with non-Zollverein

countries. And third, countries outside of the Zollverein at times liberalized trade between each

other.44 While our analysis incorporates these to some extent, we are far from having complete

information on grain protection and liberalization for this 19th century sample.45 However,

the single biggest event in this respect occurred in the third quarter of the 19th century, when

many countries liberalized their trade. We know that the Zollverein had no external duties on

wheat for some time after the year 1853 (Tracy 1989, 87; Henderson 1959, 226). Only with the

arrival of grain from the United States about two decades later, pressure for import protection

mounted and in 1879, the German Reichstag reverted to import tari¤s for wheat (Tracy 1989,

89).

       In Table 5, we compare the results between our baseline and two alternative treatments of

customs liberalizations. For the "Pervasive Liberalization" speci…cation (7), we assume that

the other European countries’policies were identical to that of the Zollverein, respectively the

German Reich; we assume that during the years 1853 to 1879, no customs duties existed between

any two markets in the sample. For the "Only ZV Liberalization" speci…cation (8), we make the

alternative assumption that there were no external customs duties for the Zollverein markets,

  44
     An example of the …rst is the South German Customs Union between Bavaria and Wurttemberg. It was
formed in the year 1828 and lasted until 1833, when both states became part of the Zollverein. Our analysis
incorporates the direct but no third-country e¤ects. An example of Zollverein customs liberalizations with other
countries is the agreement with Belgium in the year 1838. However, these were neither as comprehensive nor
as long-lasting as the Zollverein liberalizations. An example of the third point are the customs liberalizations
throughout Europe, as discussed in the following.
  45
     For general information on 19th century trade agreements, see Pahre (2008).




                                                      34
and that tari¤s greater than zero remained in place between the non-Zollverein markets.46 The

results for speci…cations (7) and (8) indicate that either treatment leads to similar conclusions

as our baseline. This suggests that accounting fully for temporary liberalizations and controlling

for third-country e¤ects will not change our main …ndings.

       We have also extended this robustness analysis in other dimensions.47 This can be found in

Tables A1 to A4 in the Appendix. Overall, these results con…rm the above …ndings.



4.3       The direct and indirect e¤ect of institutions

In this section we expand the analysis to consider indirect e¤ects of institutions through their

impact on the introduction of steam trains. Figure 4 illustrates the idea: in addition to the

direct e¤ect of institutions on market size–the solid arrows from currency agreements and

customs liberalizations–we now extend our analysis to indirect e¤ects from institutions on the

adoption of steam trains on market size (the dashed arrows). We consider the interaction of two

institutions on the adoption of steam trains, one more proximate and one more fundamental.

The former is whether the steam trains for a particular market were primarily run by the state

or by private agents. There is a general tendency in the literature to assume that private

railways would be more e¢ cient (e.g., Fremdling 1975), although as noted above this need not

be so if the state provides an important public good. In 19th century Central Europe, both

state railways and private railways were signi…cant in size, which enables us to compare the

impact of the two on market size.

  46
      Even though many European countries had relatively low duties on grain in the period of 1850-80, and in
particular between 1866-79, they were typically not equal to zero; see Bairoch (1989) and Jacks (2005).
   47
      This includes shorter and longer time horizons (instead of a 25 year window), limited-information maximum
likelihood estimation (instead of TSLS), additional controls for unobserved heterogeneity (market-pair …xed
e¤ects instead of state-pair …xed e¤ects), unweighted regressions, and robustness analysis by country.



                                                      35
       We also use a more fundamental institutional variable, which is the date at which serfdom

was formally abolished in a state or country. We take the abolition of serfdom as a general

sign that highly discretionary and exploitative activities by the state towards private agents are

becoming less likely.48 To the extent that this general institutional setting a¤ects the impact

of steam trains on market size, we expect that states that abolish serfdom relatively early will

tend to see stronger gains from train adoption than late-abolishing states. It is important to

note that in this analysis we treat the existence of a particular form of railway ownership and

serfdom as exogenously given.49

       The results are shown in Table 6. In speci…cations (1) and (2), we add two variables

to the baseline results: …rst, there is T rain_StateRailway, which is the interaction of the

0/1 trains variable with StateRailways, an indicator of the importance of state railways in

market pair ij. The latter is a constant for each market pair ij; taking on values between

0 (both markets are private) and 1 (both markets have state railways). This variable is also

included by itself to avoid misspeci…cation. In the regression, we treat the interaction variable

T rain_StateRailway as endogenous and StateRailways as exogenous. The results suggest

that state-run steam trains had a signi…cantly smaller impact on market size than private-run

railways. Moreover, with around 70 percent, the e¢ ciency of state railways in reducing price

gaps is substantially lower.50

  48
      It is not crucial for our analysis to know when serfdom in a particular state or country fell out of use (which
was typically considerably earlier than the time when it was formally abolished).
   49
      We return to this issue in section 5. Note that from Figure 4, one might also think that the existence or
non-existence of serfdom might in‡uence the impact of currency agreements and customs liberalization in an
economy. We have explored this possibility but found little evidence for it. Further, one might postulate that
serfdom (or state railway ownership) would explain the timing of when train connections were built. However,
since the correlation of the 0/1 trains variable with either the date of the abolition of serfdom or whether state
railways dominated is low, this is unlikely.
   50
      A change from StateRailway = 0 to StateRailway = 1 is associated with a 85% lower trains e¤ect in
speci…cation (1), and with a 55% lower impact according to speci…cation (2).




                                                         36
   In columns (3) and (4), we include another interaction variable T rain_LateAbolition. Here,

LateAbolition is a 0/1 variable taking the value of 1 if serfdom was present in at least one of

the markets i and j after the year 1831. The rationale of using the maximum year in pair ij

is that low institutional quality in one market is enough for it to be unlikely that trains will

be important in leading to trade. We …nd that the impact of trains on market size tends to be

lower in states that abolished serfdom relatively late, compared to states that abolished serfdom

earlier. The …ndings are consistent with theories in which the establishment of non-absolutist

institutions (no serfdom), or reliance on private railways, lead to greater increases in market

size than when railways are state-operated, or the state is feudal. These results are broadly

con…rmed in a number of robustness checks (see Table A5 in the appendix).

   At the same time, one needs to be cautious in interpreting these results. First, the size of

the reduction in the trains e¤ect from late-serfdom-abolishers is smaller than that from state

railways (20 versus 70 percent). Second, the coe¢ cient on the linear LateAbolition variable

in (3), as well as on StateRailway in (1) and (2), is negative. Relatively low price gaps

among late-abolishing market-pairs (or with state-run railways) is not what one expects if

early abolishment of serfdom is a general sign of economic e¢ ciency-oriented institutions. In

addition, the simple correlation between StateRailway and LateAbolition is negative, that is,

state railways dominated where serfdom was abolished relatively early. It appears, therefore,

that while there is evidence that the technology e¤ect of railways indeed is in‡uenced by the

speci…c institutional setting, more work is needed to determine the precise relationship between

proximate and fundamental indicators of institutional quality on the one, and their relationship

with technological change on the other hand.

   The following section presents some concluding discussion.


                                               37
5     Conclusions

Do institutional and technological change a¤ect the size of the market? To answer this question,

we examined systematic deviations from the Law of One Price in Western and Central Europe

over the 19th century. This setting is particularly interesting since at that time national and

international markets were …rst emerging. To examine systematic deviations from the Law

of One Price, we focus on the market price of wheat in cities in large parts of Europe. The

analysis embodies three determinants of trade and the size of the market: customs liberaliza-

tions, currency agreements, and train transportation. Admittedly, this list may be incomplete.

However, the analysis covers the Zollverein liberalizations, monetary uni…cation in Germany,

and transportation improvements in form of steam trains, which are a priori all of …rst-order

importance for European economic development during this time. Our empirical results strik-

ingly demonstrate that both institutional and technology change must …gure prominently for

any understanding of the expansion of markets and economic development.

    It would have been impossible to arrive at these results without extensive data. To this

end, we constructed a unique database on wheat prices, geographic, city, state, and country

characteristics, customs and currency agreements, and train connections for 68 markets in a

major part of Europe over the entire 19th century. This detailed data lets us address the

reality that institutional as well as technological change are endogenous responses to economic

conditions at the time. We …nd that accounting for this endogeneity gives vastly di¤erent

results than not doing so.

    Quantitatively, while there is some variation our estimates are for the most part highly

consistent. We …nd that the introduction of steam trains reduced price gaps by about fourteen



                                              38
percentage points; customs liberalizations lowered price gaps by about seven percentage points

and currency agreements by about six percentage points. Since there appears to be diminishing

returns, the combined impact of currency agreements and customs liberalization for the typical

market would still be substantially below what the introduction of steam trains would do. Thus,

we …nd that technological change had a larger e¤ect on market size than institutional change

in 19th century Europe. With a decline in price gaps of about twenty-two percentage points in

the sample, the introduction of trains together with currency and customs agreements account

for most of the overall decline in price gaps over this period.

   We have also asked whether there exist additional indirect e¤ects from a state’s institutions.

In particular, we were interested to see whether a state’s institutions in‡uence the rate of

technological change, in this case the adoption of steam trains. There are a number of possible

channels of why this might be so, and correspondingly, the paper examines whether either

proximate or more fundamental institutions have played a role. Both the former, measured

by the ownership of railways, as well as the latter, captured by whether serfdom existed, are

found to have in‡uenced the e¢ ciency of steam trains in raising the size of the market. In

particular, for markets that were served primarily by state railways, or that were located in

states that abolished serfdom relatively late, the introduction of steam trains reduced price

gaps by subtantially less than when railways were privately run or when serfdom had been

abolished early. Thus our analysis identi…es an important indirect e¤ect from institutions on

economic performance.

   This research suggests a number interesting areas of future research. One is the relationship

between institutions and technological change. Recently, economists have been quite successful

in explaining which countries are rich and which are poor with variation in institutional quality.


                                               39
There is also plenty of evidence that institutional quality a¤ects the rate of technical change.51

At the same time, we still know too little about what exactly determines whether an economy’s

institutions will foster technological change, and how fundamental institutions are linked to

more proximate ones in their e¤ect on economic e¢ ciency and growth. The analysis in this

paper is only a …rst step in this direction.

      Our results also indicate that studies of the impact of technological change today might

have a very high return. One example is the impact of advances in information and communi-

cations technologies— the transactions costs of technological knowledge— on o¤shoring and the

associated relocation of both jobs and production, as well as the resulting changes in global

trade ‡ows. The analysis in this paper suggests more generally that with a good measure

of technological change, it is not only feasible to estimate the impact of technology on eco-

nomic outcomes, but such studies may also yield dramatic new insights on the economics of

development.




 51
      Recent work includes Acharya and Keller (2008) and Coe, Helpman, and Ho¤maister (2008).


                                                    40
References

[1] Acemoglu, D., D. Cantoni, S. Johnson, and J. Robinson (2008), "From Ancien Regime to

   Capitalism: The Spread of the French Revolution as a Natural Experiment", Harvard and

   MIT, July 2008.


[2] Acemoglu, D., S. Johnson, and J. Robinson (2005), "Institutions as the Fundamental

   Cause of Long-run Growth", Handbook of Economic Growth, P. Aghion and S. Durlauf

   (eds.), Elsevier 2005.


[3] Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson and James A. Robinson (2001) “The Colonial Origins

   of Comparative Development: An Empirical Investigation,” American Economic Review,

   December, 91, 5, 1369-1401.


[4] Acharya, R., and W. Keller (2008), "Estimating the productivity selection and technology

   spillover e¤ects from imports", NBER Working Paper # 14079.


[5] Alesina, Alberto and Robert J. Barro (2002). “Currency Unions”, Quarterly Journal of

   Economics, May, 409-436.


[6] Baier, Scott and and Je¤rey Bergstrand (2007), “Do Free Trade Agreements Actually

   Increase Members’International Trade?”, Journal of International Economics.


[7] Bairoch, Paul (1989), "European trade policy, 1815-1914", Chapter 1 in The Cambridge

   Economic History of Europe, Vol. 8, Peter Mathias and Sidney Pollard (eds.), Cambridge

   University Press: Cambridge, pp. 1-160.


[8] Bairoch, Paul, Jean Batou, and Pierre Chevre (1988), The Population of European Cities

   from 800 to 1850: Data Bank and Short Summary of Results. Geneva: Librairie Droz.

                                             41
 [9] Barro, R., and S. Tenreyo (2004), "Economic E¤ects of Currency Unions", Economic

    Inquiry 45, 1: 1-23.


[10] Blum, J. (1978), The End of the Old Order in Rural Europe, Princeton University Press:

    Princeton, NJ.


[11] Bound, J., D. A. Jaeger, and R. Baker (1995), "Problems with Instrumental Variables

    Estimation when the Correlation between the Instruments and the Endogenous Explana-

    tory Variable is Weak", Journal of American Statistical Association, Volume 90, No. 430,

    443-450.


[12] Braudel, Fernand (1992), The Wheels of Commerce, Volume 2. Berkeley: University of

    California Press.


[13] Cameron, R., and L. Neal (2003), A Concise Economic History of the World, 4th edition,

    Oxford University Press: New York and Oxford.


[14] Coe, D., E. Helpman, and A. Ho¤maister (2008), "International R&D Spillovers and In-

    stitutions", NBER Working Paper # 14069.


[15] De Vries, Jan (1984), European Urbanization 1500-1800, Cambridge, Massachusetts: Har-

    vard University Press.


[16] Dumke, Rolf H. (1976), “The Political Economy of German Economic Uni…cation: Tari¤s,

    Trade and Politics of the Zollverein Era”, Ph.D. Dissertation, University of Wisconsin-

    Madison.


[17] Eichengreen, Barry and Douglas Irwin (1995), “Trade Blocs, Currency Blocs, and the

    Reorientation of World Trade in the 1930s”, Journal of International Economics: 1-24.

                                            42
[18] Estevadeordal, Antoni, Brian Frantz, and Alan Taylor (2003), “The Rise and Fall of World

    Trade, 1870-1939”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(2): 359-407.


[19] Fishlow, Albert (1965), American Railroads and the Transformation of the Ante-Bellum

    Economy. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.


[20] Flandreau, Marc and Mathilde Maurel (2001), “Monetary Union, Trade Integration, and

    Business Cycles in 19th Century Europe: Just Do It”, Centre for Economic Policy Re-

    search, Discussion Paper Series No. 3087, November.


[21] Fogel, R.W. (1964), Railroads and American Economic Growth: Essays in Econometric

    History. Johns Hopkins Press: Baltimore, Maryland.


[22] Frankel, Je¤rey, and Andrew Rose (2002), “An Estimate of the E¤ect of Common Cur-

    rencies on Trade and Income”, Quarterly Journal of Economics.


[23] Fremdling, R. (1975), Eisenbahnen und deutsches Wirtschaftswachstum 1840-1879, Dort-

    mund.


[24] Fremdling, R., R. Federspiel, and A. Kunz (1995), (eds.), Statistik der Eisenbahnen in

    Deutschland 1835-1989, Scripta Mercaturae Verlag: St. Katharinen.


[25] Fremdling, R., and G. Hohorst (1979), “Marktintegration der preussischen Wirtschaft

    im 19. Jahrhundert— Skizze eines Forschungsansatzes zur Fluktuation der Roggenpreise

    zwischen 1821 und 1865”, in R. Tilly and R. Fremdling (eds.), Industrialisierung und

    Raum, Stuttgart, 56-101.


[26] Gerhard, H.-J., and K. H. Kaufhold (1990), (eds.), Preise im vor- und frühindustriellen

    Deutschland, Göttingen.

                                             43
[27] Glick, R., and A. Taylor (2008), "Collateral Damage: Trade Disruptions and the Economic

    Impact of War", forthcoming, Review of Economics and Statistics.


[28] Goethe (1828), Johann Wolfgang von Goethe: Conversation with Eckermann on Oct. 23,

    1828; on the internet at http://www.zeno.org (accessed February 19, 2008).


[29] Hall, R. E., and C. Jones (199), "Why Do Some Countries Produce So Much More Output

    Per Worker Than Others?", Quarterly Journal of Economics 114, 1: 83-116.


[30] Hahn, H.-W. (1984), Geschichte des Deutschen Zollvereins, Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht:

    Göttingen.


[31] Hanauer, A. (1878), Etudes Economiques sur L’Alsace Ancienne et Moderne, Vol. 2, Paris.


[32] Harley, C. Knick (1988), "Ocean Freight Rates and Productivity, 1740-1913: The Primacy

    of Mechanical Invention Rea¢ rmed", Journal of Economic History 48: 851-876.


[33] Harris, C. (1954), "The Market as a Factor in the Localization of Industry in the United

    States", Annals of the Association of American Geographers 64: 315-348.


[34] Hausman, J. (1978), "Speci…cation Tests in Econometrics", Econometrica 46, 6: 1251-1271.


[35] Helpman, E. (2008), "Introduction", in Institutions and Economic Performance, E. Help-

    man (ed.), Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.


[36] Henderson, W. O. (1959), The Zollverein, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.


[37] Holtfrerich, Carl-Ludwig (1993), “Did monetary uni…cation precede or follow political

    uni…cation of Germany in the 19th century”, European Economic Review 37: 518-524.



                                             44
[38] Holtfrerich, Carl-Ludwig (1989), “The monetary uni…cation process in 19th century Ger-

    many: Relevance and lessons for Europe today”, in M. de Cecco and A. Giovannini, (eds.),

    A European central bank? Perspectives on monetary uni…cation after ten years of the EMS.

    Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.


[39] Hummels, D. (2007), "Transportation Costs and International Trade in the Second Era of

    Globalization", Journal of Economic Perspectives 21, 3: 131-154.


[40] IEG (2008), Server für digital Karten am Institut für Europäische Geschichte, Mainz;

    http://www.ieg-maps.uni-mainz.de/; accessed November 2008.


[41] Jacks, David (2006), “What drove 19th century commodity market integration?”, Explo-

    rations in Economic History 43: 383-412.


[42] Jacks, David (2005),"Intra- and International Commodity Market Integration in the At-

    lantic Economy, 1800-1913", Explorations in Economic History 42: 381-413.


[43] Jacks, D., and K. Pendakur (2008), "Global Trade and the Maritime Transport Revolu-

    tion", NBER Working Paper # 14319.


[44] Kopsidis, Michael (2002), “The Creation of a Westphalian Rye Market 1820-1870: Leading

    and Following Regions, an Co-Integration Analysis", Jahrbuch für Wirtschaftsgeschichte:

    85-112.


[45] Köttgen, August (1890), Studien über Getreideverkehr und Getreidepreise in Deutschland.

    Jena: Verlag von Gustav Fischer.




                                               45
[46] Kunz, A. (2008), eKompendium-HGISG: Kompendium zum Historischen Information-

    ssystem der deutschen Staatenwelt, University of Mainz, Germany, http://www.hgisg-

    ekompendium.ieg-mainz.de, accessed March 2008.


[47] La¤ut, Michel (1983), “Belgium”, in Patrick O’Brien, ed. Railways and the Economic

    Development of Europe, 1830-1914. St. Martin’s Press: New York.


[48] Lopez-Cordova, J. Ernesto and Christopher Meissner (2003), “Exchange-Rate Regimes and

    International Trade: Evidence from the Classical Gold Standard Era,”American Economic

    Review, 93 (1).


[49] Milward, A.S. and S.B. Saul (1977), The Development of the Economies of Continental

    Europe, 1850-1914. Harvard University Press: Cambridge, MA.


[50] Mitchell, B. R. (1980), European Historical Statistics, 1750-1975, 2nd edition, Facts on

    File: New York.


[51] North, D. (1990), Institutions, Institutional Change, and Economic Performance, Cam-

    bridge University Press, New York.


[52] O’Brien, Patrick (1983), “Transport Development in Europe, 1789-1914”, in Railways and

    the Economic Development of Western Europe, 1830-1914, edited by P. O’Brien.


[53] O’Rourke, Kevin, and Je¤rey G. Williamson (1999), Globalization and History, Cambridge:

    MIT Press.


[54] O’Rourke, K., and J. G. Williamson (1994), "Late Nineteenth-Century Anglo-American

    Factor-Price Convergence: Were Heckscher and Ohlin Right?", Journal of Economic His-

    tory 94,4: 892-916.

                                             46
[55] Pahre, Robert (2008), Trade Agreements Database, University of Illinois.


[56] Putzger (1997), "Entwicklung des Eisenbahnnetzes", in Putzger Historischer Weltatlas,

    (ed.) W. Leisering, 102nd edition, Cornelsen: Berlin.


[57] Ritschl, A., and N. Wolf (2003), "Endogeneity of Currency Areas and Trade Blocs: Evi-

    dence from the Inter-War Period", CEPR Discussion Paper No. 4112, November.


[58] Rittmann, Herbert (1975), Deutsche Geldgeschichte 1484-1914, München: Battenberg.


[59] Rodrik, D., A. Subramaniam, and F. Trebbi (2004), "Institutions Rule: The Primacy

    of Institutions over Geography and Integration in Economic Development", Journal of

    Economic Growth 9, 2: 131-165.


[60] Rose, Andrew (2004), “Do We Really Know that the WTO Increases Trade?” American

    Economic Review.


[61] Rose, Andrew (2000), “One Money, One Market: Estimating the E¤ect of Common Cur-

    rencies on Trade”, Economic Policy.


[62] Seu¤ert, G. K. L. (1857), Statistik des Getreide- und Viktualien-Handels im Königreiche

    Bayern mit Berücksichtigung des Auslandes, J. G. Weiss, Munich.


[63] Shiue, C. H., and W. Keller (2007), "Markets in China and Europe on the Eve of the

    Industrial Revolution", American Economic Review, September.


[64] Staiger, D., and J. Stock (1997), "Instrumental Variable Estimation with Weak Instru-

    ments", Econometrica 65: 557-586.




                                             47
[65] Subramanian, Avind and Shang-Jin Wei (2007), “The WTO Promotes Trade, Strongly,

    but Unevenly,”Journal of International Economics 72: 151-175.


[66] Tracy, Michael (1989), Government and Agriculture in Western Europe 1880–1988, 3rd

    edition, New York: New York University Press.


[67] Vierteljahrshefte (1935), Vierteljahrshefte zur Statistik des Deutschen Reichs, Year 1935,

    Germany, Statistisches Reichsamt.


[68] Viner, Jacob (1950), The Customs Unions Issue, New York: Carnegie Endowment for

    International Peace.


[69] von Eisenhart Rothe, Wilfried, and Anton Ritthaler (1934), Vorgeschichte und Begründung

    des deutschen Zollvereins : 1815-1834, Berlin 1934.


[70] von Viebahn, Georg (1862), Statistik des zollvereinten und nördlichen Deutschlands,

    Zweiter Theil (Bevölkerung, Bergbau, Bodenkultur), Georg Reimer Verlag, Berlin 1862.


[71] Williamson, Je¤rey G. (1980), “Greasing the Wheels of Sputtering Export Engines: Mid-

    western Grains and American Growth”, Explorations in Economic History, 17: 189-217.


[72] Willis, Henry Parker (1896), “The Vienna Monetary Treaty of 1857”, Journal of Political

    Economy, pp.187-207.




                                              48
Table 1: Summary Statistics
Overall sample period: 1800 - 1899
                                                                                                                 Year of
                                                 Number             Year of     Year of          Year of         Earliest
                                                 of price   Mean    Earliest   Zollverein        Earliest         Legal
No        City                 State/Country      obs.      price    Obs.      Accession    Rail Connection   Tender Status

1         Prague               Austria-Hungary      8       19.47    1836                        1845
2         Salzburg             Austria-Hungary      4       29.02    1849                        1860
3         Venice               Austria-Hungary      7       15.57    1836                        1856
4         Vienna               Austria-Hungary      86      20.57    1820                        1845
5         Baden                Baden                28      16.29    1818        1836            1846             1837
6         Augsburg             Bavaria              41      16.92    1815        1834            1840             1837
7         Bamberg              Bavaria              41      16.32    1815        1834            1844             1837
8         Bayreuth             Bavaria              41      16.82    1815        1834            1853             1837
9         Erding               Bavaria              41      16.33    1815        1834            1859             1837
10        Kempten              Bavaria              41      18.81    1815        1834            1852             1837
11        Landshut             Bavaria              41      15.58    1815        1834            1854             1837
12        Lindau               Bavaria              41      19.14    1815        1834            1852             1837
13        Memmingen            Bavaria              41      18.00    1815        1834            1858             1837
14        Munich               Bavaria             100      18.69    1800        1834            1840             1837
15        Noerdlingen          Bavaria              41      16.14    1815        1834            1849             1837
16        Nurnberg             Bavaria              45      16.42    1811        1834            1844             1837
17        Regensburg           Bavaria              41      15.09    1815        1834            1859             1837
18        Straubing            Bavaria              41      14.65    1815        1834            1858             1837
19        Wuerzburg            Bavaria              41      16.41    1815        1834            1854             1837
20        Zweibruecken         Bavaria              38      16.57    1818        1834            1857             1837
21        Brugge               Belgium             100      20.62    1800                        1838
22        Brussels             Belgium              91      22.45    1800                        1838
23        Braunschweig         Brunswick            50      16.50    1800        1841            1844             1857
24        Bar-le-Duc           France               30      18.08    1825                        1851
25        Chalons sur Marne    France               30      18.55    1825                        1851
26        Luneville            France               30      19.03    1825                        1851
27        Mulhouse             France               76      22.41    1800                        1841
28        Strassburg           France               76      21.63    1800                        1841
29        Toulouse             France              100      21.40    1800                        1859
30        Bremen               Free City            11      20.53    1837        1888            1847             1871
31        Frankfurt/Main       Free City            14      22.57    1816        1836            1840             1837
32        Hamburg              Free City           100      19.68    1800        1888            1846             1871
33        Luebeck              Free City            9       17.58    1837        1867            1851             1871
Table 1, cont'd
                                                                                                                          Year of
                                                        Number               Year of     Year of          Year of         Earliest
                                                        of price     Mean    Earliest   Zollverein        Earliest         Legal
No         City                  State/Country           obs.        price    Obs.      Accession    Rail Connection   Tender Status

34         Goettingen            Hannover                  68        17.12    1800        1854            1854             1857
35         Hannover              Hannover                  50        17.81    1801        1854            1844             1857
36         Kassel                Hesse-Cassel              27        14.22    1822        1831            1849             1857
37         Bingen                Hesse-Darmstadt           1         20.34    1840        1828            1858             1837
38         Giessen               Hesse-Darmstadt           1         19.12    1840        1828            1850             1837
39         Mainz                 Hesse-Darmstadt           3         23.68    1840        1828            1853             1837
40         Worms                 Hesse-Darmstadt           1         20.68    1840        1828            1853             1837
41         Wiesbaden             Hesse-Nassau              1         18.13    1840        1836            1840             1837
42         Grabow                Mecklenburg               71        18.45    1800        1867            1846             1871
43         Boizenburg            Mecklenburg               71        18.30    1800        1867            1846             1871
44         Parchim               Mecklenburg               71        17.43    1800        1867            1880             1871
45         Rostock               Mecklenburg               71        17.57    1800        1867            1850             1871
46         Schwerin              Mecklenburg               71        17.67    1800        1867            1847             1871
47         Wismar                Mecklenburg               57        16.65    1800        1867            1848             1871
48         Nijmegen              Netherlands               93        21.46    1800                        1856
49         Utrecht               Netherlands               15        30.66    1800                        1856
50         Aachen                Prussia                   61        18.88    1800        1834            1841             1857
51         Berlin                Prussia                   61        18.14    1800        1834            1841             1857
52         Cologne               Prussia                  100        18.25    1800        1834            1841             1857
53         Hamm                  Prussia                   20        20.86    1800        1834            1847             1857
54         Herdecke              Prussia                   20        23.23    1800        1834            1848             1857
55         Minden                Prussia                   13        21.49    1800        1834            1847             1857
56         Muenster              Prussia                   64        18.91    1800        1834            1848             1857
57         Saarlouis             Prussia                   20        17.70    1800        1834            1858             1857
58         Soest                 Prussia                   20        17.71    1800        1834            1850             1857
59         Wetzlar               Prussia                   20        19.27    1800        1834            1862             1857
60         Xanten                Prussia                   20        18.48    1800        1834            1880             1857
61         Dresden               Saxony                    21        16.78    1832        1834            1839             1857
62         Leipzig               Saxony                    68        20.15    1832        1834            1839             1857
63         Zwickau               Saxony                    21        18.44    1832        1834            1845             1857
64         Basel                 Switzerland               10        24.75    1845                        1844
65         Lucerne               Switzerland               9         23.94    1845                        1856
66         Rorschach             Switzerland               14        20.79    1824                        1856
67         Stuttgart             Wurttemberg               5         23.68    1850        1834            1850             1837
68         Ulm                   Wurttemberg               6         22.81    1850        1834            1850             1837

Prices in Bavarian Gulden, per Bavarian Scheffel (about 223 liter)
Table 2: Sample Summary Statistics


                                                 Std.
Variable                            Mean         Dev.         Variable Description

Price Gap                            0.15        0.12         Absolute value of the log difference of wheat price in market i and market j (pdif)

Train Connection                     0.21        0.41         0/1 variable; 1 if train connection exists between markets i and j in year t, 0 otherwise (TR)

Currency Agreement                   0.23        0.42         0/1 variable; 1 if currencies of i and j are legal tender in both markets in year t, 0 otherwise (LT)

Customs Liberalization               0.30        0.46         0/1 variable; 1 if customs are liberalized between markets i and j in year t, 0 otherwise (CU)

City Population in 1800              0.39        0.40         Average of the population of city i and city j in the year 1800; in 100,000 people

Market Potential                    13.93        1.47         Log distance-weighted state population in year t

Gulden in 1754                       0.13        0.34         0/1 variable, equal to 1 if both markets i and j had Gulden as its currency in the year 1754

Currency Population                  7.97        8.19         Log distance-weighted population of states that gave each other legal tender status in year t

Distance to the Coast                1.81        1.67         Minimum of market i and market j's distance to the nearest coast, in 100 kilometers

Zollverein Population               10.29        4.26         Log distance-weighted population of states that belonged to the Zollverein in year t

State Railways                       0.68        0.33         Average of share of railway in markets in and j that is run by the government

Late Abolition of Serfdom            0.24        0.43         0/1 variable indicating that one or both markets i and j abolished slavery after the year 1831

Length of Observation               11.40        4.71         Number of observations per market-pair


Summary statistics for the baseline sample of twenty-five years before and after train connection, currency agreement, or customs liberalization
Statistics weighted by number of observations of market-pair; Number of observations: 6,990
Table 3: Market Expansion and the Relative Costs versus Benefits of Change
                                                 (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)            (5)            (6)

                                           Panel A: Second-Stage Results

Customs Liberalization                        -0.173*                                       -0.128#
                                              (0.072)                                       (0.019)

Train Connection                                              -0.211*                                       -0.219#
                                                              (0.092)                                       (0.034)

Currency Agreement                                                           -0.158#                                       -0.099#
                                                                             (0.051)                                       (0.030)

                                           Panel B: First-Stage Results

Zollverein population                         0.022#
                                              (0.006)

Distance to Coast                             0.014#
                                              (0.004)

Market Potential                                               0.011*
                                                              (0.005)

City Population in 1800                                        0.064
                                                              (0.050)

Currency Agreement Population                                                0.020#
                                                                             (0.008)

Gulden in 1754                                                               0.998#
                                                                             (0.004)

F-statistic p-value                           < 0.001          0.01          < 0.001        < 0.001         < 0.001        < 0.001

Shea Partial R-squared (percent)                1.7             1.1            2.9            11.4            3.6            9.1

Number of excluded instruments                   2               2              2              36             24              39

                                           Panel C: Ordinary Least Squares

Customs Liberalization                                                                      -0.014
                                                                                            (0.010)

Train Connection                                                                                            -0.025#
                                                                                                            (0.009)

Currency Agreement                                                                                                         -0.002
                                                                                                                           (0.015)

Endogeneity test p-value                                                                     < 0.01          0.03           < 0.01
Hansen OverID test p-value                                                                    0.13           0.37            0.26

Dependent variable: absolute value of percentage bilateral price difference; robust standard errors clustered at the state-pair level
in parentheses. All regressions include year- and state-pair fixed effects. #/*/+ Estimate is significant at the 1%/5%/10% level
Sample observations are within a twenty-five year span before and after the establishment of train connection,
customs liberalization, or currency agreement; number of observations: 6,990; p-value of F-statistics of all regressions < 0.001
Table 4: Institutional and Technological Change Compared

                                                                    (1)                     (2)                     (3)

                                                          Panel A: Second-Stage Results
                                                                          #                       #                       #
Train Connection                                                 -0.129                  -0.162                  -0.131
                                                                 (0.010)                 (0.025)                 (0.008)

Customs Liberalization                                           -0.072#
                                                                 (0.010)
                                                                                                  #
Currency Agreement                                                                       -0.059
                                                                                         (0.022)

Institutions                                                                                                     -0.031#
                                                                                                                 (0.004)

                                                          Panel B: First-Stage Statistics

Trains First-Stage

  F-statistic p-value                                            < 0.001                 < 0.001                 < 0.001

  Shea Partial R-squared (percent)                                  5.6                     4.8                     6.1


Insitutions First-Stage

  F-statistic p-value                                            < 0.001                 < 0.001                 < 0.001

  Shea Partial R-squared (percent)                                 18.9                     9.8                    19.4



Number of excluded instruments                                      74                      62                      96

Hansen OverID test p-value                                         0.14                    0.28                    0.16

Number of observations                                            6,990                   6,990                   6,990


Dependent variable: absolute value of percentage bilateral price difference; robust standard errors clustered at the state-pair level
in parentheses. All regressions include year- and state-pair fixed effects. #/*/+ Estimate is significant at the 1%/5%/10% level
Sample observations are within a twenty-five year span before and after the establishment of a train connection,
customs liberalization, or currency agreement; p-value of F-statistics of all regressions < 0.001
Instruments: Population in 1800, market potential (specification (1)-(3)), distance to the coast, Zollverein population
(specificaitions (1) and (3)), and Gulden in 1754, currency agreement population (in (2) and (3)), all varying by state
Table 5: Robustness Analysis


                                                       Baseline                           Years 1820 to 1880                      Trimmed 95% sample      Non-ZV customs liberalizations
                                                                                                                                                          Pervasive Lib'n Only ZV
                                                (1)                 (2)                   (3)                 (4)                   (5)           (6)           (7)           (8)

                                         Panel A: Second-Stage Results

Train connection                              -0.129#            -0.162#                -0.113#            -0.129#               -0.123#        -0.177#       -0.142#       -0.136#
                                              (0.010)            (0.025)                (0.011)            (0.022)               (0.009)        (0.022)       (0.011)       (0.012)

Customs liberalization                        -0.072#                                   -0.086#                                  -0.054#                      -0.053#       -0.062#
                                              (0.010)                                   (0.011)                                  (0.007)                      (0.008)       (0.008)

Currency agreement                                               -0.059#                                   -0.091*                              -0.043#
                                                                 (0.022)                                   (0.037)                              (0.016)

                                         Panel B: First-Stage Summary

Shea R-squared (%)

  Trains                                        5.6                 4.8                   5.3                 4.8                   5.6           4.9           5.6           5.6

  Institutions                                  18.9                9.8                  17.7                 7.9                  18.9          10.2          15.5           12.6


Number of excluded instruments                   74                  62                    74                 62                    74            62            74             74

Hansen OverID test p-value                      0.14               0.28                  0.21                0.32                  0.18          0.28          0.13           0.15

Number of observations                         6,990               6,990                 6,072              6,072                  6,642        6,642         6,990          6,990



Dependent variable: absolute value of percentage bilateral price difference; robust standard errors clustered at the state-pair level
in parentheses. #/*/+ Estimate is significant at the 1%/5%/10% level; all regressions include year fixed effects and state-pair fixed effects
Sample observations are within a twenty-five year span before and after the establishment of a train connection,
 a customs liberalization, or a currency agreement; instruments as in Table 4; p-value of F-statistics of all regressions < 0.001
Table 6: The Direct and Indirect Impact of Institutions

                                                       State Railways                                Abolition of Serfdom
                                                    (1)              (2)                             (3)               (4)

                                           Panel A: Second-Stage Results

Train connection                                 -0.222#                 -0.231#                  -0.138#                 -0.212#
                                                 (0.059)                 (0.052)                  (0.010)                 (0.021)

Train * State Railways                           0.187*                  0.125+
                                                 (0.096)                 (0.067)

Train * Late Abolition of Serfdom                                                                 0.045#                  0.026+
                                                                                                  (0.009)                 (0.015)

Customs liberalization                           -0.084#                                          -0.067#
                                                 (0.032)                                          (0.010)

Currency agreement                                                       -0.066#                                          -0.019*
                                                                         (0.017)                                          (0.008)

State Railways                                   -0.044#                 -0.039#
                                                 (0.013)                 (0.013)

Late Abolition of Serfdom                                                                         -0.143#                 0.036#
                                                                                                  (0.006)                 (0.012)

                                           Panel B: First-Stage Summary

Shea R-squared (%)

  Trains                                            4.3                    4.7                       5.9                     5.2

  Trains * State Railways                           2.4                    3.5

  Trains * Late Abolition of Serfdom                                                                11.3                    16.4

  Customs lib'n or currency agr't                   6.0                    5.3                      18.8                    10.7


Number of excluded instruments                      37                      26                       74                      63

Hansen OverID test p-value                         0.11                   0.28                      0.16                    0.15



Dependent variable: absolute value of percentage bilateral price difference; robust standard errors clustered at the state-pair level
in parentheses. All regressions include year- and state-pair fixed effects. P-value of F-test of all regressions < 0.001
#/*/+ Estimate is significant at the 1%/5%/10% level. Number of observations: 6,990. Sample of observations within
 a 25 year window before and after the establishment of train connection, customs liberalization, or currency agreement
Instruments: Population in 1800, market potential (specification (1)-(4)), distance to the coast, Zollverein population
(specificaitions (1) and (3)), and Gulden in 1754, currency agreement population (in (2) and (4))
P-value of F-test of excluded instruments <0.001 in all cases
 Figure 1




                             Parchim




                                       Berlin


            Munster


Brussels




                      Nurnberg
Figure 2: Train connections in the German states in the year 1850


                                         Hamburg




  Cologne




                                                            Connection
                                                            established in the
                                                            following year of
                                                            1851




  Strassbourg



                                                   Munich
Figure 3: The Southern German States have joined the Zollverein by 1836
Figure 4: Direct and Indirect Effects from Institutions




                       INSTITUTIONS




                                           Currency
                                          agreements
        Serfdom



                                        Customs
                                     liberalizations




                             State railway
                                                          Market size




                           Steam Trains




                        TECHNOLOGY
Appendix for "Institutions, Technology, and Trade"

                        Wolfgang Keller
          University of Colorado, CEPR, and NBER
                        Carol H. Shiue
          University of Colorado, CEPR, and NBER
                     December 2, 2008




                            1
1     Robustness analysis
This section presents results that shed additional light on the robustness of our …ndings.
We …rst turn to the time horizon that is considered in our main speci…cation. Recall that
the impact of institutional and technological change on price gaps is estimated from a win-
dow of twenty-…ve years before and after the ’change’(i.e., customs liberalization, currency
agreements, or train connection). We report results from varying the size of this window. In
general, a larger window will have two consequences. First, it amounts to employing data
over a longer time horizon. If there are important adjustment costs that limit the market
size in the short-term, then one expects to estimate a larger impact on price gaps with a rel-
atively large window. At the same time, a larger window makes identi…cation more di¢ cult,
since in the long-run many other processes may be important. This reduces the signal-to-
noise ratio and will typically lead to lower estimates. Which of these e¤ects dominates is
not immediately clear.
    In Table A1, we see that the customs and currency estimates are similar to the baseline
results for the shorter window of …fteen years, and this is the case also for the train estimate.
For a longer time horizon of thirty-…ve years, the estimates for institutional change move to-
wards zero, especially for currency agreements. Using all available data, neither the customs
nor the currency e¤ect is signi…cantly di¤erent from zero. In contrast, the trains estimate
rises, from about -0.14 to -0.21. This however might re‡ect not only the long-run trains e¤ect
but also the weakening of the institution variables (the correlation of T R with CU is about
6%, and the correlation of T R with LT is about 7%). Overall, the results are consistent
with the relatively large impact we estimate for trains, and moreover, the twenty-…ve year
window in our baseline appears to be a good compromise between identifying power and
time horizon of the estimate.
    Next, we present results for market-pair instead of state-pair …xed e¤ects in Table A2.
Recall that the analysis is at the level of the market-pair, so using deterministic market-pair
…xed amounts to the usual within estimator panel speci…cation. This has the advantage
that time-invariant heterogeneity (including bilateral distance) at the market-pair level is
controlled for. It may, however, exacerbate measurement error problems. As seen from Table
A2, the impact of the institution variables is somewhat lower, around -0.045 instead of -0.065,
while the average trains e¤ect is -0.14, as before, but it varies more across speci…cations
(compare (4) and (1)). Overall, our main …ndings hold up both qualitative as well as
quantitatively.
    Table A2 also shows results for the estimation with limited-information maximum like-
lihood (LIML), which have in some settings, in particular when the instruments are weak,
better properties than two-stage least squares (TSLS) estimators. In this case, both the
currency and the customs point estimates are similar to those with TSLS, although the
LIML estimates are less precise (and for currency agreements not signi…cant at standard
levels). The LIML trains estimates are somewhat larger than the TSLS estimates, although
the di¤erence is not statistically signi…cant. We also show in speci…cations (3) and (6) of
Table A2 that unweighted regressions yield very similar results to the baseline reported in
Table 4 (recall that in the baseline we perform weighted regressions, where the number of


                                               2
bilateral observations for a given market-pair serves as the weight).
    We take another step by examining the sensitivity of our results with respect to features
speci…c to particular countries. For example, Austria-Hungary around the year 1820 still
had internal customs duties (Bairoch 1989, 6). This would be in contrast to our assumption
that there are no customs borders between any two markets of a given state or country with
contiguous areas ( CUijt = 1, all t). The following analysis is also useful to examine whether
our analysis holds even if we restrict the analysis to subsets of states. The six speci…cations
in Table A3 show trains and currency results for restricted samples; "No Austria-H", for
example, means that all observations involving a market in Austria-Hungary are dropped
from the sample. On the right, we report the average of the six restricted-sample estimates,
as well as the baseline estimate from Table 4.
    It is clear that individual country- observations have a substantial e¤ect on the currency
estimate; the average is only about half the size of the baseline estimate. At the same time, it
is reassuring that currency agreements in the …fteen German states, labeled "Only Germany"
in Table A3, have a similar e¤ect as in the sample as a whole. This allays concerns that
our results are primarily identifying the di¤erence between German and non-German states.
Turning to the analysis of the customs and trains e¤ects in Table A4, we …nd these results
to be very robust. Also in the case of customs we estimate a signi…cant price-gap reducing
impact from liberalizations if the sample is limited to the German states. Moreover, the
"Only Germany" customs impact is somewhat smaller than in the full sample, while the
"Only Germany" currency point estimate is slightly larger than in the full sample, so there
is no clear pattern of how sample composition a¤ects the results.
    Finally, we have also further examined the …ndings on indirect e¤ects of institutions
presented in Table 6. These robustness checks are presented in Table A5. We see that
market pairs that were served by state railways see a considerably smaller reduction of price
gaps with the arrival of steam trains, and in three out of four cases this e¤ect is statistically
signi…cant at standard levels. Also the results for the more fundamental institutional quality
variable, late abolition of serfdom, are seen to be robust: steam trains brought price gaps
down by less, on average, if they operated in states that abolished serfdom relatively late
(Table A5, on the right). The robustness checks also con…rm our …ndings above that the
quantitative e¤ect of the proximate variable, StateRailways, appears to be larger than that
of the fundamental variable, LateAbolition.
    To sum up, we …nd the estimates to be robust, more so for the trains and customs
estimates than that for currency agreements. Given the generally smaller number of observed
changes for currency agreements relative to customs liberalizations or train adoptions, it is
di¢ cult to know for sure whether the impact is smaller or less-precisely estimated. In general,
however, the robustness analysis con…rms the main …ndings emphasized in the text.


2     Data Sources and Construction
Price data The two most important sources for information on wheat prices are Shiue and
Keller (2007) and Seu¤ert (1857). The former covers markets in Bavaria, Belgium, France,
Mecklenburg, and the Netherlands, while the latter provides information on markets in

                                               3
Austria-Hungary, Baden, Brunswick, Hesse-Darmstadt, Hesse-Cassel, Hesse-Nassau, Saxony,
Switzerland, and Wurttemberg. The wheat prices for Prussian markets were provided by
Michael Kopsidis, see Kopsidis (2002). Additional sources that improve the coverage are
Fremdling and Hohorst (1979), Gerhard and Kaufhold (1990) for Prussia, Hanauer (1878)
for the Alsatian cities Mulhouse and Strassbourg, Shiue and Keller’s (2007) data for Vienna,
and Vierteljahrshefte (1935) for Berlin, Cologne, Hamburg, Leipzig, and Munich.
    Since neither quantity nor monetary units were standardized in Europe during the 19th
century, conversion rates are required for our analysis of absolute price di¤erences, and all
prices are converted into Bavarian Gulden per Bavarian Schae¤el. The conversion factors
are taken from the original sources, reported to some extent in Shiue and Keller (2007), as
well as from Seu¤ert (1857). Speci…cally, from the latter we have (page 351):

                                             Conversion                          Conversion
                                                factor                              factor
    State                 Quantity unit                      Monetary unit
                                              into Bav.                           into Bav.
                                              Schae¤el                             Gulden
    Baden               Malter                   0.67           Gulden               1.00
    Brunswick           Himten                   0.14           Thaler               1.75
    Belgium            Hectoliter                0.45           Francs               0.47
    Frankfurt           Malter                   0.51           Gulden               1.00
    France             Hectoliter                0.45           Francs               0.47
    Hamburg               Fass                   0.24         Mark Banco             0.88
    Hanover             Himten                   0.14           Thaler               1.75
    Hesse-Darmstadt     Malter                   0.57           Gulden               1.00
    Hesse-Cassel       Schae¤el                  0.36           Gulden               1.00
    Hesse-Nassau        Malter                   0.49           Gulden               1.00
    Netherlands         Zacken                   0.45       Gulden Courants          0.99
    Austria-Hungary     Metzen                   0.27           Gulden               1.22
    Prussia            Schae¤el                  0.24           Thaler               1.75
    Saxony             Schae¤el                  0.46           Thaler               1.75
    Switzerland     Concordia Malter             0.67       Concordia Francs         0.47
    Wurttemberg        Schae¤el                  0.80           Gulden               1.00


Other data The main sources of information on railway building are the digital histori-
cal maps provided at IEG’s website at the University of Mainz, http://www.ieg-maps.uni-
mainz.de/ and Putzger (1997). We derive the state versus private railways indicator pre-
sented in Table A6 from information in Fremdling, Federspiel, and Kunz (1995). The customs
liberalization variable is based on information on the history of Zollverein treaties in Hen-
derson (1959) and Hahn (1984), as well as the historical maps at IEG (2008). Also the
currency agreement variable is based on information in Henderson (1959) and Hahn (1984),
as well as Willis (1896). City population data comes from Bairoch et al. (1988) and de
Vries (1984), while state and country-level population …gures come from Kunz (2008) and
Mitchell (1980). Information on serfdom, as shown in Table A6, comes from Blum (1978).

                                             4
Finally, the information on cities’latitude and longitude that we employ to compute several
variables (DistCoast, ZollP op, M arket_P otential; and CurrP op) comes from maporama,
http://world.maporama.com/ .



References
 [1] Bairoch, Paul, Jean Batou, and Pierre Chevre (1988), The Population of European
     Cities from 800 to 1850: Data Bank and Short Summary of Results. Geneva: Librairie
     Droz.

 [2] Blum, J. (1975), The End of the Old Order in Rural Europe, Princeton University Press:
     Princeton, NJ.

 [3] De Vries, Jan (1984), European Urbanization 1500-1800, Cambridge, Massachusetts:
     Harvard University Press.

 [4] Fremdling, R., R. Federspiel, and A. Kunz (1995), (eds.), Statistik der Eisenbahnen in
     Deutschland 1835-1989, Scripta Mercaturae Verlag: St. Katharinen.

 [5] Fremdling, R., and G. Hohorst (1979), “Marktintegration der preussischen Wirtschaft
     im 19. Jahrhundert— Skizze eines Forschungsansatzes zur Fluktuation der Roggenpreise
     zwischen 1821 und 1865”, in R. Tilly and R. Fremdling (eds.), Industrialisierung und
     Raum, Stuttgart, 56-101.

 [6] Gerhard, H.-J., and K. H. Kaufhold (1990), (eds.), Preise im vor- und frühindustriellen
     Deutschland, Göttingen.

 [7] Hahn, H.-W. (1984), Geschichte des Deutschen Zollvereins, Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht:
     Göttingen.

 [8] Hanauer, A. (1878), Etudes Economiques sur L’Alsace Ancienne et Moderne, Vol. 2,
     Paris.

 [9] Henderson, W. O. (1959), The Zollverein, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.

[10] IEG (2008), Server für digital Karten am Institut für Europäische Geschichte, Mainz;
     http://www.ieg-maps.uni-mainz.de/ ; accessed November 2008.

[11] Kopsidis, Michael (2002), “The Creation of a Westphalian Rye Market 1820-1870:
     Leading and Following Regions, an Co-Integration Analysis, Jahrbuch für Wirtschafts-
     geschichte: 85-112.

[12] Kunz, A. (2008), eKompendium-HGISG: Kompendium zum Historischen Information-
     ssystem der deutschen Staatenwelt, University of Mainz, Germany, http://www.hgisg-
     ekompendium.ieg-mainz.de, accessed March 2008.


                                             5
[13] Mitchell, B. R. (1980), European Historical Statistics, 1750-1975, 2nd edition, Facts on
     File: New York.

[14] Putzger (1997), "Entwicklung des Eisenbahnnetzes", in Putzger Historischer Weltatlas,
     (ed.) W. Leisering, 102nd edition, Cornelsen: Berlin.

[15] Seu¤ert, G. K. L. (1857), Statistik des Getreide- und Viktualien-Handels im Königreiche
     Bayern mit Berücksichtigung des Auslandes, J. G. Weiss, Munich.

[16] Shiue, C. H., and W. Keller (2007), "Markets in China and Europe on the Eve of the
     Industrial Revolution", American Economic Review, September.

[17] Vierteljahrshefte (1935), Vierteljahrshefte zur Statistik des Deutschen Reichs, Year 1935,
     Germany, Statistisches Reichsamt.

[18] von Viebahn, Georg (1862), Statistik des zollvereinten und nördlichen Deutschlands,
     Zweiter Theil (Bevölkerung, Bergbau, Bodenkultur), Georg Reimer Verlag, Berlin 1862.

[19] Willis, Henry Parker (1896), “The Vienna Monetary Treaty of 1857”, Journal of Political
     Economy, pp.187-207.




                                              6
Table A1: The expansion of market size over different time horizons


                                                                          Customs liberalization and steam trains                                                Currency agreements and steam trains

                                                               25 year              15 year              35 year                 All                  25 year              15 year      35 year          All
                                                               window               window               window                 Data                  window               window       window           Data

                                                          Panel A: Second-Stage Results

Train Connection                                                -0.129#              -0.114#              -0.156#              -0.229#                 -0.162#              -0.126#     -0.155#         -0.202#
                                                                (0.010)              (0.009)              (0.017)              (0.026)                 (0.025)              (0.017)     (0.017)         (0.036)

Customs Liberalization                                          -0.072#              -0.072#              -0.011               -0.008
                                                                (0.010)              (0.008)              (0.013)              (0.012)

Currency Agreement                                                                                                                                     -0.059#              -0.062#     -0.034#          0.003
                                                                                                                                                       (0.022)              (0.015)     (0.011)         (0.013)

                                                          Panel B: First-Stage Statistics

Trains First-Stage

  Shea Partial R-squared (percent)                                5.6                  6.6                   4.2                  3.3                    4.8                  7.4         3.9             3.5


Insitutions First-Stage

  Shea Partial R-squared (percent)                                18.9                 12.8                 17.8                 15.4                    9.8                  13.3       10.9            11.1



Number of excluded instruments                                     74                   74                   74                   74                      62                   61         64              64

Hansen OverID test p-value                                        0.14                 0.32                 0.08                 0.29                    0.28                 0.24       0.44            0.62

Number of observations                                           6,990                4,800                8,403               10,434                   6,990                4,800       8,403          10,434


Dependent variable: absolute value of percentage bilateral price difference; robust standard errors clustered at the state-pair level
in parentheses. All regressions include year- and state-pair fixed effects. #/*/+ Estimate is significant at the 1%/5%/10% level; p-values of F-statistics of all regressions < 0.001
Sample observations are within a certain window before and after the establishment of a train connection, customs liberalization, or a currency agreement
Instruments: Population in 1800, market potential (specification (1)-(3)), distance to the coast, Zollverein population (specificaitions (2) and (3)), and Gulden in 1754,
currency agreement population (in (2) and (3)), all varying by state; p-value of F-test of excluded instruments <0.001 in all cases
Table A2: Additional controls and alternative estimators


                                                         Customs liberalization and steam trains                                    Currency agreements and steam trains

                                                  Market-Pair FE                LIML                Alt. weights            Market-Pair FE                LIML      Alt. weights
                                                       (1)                       (2)                     (3)                     (4)                       (5)           (6)

                                                Panel A: Second-Stage Results

Train connection                                       -0.067+                 -0.185#                 -0.152#                   -0.203#                 -0.257#      -0.217#
                                                       (0.039)                 (0.056)                 (0.015)                   (0.060)                 (0.084)      (0.026)

Customs liberalization                                 -0.039#                 -0.066*                 -0.067#
                                                       (0.012)                 (0.028)                 (0.011)

Currency agreement                                                                                                               -0.054+                 -0.059       -0.066#
                                                                                                                                 (0.031)                 (0.057)      (0.015)

                                                Panel B: First-Stage Summary

Shea R-squared (%)

  Trains                                                 3.1                     5.6                     4.7                        2.9                     3.8         4.2

  Institutions                                           22.9                    18.9                    19.1                      15.4                    13.9        17.6


Number of excluded instruments                            38                      74                      74                        38                      60          63

Hansen OverID test p-value                               0.51                    0.16                    0.13                      0.22                    0.43        0.22

Number of observations                                  6,593                   6,990                   6,990                     6,593                   6,990        6,990


Dependent variable: absolute value of percentage bilateral price difference; robust standard errors clustered at the state-pair level; in parentheses.
#/*/+ Estimate is significant at the 1%/5%/10% level; all regressions include year fixed effects; p-values of F-statistics of all regressions < 0.001
Sample observations are within a twenty-five year span before and after the establishment of a train connection, customs liberalization, or a currency agreement
Specifications (1) and (4) include market-pair fixed effects instead of state-pair fixed effects; (2) and (5) employ limited-information maximum
likelihood (LIML) instead of two-stage least squares. Specifications (3) and (6) do not weight the regressions by the number of observations for each market-pair
Table A3: Country results - currency agreements


                                              No Austria-H          No Belgium             No France           No Netherld.         No Switzerld. Only Germany Average            Baseline
                                                  (1)                   (2)                   (3)                  (4)                  (5)            (6)                         Table 4

                                            Panel A: Second-Stage Results

Train connection                                  -0.158#               -0.169#              -0.184#               -0.212#              -0.218#              -0.174#     -0.186    -0.162
                                                  (0.026)               (0.024)              (0.025)               (0.028)              (0.027)              (0.019)

Currency agreement                                 -0.006                0.030*              -0.090#                -0.008               -0.010              -0.068#     -0.025    -0.059
                                                  (0.016)               (0.015)              (0.024)               (0.015)              (0.012)              (0.003)


                                            Panel B: First-Stage Summary

Shea R-squared (%)

  Trains                                             2.9                  4.3                   6.1                  5.2                   5.0                  6.7

  Currency agreement                                15.4                 13.7                  11.4                 10.5                  11.3                 32.5


Number of excluded instruments                       60                    59                   59                    59                   61                   46

Hansen OverID test p-value                          0.15                 0.13                  0.22                 0.20                  0.15                 0.15

Number of observations                             6,544                 6,371                5,656                 6,711                6,720                4,348


Dependent variable: absolute value of percentage bilateral price difference; robust standard errors clustered at the state-pair level in parentheses.
All regressions include year- and state-pair fixed effects. #/*/+ Estimate is significant at the 1%/5%/10% level; p-values of F-statistics for all regressions < 0.001
Sample observations are within a twenty-five year span before and after the establishment of a train connection, customs liberalization, or a currency agreement
Instruments: Population in 1800, market potential (specification (1)-(3)), distance to the coast, Zollverein population
(specificaitions (1) and (3)), and Gulden in 1754, currency agreement population (in (2) and (3)), all varying by state
Table A4: Country results - customs liberalization


                                             No Austria-H           No Belgium             No France           No Netherlds           No Switz.ld.        Only Germany Average     Baseline
                                                 (1)                    (2)                   (3)                  (4)                    (5)                  (6)                 Table 4

                                           Panel A: Second-Stage Results

Train connection                                 -0.127#               -0.143#               -0.129#               -0.130#               -0.130#                -0.124#   -0.131    -0.129
                                                 (0.012)               (0.008)               (0.008)               (0.010)               (0.010)                (0.005)

Customs liberalization                           -0.057#               -0.044#               -0.077#               -0.071#               -0.071#                -0.037#   -0.060    -0.072
                                                 (0.012)               (0.008)               (0.009)               (0.010)               (0.010)                (0.006)


                                           Panel B: First-Stage Summary

Shea R-squared (%)

  Trains                                            5.8                   4.7                   6.7                   5.8                   5.6                   6.8

  Customs liberalization                           18.5                  20.4                  20.0                  18.9                  18.9                  22.3


Number of excluded instruments                      69                    67                    69                    69                    69                     53

Hansen OverID test p-value                         0.25                  0.20                  0.14                  0.13                  0.11                  0.24

Number of observations                            6,544                 6,371                 5,656                 6,711                  6,720                 4,348



Dependent variable: absolute value of percentage bilateral price difference; robust standard errors clustered at the state-pair level in parentheses.
All regressions include year- and state-pair fixed effects. #/*/+ Estimate is significant at the 1%/5%/10% level; p-value of F-statistics for all regressions < 0.001
Sample observations are within a twenty-five year span before and after the establishment of a train connection, customs liberalization, or a currency agreement
Instruments: Population in 1800, market potential (specification (1)-(3)), distance to the coast, Zollverein population
(specificaitions (1) and (3)), and Gulden in 1754, currency agreement population (in (2) and (3)), all varying by state
Table A5: Robustness checks on direct versus indirect effects of institutions

                                                                             State Railways                                                        Abolition of Serfdom

                                                  Years 1820 - 1880                  Trimmed 95% sample                    Years 1820 - 1880                   Trimmed 95% sample

Train Connection                                       -0.260#          -0.236#           -0.201#           -0.200#             -0.128#           -0.153#           -0.139#    -0.173#
                                                       (0.076)          (0.056)           (0.039)           (0.036)             (0.010)           (0.021)           (0.009)    (0.019)

Train * State Railway                                  0.304*           0.150*            0.161*             0.094
                                                       (0.118)          (0.074)           (0.064)           (0.059)

Train * Late Abolition of Serfdom                                                                                               0.077#            0.044*            0.054#      0.007
                                                                                                                                (0.015)           (0.019)           (0.008)    (0.011)

Customs liberalization                                 -0.159#                            -0.062#                               -0.076#                             -0.052#
                                                       (0.059)                            (0.029)                               (0.010)                             (0.008)

Currency agreement                                                      -0.024                              -0.070#                               -0.069*                      -0.030+
                                                                        (0.018)                             (0.014)                               (0.031)                      (0.016)

State Railways                                         -0.073#          -0.073#           -0.032#           -0.031#
                                                       (0.015)          (0.014)           (0.009)           (0.009)

Late Abolition of Serfdom                                                                                                       -0.134#           -0.055            -0.129#    -0.001
                                                                                                                                (0.007)           (0.042)           (0.005)    (0.023)

Shea R-squared (%)

 Trains                                                  3.2               4.6              4.5               4.8                 5.7               5.2                6            5.3

 Trains * State Railways                                 1.8               3.3              2.5               3.7

 Trains * Late Abolition of Serfdom                                                                                               7.3               12.7             18.8       16.5

Customs lib'n or currency agr't                          2.2               6.2              5.7               5.4                 17.7              8.1              11.5           11


Number of excluded instruments                           37                26                37                27                  74                63               74            63

Hansen OverID test p-value                              0.08              0.36              0.10              0.27                0.22              0.22             0.22       0.26

Number of observations                                 6,072             6,072             6,642             6,642               6,072             6,072             6,642      6,642

Dependent variable: absolute value of percentage bilateral price difference; robust standard errors clustered at the state-pair level in parentheses. Sample as in Table 6.
All regressions include year- and state-pair fixed effects. #/*/+ Estimate is significant at the 1%/5%/10% level; p-values of F-statistics of all regressions < 0.001
Instruments: Population in 1800, market potential (specification (1)-(3)), distance to the coast, Zollverein population
(specifications (1) and (3)), and Gulden in 1754, currency agreement population (in (2) and (3)), all varying by state
Table A6: Measures of instutional quality

    Number City Name               State/Country                   Abolition of Serfdom*                   State Railway Indicator**

      1     Aachen                 Prussia                                  1807                                         0
      2     Augsburg               Bavaria                                  1808                                         1
      3     Karlsruhe              Baden                                    1783                                         1
      4     Bamberg                Bavaria                                  1808                                         1
      5     Bar le Duc             France                                   1789                                         1
      6     Basle                  Switzerland                              1789                                         0
      7     Bayreuth               Bavaria                                  1808                                         0
      8     Berlin                 Prussia                                  1807                                         0
      9     Bingen                 Hesse-Darmstadt                          1820                                         0
      10    Boizenburg             Mecklenburg                              1820                                         1
      11    Braunschweig           Brunswick                                1832                                         1
      12    Bremen                 Free City                                1783                                         1
      13    Brugge                 Belgium                                  1789                                         1
      14    Brussels               Belgium                                  1789                                         1
      15    Chalons-sur-Marne      France                                   1789                                         1
      16    Dresden                Saxony                                   1832                                         0
      17    Erding                 Bavaria                                  1808                                         1
      18    Frankfurt              Free City                                1783                                         1
      19    Giessen                Hesse-Darmstadt                          1820                                         0
      20    Goettingen             Hannover                                 1831                                         1
      21    Grabow                 Mecklenburg                              1820                                         1
      22    Hamburg                Free City                                1783                                         1
      23    Hamm                   Prussia                                  1807                                         0
      24    Hannover               Hannover                                 1831                                         1
      25    Herdecke               Prussia                                  1807                                         0
      26    Kassel                 Hesse-Cassel                             1831                                         0
      27    Kempten                Bavaria                                  1808                                         1
      28    Köln                   Prussia                                  1807                                         0
      29    Landshut               Bavaria                                  1808                                         0
      30    Leipzig                Saxony                                   1832                                         0
      31    Lindau                 Bavaria                                  1808                                         1
      32    Lucerne                Switzerland                              1789                                         0
      33    Luebeck                Free City                                1783                                         0
      34    Luneville              France                                   1789                                         1
      35    Mainz                  Hesse-Darmstadt                          1820                                         0
      36    Memmingen              Bavaria                                  1808                                         1
      37    Minden                 Prussia                                  1807                                         0
      38    Mulhouse               France                                   1789                                         1
      39    Munich                 Bavaria                                  1808                                         1
      40    Münster                Prussia                                  1807                                         1
      41    Nijmegen               Netherlands                              1789                                         0
      42    Noerdlingen            Bavaria                                  1808                                         1
      43    Nurnberg               Bavaria                                  1808                                         1
      44    Parchim                Mecklenburg                              1820                                         1
      45    Prague                 Austria-Hungary                          1848                                         0
      46    Regensburg             Bavaria                                  1808                                         0
      47    Rorschach              Switzerland                              1789                                         0
      48    Rostock                Mecklenburg                              1820                                         1
      49    Saarlouis              Prussia                                  1807                                         1
      50    Salzburg               Austria-Hungary                          1848                                         0
      51    Schwerin               Mecklenburg                              1820                                         1
      52    Soest                  Prussia                                  1807                                         1
      53    Strassbourg            France                                   1789                                         1
      54    Straubing              Bavaria                                  1808                                         0
      55    Stuttgart              Wuerttemberg                             1817                                         1
      56    Toulouse               France                                   1789                                         1
      57    Ulm                    Wuerttemberg                             1817                                         1
      58    Utrecht                Netherlands                              1789                                         0
      59    Venice                 Austria-Hungary                          1848                                         0
      60    Vienna                 Austria-Hungary                          1848                                         0
      61    Wetzlar                Prussia                                  1807                                         0
      62    Wiesbaden              Hesse-Nassau                             1812                                         0
      63    Wismar                 Mecklenburg                              1820                                         1
      64    Worms                  Hesse-Darmstadt                          1820                                         0
      65    Wuerzburg              Bavaria                                  1808                                         1
      66    Xanten                 Prussia                                  1807                                         0
      67    Zweibruecken           Bavaria                                  1808                                         0
      68    Zwickau                Saxony                                   1832                                         0


*
  Year of initial decree of emancipation; source: Blum (1978) and own estimates for missing data: For Belgium (founded in 1830) and the Netherlands,
   the French date is employed; for the Free Cities, which were urban and relatively democratic, we pick the earliest year in the sample.
**
   State had a major role in financing and operating the key railway serving this market early on; coding for the German markets based on the descriptions of
  the rail lines in Fremdling, Federspiel, and Kunz (1995), pp. 20-55. The markets outside Germany are coded based on O'Brien (1983) and sources therein
  We focus on the early period to make our distinction since most railways were nationalized in the late 19th century
                                          Figure A1: Cities in states further away from the seaboard join
                                                                the Zollverein earlier

                               1900


                               1890
Year of Zollverein accession




                               1880


                               1870
                                                                                           y = -5.62x + 1858.8
                               1860                                                             R2 = 0.48

                               1850


                               1840


                               1830


                               1820


                               1810
                                      0            1         2         3         4          5          6         7

                                                          Distance to closest seaboard (100s km)
                                                      Figure A2: Larger Cities Have Railways Earlier
                                          7.545
Year of Earliest Train Connection (log)




                                           7.54




                                          7.535
                                                                                                         y = -0.002x + 7.53
                                                                                                              R2 = 0.19
                                           7.53




                                          7.525




                                           7.52




                                          7.515
                                                  0   1           2               3               4                 5         6

                                                                City Population in the Year 1800 (log)
