NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE ROLE OF CONSUMPTION
IN ECONOMIC FLUCTUATIONS

Robert E. Hall

Working Paper No. 1391

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MP 02138
June 198k

Presented at the NBER's Conference on Business Cycles, Puerto Rico,
March 23 to 25, l984. I am grateful to Olivier Blanchard and Ben
Bernanke for comments and to Valerie Rainey for expert assistance.
The research reported here is part of the NBER' s research program
in Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #1391
June 19814

The Role of Consumption in Economic Fluctuations

ABSTRACT

Consumption and income tend to move together; the correlation of
their first differences is about 0.14.

In most accounts, the correlation is

attributed to the upward slope of the consumption function.
is better off, they consume more.

But in the microeconomic theory of the

household, income is a variable chosen by the household.

more, and

therefore

well being.

have a

When the public

Choosing to work

to consume less time away from work, is a sign of diminished

The structural relation between earnings and consumption should

negative

slope.

The explanation of the observed positive correlation

of consumption and income must rest on shifts of the consumption—income
relation, not movements along it.

An examination of data for the U.S. in

the twentieth century shows that the slope of the consumption—income relation
has been approximately zero.

Shifts in consumer behavior explain the

positive observed correlation; they are an important, but not dominant, source
of overall fluctuations in the aggregate economy.

Robert E. Hall
Herbert Hoover Memorial Building
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 914305
(1415) 1491—2215

1.

The issues

Consumption is the dominant component of BNP. A one percent
change in consumption is five times the size of a one percent

change in investment. This paper investigates whether the
behavior of consumers is an independent source of macroeconomic
fluctuations, or whether most disturbances come from other
sectors.

Informal commentaries on the business cycle put considerable

weight on the independent behavior of consumption. It is
commonplace to hear of a business revival sparked by consumers.
On the other hand, all modern theories of fluctuations make the
consumer a reactor to economic events, not a cause of them.

Random shocks in technology are generally the driving force in

articulated

fully

models.

This paper develops a framework where the distinction between
a movement along a consumption schedule and a shift of the

schedule is well defined. pplication of the framework to 20th
century American data shows that shifts of the consumption
schedule have probably been an important cause o-f lluctuations
but have probably not been the dominant source of fluctuations.
I

consider

three sources of disturbances to the economy:

1

1. Shifts of the consumption schedule
2. Shifts of the schedule relating spending in categories
other than consumption and military spending

3. Shifts in military spending
The reason for the e>plicit examination of military spending is
that such spending is the only plainly exogenous major influence

on the economy. Movements in military spending reveal t

slopes

of the consumption and other spending schedules.

My basic strategy is the following. Fluctuations in
military spending reveal the slope of the consumption—BNP

schedule. GNP rises with military spending——quite stably, GNP
has risen by about 62 cents for every dollar increase in military

spending. This conclusion is supported by data from years other
than major wars when resource allocation by command may have made

the consumption schedule irrelevant. But when GNP rises under
the stimulus of increased military spending, consumption actually
falls a little——the same dollar of military spending has
depressed consumption by about 7 cents.
Under the reasonable assumption that higrter military

spending does not shift the consumption schedule, but only moves
consumers along the schedule, we can infer the slope a-f the

schedule from the ratio of the consumption change to the GNP

change. The slope is essentially zero.
S.

Equipped with this knowledge, we can measure the shift of
the consumption schedule as the departure of co.'sumption from a

schedule with the estimated slope. My macn concern is the
absolute and relative importaice a-f these shifts.

The effect 'f a consumption shift on GNP depends on the
slope c-f tht consumption schedule and also upon the slope 0-f the

schedule relating other spending to GNP. For this reason, it is
necessary to carry out a similar exercise for other spending.

Again, the way other spending changes when military spending
absorbs added resources is the way the slope can be inferred.

Historically, other spending has declined when military spending
has risen; investment, net exports, and non—military government

purchases are crowded out by military spending. For each dollar of
added military spending, other spending declines by about .O

cents. The inference is that the schedule relating other
spending to GNP has an important negative slope.

Over the period studied here, the correlation of the change
in consumption and the change in GNP has been strong; the

correlation coefficient is 0.59. Similarly, the correlation of
the change in other spending and the change in GNF is strongly

positive at 0.61. The results of this paper explain all
correlation a-f consumption and GNP in terms of

shifts

of

the

the unexplained

in the two schedules and nore as the result o-f movements

along the consumption function. Even more strikingly, the
results explain the strong positive correlation of other spending
and GNP in spite of the negative slope of

the

schedule relating

the two.

Stated in terms of the scale of the economy in 1982, the
standard deviation of the annual first difference of GNP for the

period was $90 billion. The standard deviation of the component
associated with the shift of the consumption function was $28

billion; for other spending including military, $72 billion. The
decomposition between the two schedule shifts is ambiguous
because they are quite highly correlated, but, by assumption,
both are uncorrelated with the shift in military spending..

Eecause the slightly negative slope found for the
consumption function in this work contradicts the thinking of

many macroeconomists on this subject, I have repeated the
exercise for two assumed values for the slope a-f the consumption—

GNF' schedule. One, which I think of as Keynesian, assumes a

value of 0.3. The standard deviation of the consumption shift
effect on GNP is $26 billion. The shifts in the consumption
function are estimated to be smaller in this case, but their
contribution to movements in GNP is larger because the multiplier
is larger.

second case derives from equilibrium models of the
4

business cycle. It interprets the consumption—GNP schedule as
the expansion path of the consumption—labor supply decision of

the household. The slope of

since

the

schedule should be r?egative

presumably both consumption and leisure are normal goods.

Any events that make people feel that it is a good idea to
consume more should also cause them to take more leisure and
there-fore work less.

A reasonable value -for the slope o-f the

consumption—GNP schedule under this interpretation is —1. When
this is imposed on the problem, the consumption shifts appear
much larger, since this is a long step away from the regression
relation. The standard deviation of the e-f-Fect o-f

consumption on

GNP is $47 billion, comparable to the effect of shifts in

other spending, $4 billion.

2. Earlier research

Modern thinking about the possible role of shifts in the
consumption function in overall macro -fluctuations began with

Milton Friedman and Gary Beckers 'A Statistical Illusion in
Judging Keynesian Models" (1957). They pointed out that random

shits

in

the consumption function could induce a positive

correlation between consumption and income, which in turn could
5

make the consumption look more responsive to income than it
really was and also make the consumption function more reliable

than it really was. However, neither Friedman and Becker nor
other workers on the consumption function pursued the idea that
shifts in the consumption function might be an important element
of the business cycle.

More recently, Peter Temins Did Moretary Forces Cause the
Great Depression' (19Th) argued force-Fully -for a role for shifts

o-- the consumption function in explaining the contraction from

1929 to 1933. Temin focusses particularly on the residual from a
consumption function in the year 1930 and suggests that the shift
in consumption in that year was an important factor in setting
of-f the contraction. His results are strongly supported in this
paper, which finds large shifts in the consumption—GNP relation
in all the years a-f the contraction.

Tem3.ns critics, Thomas Mayer (1978) and Barry Anderson and
James Butkiewicz (198t)., confirm that consumption functions of

various types had important negative residuals in 1930.

It is a

curious feature a-f Temins work and that of his critics that no
attention has been paid to the issue of finding the true slope of
the consumption—income schedule.

If the history of the U.S. is

-full of episodes where consumption shifts affected GNP, then the
observed correlation a-f consumption and income is no guide at all

to the slope of the consumption function. Temin considerably
understates the power of his case by looking for departures from
the historical relation between consumption and income, which is
not at all the same thing as the slope of the structural

relation. The historical relation summarizes numerous other
episodes where a spontaneous shift in consumption had important

macro effects. Temin only looks at the excess in 1930 over the
usual amount of a shift, when his argument logically involves the
whole amount of the shift.
Because o-f my use o-f

military

spending as the exogenous

instrument that identities the structural consumption function,
the paper spends some effort in understanding how a burst of

military purchases influences the economy. Robert Barro (1981)
has examined the theory of the effect of government purchases in
an equilibrium framework and has studied U.S. data on the effect

•n GNP. He found a robust positive effect of all types of
government purchases, with an especially large coe-rficient for

temporary military spending. My results here are in line with

Barros, though I do not attempt to distinguish permanent and

temporary purchases. Barro notes that higher government
purchases should depress consumption as a matter of theory (p.
1094) but does not examine tre

actual

behavior of consumption.

Barro and Robert King (1982) point out the difficulties of
7

creating a theoretical equilibrium model in which the covariance
of consumption and work effort is anything but sharply negative.
Joseph Altonji (1982) and N. Gregory Mankiw, Julio

Rotemberg, and Lawrence Summers (1902) use the observed positive
covariation of consumption and hours of work to cast doubt on the

empirical validity of equilibrium models. However, neither paper
considers the possibility that feedback from shifts in household

behavior creates an econometric identification problem. The
results of

this

paper give partial support to their conclusion,

With a serious treatment of the identification problem, the
structural relation between work and consumption appears to be
flat or slightly negatively sloped, but not nearly enough
negatively sloped to fit the predictions of the equilibrium
model.

This paper examines the importance of fluctuations in
consumption as an interesting question in its own right.

Its

finding of important shifts in the consumption function is
important as well for recent research on consumption and related

issues in finance. As Peter Barber and Robert King (1983) point
out, shifts in preferences or other sources of unexplained
fluctuations in consumption behavior invalidate the Euler
equation approach used by myself and others in studying the
reaction of consumers to surprises in income and to changes in
8

expected real interest rates. The hope that the Euler equation
is identified econometrically without the use of exogenous
variables depends critically on the absence of

the

type of shift

found in this paper. My findings suggest that the Euler equation
is identified only through the use of exogenous instruments, just
as most other macroeconomic structural relations.

9

3. A simple structural relation between GNP and consumption

K:eynesian theory denies consumers choice about the level of

work effort. The effective demand process dictates the amount of
work and the corresponding level of earnings. Consumers choose
consumption so as to maximize satisfaction given actual and

expected earnings. In general, the resulting relationship
between earnings and consumption can be complicated——consumers

will use the information contained in current and lagged earnings
to infer likely future earnings and thus the appropriate level of

consumption. Traditional K:eynesian thought has emphasized the
strength at the contemporaneous relation between income and

consumption. Liquidity constraints probably contribute to the
strength. Recent tests by myself and Frederic Mishkin (1982) and
by Marjorie Flavin (1981) have rejected the optimal response of
consumption in favor o-f excess sensitivity to current income

(however, these tests are likely to be contaminated by shifts in
consumer behavior of the type investigated in this paper).
Otto Eckstein and Allen Sinai a paper + or this conference

(1984) provides a reasonable estimate for the slope of the GNP—
consumption schedule.

In their Table 7, they estimate the

effects on GNP and consumption of an exogenous increase in
government purchases. The ratio o-f the change in consumption to
10

the change in GNP is an estimate of the slope of exactly the

schedule considered in this paper. The ratio is
Quarters
after increase

GNP

Consumption

Ratio

4

1.26

0.41

0.32

8

0.94

0.28

0.30

12

0.81

0.18

0.22

16

0.64

0.10

0.16

24

0.56

0.10

0.18

I will use an estimate for the year—to—year marginal propensity

to consume of 0.3 on the basis of this evidence about the overall
behavior of a fully—developed Keynesian model.

Equilibrium thinking about the consumption—GNP schedule
In an equilibrium model consumers are free to choose the most
satisfying combination of hours of work and consumption of goods,
subject to the market tradeoff between the two:
max

:

Cc. , ye,)
subject to

R(p4c,, —

wtyi)

= W.

11

My notation is:
D:

Time preference factor

uO: One—year utility function
ct: Consumption in year t

y: Employment in year t

R: Discount factor
pt: Price of consumption goods in year t

w: Wage in year t
Initial wealth

I will work with one aspect of the overall problem, the

consumption—work choice in year t. The first—order condition for
that choice is:

Marginal rate a-f substitution =
or
—

u/y

=

w

real

wage

=

Define the expansion path, f(y,), by

u(f(y,u) ,y,/y —

Other aspects of the overall choice problem determine the point
12

the consumer chooses on the expansion path. These include wealth
and the timing of consumption and work. With the real wage held
constant, higher wealth moves the consumer to a point of higher

consumption and lower work. Again with the real wage held
constant, a higher real interest rate moves the consumer to a

point of lower consumption and more work. Joseph Altonji (1982)
pointed out the usefulness a-f examining the joint behavior a-F

work effort, consumption, and the real wage; his paper presents
many more details on the derivation o-f their relationship..

It should be apparent that the expansion path slopes
downward, so long as consumption and leisure are normal goods.

13

onsuption

\\ \yatn

£xpnsion

ok
Figure

1. The expansion path. For a given real wage,

consumption and work occur in combinations given by the path.
The real interest rate and the level of wealth determine the
position on the expansion path chosen by the consumer.

The expansion path shifts downward if the real wage

declines. Consequently, a higher tax rate depresses consumption

14

given the level of work effort. On the other hand, the expansion
path is unaffected by an increase in government purchases of

goods and services or by lump—sum transfers or taxes. These
latter influences will move the consumer along the expansián
path, but will not shift the path.

The slope of the expansion path can be estimated as the
negative o-f the ratio of the income effect in the demand for

consumption goods to the income effect in the labor supply
-function. Estimated income effects for labor supply run on the
order of $0.50 less in earnings -for each $1.00 in increased non—

labor income. That is, an increase in non—labor income of $1.00
raises total income by only $.50.

If all of the increase in

total income is applied to goods consumption, sooner or later,

then the income effect for goods consumption is also $.50 per
$1.00 o-f non—labor income. The resulting slope of the expansion
path is —I..

The structural relation in the equilibrium model refers to
consumption and work effort. For the purposes o-f this paper, I

think the best measure of the change in work effort from one year
to the next is the change in real GNP.

In the short run, the

amount of capital available for use in production hardly changes,

though, of course, the intensity of its use cnanges. lmost all
changes in output correspond to changes in hours of labor input

15

and in the amount of effort per hour spent on the job (see Hall,
1980, for an elaboration and empirical study of this point).

Real GNP is the best available measure of all the dimensions of
changes in work effort in the short run.

The structural relation suggested by the equilibrium model

has the form
=

Øy

+

In addition to the level of work effort, measured by y, the
after—tax real wage, w, shifts consumption up relative to work
effort. In the empirical work carried out here, it is not
possible to estimate the coefficients of two different endogenous

variables. The best that can be done is to estimate the
coefficient of y net of the part of a real wage movement that is
systematically related to y. For example, if the real wage is
countercyclical , so that

=

5yi

then it is possible to estimate the net relation,

Ct

= (0

—

Because 0 is negative, the countercyclical wage movements makes

16

the consumption—GNP relation even more negatively sloped.

It -

seems unlikely that procyclical movements of after—tax real wages
are anywhere near large enough to explain the finding of this

paper of a zero net slope of the consumption—GNP relation. That
finding is probably evidence against a pure equilibrium model.

Synthesis

Equilibrium and Keynesian models agree on a structural

relation between consumption and income or work of the form
=

+

Here,
B:

slope o-f

the structural relation, negative for the

equilibrium model (say —I), positive for the Keynesian model (say
t:1.

)

£: random

shift in the c—y relation

17

4. Other components of GNP

I will assume that military purchases of goods and
services, g.e, is an exogenous variable.

I will define x as the remainder of GNP, that is,
investment plus net exports plus non—military government
purchases of goods and services (the latter is largely state and

local). x has a structural relation to GNP; fluctuations in
this relation are a source of fluctuations in almost all theories
of the business cycle.

It is not possible to estimate a detailed structural model

for x for the reason just mentioned——a single exogenous variable
limits estimation to a single endogenaus variable. Basically,
what can be estimated is the net effect of an increase in GNP on
investment, net exports, and non—military government purchases.
On the one hand, considerations of the accelerator (particularly

important for inventory investment suggest a positive relation
between GNP and x. On the other hand, increases in interest
rates that accompany an increase in GNP bring decreases in
For investment, especially in housing, the negative response to

interest rates is well documented. For net exports, an increase
in GNP raises imports directly. In addition, under floating
exchange rates, the higher interest rates brought by higher GNP
18

cause the dollar to appreciate, making imports cheaper to the
U.S. and exports more expensive to the rest of the world.

It is

perfectly reasonable that the overall net effect of higher GNP on
investment, net exports, and non—military purchases should be
negative.

The following simple relation summarizes these
considerations:
=

The coefficient

+

may well be negative, if crowding out through

interest rates is an important phenomenon.

19

5. The complete model

The model comprises three equations:

=

+

=

+ Vt

= ct

+

X. +

The solution for GNP is

Vt

+

+ y)

This equation gives a precise accounting for the sources

of

fluctuations in outputs The three driving forces for the economy
are military purchases of goods and services, g., the random
shift in the consumption schedule, :., and the random shift in

other spending, v.

4-

6. Identification and estimation

The goals of estimation in this work are threefold:

1. Estimate the multiplier,
1

1--&
which applies to each of the three components in the
decomposition in the last section.

2. Estimate the "propensity to consume," ,

in

order to

compute the residuals, z, in the consumption function.

3. Estimate the 'propensity to spend," j,

compute he residuals, ,

in

in

order to

the function for other spending.

The solution to the first problem is perfectly

straightforward. In the equation for the movement in GNP,
military spending appears as a right—hand variable along with two
disturbances assumed to be uncorrelated with military spending.
Hence, the regression of GNP on military spending should estimate

the multiplier directly. Again, the interpretation of the
estimated multiplier is net of feedback effects through interest
rates.

21

To estimate the slope of the consumption—GNP schedule, ,

note that c and g have the regression relation,

c =

_____

An estimate of

(g

+

-) +

1—t*

can be computed as the ratio of this coefficient

to the multiplier. Alternatively, exactly the same estimate can
be computed with two—stage least squares applied to the c—y
relation with g as the instrument.

The slope of the x—y relation can be computed analogously
either by the ratio of the regression coefficient of x on g to
the multiplier, or by applying two—stage least squares to the x—y
equation with g as instrument.

The relationships estimated in this paper are approximations

to more complicated equations. For example, the complete model
does not do justice to the modern Keynesian notion that gradual
wage and price adjustment gives the model a tendency toward full

employment in the long run. The results are likely to look
somewhat different with an estimation technique that gives heavy
weight to lower frequencies from those based more on higher

frequencies. Because cyclical fluctuations are the focus of this
paper, I want to exclude the lower frequencies from the
estimation.

I have accomplished the exclusion in two ways.

4-—

First, I have detrended all of

the

data in a consistent fashion.

Second, I have used first differences in all of the basic

estimation. With annual data, first differences puts strong
weight on the cyclical frequencies and no weight at all on the
lowest frequencies.

23

7. Data
The data on real GNP in 1972 dollars for 1919—1982 and real
personal consumption expenditures for 1929—1982 are from the U.S.

National Income and Product Accounts. For 1919—28, data on real
consumption are taken from John Kendrick (1961).
I used data on real military purchases of goods and services

from the NIFA for 1972 through 1982 and from Kendrick for 1919—

53. For 1954 through 1971, nominal military spending is taken
from the NIPA and deflated by the implicit deflator for national
security spending from the Office of Management and Budget
(1983), converted to a calendar year basis.

For some additional results described at the end of the
paper, I used the number of full—time equivalent employees in all
industries, including military, from the NIPA.

To eliminate the non—cyclical frequencies from the data, I

by fitting a trend

started

log

(t

to real GNP:

y = 5.14 + .0206 t ÷ .00014

t2

is one in 1909)

Then I detrended real GNP, real consumption, and real military
purchases with this real GNP trend.
0-f

each

o-f

the

I preserved the 1982 values

three variables, so the effect c-f detrending was

24

to raise the earlier levels. For employment, I detrended with a
log—linear trend of 1.96 percent per year and rebased the series
so that it equals real GNP in 1982.

All of the estimates used the first differences of the
detrended series.

S.

8. Results

All of the regressions reported in this paper include
intercepts, but the values of the intercepts are not reported
because detrending makes them almost meaningless.
Estimation a-f the multiplier by regressing the change in GNP

an the change in military spending for the years 1920 through
1942 and 1947 through 1982 gives the following results:

Ay- = .62 Ag.
(.16

Standard error: $81 billion

DW:

1.48

Because the multiplier is less than one, it is clear that a
certain amount a-f crowding out took place, on the average. Each
dollar of military purchases raises GNP by 62 cents, so nonmilitary uses of output decline by 38 cents.
The regression a-f consumption on military spending is:
=

—0.07
(.08)

Standard error: $38 billion

DW: 1.50

Because the coefficient is close to zero, with a small standard
error, it is clear that the implied slope a-f the c—y relation
26

will be close to zero as well. Even though periods of wartime
controls on consumption have been omitted from this regression,
there is strong evidence against the proposition that those
increase in GNP that can be associated with exogenous increases
in military spending stimulated any important increases in

consumption. Similarly, the strong regative response of
consumption to military spending predicted by the equilibrium
model has also been shown to be absent.

The ratio of the two regression coefficients is —.12; this
is the estimate of the slope of the consumption—GNP schedule.

The same estimate can be obtained by two—stage least squares,
together with the standard error of

and the standard error of

the residuals:

Ac. = —) 12 iyt

(. 1,

Stanoarij error: $4 billion

DW:

1.39

The confidence interval on the slope of the c—y relation includes
a range of values, but

excludes

the equilibrium value of

—1

the :eynesian value a-f O.

and

as well. Neither theory is able to

explain the lack of a structural association of consumption and
GNP.
In

the

next

section,

I will make use a-f
27

consumption

equations with two different assumed values of the
slope:

Keynesian,

= 0.3

Ct = O.3y
s = $31 billion

Equilibrium, i=—l
= —Aye

s = $117 billion
The basic results of the paper can be guessed from these

results. The residuals in the Keynesian consumption relation are
smaller than those for the estimated relation (standard errors of
$31 billion against $46 billion) and are very much smaller than

are those for the equilibrium case ($117 billion). Even the
smaller Keynesian residuals turn out to be important in the

overall determination of GNP. GNP and consumption are positively
correlated both because the consumption relation slopes upward
and because shifts in the relation are an important determinant
of both variables.

On the other hand, the equilibrium model sees very large
28

shifts in the c—y relation. When the relation shifts upward,

both c and y rise. Because most of the variation in both
variables comes from the shifts in the relation, the two are
highly positively correlated, even though the relation has a

negative slope. The fact

that

a positive slope gives a better

fit in the consumption equation is not evidence against the
equilibrium view at all.

Results for other spending, x

The regression of x on _g gives:

= —0.30
..

12>

Standard error: $58 billion

DW: 2.03

Investment, net exports, and non—military government

spending are quite strongly neqatively influenced by military
spending, again during years when wartime controls on private

spending were not in effect. The estimate of the slope of the
y schedule inferred by dividing by the multiplier is —0.48. The
same estimate is available -from two—stage least squares:

29

= —0.48
(.30)

Standard error: $95 billion

DW:

1.79

Plainly, the negative effects operating through interest rates

dominate the positive effects of the accelerator. Higher GNP
depresses non—consumption, non—military spending along this
structural schedule.

30

9. Estimates of the importaice of the consumption shift

Because neither of the major schools of business cycle
theory is consistent with my estimates of the slope of the c—y
relation, I will proceed by making estimates for three different
cases:

1.

Estimated.. The slope of the c—y relation is —.12, the

value inferred from the fact that, historically, higher
military purchases have raised GNP but not consumption.
Consumption is virtually an exogenous variable..

It influences

GNP but is not influenced by GNP.

2. Keynesian.. The slope of the c—y relation is 0.3. When
more work is available, people consume more as well.

. Equilibrium.

The slope of the c—y relation is —1.

Events that move consumers along their expansion paths leave the
sum of GNP and consumption unchanged. Departures o-f the sum a-f

GNP and consumption are a signal of a shift in the expansion
path, possibly associated with a change in the after—tax real
wage, but usually a random, unexplained shift.

Though the movements of GNP can be decomposed into three
components for the three driving forces listed in the model in
31

section 4 (military purchases, the random shift in the

consumption schedule and the random shift in the investment—
exports schedule) ,

I

will concentrate on the consumption shift on

the one hand and the sum of the two other components on the

other hand. The consumption component is
I

:

is the residual from the consumption equation. Note that the
magnitude of the consumption component depends on the magnitude
of the residual and on the magnitude o-f the multiplier. The other
component is Just -•y. less the consumption component.

Figure 2 shows the total change in real GNP and the

consumption components tor the three cases. As a general matter,
the consumption component is most important for the equilibrium

case and least important for the Keynesian case. However, it is
a signiticant contributor to GNP fluctuations in all three
cases.

32

hangein

angenconsuRption coponent

f/\\/llhibNUM
29 25

Figure

39

35

49

59 55

69

65

79

75 8

2. Change in real GNP and the consumption component for

the three cases.

Under the estimated results where consumption is effectively
exogenous, shifts in the consumption schedule are important, but
so are shifts in the other determinants of GNP, especially in the

interwar period. Responsibility for the Great Contraction is

._.

._,

shared between shi-fts in the c—v relation and the other sources.

However, in the postwar period, shii-ts in other spending account
i-or

in

the bulk o-f the movement or GiF.

the two large drops of (NP

1973—74 and 1974—75 are partly the result of drops in

consumption.

borne of

the

long contraction since 1978 is the

result of a consumption shift as well.

In the reynesian view, shifts in the consumption function

are bound to be less important than in the other two cases. When
consumption and GE crop together, all or part o-f the decline in

consumption can be attributed to the drop in GNP. Still, shifts
in consumption are a part at

the

story o-f total fluctuations.

For the equilibrium case, the story about the Great
Contraction in 1925—32 toid

by these results

will

what the theory is saying. Fescajed real GiF

fell

help clarify
by $227

biliion in i525—30, i7j oiliion in 1930—31, and $243 billion in
1531—32.

0-f this, $140 billion came -t-rom a random shift in

housenoid behavior toward less work and less consumption in 1929—
30, $97 billion in 1930—31, and $148 billion in 1931—32.

The

remaining $87 billion in the first vear *-74 ciliion in the
second year, and $55 billion in the third year came from changes
in miiitarv spendina ana shitts in the investment—export
schedule.

0-f the two, tne tirst was almost negligible. But the

most important part at the story ot the contraction was a sudden

lack of interest in working and consuming,, according to the

equilibrium model.

Table 1 summarizes the findings for the three cases in terms
of simple statistical measures.
Case

Standard
deviation
of change in

Estimated

Keynesian

Equilibrium

Real GNP

90

93

93

Consumption
component

2o

28

47

Other
component

97

72

46

—0.40

0.53

0.86

Correlation of
two components

Table 1. Statistical summary. Standard deviations are in
billions of 1972 dollars, with quantities rescaled to 1982
magnitudes.

it is interesting to note that the standard deviation of the
consumption component for the Keynesian case is slightly higher

that it is in the estimated case. llthouqh the residuals in the
Keynesian consumption function are smaller than the residuals in
the other case, the multiplier is quite a bit hiqher (0.85 as

against 0.b2. The big difference between the two cases is in
35

the size of the other component. Again, because the multiplier
is lower for the estimated case and higher for the K:eynesian

case, the other component is larger for the Keynesian case. The
Keynesian case reconciles a larger other component with a
consumption component of about the same size by invoking a
lower correlation of the two components.. The negative

correlation permits the sum to have the same standard deviation
(the known standard deviation of the change in real GNP) even
though one of the components is more variable.

36

10. Other

estimates

Estimates for other time periods and other specifications
have convinced me that the basic findings of this paper are

robust. First, estimates for the entire period, the interwar
period, and the postwar period are
Entire period, 1920—82
= —. 16

(.09)

Standard error: $47 billion

=

DW:

1.37

—.54
(.18)

Standard error: $96 billion

DW:

1.78

For both equations, the considerable extra variance
from the extraordinary level of military spending during World
War II helps to reduce the sampling variation without much
changing the coefficients.

37

Interwar period, 1920—42

AC = —0.l3y%
(.24)

Standard error: $70 billion

AX =

—. SC)

(.50)

DW: 1.31

Yt

Standard error: $144 billion

OW:

1.75

OW:

1.78

Postwar period, 1947—82

AC

= —.11
(.20)

Standard error: $23 billion

= —.36
(.41)

Standard error: $46 billion

-I

DW:

1.94

Results for a direct measure of work effort
In his comment on the version of this paper presented at the

conference, Angus Deaton suggested that the negative findings for
the equilibrium model might be the result of the use of GNP as a

measure of work effort. Because GNP might measure the result of
other productive factors, including pure good luck, and these
other factors might reasonably be positively correlated with
consumption, the consumption—GNP relation might be more
positively sloped than is the consumption—work effort relation.

To check this possibility, I repeated the analysis with
full—time equivalent employment in place of real GNP.

I

detrended the series by its own exponential trend and rescaled it

to equal real GNP in 1982. Application of two—stage least
squares to the relation of the first difference o-f consumption to
the first difference o-f employment, with the change in military

spending as the instrument, for the period 1930—42 and l94782, is

= —0.10
(.18)

Standard error: 41 billion

DW:

(:1.91

Again, the structural slope is slightly negative, but not nearly

negative enough to fit the equilibrium hypothesis. The
hypothetical value of —1 is strongly rejected.
39

11. Conclusions

A simple structural

relation between GNP and consumption is

a feature of two major theories a-f economic fluctuations, though
the theories differ dramatically in most other respects.
In the K:eynesian analysis, the consumption function slopes

upward, so, in principle, the positive correlation of 6NP and
consumption could be explained purely by forces other than shifts

in consumption behavior. Nonetheless, the results of

this

paper

show that shifts in the consumption function are a source

of overall fluctuations in a Keynesian analysis. In the first
place, even the Keynesian consumption function has residuals,
though they

are

smaller than the residuals -from the

equilibrium or estimated c—y relationships.

In the second place,

exactly because of the Keynesian multiplier process operating
through a positively sloped consumption function, the consumption
disturbances are much more strongly amplified than they are in
the equilibrium or estimated models.

In the equilibrium theory, the relation is the expansion

path of the work—consumption choice. The public is free to pick
a point along the path in response to economic conditions.
Shi-ft in government tax and spending policies and shifts in

40

investment and net exports will move the economy along its
I-f ever GNP and consumption move

negatively sloped c—y schedule.

together, it is the result of a shift in the consumption

schedule. Because consumption and GNP frequently move together,
random shifts o-f the consumption—work schedule must be a dominant

part of the equilibrium explanation of cyclical fluctuations.

In the Keynesian model, an increase in military purchases

should raise GNP and raise consumption. In the equilibrium
model, an increase in military purchases should raise GNP and

lower consumption. The data for the past six decades examined in
this paper seem to split the difference——consumption is

unaffected by military purchases, while GNP rises. Hence the
estimate of the slope o-f the c—y relation inferred through the

use a-f military purchases as an instrument is about zero. In
the compromise economy (which does not have a theory to go with
it, ,

random shifts in consumption are an important source of

overall fluctuations.

4'

References

Altonji, Joseph 6. 1982. The intertemparal substitution
model a-f labour market fluctuations: an empirical analysis.

Review of Economic Studies 49: 783—824

Anderson, Barry L., and Butkiewicz, James L. 1980

Money,

spending, and the great depression. Southern Econosic

Journal 47: 388—403
Barro, Robert J. 1981. Output effects of government purchases.
Journal of Political Economy 89: 1086—1121

________ and King, Robert 6. 1982. Time—separable preferences
and intertemporal—substitution models o-f

business

cycles.

Working Paper 888, National Bureau of Economic Research, May

Eckstein, Otto, and Sinai, Allen 1984. The mechanisms of

the

business cycle in the postwar era. This volume.
Flavin, Marjorie A. 1,81. The adjustment o-F consumption to

changing expectations about tuture income. Journal of

Political

Economy 89: 974—1009, October

Friedman, Milton and Becker.. Gary 5., 1957. A
statistical illusion in judging Keynesian consumption
-functions Journal of Political Ecorioy o5: 64—75, February
Garber, Peter Ni.,

and King, Robert 6. 1983. Deep structural

excavation? A critique of Euler equation methods. Technical

42

Paper 31, National Bureau of Economic Research, November

Hall, Robert E. 1980. Employment fluctuations and wage rigidity.
Brookings Papers on Econo.ic Activity 91—123, Number 1

________

and Mishkin, Frederic S. 1982. The sensitivity of

consumption to transitory income: estimates from panel data

on households. Econoetrica 50: 461—481, March
Kendrick, John 1961, Productivity trends in the United States.

New York: National Bureau of Economic Research
Mankiw, N. Gregory, Rotemberg, Julio J. , and Summers, Lawrence H.

1982. Intertemporal substitution in macroeconomics.
National Bureau o-f Economic Research, Working Paper 898, June

Mayer, Thomas 1980. Consumption in the great depression. Journal ot
Political Economy 86: 139—145, January

Office of Management and Budget 1983. Federal govern.ent

finances: 1984 budget data

February.

Temin, Peter 1976. Did monetary forces cause the great

depression? New York: Norton

43

