NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WOMEN'S LIBERATION:
WHAT'S IN IT FOR MEN?
Matthias Doepke
Michèle Tertilt
Working Paper 13919
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13919

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2008

We thank Stefania Albanesi, Jeremy Greenwood, Bob Hall, Simon Johnson, Larry Jones, Ethan Kaplan,
Pete Klenow, John Knowles, Yishay Maoz, Bob Pollak, Victor Rios-Rull, as well as the audiences
at a number of conferences and seminars for valuable comments that helped to improve the paper.
Financial support from the National Science Foundation (grants SES-0217051 and SES-0519324),
the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation, and the Michelle Clayman Institute is gratefully acknowledged. Simeon
Alder, Wendi Goh, and Alejandrina Salcedo-Cisneros provided excellent research assistance. The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Matthias Doepke and Michèle Tertilt. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Women's Liberation: What's in It for Men?
Matthias Doepke and Michèle Tertilt
NBER Working Paper No. 13919
April 2008
JEL No. D13,E13,J16,N30,O43
ABSTRACT
The nineteenth century witnessed dramatic improvements in the legal rights of married women. Given
that these changes took place long before women gained the right to vote, they amounted to a voluntary
renouncement of power by men. In this paper, we investigate men's incentives for sharing power with
women. In our model, women's legal rights set the marital bargaining power of husbands and wives.
We show that men face a tradeoff between the rights they want for their own wives (namely none)
and the rights of other women in the economy. Men prefer other men's wives to have rights because
men care about their own daughters and because an expansion of women's rights increases educational
investments in children. We show that men may agree to relinquish some of their power once technological
change increases the importance of human capital. We corroborate our argument with historical evidence
on the expansion of women's rights in England and the United States.

Matthias Doepke
University of California, Los Angeles
Department of Economics
405 Hilgard Avenue
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
and NBER
doepke@econ.ucla.edu
Michèle Tertilt
Department of Economics
Stanford University
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and NBER
tertilt@stanford.edu

1 Introduction
“Once married, a bride was obliged by law and custom to obey her husband—
a requirement so fundamental to the biblical idea of a wife that it remained in
most Jewish and Christian wedding vows until the late twentieth century. After
all, wives were considered a husband’s ‘property,’ alongside his cattle and his
slaves.”
Marilyn Yalom, A History of the Wife (2001)
The cause of gender equality has made dramatic progress over the past 200 years.
Today, the expansion of political rights through female suffrage, introduced in
1918 in the United Kingdom and in 1920 in the United States, is often regarded as
the main breakthrough. However, important changes in women’s economic rights
took place much earlier. In England and the United States (which have similar
common-law legal systems), this is especially true for the rights of married women. Prior to 1830, in these countries married women essentially had no rights at
all. Upon marriage, the legal rights of husband and wife were merged and subsequently exercised solely by the husband. Married women had no rights with
regard to their legitimate children, they could not own property, and they could
not obtain a divorce. In short, a married woman had no separate legal existence
of her own.1 Throughout the nineteenth century, both England and the United
States carried out a series of reforms in areas such as child custody, divorce, and
marital property law that substantially altered the rights and obligations of husbands and wives during and after marriage.2 By the end of the century, the rights
1

The English common law makes the legal distinction between a feme sole, a single woman who
had some legal rights, and a feme covert, a married woman with no rights of her own. The legal
impotence of married women in the mid-nineteenth century is famously summarized in Elizabeth Cady Stanton’s “Seneca Falls Declaration” for the United States (Stanton 1848) and Caroline
Norton’s pamphlet “A Letter to the Queen on Lord Chancellor Cranworth’s Marriage and Divorce Bill” for England (Norton 1855). An extensive description of the rights and obligations of
wives in sixteenth and seventeenth century England can be found in Stone (1977).
2
Among the earliest changes was a shift in child custody rules, with Iowa being the first U.S.
state to grant some custody rights to mothers in 1838 and the Custody of Infants Act that passed
in England in 1839. This was followed by changes in divorce laws in the mid-nineteenth century
such as the Matrimonial Causes Act of 1857 in England. The Married Women Property Acts of 1870
and 1882 enabled married women in England to have control over their earnings, to own separate
property, and to write contracts. Similarly, almost all U.S. states established some form of married
women’s property rights by the end of the nineteenth century. A detailed time line of these

1

of husbands and wives in these areas were close to being equal.
Our research is motivated by the observation that this dramatic improvement of
married women’s economic rights took place before women were granted political
rights. All the reform laws of this period were passed by all-male legislatures that
were accountable only to male voters. Given that the granting of rights to women
implied a weakening of men’s rights, it amounted to a voluntary renouncement
of power by men. This brings us to our main question: Why would men ever
agree to grant more rights to women?
The idea put forth in this paper is that from a man’s perspective, there is a tradeoff
between the rights of his own wife versus the rights of other men’s wives. Improvements in married women’s legal rights increase women’s bargaining power
relative to their husbands within the household. Since husbands have nothing to
gain from an increase in their wives’ bargaining power at their own expense,
men ideally want their own wives to have no rights. But men might stand to
gain from other women having rights. We focus on two channels that give men
a stake in the rights of other men’s wives. First, men are altruistic towards their
own children, half of which are daughters. Men prefer their daughters to have a
strong bargaining position vis-à-vis their sons-in-law.3 Second, in our model an
improved bargaining position for wives translates, among other things, into increased investments in children’s human capital. A father prefers his children to
find high-quality mates, and therefore stands to gain from increasing the power
of his children’s future mothers-in-law.
We argue that this tradeoff between the rights of a man’s own wife versus those
of other men’s wives has shifted over time, because of a changing role of human
capital. When the return to education increases, finding well-educated spouses
for one’s children becomes a more important concern. Similarly, a rising return
to education also increases fathers’ concern about the rights of their daughters,
because the daughter’s marital bargaining power matters for the grandchildren’s
education. According to our theory, the ultimate cause of the expansion of women’s rights throughout the nineteenth century was technological change that
reforms is given in Appendix A.
3
Washington (2008) and Oswald and Powdthavee (2006) provide empirical evidence that
men’s political preferences are influenced by their number of daughters.

2

increased the demand for human capital. This change elevated the importance
of children’s education, it increased men’s incentives to expand women’s bargaining power, and it ultimately induced men to voluntarily extend rights to
women.
The framework for our theoretical analysis is an overlapping-generations model
in which married couples face a tradeoff between the quantity (i.e., number) and
quality (i.e., education) of their children. In addition, couples have to allocate
consumption between husband and wife. Our theory builds on the altruisticparents model of Becker and Barro (1988) and Barro and Becker (1989). We
modify the original setup by explicitly modeling husbands and wives.4 We follow Chiappori (1988, 1992) and model household decision-making by solving
a Pareto problem, with different weights on husband and wife, signifying their
relative bargaining power. There is disagreement between the spouses in two dimensions. First, even though the spouses are altruistic towards each other, both
husband and wife value their own consumption more than that of their spouse.
Marital bargaining power therefore affects the allocation of consumption. Second, we assume that mothers care more about the well-being of their children
than fathers do. Bargaining power therefore also matters for children’s education; in particular, extending rights to women will lead to a better education of
all children.5
We then analyze the economic implications of two alternative political regimes.
4

Papers that analyze two-gender OLG models in non-altruistic settings include Aiyagari,
Greenwood, and Guner (2000), Fernández, Guner, and Knowles (2005) and Tertilt (2005).
Fernández, Fogli, and Olivetti (2004) also provide a formal model where men’s attitudes towards women change endogenously, although the application is to female labor force participation rather than women’s rights.
5
The idea that female empowerment leads to higher investments in child quality is also
present in Edlund and Lagerlöf (2004), who have a model in which a shift in power towards
women leads to faster human capital accumulation (see also Iyigun and Walsh 2007b). Eswaran
(2002) argues that one reason for such behavior is that women bear relatively higher utility costs
of child-bearing (e.g. pains and mortality associated with child-bearing) than men. In another
empirical contribution, Miller (2008) analyzes the connection between women’s suffrage, public
health spending, and child survival rates in the U.S. and argues that investment in children increased significantly in response to women having more power. Similar ideas are also extensively
discussed in the demography literature (Federici, Mason, and Sogner 1993). In Gould, Moav, and
Simhon (2007), the link from female education to investments in children leads to a switch from
polygyny to monogamy once the return to education is sufficiently high.

3

Under patriarchy all family decisions are made solely by the husband, whereas
under empowerment decisions are made jointly by husband and wife. We allow
men to vote on the political regime, and we analyze their incentives for supporting empowerment. We find that when returns to education are low, men are
better off living in patriarchy. As returns to education increase, parents choose
to have fewer children and to educate them more. We show that once returns to
education reach a critical threshold, men stand to gain from improving women’s
rights and will vote for empowerment.
We corroborate our argument with historical evidence on the expansion of women’s rights in England and the United States. Our theory places the introduction of women’s rights in the context of the demographic transition and the increased accumulation of human capital in the second phase of the industrial revolution.6 We show that the historical timing of increased investments in education,
declining fertility, and the expansion of women’s rights is consistent with the implications of our theory. We also show that the historical debates surrounding
the major reforms of women’s rights during this period reflect the key arguments
articulated by our analysis. Based on evidence from parliamentary debates, proreform pamphlets, and newspaper editorials, we document that in both England
and the United States there was a gradual shift during the nineteenth century
from arguments that focus on the rights of men towards a view that gives first
priority to the needs of children.
Our theory leads to an interesting reassessment of the relationship between traditional family roles and the progress of women’s liberation. During the twentieth century, a major focus of the women’s liberation movement has been the
advancement of women in the formal labor market. From this perspective, traditional role models and the glorification of motherhood were often viewed as
obstacles which the women’s liberation movement aimed to overcome. A longerterm perspective, however, reveals that the “traditional” roles for women and
mothers are a relatively recent invention. Social historians document that the
sharp distinction between the roles of mothers and fathers in the household as
6

To this end, our theory builds on unified models of economic and demographic change such
as Galor and Weil (1996), Galor and Weil (2000), Greenwood and Seshadri (2002), Hansen and
Prescott (2002), Boldrin and Jones (2002), Doepke (2004), and Jones and Schoonbroodt (2007).

4

well as the heightened status of motherhood arose only in the nineteenth century,
when industrialization led to a greater separation of home and work spheres and
the nurturing and education of children gained in importance. In our theory, it is
exactly the increasingly central role of mothers in the education of their children
that triggers improvements in women’s rights.
By focusing on the “supply” of rights by men, our approach provides a contrast
to theories advanced by historians that focus on the “demand” side by highlighting the role of the women’s movement in achieving gender equality. Within the
economics literature, there are only a few papers that attempt to explain changes
in the legal position of women. Geddes and Lueck (2002) emphasize that women’s rights will expand when an increasing return to female labor induces more
women to enter the formal labor market. While such arguments may be applicable to more recent changes in women’s rights, they are unlikely to be relevant
for the major reforms of married women’s rights during the nineteenth century,
because these occurred long before married women entered the formal labor market in large numbers. As late as 1920 (when female suffrage was introduced at
the federal level), only five percent of married women in the United States were
in the labor force. Another strand of the literature focuses specifically on the extension of political rights to women.7 For example, Bertocchi (2007) argues that a
decline of the gender wage gap reduced disagreement about the optimal tax rate
between men and women, which lowered the cost for men to include women in
the franchise. While interesting, this argument is not applicable to the nineteenthcentury reforms of the economic rights of married women, which took place long
before franchise extension.8
The next section sets up the formal model. In Section 3 we analyze men’s incentives to share power with women, and Section 4 describes the transition from
patriarchy to empowerment that is triggered by a rise in the return to educa7

Empirical papers on the causes and consequences of female suffrage include Jones (1991),
Lott and Kenny (1999), Edlund and Pande (2002), and Funk and Gathmann (2006).
8
Papers that analyze the general extension of the franchise (not restricted to women) include
Acemoglu and Robinson (2000, 2006), Lizzeri and Persico (2004), Diaz (2000), and Jack and Lagunoff (2006). The arguments in these papers are specific to expansions of political rights. Our
work is more closely related to Galor and Moav (2006), who argue that an increase in the return to
education helped overcome the historical conflict between workers and capitalists and induced
capitalists to support public education.

5

tion. Section 5 contains historical evidence from England and the United States.
Section 6 concludes and discusses some implications of our theory for economic
development. All proofs are contained in the mathematical appendix.

2 A Model of Women’s Rights
Our model economy is populated by overlapping generations of men and women who are joined in marriage. Each household is composed of a husband, a
wife, and their children. Couples have to decide on fertility, the education of their
children, and the allocation of consumption between the husband and the wife.
Women’s rights are represented as the relative bargaining power of the husband
and the wife in the decision making of the household.9 Women’s rights are endogenous; in particular, men can vote on whether to extend rights to women.
The aim of our analysis is to determine how the economic environment affects
men’s incentives to grant women rights.

2.1 Preferences and Constraints
Each couple in our economy has an equal number of sons and daughters. We use
i ∈ {m, f } to denote gender (male or female) and −i to denote the gender opposite to i. People care about their own consumption ci , their spouse’s consumption
c−i , their number of children of each gender n (i.e., n sons and n daughters), and

and daughters Uf . The utility function
the average of the utilities of their sons Um
of an adult i with spouse −i is given by:


, Uf )
Ui (ci , c−i , n, Um

= u(ci , c−i , n) + γi


+ Uf
Um
2


,

(1)

where:
u(ci , c−i , n) = log(ci ) + σ log(c−i ) + δ log(n).
9

Echevarria and Merlo (1999) use a related two-parent dynastic model to analyze gender differences in education. There is no voting on women’s rights, but men can improve the position
of their daughters by choosing a higher education level, which increases the daughters’ outside
options and hence their bargaining positions in marriage.

6

Thus, σ is the weight on spousal consumption, and δ is the weight on the number
of children. We assume that 0 < σ < 1 (people value their spouses’ consumption
less than their own) and δ > 0 (people like children). The only gender-specific
part of the utility function is the weight γi > 0 attached to the welfare of the
children.
A central assumption of our model is that women attach relatively more weight
to the welfare of their children than men do, i.e., γf > γm . There is a substantial
empirical literature supporting this assumption. Several studies use natural experiments to show that when women have control of household decisions, they
tend to spend more resources on children.10 From an evolutionary perspective,
the altruism gap between women and men can be rationalized by higher paternity uncertainty for men (e.g. Anderson 2006) or by the more limited reproductive capacity of women.11
Both spouses have one unit of time available. Men use all of their time for work,
tm = 1, while women split their time between working, tf , and raising and educating children. The assumption that women bear the entire burden of caring
for children is not crucial, but is made for simplicity and realism.12 Weakening or
even reversing this assumption would not alter the main results.
The labor effort of men and women is combined by a Cobb-Douglas household
production function to produce the consumption good. For a family where the
husband and the wife have human capital Hm and Hf , respectively, the budget
constraint for consumption is given by:
cm + cf = A(tf Hf )α (tm Hm )1−α ,

(2)

where 0 < α < 1.
There is a time cost φ for raising each boy-girl pair. In addition, the couple can
10

See Lundberg, Pollak, and Wales (1997), Pitt and Khandker (1998), Case and Deaton (1998),
and Attanasio and Lechene (2002).
11
Another reason might be that altruism towards children increases in time spent with children,
and that women typically do most of the child-rearing.
12
One reason why women have historically done most of the child-rearing is their ability to
breast-feed and the fact that high-quality breast milk substitutes were only developed in the mid
20th century, as documented in Albanesi and Olivetti (2007).

7

decide how much time to devote to their children’s education. The time spent
educating the daughters is denoted by ef per daughter, and the time spent educating each son is em . The time constraint for women is thus
tf + (φ + em + ef )n ≤ 1.

(3)

The point of education is to increase the children’s human capital, which improves their welfare. The laws of motion for human capital are given by:

1−β
Hm
= max{1, (Bem )θ Hfβ Hm
},

(4)

1−β
Hf = max{1, (Bef )θ Hfβ Hm
},

(5)


where Hm
and Hf denote the human capital of sons and daughters, and the pa-

rameters satisfy B ≥ 0, θ ≥ 0, and 0 < β < 1. Two features are noteworthy here.
First, the human capital of both parents has a positive effect on the productivity
of education. Second, even without education (em = ef = 0) children receive one
unit of human capital, which can be interpreted as the basic productive capacity of an uneducated person (such as the ability to perform unskilled physical
tasks). If the education technology is relatively unproductive (i.e., B or θ is low)
the individual choice problem will yield a corner solution in which parents do
not educate their children. While this possibility is not crucial for our results,
analyzing the no-education case will help illuminate the extent to which human
capital accumulation is a necessary prerequisite for female empowerment.
The elasticity parameter θ in the production function for human capital plays an
important role in our analysis. In particular, θ pins down the return to education,
i.e., the percentage increase in children’s earnings for a given increase in education time em or ef . We will see below that the level of θ is a key determinant of
men’s incentives for granting women’s rights.

2.2 Determination of Economic Choices
Decision-making in a household depends on the political regime. Under either
political regime, the current generation sets only current economic choices. That
8

is, there is no possibility of committing future family members to particular decisions. There are two possible political regimes. Under the patriarchy regime, men
make all decisions. Economic choices are therefore determined by maximizing
male utility:



{cm , cf , n, em , ef } = argmax Um (cm , cf , n, Um
, Uf ) ,

(6)

where the maximization is subject to the constraints (2) to (5) above. In the alternative regime, decisions are made through efficient bargaining between the
husband and the wife with equal weights.13 We call this the empowerment regime.
Under this regime, economic choices are given by:

{cm , cf , n, em , ef } = argmax



, Uf ) + Uf (cf , cm , n, Um
, Uf )
Um (cm , cf , n, Um
2


, (7)

where once again the maximization is subject to (2) to (5). Implicitly, we assume that the government can set the relative bargaining power of the spouses
(with women receiving zero weight under patriarchy and equal weight under
empowerment).14 The political regime is determined through a vote of the male
population, to be described in more detail below.
To solve the maximization problems in (6) and (7), we first need to determine
how the children’s utilities are affected by parental choices in each regime. This
can be done by formulating the decision problem of a household recursively, so
that all utilities become functions of the state variables. Clearly, the human capital of husband and wife Hm and Hf are state variables for a family. However,
13

The exact weighting is not essential for the qualitative results. What matters is that the weight
of the wife increases relative to patriarchy. See Pollak and Lundberg (1993) and Pollak and Lundberg (2008) for alternative ways of modeling household bargaining. Recent discussions of the
importance of household bargaining for explaining family labor supply include Burda, Hamermesh, and Weil (2007) and Knowles (2007).
14
Reforms to marital property law improved women’s bargaining position because women
gained independent control over their property and earnings. Reforms to divorce and child custody law also mattered because these improved married women’s outside options. For the case of
England, Stone (1993) documents why before the nineteenth-century reforms divorce was not a
meaningful outside option for women. Women suing for separation would bring extreme financial hardship upon themselves, they would lose control over and in many cases all access to their
children, and they would face public humiliation (the only grounds for divorce were extreme
cruelty or adultery, the details of which would be discussed in court).

9

these state variables are not sufficient to describe the decision problem. Parents
care about the welfare of their children, which in turn depends on the human
capital of the children’s future spouses. We assume that the sons and daughters
of a given family do not marry each other, but draw a spouse at random from
other families. We therefore also need a state variable that summarizes the family’s expectations regarding the human capital of their children’s future spouses.
Given our setup, these state variables are given by the economy-wide averages of
male and female human capital, denoted H̄m and H̄f . The aggregate state vector
is written as H̄ = {H̄m , H̄f }.15
We use VmP and VfP to denote the male and female value functions under patriarchy, and VmE and VfE denote the value functions under empowerment. For
either gender i ∈ {m, f } and under either political regime j ∈ {P, E}, the value
functions satisfy the recursive relationship:

Vij (Hm , Hf , H̄)

= u(ci, c−i , n) + γi



Vmj (Hm
, H̄f , H̄  ) + Vfj (H̄m
, Hf , H̄  )
,
2

(8)

where the economic choices are given by (6) and (7), respectively. The children’s
utilities in (6) and (7) as a function of the political regime j are thus given by:


Um
= Vmj (Hm
, H̄f , H̄ ),

(9)


Uf = Vfj (H̄m
, Hf , H̄  ).

(10)


Notice that the family has direct control only over the human capital Hm
of their

sons and the human capital Hf of their daughters. In contrast, the human capital
of their daughters-in-law and sons-in-law is given by economy-wide averages

H̄f and H̄m
. These quantities, in turn, are determined by equilibrium laws of
15

We focus on equilibria in which all dynasties start out with the same initial human capital,
in which case individual and aggregate human capital are always equal, Hi = H̄i . Nevertheless,
the distinction between individual and aggregate variables is essential, because individuals do
not internalize their impact on aggregate human capital.

10

motion as a function of current average female and male human capital:

H̄m
= Gjm (H̄f , H̄m ),

(11)

H̄f = Gjf (H̄f , H̄m ),

(12)

which have to be consistent with the individual laws of motion (4) and (5). The
recursive system (6) to (12) can be solved to yield allocations and the welfare of
men and women under either political regime.

2.3 Determination of the Political Regime
The political regime is determined by a once-and-for-all vote among the male
population.16 Before economic decisions are made in the initial period, men can
vote on which political regime should be adopted. Men are utility maximizers in
their voting decisions as well. Under the assumption that men will vote for patriarchy when both regimes yield the same utility, empowerment will be adopted if
and only if:
VmE (Hm , Hf , H̄) > VmP (Hm , Hf , H̄).
At first sight, it may appear that patriarchy is advantageous for men. Given that
σ < 1, men would like to claim a disproportionate share of consumption for
themselves, and patriarchy allows them to do so. However, there are also frictions in this economy that could make a lopsided distribution of power unattractive to men. First, men care about their daughters, and do not want their sons-inlaw to have too much power over them. Second, the political regime also affects
the accumulation of human capital, which may provide additional motives for
men to support women’s rights. In what follows, we examine these tradeoffs in
more detail, and derive conditions under which men prefer to share power with
their wives.
16

Our focus on a once-and-for-all vote is consistent with the finding below that in the relevant
cases the tradeoff between the political regimes depends only on parameters, and not on state
variables. If there are changes in parameters over time, on the other hand, dynamic voting would
be a more natural concept. We will address this issue in Section 4.

11

3 Men’s Incentives for Voting for Empowerment
To determine how men’s utility is affected by women’s rights, we need to solve
the recursive system (6) to (12) and then compare the male value functions under
each political regime. It will be useful to carry out this analysis separately depending on whether parents invest in the education of their children. We will see
that even if parents do not educate their children, men have a motive to support
women’s rights because of their concern for their daughters. However, we argue
that this motive is unlikely to be strong enough to explain female empowerment.
In contrast, we show that if parents educate their children and the return to human capital is sufficiently high, additional rationales for supporting women’s
rights will arise, and men will vote to share power with women.

3.1 Incentives when Parents Do Not Invest in Education
Consider an economy where everyone starts out with the basic level of human
capital Hm = Hf = 1. If the human capital technology is sufficiently unproductive for zero education to be optimal, em = ef = 0, the economy will behave
as if B = 0, i.e., as if there were no human capital technology at all. Human
capital will therefore remain at the basic level in all future generations. Since in
this regime parents do not influence the human capital of their children, the children’s utility is exogenous from the parents’ perspective, and the family decision
problem is static.
In the patriarchy regime, the maximization problem in (6) simplifies to:
{cm , cf , n} = argmax {u(cm , cf , n)}
subject to:
cm + cf = A(1 − φn)α .

12

(13)

The optimal choices (i.e., optimal from the husband’s perspective) are given by:
cPm
cPf
nP


α
α(1 + σ)
1
A
=
,
1+σ
α(1 + σ) + δ

α
α(1 + σ)
σ
A
=
,
1+σ
α(1 + σ) + δ
δ
.
=
φ(α(1 + σ) + δ)

(14)

Under empowerment, the maximization problem in (7) can be written as:

{cm , cf , n} = argmax

u(cm , cf , n) + u(cf , cm , n)
2



subject to (13). The optimal value of fertility is unchanged, nE = nP . The consumption choices now become:
cE
m

=

cE
f

1
= A
2



α(1 + σ)
α(1 + σ) + δ

α
.

Not surprisingly, female consumption is higher and male consumption is lower
under empowerment than under patriarchy. One might think that this implies
that men would never favor women’s rights. This is not necessarily true, however, since men also value the utility of their daughters (and granddaughters
etc.). Lifetime utility for a man in political regime j ∈ {P, E} can be written as:
Vmj

=

u(cjm , cjf , nj )

+

γm
1−



γm +γf
2

u(cjm , cjf , nj ) + u(cjf , cjm , nj )
.
2

(15)

The first term is maximized by the patriarchal choices, but the utility derived
from the children’s generation onward is maximized by the choices under empowerment. The reason is that men care equally about their sons and their
daughters, which induces a preference for gender equality in the future. Given
this taste for equality effect, men prefer empowerment if they either care sufficiently much about their children (γm high) or if they care sufficiently little about
their wives (σ low). A low σ strengthens the incentive to support empowerment
because it implies low utility for daughters, granddaughters etc. under patri13

archy, which men would like to avoid.
Proposition 1 (Optimal Empowerment in No-Education Case) Consider an economy in which positive education is never optimal, so that em = ef = 0 and Hm = Hf = 1
in all generations. For any remaining parameters, there exists a threshold γ̄m < 1 such
that VmE > VmP (men vote for empowerment) for all γm > γ̄m . Similarly, for any remaining parameters there exists a threshold σ̄ > 0 such that VmE > VmP for all σ < σ̄.
We conclude that even in an economy in which parents do not invest in the education of their children, men have a motive for supporting gender equality. At
the same time, the taste for equality effect alone is unlikely to be strong. From a
theoretical perspective, the effect is strong only if men’s concern for their wives
and their daughters is highly asymmetric: men would have to care so little for
their wives and treat them so poorly that the prospect of the same treatment being
applied to their daughters made them prefer empowerment. More importantly,
the historical evidence suggests that women had very limited legal rights until
the age of mass education started less than 200 years ago. This observation suggests that additional benefits from supporting women’s rights had to arise before
political support for reform reached the critical threshold.

3.2 Incentives when Education Investment is Positive
We now move on to the second regime of our model in which investment in education is positive. The nature of the family is substantially different in this regime;
whereas before the family was mostly about producing and allocating consumption goods, here it becomes a center for the accumulation of human capital. As
we will see, human capital investment generates additional motives for men to
support women’s rights. Thus, an increase in the economic significance of human
capital may act as a trigger of political reform.
As in the previous section, our strategy is to solve for the equilibrium value functions under patriarchy versus empowerment, and then compare the two to determine the conditions under which men prefer to share power with their wives.
The following lemma establishes that the value functions are log-linear.
14

Lemma 1 (Characterization of Value Functions under Positive Education) Consider an economy in which it is always optimal to educate, so that em , ef > 0 in all generations. The male and female value functions under either political regime (as defined
by the recursive system (6) to (12)) can then be solved analytically, and take the form:
VmP (Hm , Hf , H̄) = aP1 + a2 log(Hm ) + a3 log(Hf ) + a4 log(H̄m ) + a5 log(H̄f ),
VfP (Hm , Hf , H̄) = bP1 + b2 log(Hm ) + b3 log(Hf ) + b4 log(H̄m ) + b5 log(H̄f ),
VmE (Hm , Hf , H̄) = aE
1 + a2 log(Hm ) + a3 log(Hf ) + a4 log(H̄m ) + a5 log(H̄f ),
VfE (Hm , Hf , H̄) = bE
1 + b2 log(Hm ) + b3 log(Hf ) + b4 log(H̄m ) + b5 log(H̄f ).
The solutions for the value function coefficients are given in the proof of the
lemma (see Appendix B). Notice that when comparing the value functions for a
given gender across political regimes, only the constant terms are regime-specific
E
(aP1 , bP1 , aE
1 , and b1 ), whereas the slope coefficients (a2 to a5 and b2 to b5 ) are the
same across regimes. To determine political preferences, we therefore merely
need to compare the constant terms in the male value function across political

regimes. It will be more instructive, however, first to consider how the political
regime affects education choices in our economy. Given the explicit solutions for
the value functions, the choice problems (6) and (7) under patriarchy and empowerment can be easily solved. Under patriarchy, the optimal decisions are:
cPm

=

cPf =
nP =
ePm =
ePf =


α
α(1 + σ)
1
1−α
A
Hf
Hm
,
1+σ
α(1 + σ) + δ
α

α(1 + σ)
σ
1−α
A
Hf
Hm
,
1+σ
α(1 + σ) + δ
δ − γ2m (a2 + b3 )θ
,
φ(α(1 + σ) + δ)
φ γ2m a2 θ
,
δ − γ2m (a2 + b3 )θ
φ γ2m b3 θ
.
δ − γ2m (a2 + b3 )θ

(16)

For analyzing the empowerment regime, it will be useful to define γ as the aver-

15

age of the male and female weight on children’s utility,
γ=

γm + γf
.
2

Writing out the right-hand side of (7) (the function to be maximized under empowerment) yields:
u(cm , cf , n) + u(cf , cm , n)
+γ
2




+ Uf
Um
2


.

Thus, γ is the weight applied to children’s utilities if decisions are made under
empowerment. The optimal choices are:
cE
m

=

cE
f

=

nE =
eE
m =
eE
f =


α
α(1 + σ)
1
1−α
A
Hf
Hm
,
2
α(1 + σ) + δ
δ − γ2 (a2 + b3 )θ
,
φ(α(1 + σ) + δ)
φ γ2 a2 θ
,
δ − γ2 (a2 + b3 )θ
φ γ2 b3 θ
.
δ − γ2 (a2 + b3 )θ

(17)

Comparing (16) and (17), two key differences between the regimes become apparent. First, under patriarchy women consume less than men (cPf /cPm = σ),
whereas under empowerment consumption is equalized between the genders
E
(cE
m = cf ). This effect also arose in the no-education case. Second, under emP
E
P
powerment couples invest more in education (eE
m > em , ef > ef ) but have fewer
children (nE < nP ) than under patriarchy. The only difference between the expressions for fertility and education is that the weight γm under patriarchy is
replaced by the larger weight γ under empowerment, which reflects that women
place greater weight on the welfare of children than men do. Put differently,
empowerment increases the influence of those family decision-makers who care
more about their children’s education (i.e., mothers). The following proposition
summarizes the economic implications of the two regimes.

16

Proposition 2 (Economic Implications of the Political Regimes) For given state
variables, aggregate consumption is identical under patriarchy and empowerment. Women’s time allocation between production and raising children (including basic time cost
and education time) is also independent of the political regime. However, the tradeoff between the number of children and their education does depend on the regime, with fertility
being lower and education being higher under empowerment. In either regime, fertility
and education are independent of the state variables. The ratio of female to male education
ef /em is independent of both the political regime and the state variables. The growth rate
of the economy (in terms of output, human capital, and consumption) is higher under
empowerment than under patriarchy.
To summarize, we find that the key implication of empowerment (other than
equalizing consumption between men and women) is that it leads to faster accumulation of human capital and consequently to faster growth. For the political
tradeoff, we need to determine whether the effects of empowerment on education and growth could induce men to support female empowerment. In a model
without frictions (where the welfare theorems apply), men would always prefer patriarchy. In our model, however, there are frictions which may lead to a
different outcome.
The first friction is the lack of commitment across generations. Men can decide
on consumption and education choices only for their own generation, but they
are not able to impose decisions on their future family members. Lack of commitment across generations matters only if there is a conflict of interest between
current and future decision makers, i.e., if intertemporal preferences are timeinconsistent. In our model, such a conflict arises, because men turn out to have
quasi-hyperbolic preferences with regards to the utility of current and future generations.17 Iterating forward on (1) and using t to index generations (with 0 being
17

The quasi-hyperbolic structure of intertemporal preferences was first introduced by Phelps
and Pollak (1968) in an intergenerational context. Recently, following Laibson (1997), a number of
authors have applied the hyperbolic discounting model to intragenerational choice problems as
well. Our microfoundation for hyperbolic discounting is related to Amador (2003), who presents
a political-economy setting in which the current government heavily discounts the near future
because of the probability of losing the next election.

17

the current generation) results in the following expression for male utility:


∞

Um = u(cm,0 , cf,0 , n0 ) + γm

γ

t−1

t=1

u(cm,t , cf,t , nt ) + u(cf,t, cm,t , nt )
2


,

where, as before, γ > γm is the average of male and female utility. Thus, men
use discount factor γm when comparing their own period utility to that of their
children, but they use the higher discount factor γ when evaluating the relative
welfare of future generations, such as that of their children versus their grandchildren. The reason for this discrepancy is that in our altruistic preference structure, grandchildren enter the grandparents’ utility through the utility of the children. That is, men look at their children through their own (male) eyes, whereas
they look at half of their grandchildren through the (female) eyes of their daughters.18 As a consequence, grandfathers prefer a higher level of education for these
grandchildren than would be chosen by the sons-in-law.
This dynastic time-inconsistency effect may lead men to prefer empowerment if
they care sufficiently much about the education of their descendants in the future
relative to the allocation of consumption between them and their wives in the
present. The strength of the effect therefore depends on the importance of human
capital.
The second friction which may lead men to support empowerment in the model
with education is an externality created by the marriage market. When a father
invests in the education of his children, he creates a positive externality on the
future spouses of his children (his children-in-law), as well as on the parents of
those spouses (who care about their own children). This externality is not taken
into account when maximizing individual utility.19 Put differently, men stand to
gain from forcing all other men in the economy to invest more in the education
of their children, because this would improve the quality of their own children’s
spouses. In our model, one way to increase overall investment in education is
18

This causes an asymmetry in attitudes towards maternal and paternal grandchildren. Such
an asymmetry has indeed been documented in the social biology literature, see Sear, Mace, and
McGregor (2000) and Voland and Beise (2002).
19
More formally, note that on the right-hand side of (8) parents control only their children’s
own human capital, but not the human capital of the children’s spouses or the average human
capital in the society. The private and social returns of investing in education therefore differ.

18

to vote for female empowerment. Thus, the marriage market externality effect can
also lead men to support women’s rights. Once again, this effect becomes more
powerful as the importance of human capital and education in the economy increases.
The dynastic time-inconsistency and marriage market externality effects generate
the main result of our theoretical analysis: provided that male and female preferences do not diverge too much,20 men will be willing to vote for empowerment
if the return to education (as measured by the parameter θ) is sufficiently high.
Proposition 3 (Optimal Empowerment under Positive Education) Consider an
economy in which parents choose to provide positive education to their children. If
γ

γf > γm > 3f , then there exists a θ̄ such that for all θ that satisfy θ > θ̄ men prefer
empowerment to patriarchy, i.e., VmE (Hm , Hf , H̄) > VmP (Hm , Hf , H̄).
We conclude our theoretical analysis with a proposition that highlights how our
main result is related to the underlying model assumptions. In particular, the
proposition establishes that both the assumption that women put a higher weight
on the welfare of children and the presence of a marriage-market externality are
essential. Moreover, it shows that the incentives for voting for empowerment are
not influenced by the productive role of women, that is, political incentives are
independent of the weight α of female labor in the production of final output.
Proposition 4 (Economic Forces Underlying Main Result) If γm = γf then the
optimal regime does not depend on θ. If there is no human capital externality across
dynasties, then, if γm < γf , there exists a θ̄ such that for all θ that satisfy θ > θ̄ men
prefer patriarchy to empowerment, i.e., VmE (Hm , Hf , H̄) < VmP (Hm , Hf , H̄). That is,
unlike in the case with the externality, a high return to education does not lead men to
support empowerment. Finally, the optimal regime choice is independent of α.
The gender difference in the appreciation of children is essential for our findings because it drives the positive effect of women’s rights on education. If husbands and wives valued children equally, but the marriage-market externality
γ

The condition γm > 3f is sufficient to guarantee that men benefit from giving more power to
women for some θ. If men do not put enough weight on future generations, it is never optimal to
vote for empowerment.
20

19

were still present, men would still like to impose higher education choices on
other families, but extending rights to women would no longer achieve that purpose. Conversely, if the gender difference in preferences were present but the
marriage-market externality were absent, men would still like to impose higher
education choices on their descendants due to the time-inconsistency in preferences. However, without the externality, ceding control over the family’s current
decisions would be too high a price to pay from the men’s perspective for committing future generations to higher human-capital investment.

3.3 Are There Alternatives to Female Empowerment?
We argue that men’s main motive for supporting women’s rights is to induce
other families (in particular, the parents of their future children-in-law and the
families of their daughters and granddaughters) to invest more in children’s education. A natural question to ask, then, is whether men could take any other
measures that would achieve the same objective, without having to share power
with their wives. This question is especially relevant given that extending rights
to women does not provide a perfect fix for the underlying frictions. If the return to education is sufficiently high, we know that sharing power with women
will improve men’s welfare, but in general empowerment will not implement the
efficient level of education.
In principle, it is possible to imagine contracts that would offset the underlying frictions and implement the level of education that is optimal from the perspective of the initial generation of men. However, these contracts are of a kind
that would be difficult or impossible to implement in the real world. Within dynasties, what would be required is the ability to commit all future descendants
to particular choices regarding the investment in their children. Such contracts
would be illegal under the legal systems of most countries, and even if they were
feasible in principle it is hard to see how they could be enforced. We do observe
some legal constructs (such as education trust funds for grandchildren that exclude access by the grandchildren’s parents) that serve a similar purpose, but
such instruments do not fully resolve the underlying commitment problem.
20

Similarly, bride prices or dowries that are conditional on the bride and groom’s
education could help to overcome the marriage market externality. In modern
times, a perhaps more important mechanism is assortative mating. If well educated children attract higher-quality spouses, the marriage-market externality
will be at least partially internalized. Nevertheless, it is unlikely that such mechanisms could remove the underlying inefficiency entirely.21 This would not only
require highly assortative matching, but also a high degree of heterogeneity in
realized education levels. For example, if all families are homogeneous (as in
our theoretical framework), assortative matching cannot arise at all. Similarly,
it is hard to imagine a contractual solution for the marriage-market externality.
This would require writing contracts involving all families who will be linked at
any future date through intermarriage, which cannot be done in the absence of
perfect foresight regarding future marriages. The marriage-market externality is
thus difficult to overcome privately by individual families, which is one reason
why extending women’s rights is done at a political level.
A final potential counterargument is that, rather than changing bargaining power
within families, men could have increased investment in children more directly
through measures such as public schooling and compulsory education laws. In
England and the United States, such laws were indeed introduced or expanded
during the first major phase of the expansion of women’s rights. However, education reforms would be an alternative to women’s rights only if public and
private inputs (i.e., schools versus education within the family) acted as substitutes in the production of human capital. The evidence suggests, however, that
public education and family-based investments are complements.22 Reforms in
21
The literature identifies a number of particular assumptions under which assortative mating
does exactly offset the marriage-market externality. In the two-period model of Laitner (1991),
there is no joint production in marriage and all consumption is shared equally. In Peters and
Siow (2002). there are no gender differences and only public goods are consumed in marriage.
These assumptions are not satisfied in more general models such as ours. Iyigun and Walsh
(2007a) derive an efficiency result for premarital investments in a more general framework. Here,
however, the key assumptions are a frictionless marriage market and an endogenous sharing
rule between spouses. Sharing between spouses is unlikely to change endogenously if women
initially have no rights as in our model.
22
See, for example, Leibowitz (1974), Behrman, Foster, Rosenzweig, and Vashishtha (1999),
and Cunha, Heckman, Lochner, and Masterov (2005) for the importance of parental inputs (and
in particular the role of mothers) in human capital development.

21

the areas of education and women’s rights are therefore mutually reinforcing. We
believe that both areas of political reform (women’s rights and education laws)
were driven by the same underlying economic change, namely an expanded role
for human capital.23

4 The Transition to Female Empowerment
Up to this point, we have focused on the determination of women’s rights in
a stable environment: the parameters of the model economy were assumed to
be constant, and in the initial period men made a once-and-for-all choice of the
political regime. In this section, we expand our analysis to an economy that is
subject to technological change, and in which the political regime can change
over time. We envision an economy that starts out with a low return to human
capital investment, so that parents do not invest in the education of their children and men choose the patriarchy regime. Over time, the return to education
increases (i.e., the return-to-education parameter θ shifts upward), which induces
parents to invest in their children’s education. Ultimately, the return to education
is sufficiently high for men to vote for female empowerment.
As a first pass, we can apply the results derived in the previous section to such a
transition. This requires us to assume that all shifts in the return to education are
unanticipated (because we analyzed incentives for constant parameter values)
and that people vote as if there were once-and-for-all voting (even though votes
are repeated). Later, we will use a dynamic-voting framework to examine the
extent to which these assumptions affect our theoretical results and then provide
a numerical example of the transition to empowerment.
Consider, then, an economy that starts out with parents not educating their children (so that em = ef = 0 and Hm = Hf = 1), but in which the return-toeducation parameter θ trends upwards over time. The economy starts out in the
patriarchy regime. We also assume that the conditions of Proposition 1 are not
23

See Doepke and Zilibotti (2005) for an analysis of child labor restrictions and compulsory
schooling laws along these lines.

22

satisfied; that is, the taste-for-equality effect alone is not strong enough to induce
men to vote for female empowerment.24
At some point, the return to education θ will be sufficiently high for parents to
prefer educating their children, em , ef > 0, so that human capital starts to rise
over time. Comparing (14) to (16), we see that the fertility rate drops once parents educate their children. Intuitively, families economize on their number of
children to devote more time to educating each child. Subsequently, as θ keeps
increasing fertility will continue to fall, education levels em and ef will continue
to rise, and growth in human capital and output will accelerate. Ultimately, the
return to education θ will reach the threshold θ̄ at which men vote to introduce
the empowerment regime (see Proposition 3).25 At this time, according to Proposition 2 and equations (16) and (17) there will be a further drop in fertility, a
further rise in education, and a further acceleration of economic growth.
Thus, our theory implies that the vote for female empowerment is preceded by
the onset of the demographic transition (i.e., fertility decline) and a rise in education. Moreover, the expansion of women’s rights further amplifies the existing
trends towards lower fertility and increased human-capital investment. In contrast to existing explanations for rising female rights, our model does not imply
that the introduction of power sharing should coincide with or be followed by increased female labor force participation: the fraction of time that women devote
to production is unchanged throughout the entire transition. Indeed, Proposition 4 implies that women’s role of the production of goods has no bearing at all
on the expansion of women’s rights.
We now demonstrate that these qualitative findings remain intact if we allow
people to anticipate parameter changes as well as future political decisions. More
precisely, we introduce perfect foresight regarding the time path for θ as well as
dynamic voting. In every period, before any other economic decisions are taken,
men can vote on whether to introduce female empowerment. This setting leads
γ

This assumption requires γm < γ̄m , while for a transition to empowerment γm > 3f is needed
γ
(see Proposition 3). It can be shown that for a large set of parameters, γ̄m > 3f , so that both
conditions can be satisfied simultaneously.
25
Depending on parameters, it is possible that men will vote for female empowerment immediately once the switch to education occurs. Empirically, the relevant case is where there is a gap
between the switch to education and the extension of women’s rights.
24

23

to a dynamic game that is played between the male voters of different generations. The set of equilibria of this game is potentially large. We focus on the subclass of equilibria where voters condition their strategies only on payoff-relevant
state variables. In our setup, the only payoff-relevant state variable is the current
level of the return-to-education parameter θ.26
Given that the time path for θ is exogenous, future political decisions are independent of the outcome of today’s vote, which simplifies the characterization
of voting equilibria. Because future political outcomes are fixed, the vote in a
given period only affects education choices in the present period. Voters therefore weigh the cost of sharing power with their wives against the benefits of
the one-time upward shift in future human capital levels that is implied by empowerment. Compared to the case of once-and-for-all voting (where a vote for
empowerment also raises future education levels), the benefits of empowerment
are smaller under dynamic voting. In fact, as far as the taste-for-equality and
the dynastic-time-inconsistency effects are concerned, men would ideally like to
leave the vote in favor of empowerment to the next generation.27 The situation
26

The restriction to voting strategies that condition only on payoff-relevant variables is standard in the dynamic political-economy literature, see for example Krusell and Rı́os-Rull (1999)
and Hassler et al. (2003). We assume that the return to education is sufficiently high to lead to
positive education before female empowerment is introduced. Notice that (at least once education is positive and human capital is growing) the current level of human capital is not payoffrelevant as far as the voting decision is concerned. Current human capital enters current and
future constraints multiplicatively. Given that utility is logarithmic, the current level of human
capital enters utility as an additive constant, so that the political tradeoff between empowerment
and patriarchy is not affected by current human capital.
It is possible to construct additional, expectations-driven equilibria. For example, consider
the trigger-strategy equilibrium in which each generation votes for empowerment, unless any
preceding generation has voted for patriarchy, in which case all following generations vote for
patriarchy as well. In this equilibrium, the payoffs are the same as under once-and-for-all voting,
because (given the future voters’ strategies) the present vote will stay in place forever. This equilibrium therefore exists if, given the time path for θ, all generations would vote for empowerment
under once-and-for-all voting.
27
Alternatively, men might prefer to pass laws that bind only from the following generation on.
We rule out such votes by requiring that a vote for empowerment affects marriages immediately.
It would be difficult to enforce laws that apply only to future marriages, and indeed actual laws
generally applied to all marriages equally. For example, the British Married Women’s Property
Act of 1870 stated that “The wages and earnings of any married woman acquired or gained by
her after the passing of this Act in any employment, occupation, or trade . . . shall be deemed
and be taken to be property held and settled to her separate use, independent of any husband
to whom she may be married.” The only exception is that the law did not apply retroactively to

24

is different in the case of the marriage-market externality effect; here men would
like to introduce the law immediately to improve the quality of their children’s
future spouses. On balance, our main result still holds: if the return to human
capital θ is sufficiently high, men will vote for empowerment.
Proposition 5 (Transition to Empowerment) Consider an economy in which parents choose to provide positive education to their children, and in which the return to
education follows an exogenous time path {θt }∞
t=0 . In every period, all men can vote on
the political regime for the present period. The time path for θ as well as future voting
γ
outcomes are perfectly anticipated. If γf > γm > 3f , then there exists a θ̃ such that in all

periods T where θT > θ̃ men vote for empowerment. The threshold for empowerment is
higher than under once-and-for-all-voting, i.e., we have θ̃ > θ̄, where θ̄ is the threshold
characterized in Proposition 3.
We conclude our analysis with a numerical example of an economy undergoing
the transition from patriarchy to power sharing.28 We model an increase in the
demand for human capital through an upward shift in the return-to-education
parameter θ. The time path for θ starts at 0.4 in period 1 and then increases
linearly until reaching 0.6 in period 8, and then remains constant at that level.
The parameter shift as well as future voting outcomes are fully anticipated.
Figures 1 and 2 display the evolution of fertility, education, human capital, and
output per adult in the economy throughout this technological shift.29 In both
figures, the solid lines represent the equilibrium political-economy outcome, i.e.,
female empowerment is introduced once it is advantageous for men to do so. For
comparison, the dashed lines display outcomes under permanent patriarchy (i.e.,
empowerment is never introduced). Given the parameter values, the economy
starts out in the no-education case. In this phase, the men are in power, and they
prefer to stay in power. During the no-education period, fertility is high at close
married women’s earlier inheritances that had already passed into their husbands’ possession.
See Holcombe (1983) for the original text of the law, and Combs (2005) for an analysis of its
economic effects.
28
The parameter values used in the numerical example are γf = 0.45, γm = 0.4, σ = 0.66,
δ = 0.66, α = 0.4, β = 0.5, φ = 0.25, and B = 35.
29
For simplicity, only female education and human capital are displayed. Male education and
human capital are proportional to the female values.

25

Fertility

4

Optimal Empowerment
Permanent Patriarchy

3

2
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Time

Education

0.1

0.05
Optimal Empowerment
Permanent Patriarchy
0
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Time

Human Capital

Figure 1: Fertility Rate and Female Education in Numerical Example

Optimal Empowerment
Permanent Patriarchy

20

10

0
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

6

7

8

9

10

Time

Output

15

Optimal Empowerment
Permanent Patriarchy

10
5
0
1

2

3

4

5
Time

Figure 2: Female Human Capital and Output per Adult in Numerical Example
26

to four children per family, and human capital and output per adult are constant.
The switch to education takes place in period 4, and is accompanied by an immediate drop in the fertility rate. Despite the shift to the education regime, in
periods 4 and 5 the return to human capital is still too low for men to favor the
extension of rights to women. This changes in period 6, when empowerment is
finally introduced. Relative to the case of permanent patriarchy, optimal empowerment results in a further drop in fertility and a further increase in education.
As Figure 2 shows, these changes lead to an increasing advantage in terms of
human capital and income per adult under empowerment relative to patriarchy.
That, of course, is one of the main reasons why men introduce women’s rights in
the first place: high returns to human capital make the growth effects of female
power too big to ignore.

5 Historical Evidence from the Expansion of Women’s
Rights in England and the United States
In this section, we compare the predictions of our theory to historical evidence
from England and the United States. We start by examining trends of fertility
and education relative to the timing of the main political reforms. We then document that the extension of women’s rights coincided with a more general transformation of the role of families in which investments in children held increasing
importance. Finally, we present evidence from the historical debates on women’s
rights to show that the main arguments of the supporters of reform were closely
related to the forces captured in our theory.

5.1 Fertility and Education
We argue that the expansion of women’s rights was triggered by a rise in the
demand for human capital, as reflected by rising education levels and declining
fertility rates. Moreover, once the political reforms were carried out, they should
have reinforced the trend towards higher education and lower fertility. Hence,
in terms of aggregate time series the main prediction of our theory is that the
expansion of women’s rights should have taken place after the onset, but before
27

the completion, of the demographic transition, and should have coincided with
increasing investments in human capital.30 The data for England and the United
7

120

6

100
80

5

60

4

40

3

20

2

0
1840

1860

1880

1900

1920

Percent

Totaal Fertility Rate

States are consistent with these predictions.

1940

Year

Figure 3: Fertility and Schooling in the United States. Solid: Total Fertility Rates
(Left Axis. Source: Haines 1994). Dashed: Elementary Enrollment Rate (Right
Axis. Source: Baier et al. 2007). Dotted: Graduation Rate at 17 years (Right Axis.
Source: Goldin 2006).
In both England and the United States, the most important reforms of women’s
rights were carried out in the second half of the nineteenth century. During this
period, married women in England and most U.S. states obtained rights to own
and bequeath property, to obtain divorce, and to receive custody of their children
in the case of separation or divorce (see Appendix A for detailed time lines). Figures 3 and 4 display the aggregate trends in fertility and education during this
period. In the United States, at the beginning of the nineteenth century the av30

We focus on changes in education levels because direct evidence on returns to education for
this time period is scarce. Moreover, whether the increase in education was driven by a rise in the
return to education or a fall in the cost of acquiring education is immaterial for the implications
of our theory. What matters is that educating children grew in importance as a task for families.
The dramatic increase in school enrollment rates in both England and the United States over the
nineteenth century clearly indicates that schooling became more desirable. Skill-biased technological change is only one potential explanations for this change. Other factors that indirectly
raised the private return to education include the complementary public provision of education
(see Fishlow 1966 on the increase in public education expenditures during this period), laws prohibiting child labor (by decreasing the opportunity cost of education), as well as increases in life
expectancy.

28

80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

6
5
4
3
2
1820

1840

1860

1880

1900

Percent

Totaal Fertility Rate

7

1920

Year

Figure 4: Fertility and Schooling in England. Solid: Total Fertility Rates (Left
Axis. Source: Lee and Schofield 1981 and Chesnais 1992). Dashed: School Enrollment Rate for Ages 5–14. (Right Axis. Source: Cunningham 1996).
erage woman had almost seven children. The total fertility rate31 (TFR) declined
gradually over the course of the century, and reached about 3.5 by 1900. Throughout the same period, the United States underwent a transformation towards mass
education. Primary enrollment rates increased from under 50 to more than 100
percent from 1840 to 1900,32 and already in 1880 almost all children received at
least some primary schooling (Turner et al. 2007).33 Shortly after the main phase
of the expansion of women’s rights, the “high school movement” continued the
trend towards mass education at the secondary level. Whereas until 1910 fewer
than 10 percent of each cohort graduated high school, by 1940 graduation rates
were around 50 percent.
In England, total fertility rates reached a peak of about 5.5 during the first half
of the nineteenth century. Fertility decline proceeded slowly at first, but picked
31
The total fertility rate in a given year is the sum of age-specific fertility rates over all ages. It
can be interpreted as the total number of children an average woman will have over her lifetime
if age-specific fertility rates stay constant over time.
32
Enrollment rates can exceed 100 percent because of grade repetition.
33
Even though data on elementary school attendance are constructed from Census data and
the exact numbers are somewhat controversial, there is no disagreement that the transformation
to mass primary education happened throughout the nineteenth century (Goldin 2006). See also
Fishlow (1966) and Kaestle and Vinovskis (1980).

29

up speed after 1880, right when the major reforms of women’s rights were implemented. By 1920, the total fertility rate had fallen to 2.4. Average school attendance of children aged 5–14 was still under 10 percent in 1850, but then increased
dramatically to about 70 percent by the turn of the century.
In sum, we find that the data confirm the prediction that changes in women’s
rights should be preceded by modest fertility decline and a rise in education, and
followed by accelerated changes in the same direction.

5.2 The Changing Role of the Family
Our theory posits that the expansion of women’s rights goes hand in hand with
a shift in the role and function of families. In particular, we argue that the nurturing and education of children steadily gained in importance, and that it was
the mothers who carried most of the expanded responsibilities for child rearing.
These changes are reflected not only in aggregate data on fertility and education,
but also in observations by social historians on the reorganization of family life,
changes in attitudes towards children, and shifts in the expected role of mothers.
First and foremost, the nineteenth century brought along a new view of the nature of childhood. Commenting on earlier perceptions of childhood in the United
States, Kaestle and Vinovskis (1980) report that the “early Puritans had stressed
that children were innately evil . . . . The only proper response for parents was
to watch their children closely and to discipline them at very young ages.” In
contrast, by the nineteenth century “children were viewed as innocent beings
that had to be protected and nurtured,” and childhood became to be regarded
as a “distinct phase of human development that required special attention and
training” (p. 192).34 Following this change in attitudes, the nurturing of children
became an increasingly important focus of family life. “Generally speaking, parents tended to bestow more economic, educational, and emotional resources on
their children than ever before” (Guttormsson 2002, p. 265).
34

Similarly, Mason (1994) argues that “children, who previously had been viewed, at best, as
miniature adults, and at worst, as small creatures possessing evil tendencies that must be firmly
tamed, began to be viewed positively as innocent beings who were naturally closer to God” (p.
52).

30

These changes in the perception of childhood led to a heightened appreciation
of motherhood. “The mood was shifting away from beating as a routine punishment (except in schools) toward the application of moral and emotional pressures
developing in children a capacity for self-government. . . . insistence on this type
of moral education, which was widely assumed to be beyond the capacity of a
father-provider, contributed to valorizing the mother’s moral role” (Guttormsson 2002, p. 268). The improved status of motherhood soon became reflected in
the child-rearing advice literature of the period. “The most striking change, centrally illustrated by the works of Pestalozzi, was the shift from father-centered to
mother-centered theories of child raising” (Maynes 2002, p. 198). Kaestle and Vinovskis (1980) emphasize the role that mothers—as opposed to teachers—played
in this transformation. “In the early 1820’s and 1830’s . . . there was a strong revival of the idea that young children should be educated at home . . . Accompanying the emphasis on early child development within the home was the increasing
focus on the role of mothers in childhood education. The great outpouring of domestic literature in the 1820s and 1830s in the United States encouraged mothers
to take a more active role in the training of children” (p. 205).
The expanded role of mothers as the educators of their children also raised the
value of female education. “As long as there were few schools for very young
children, their education was normally the task of mothers. Some mothers felt
they had to improve their own education to be fit for the task” (Guttormsson
2002, p. 266). Among the upper classes “young girls who did attend boarding
school were educated to be good mothers to England’s future rulers . . . [rather
than to] be shaping England themselves” (Nelson 2007, p. 77). In working-class
schools, girls’ education often emphasized the teaching of Christian values. The
rationale for this focus was that working-class girls would become “essential conduits of morality” in their future role as mothers (Steinbach 2004, p. 165).
The new emphasis on children and mothers was accompanied by other changes
in the organization of families, in particular an increased separation between the
work and home spheres, which deepened the division of labor between husbands and wives. While our model cannot speak directly to these changes (for
simplicity, we do not distinguish between market and home goods), they help

31

explain why the increased burden of nurturing and educating children largely
fell on mothers. In the pre-industrial period, men and women would often work
alongside each other. This practice not only applied to family-based agriculture,
but also to many of the skilled professions.35 The flipside of the involvement
of women in their husbands’ work was a more important role of husbands in
the household: “Home and work were close together, and wife and husband
participated in both” (Degler 1980, p. 5). Indeed, both mothers and fathers
spent considerable amounts of time with their children and contributed to their
upbringing. The nurturing of infants and the youngest children was generally
the mother’s domain, but from fairly young ages many children (and especially
boys) would start working with their fathers, who would then be responsible for
much of their further education.
The links between working fathers and their children weakened throughout the
industrialization period. “During the early nineteenth century, family roles were
reorganized around the idea of sexual difference, with men and women increasingly occupying separate spheres . . . Many middle-class women began to define
themselves consciously as nurturers and full-time mothers, whereas the father
was viewed as protector, provider and the representative of public authority.”
(Ross 2006, p. 18). Similarly, Ehmer (2002) documents that a “new form of labor
division between husband and wife . . . became widespread after 1850: the male
breadwinner—female homemaker model” (p. 300). The separation between the
spheres of husbands and wives was particularly pronounced for the families of
middle-class men who commuted to work. A “husband might well catch an early
train to a job in the city and not return until evening. Thus while pre-Victorian
texts . . . show middle-class men playing an active domestic part, particularly parenting, later in the century the typical middle-class husband’s principal function
was to provide economic support for the family” (Nelson 2007, p. 31).
35

“Women have been active participants in commerce, farming, and many business pursuits,
assisting their husbands, keeping books, overseeing apprentices and journeymen, and manufacturing many goods for sales. Not only artisans but also lawyers and doctors practiced in a room in
their house, so women tended to have a direct relationship with their husband’s business affairs”
(Ross 2006, p. 18–19).

32

5.3 The Political Debate on Women’s Rights
We now turn to evidence from the political debates that accompanied the expansion of women’s rights during the nineteenth century (see Appendix A for time
lines). If we are correct in asserting that women’s role in the education of children
was central to the process of female empowerment, this view should be reflected
in the arguments put forward by the supporters of reform. We find that evidence
from parliamentary debates, pro-reform pamphlets, and newspaper editorials
supports our hypothesis. To be sure, the campaigners for women’s rights made a
number of different arguments, not all of which are reflected in our theory. However, in both England and the United States36 we observe a gradual shift in the
course of the nineteenth century from arguments that focus on the rights of men
towards a view that gives the greatest weight to the needs of children. This shift
mirrors the changing role of the family towards greater emphasis on investments
in children discussed in the previous section.
In England, the first milestone in the expansion of women’s rights was the passing of the Custody of Infants Act in 1839. Before 1839, mothers had no parental
rights at all with regard to their legitimate children. In contrast, a father’s rights
extended even beyond his own death: he could appoint a guardian who would
be able exercise his full parental rights. In 1837, Thomas Talfourd proposed a bill
that would have enabled separated or divorced women to apply to a court for
obtaining visitation rights to their children under the age of seven. In the discussion of the bill in the House of Commons, Talfourd argued that “. . . to deprive
the mother of any contact was cruel and against nature both to her and the child”
(Wroath 1998, p. 98). The central argument of the MPs opposing the bill was that
it would undermine marriages. Much was made of the fact that given that the bill
was to apply to divorced women, it would in particular apply to adulteresses.37
A modified bill was ultimately passed in 1839.
36

The arguments put forward by supporters and opponents of reform in the two countries were
remarkably similar, and we therefore discuss them together. Women’s role for the education of
children also played an important role in the debates on women’s rights in other countries, see
for example Southard (1993) and Nolte (1986).
37
An opponent argued that “he could not conceive a more impolitic provision. If the father
wished to preserve his children from contamination he should keep them separated from such a
woman” (Wroath 1998, p. 99).

33

From a modern perspective, the Custody of Infants Act was a rather moderate
advance for women’s rights. It merely opened the possibility of applying to a
court in case of hardship; the courts still could, and often would, decide against
awarding custody to the mother. Nevertheless, the bill marked a change in principle: “It was a modest step in real terms but a landmark in the history of English
law. For the first time the mother of a legitimate child was given some rights
in respect to it” (Wroath 1998, p. 112). What is significant from our perspective
is that this first advance in women’s right was directly related to women’s role
in the upbringing of their children. In an 1849 decision applying the act, the
Lord Chancellor argued that the courts should “apply a course which seems best
for the interests of the children, without regard, so far as it interferes with that
object, to the pain which may be inflicted on those who are authors of the difficulty” (cited in Wroath 1998, p. 115). Wroath comments that this “must be one of
the earliest court decisions where the welfare of the children was considered as
overriding the interests of the father.”
The continuing shift in emphasis from the rights of men to the needs of children
can also be gleaned from the editorial pages of the Times of London. In 1864,
commenting on a court case involving the Custody of Infants Act, the Times still
upheld the traditional view: “We must here, as ever, adapt human laws to the
natural inequality of the sexes, and give the superiority of right to that which
cannot but have the superiority of power” (London Times, April 4, 1864, p. 8). In
1873, women’s child custody rights were further extended; women could apply
for custody of children regardless of age, and adultery no longer led to automatic
disqualification. On this occasion, the Times supported the reform: “The Court
. . . has struggled to mitigate the harshness of the rule which rigorously denies to
a mother, however great may be her claims, the care of her infant children, and
gives it over, without consideration or scruple, to a father, however manifestly
unfit he may be” (London Times, April 22, 1873, p. 9).
After child custody, the next major area of reform was marital property law. Here,
the United States took the lead. The first state that passed a law allowing married women to own separate property was Maine in 1844, closely followed by

34

New York in 1848. 38 In England, the Married Women’s Property Act was passed
in 1870 and further expanded in 1874 and 1882. The reforms to property law
dramatically improved the legal position of married women relative to their husbands by giving them control over their earnings and their property.
In both the United States and England, the main argument of the opponents of
reform was once again that extending rights to married women would endanger
the institution of marriage. In an 1857 debate on a proposed reform in Oregon it
was argued that “the provision would cause much domestic trouble and many
divorces” (Chused 1985, p. 17). In 1868, an editorial writer for the London Times
claimed that “the proposed change would totally destroy the existing relation
between husband and wife. That relation is at present one of authority on the one
side and subordination on the other. . . . If a woman has her own property, and
can apply to her separate use her own earnings, she is practically emancipated
from the control of her husband. . . . what is to prevent her from going where she
likes and doing what she pleases?” (London Times, April 23, 1868, p. 8).
In many U.S. states, limited property rights were extended to women with the
main goal of protecting women and their children from a husband’s creditors.
It was thought that these provisions would be used only rarely in the case of
extremely irresponsible husbands.39 In England the debate proceeded along similar lines, with the effect of women’s rights on the welfare of children receiving
increasing attention. John Stuart Mill (who was an independent MP from 1865
to 1868) emerged as a major proponent of women’s rights during this period. He
argued that equality would have many advantages for men, not least for their
own education. Mill also argued that men would benefit from women’s education, because the “influence of mothers on the early character of their sons . . .
have in all recorded times been important agencies of the formation of character,
and have determined some of the chief steps in the progress of civilization” (p.
38

Many more states introduced similar laws in the 1860s and 1870s, and by the end of the
nineteenth century all married women in the United States had access to some form of property
and/or earnings protection. See Khan (1996) for a detailed account of these laws in the United
States.
39
In a debate about Oregon’s Married Women’s Property Act, a Mr. Logan argued that “If he
[the husband] was prudent and thrifty she would give him control of her property. And if he was
not, it was better that she should have the power to preserve her property to support herself and
educate her children” (Chused 1985, p. 18).

35

91).
In July 1868, a Select Committee in the House of Commons issued a favorable report on a proposed marital property bill. Much of the testimony received by the
committee suggested that reform would be particularly beneficial to women from
the lower classes. When asked whether the bill would have “generally a good effect upon the moral condition of the women,” a witness from Belfast replied: “I
think it would; and perhaps it would be even more advantageous as regards the
children, for they often cannot get an education under present circumstances”
(British Parliamentary Papers 1970, p. 99). The experience of the United States
with women’s property laws played a considerable role in the debate. A New
York merchant, serving as a witness to the Select Committee, stated that one of
the reasons for reforming the law in that state was “the desire to furnish mothers
with power to supply the wants of their children when the husband neglects to
do so” (p. 14). Asked whether he had “seen any alteration in the condition of
married women of the labouring class since the alteration of the law,” the witness replied: “I think there has been a gradual improvement ever since I have
noticed the women are being more educated, and are more desirous to educate
their children. They send their children almost universally to school” (p. 77).
By 1869, a London Times editorial reflected many of these arguments: “It is true
that theoretically [the husband] is liable to maintain her, as well as their children. But this liability is practically qualified. . . . As for children, no degree of
neglect short of criminal maltreatment brings the father within the penalties of
the law . . . It must, therefore, be admitted that while the Common Law makes the
husband master of all his wife’s personal property, no equivalent obligation to
support her or their children in tolerable comfort is imposed upon him” (London
Times, March 27, 1869).
Another area in which women’s rights improved in the late nineteenth century
was education politics. In England, the Elementary Education Act of 1870 created school boards with the aim of providing universal education to children up
to 12 years of age. Women were given the same active and passive election rights
as men; thus, in the area of education women gained political rights half a century before universal female suffrage was introduced. This expansion of rights
36

was motivated by the increasing public recognition of women’s role in the organization of education.40 Women were also granted school suffrage in many U.S.
states, and the pro-reform arguments were once again centered around women’s
expertise with children. A public letter to the Mayor of Brooklyn with the goal
of increasing the number of women on the Board of Education stated that “We
would urge upon your consideration the fact that interest in the public schools
belongs largely to women as educators and even more distinctively as mothers;
that wherever the training of children is to be considered experience with child
life gives value to the judgment of intelligent women” (New York Times, September 6, 1894).41
In summary, in both England and the United States the link between women’s
rights and the education and welfare of children became an increasingly important argument in the debate on women’s rights throughout the nineteenth century. Clearly, the theoretical mechanisms highlighted by our model and the arguments in the historical debates do not line up in every detail. Perhaps most
importantly, one feature of the historical debates is that formal women’s rights
were often regarded as directly affecting only a small number of women with irresponsible husbands, whereas in our theory all families are identical and equally
affected by the law. Despite these reservations, we believe that our theoretical
model captures the main impetus behind the advances in the rights of women
throughout the nineteenth century.
40

The Times writes: “When Mr. Mill, again, urges the election of women on the Board, he
will meet with more general assent than he often finds when he pleads for the rights of the sex.
Women are, in point of fact, some of the principal managers of the existing girls’ schools . . . and
even in London women form the most active members of many School Committees. To elect them
as members of the School Board would merely be to recognize their present influence” (London
Times, November 12, 1870).
41
Similarly, in an address to New Jersey voters the Republican Party argues that “The third
proposed amendment, giving votes to women in school elections, widens the suffrage in regard
to a subject which has been shown by the history of our State schools, to be one concerning which
women are clearly entitled to have a voice” (New York Times, September 20, 1897).

37

6 Conclusions and Outlook
In this paper we analyze men’s incentives for sharing power with women. We
show that men face a tradeoff between the rights they want for their own wives
and the rights of other women in the economy. Men benefit from other women’s
rights for two reasons. First, men would like their own daughters to have rights,
partly because they don’t want them to be treated badly by their sons-in-law, but
also because this mitigates a dynamic time-inconsistency problem by fostering
human-capital investments in grandchildren. Second, improved rights for women in general improve the education of the next generation and thereby help
offset a human-capital externality created by the marriage market. We show that
an increase in the importance of education can alter men’s preferences regarding
women’s rights. Hence, we argue that the ultimate cause of the expansions of
married women’s rights in England and the United States throughout the nineteenth century was technological change that increased the importance of human
capital in the economy.
Our theory offers a new perspective on the relationship between traditional role
models and the expansion of women’s rights. In our model it is exactly the “traditional” role of women as nurturers and educators of their children that induces
men to grant power to women. In contrast, women’s participation in the formal labor market does not play any role. Our theory therefore suggests that the
“glorification of motherhood” throughout the nineteenth century actually helped
advance the cause of women’s rights in its early phase.
The analysis could be extended in several directions. Whereas the model restricts
attention to two polar regimes (patriarchy versus empowerment), in reality women’s legal rights were expanded gradually over a period of several decades.
Similarly, cross-country data suggest that there exist varying degrees of female
empowerment around the world. A gradual extension of rights can be easily incorporated into our setup by analyzing a family decision problem with general
weights and letting men vote on the weight of women. The value functions for
this more general case can be found in the same way as in the two polar cases
considered here. Then, one can show numerically that the optimal weight as38

signed to the wife increases with the return to education. This finding can be
interpreted as a gradual extension of rights over time in response to the growing
importance of human capital. Another limitation of our analysis is that we have
restricted our attention to a framework with a homogeneous population. In reality, men differed tremendously in their opinions on women’s rights at the time.
Anecdotal evidence suggests that highly educated men were more likely to be in
favor of women’s rights than the less educated. Such diversity of opinion could
be analyzed, for example, in a model with heterogeneity in the ability to educate
one’s children.
Measure of Lack of Rights

GDP per capita

TFR Schooling

Abortion policy index

-0.41

0.56

-0.56

Year first woman in parliament

-0.62

0.35

-0.64

Year of (partial) female suffrage

-0.50

0.58

-0.69

Women’s access to land index

-0.50

0.78

-0.68

Access to bank loans index

-0.44

0.69

-0.58

Female genital mutilation index

-0.32

0.54

-0.51

Violence against women index

-0.40

0.54

-0.63

Sources: OECD Gender Statistics (2006), World Development Indicators (2003, 2005), the UN
Women Indicator Statistics (1999), and the UN Human Development Report (2004). “Schooling”
is average years of schooling of the adult population. All data are latest available.

Table 1: Correlations between Measures of Lack of Women’s Rights and Economic Development Indicators in Cross-Country Data
It would also be interesting to explore the implications of our analysis for economic development beyond the historical cases of England and the United States.
A number of studies have identified the lack of women’s rights as an important
hindrance to successful economic development.42 Others have argued that the
status of women naturally improves with development.43 In our model, the interaction between economic development and women’s rights runs both ways.
We find that economic development must first reach a certain level (in terms of
42
43

See for example Udry (1996).
See Duflo (2005) for an excellent survey of the literature on gender equality in development.

39

the accumulation of human capital) before men are induced to vote for female
empowerment. Empowerment then causes a further acceleration in the accumulation of human capital and thereby GDP growth.
As a first cut, it is illuminating to see how women’s rights are related to measures of development in cross-country data. Good measures of women’s rights
are hard to find. Most empirical analyses use data on economic outcomes (such
as female education and labor supply), whereas we are interested in legal constraints, which are harder to measure. However, several proxies exist, such as
women’s access to land and property, women’s right to vote, and abortion policy. Arguably, the incidence (and acceptability) of violence against women in a
society could also be interpreted as a measure of constraints imposed on women.
Table 1 displays large negative correlations between these various measures of
constraints imposed upon women and GDP per capita.44 In other words, women
have fewer rights in poor countries. Assuming that countries differ in their education technology, our theory implies that schooling and women’s rights should
be positively correlated while fertility and women’s rights should be negatively
correlated. This is exactly what the cross-country data show, as displayed in Table 1.
One policy implication of our theory is that gender equality might be more easily
achieved through, say, improving the public school system rather than trying to
impose women’s rights from the outside.45 More generally, public provision of
inputs that are complementary to education within the family raises the private
return to educating children, which shifts men’s preferences in favor of female
empowerment and may lead to the endogenous expansion of women’s rights.

44

Variables are normalized so that a higher value corresponds to fewer rights.
Development organizations such as the United Nations and the World Bank have explicitly
stated improving the status of women as one of their missions.
45

40

A Time Lines of the Legal Position of Women
This appendix presents time lines of the expansion of women’s rights in England and
the United States. The U.S. time line is based on Hecker (1971), Salmon (1986), and Khan
(1996), and the time line for England is based on Hecker (1971), Shanley (1986), and
Kertzer and Barbagli (2001).

A.1 United States
1785 Pennsylvania becomes the first state to pass a statute that allows both men and
women to file for divorce under extreme circumstances (desertion of at least four years,
bigamy, sexual incapacity before marriage, and cruelty).
1838 Kentucky gives school suffrage (the right to vote at school meetings) to widows
with children of school age.
1838 Iowa becomes the first state to allow sole custody of a child to its mother in the
event of a divorce.
1839 Mississippi becomes the first state to give married women (very limited) property
rights.
1844 Maine passes a Sole Trader Law which grants married women the ability to engage
in business without the need for their husbands’ consent. Maine also passes a Property
Law that grants married women separate control over property. Other states follow over
the course of the nineteenth century.
1848 New York passes the Married Women’s Property Act, which extends separate property
rights to all married women.
1857 Maine passes an Earnings Law which grants married women the rights to their own
earnings without the need for the husband’s consent. Other states follow over the course
of the nineteenth century.
1859 Oregon’s state constitution contains a provision to protect married women’s separate property.
1861 Kansas gives school suffrage to all women. Many states follow before the turn of
the century.
1869 Wyoming becomes the first state to give women the same voting rights as men.
Most states do not follow until the beginning of the twentieth century.
1880 New York grants school suffrage to women.
1886 By 1886, all but six states allow divorce on grounds of cruelty.
1895 By 1895, almost all states have passed some form of sole trader laws, property laws,
and earnings laws.
1920 The Nineteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution grants women the right to vote.

41

A.2 England
1839 The Custody of Infants Act grants mothers (under special circumstances) the possibility of applying for custody of their children under the age of seven in the event of
divorce.
1857 The Matrimonial Causes Act permits secular divorce in England, allowing both men
and women to file. While the law allows men to file on grounds of adultery, women can
initiate a divorce only if adultery is coupled with incest, bigamy, cruelty, or desertion.
The act also gives divorced women the status of feme sole.
1869 England grants municipal suffrage to single women and widows.
1870 Public elementary education is introduced in England and Wales. Women are given
the same active and passive voting rights as men for school board elections.
1870 The Married Women Property Act grants married women limited control over their
earnings and property.
1873 The second Custody of Infants Act allows mothers to petition for child custody of
children up to sixteen years of age.
1878 The Matrimonial Causes Act allows courts to absolve a wife from her obligation to
co-habit and to require her husband to pay a weekly sum to support her, if he has been
convicted of aggravated assault against her and she is considered to be in further danger.
1882 The Act to consolidate and amend the Acts relating to the Property of Married Women
gives women the ability to hold separate property and to contract with respect to their
separate estates.
1886 The Married Women Act allows maintenance orders to be issued against men who
neglect, willfully refuse to support, or desert their wives.
1907 England makes women eligible to be elected as mayors, aldermen, and county or
town councilors.
1918 The Representation of the People Act grants women the right to vote.

B Proofs for Propositions and Lemmas
Proof of Proposition 1: We would like to derive a condition under which VmE > VmP , or,
writing out equation (15):
E
E
u(cE
m , cf , n ) +

γm
1−



γm +γf
2

>

E
E
E E
E
u(cE
m , cf , n ) + u(cf , cm , n )

u(cPm , cPf , nP )

2
+

γm
1−

42

γm +γf
2



u(cPm , cPf , nP ) + u(cPf , cPm , nP )
2

.

P
E P
E
P
Plugging in the functional form for u(·) and the solutions for cE
m , cm , cf , cf , n , and n
yields:


(1 + σ) log

1+σ
2


+

γm
1−

γm +γf
2


(1 + σ) log

1+σ
2



> σ log(σ) +


or:
[2 − γf + γm ](1 + σ) log

1+σ
2

γm
1−

γm +γf
2

1+σ
log(σ)
2


> [(2 − γf )σ + γm ] log(σ).

(18)

Isolating the terms involving γm on the left-hand side gives:







1+σ
1+σ
− log(σ) > (2 − γf ) σ log(σ) − (1 + σ) log
.
γm (1 + σ) log
2
2
For σ = 1, both sides are equal to zero, so that men are indifferent between the two
regimes. For 0 < σ < 1, both sides are strictly positive. Moreover, the left-hand side is
strictly increasing in γm . Thus, if we define:
γ̄m =

(2 − γf ) σ log(σ) − (1 + σ) log 1+σ
2
(1 + σ) log 1+σ
−
log(σ)
2

,

we have that for all γm > γ̄m inequality (18) is satisfied, implying that men prefer the
empowerment regime E. Turning to the role of σ, note that both sides of (18) are strictly
increasing in σ. However, as σ approaches zero the left-hand side converges to −[2 −
γf + γm ] log (2), whereas the right-hand side approaches minus infinity. Therefore, there
exists a σ̄ such that (18) is satisfied for all σ satisfying 0 < σ < σ̄.
2
Proof of Lemma 1: We want to derive the equilibrium value functions for the case of
positive education under the patriarchy and empowerment regimes. The proof is by
guess and verify. We guess that the value functions take the form:
VmP (Hm , Hf , H̄) = aP1 + a2 log(Hm ) + a3 log(Hf ) + a4 log(H̄m ) + a5 log(H̄f ),
VfP (Hm , Hf , H̄) = bP1 + b2 log(Hm ) + b3 log(Hf ) + b4 log(H̄m ) + b5 log(H̄f ),
VmE (Hm , Hf , H̄) = aE
1 + a2 log(Hm ) + a3 log(Hf ) + a4 log(H̄m ) + a5 log(H̄f ),
VfE (Hm , Hf , H̄) = bE
1 + b2 log(Hm ) + b3 log(Hf ) + b4 log(H̄m ) + b5 log(H̄f ).
By plugging these parameterized value functions into the right-hand sides of (6) and
(7), we can derive explicit solutions for the individual choices, which are given in (16)
and (17) in the text. Then, plugging the functional forms for the value functions, the
optimal individual choices, and the laws of motion for human capital into both sides of
the functional equation (8) yields a system of equations that can be solved for the valuefunction coefficients. The solutions for the slope coefficients (which are identical in the

43

two political regimes) are:46
a2
a3
a4
a5
b2
b3
b4
b5

(1 + σ)[2(1 − α) − (1 − α)βγf + α(1 − β)γm ]
,
2 − (1 − β)γm − βγf


βγm
= (1 + σ) α +
,
2 − (1 − β)γm − βγf



(1 − β) γ2m
(1 + σ)[2 + (1 − 2β)(γf − γm )]
=
,
1 − γm /2 − γf /2
2 − (1 − β)γm − βγf



β γ2m
(1 + σ)[2 + (1 − 2β)(γf − γm )]
=
,
1 − γm /2 − γf /2
2 − (1 − β)γm − βγf


(1 − β)γf
= (1 + σ) (1 − α) +
,
2 − (1 − β)γm − βγf
(1 + σ)(2α + (1 − α)βγf − α(1 − β)γm )
=
,
2 − (1 − β)γm − βγf


γ
(1 − β) 2f
(1 + σ)[2 + (1 − 2β)(γf − γm )]
=
,
1 − γm /2 − γf /2
2 − (1 − β)γm − βγf


γ
β 2f
(1 + σ)[2 + (1 − 2β)(γf − γm )]
=
.
1 − γm /2 − γf /2
2 − (1 − β)γm − βγf
=

The level coefficients in the two political regimes j ∈ {P, E} can be expressed as:
aj1 =
bj1 =
where:
M1P
M2P

F1P
F2P

46

2 − γf
γm
(M j + M2j ) +
(F j + F2j ),
2 − (γm + γf ) 1
2 − (γf + γm ) 1
γf
2 − γm
(M1j + M2j ) +
(F j + F2j ),
2 − (γf + γm )
2 − (γm + γf ) 1

α 


δ − γ2m (a2 + b3 )θ
α(1 + σ)
,
= σ log(σ) + (1 + σ) log
+ δ log
α(1 + σ) + δ
φ(α(1 + σ) + δ)
γm
γm
θ log(a2 )[a2 + a4 + b2 + b4 ] +
θ log(b3 )[a3 + a5 + b3 + b5 ]
=
2
2

 
φ γ2m θ
γm
θ[a2 + a3 + a4 + a5 + b2 + b3 + b4 + b5 ] log B
,
+
2
δ − γ2m (a2 + b3 )θ

α 



δ − γ2m (a2 + b3 )θ
α(1 + σ)
A
,
= log(σ) + (1 + σ) log
+ δ log
1 + σ α(1 + σ) + δ
φ(α(1 + σ) + δ)
γf
γf
θ log(a2 )[a2 + a4 + b2 + b4 ] + θ log(b3 )[a3 + a5 + b3 + b5 ]
=
2
2

 
φ γ2m θ
γf
,
+ θ[a2 + a3 + a4 + a5 + b2 + b3 + b4 + b5 ] log B
2
δ − γ2m (a2 + b3 )θ


A
1+σ



Step-by-step derivations are available on request.

44

M1E


= (1 + σ) log

A
2



α(1 + σ)
α(1 + σ) + δ

α 

γ +γ

+ δ log

δ − m 4 f (a2 + b3 )θ
φ(α(1 + σ) + δ)


,

γm
γm
θ log(a2 )[a2 + a4 + b2 + b4 ] +
θ log(b3 )[a3 + a5 + b3 + b5 ]
2
2

γ +γ
Bφ m 4 f θ
γm
,
θ[a2 + a3 + a4 + a5 + b2 + b3 + b4 + b5 ] log
+
γ +γ
2
δ − m 4 f (a2 + b3 )θ

α 
 
γ +γ
δ − m 4 f (a2 + b3 )θ
α(1 + σ)
A
,
= (1 + σ) log
+ δ log
2 α(1 + σ) + δ
φ(α(1 + σ) + δ)
γf
γf
θ log(a2 )[a2 + a4 + b2 + b4 ] + θ log(b3 )[a3 + a5 + b3 + b5 ]
=
2
2

γ +γ
Bφ m 4 f θ
γf
.
+ θ[a2 + a3 + a4 + a5 + b2 + b3 + b4 + b5 ] log
γ +γ
2
δ − m f (a2 + b3 )θ

M2E =

F1E
F2E

4

2
Proof of Proposition 2: All parts of the proposition follow from comparing the closedform solutions for consumption, education, and fertility in both regimes (see (16) and
(17)) under the condition γf > γm . Aggregate consumption is:
 α(1 + σ)
α
1−α
Hf Hm
.
CP = CE = A
α(1 + σ) + δ
α(1+σ)
The fraction of time women spend on production is tPf = tE
f = α(1+σ)+δ . Since the remaining time is spent on child care, total child care time is independent of the regime.
That fertility is lower and education is higher under empowerment and that both of
these choices are independent of state variables follows directly from the closed-form
solutions given in (16) and (17). One implication of these findings is that the total time
women devote to educating children is higher under empowerment, even though they
have fewer children in this regime. Total female education time under patriarchy is
θγm (1+σ)
θγ(1+σ)
E
, compared to nE (eE
nP (ePm + ePf ) = 2−(1−β)γ
m + ef ) = 2−(1−β)γm −βγf under empowm −βγf
e

2α+(1−α)βγ −α(1−β)γ

m
f
f
= 2(1−α)−(1−α)βγ
in both
erment. The gender education gap is given by em
f +α(1−β)γm
regimes. Finally, the growth rate of aggregate consumption (and output and human capP
E
P
ital) is given by B θ (ejf )θβ (ejm )θ(1−β) . Since, as argued above, eE
f > ef and em > em , it
follows that the growth rate is higher under empowerment.
2

Proof of Proposition 3: Men will vote for empowerment if and only if their utility under
empowerment exceeds the utility under patriarchy:
VmE (Hm , Hf , H̄) > VmP (Hm , Hf , H̄).
We have already determined that VmE (Hm , Hf , H̄) and VmP (Hm , Hf , H̄) differ only in the
P
constant term, so that the inequality can be written as aE
1 > a1 . Writing out this condition

45

and simplifying gives:

1+σ
− [(2 − γf )σ + γm ] log(σ)
(2 − γf + γm )(1 + σ) log
2
  

γ
2(1 + σ)
2(1 + σ)
log
− (2 − γf + γm )δ
+ θγm
+ θγm
(1 − γ)
γm
(1 − γ)
 δ[2 − (1 − β)γ − βγ ] − γ (1 + σ)θ 
m
m
f
> 0. (19)
× log
δ[2 − (1 − β)γm − βγf ] − γ(1 + σ)θ


The first line of this expression reflects the preference for equality in future generations
that was already present in the no-education case (compare to inequality (18) in the proof
of Proposition 1 above). The remaining terms reflect the role of education. As one would
expect, setting θ = 0 reduces the expression to the no-education case. Define θ  as:
θ =

δ[2 − (1 − β)γm − βγf ]
.
γ(1 + σ)

(20)

Note that as θ approaches θ  from below, the denominator in the log term goes to zero
γ
and, hence, the log term goes to infinity. Further, the assumption γm > 3f assures that for
θ sufficiently close to θ  the term in square brackets is strictly positive, so that the overall
expression goes to plus infinity. Intuitively, if θ = θ  , parents can achieve any positive
utility level by choosing a sufficiently small number of children with a sufficiently high
level of education. Given that the left-hand side of (19) approaches plus infinity for θ
sufficiently close to θ  , there has to be a threshold θ̄ such that (19) is satisfied for all θ that
satisfy θ̄ < θ < θ  . Hence, for sufficiently high θ men will prefer empowerment over
patriarchy.
2
Proof of Proposition 4: After plugging γm = γf into (19), the condition for preferring
equal rights reduces to


1+σ
> [(2 − γf )σ + γm ] log(σ),
(2 − γf + γm )(1 + σ) log
2
which is independent of θ and in fact identical to the condition for the no-education
case. To show that the human capital externality is crucial for our results, we solve a
version of the model without this externality, which is equivalent to assuming that sons
and daughters marry each other. Since in this setup different dynasties do not interact,
average human capital is no longer a state variable. The male and female value functions
i ∈ {m, f } in the two regimes j ∈ {P, E} satisfy the following recursive relationship:

γi  j 

Vm (Hm , Hf ) + Vfj (Hm
, Hf ) .
Vij (Hm , Hf ) = ui (cm , cf , n) +
2
As before, choices are determined either by maximizing the male value function (patriarchy) or the average value function (empowerment). The value functions can be solved

46

explicitly, and the condition under which men prefer empowerment is:

 
γ
1+σ
2(1 + σ)
− [(2 − γf )σ + γm ] log(σ) + γm
θ log
(2 − γf + γm )(1 + σ) log
2
1−γ
γm



 2(1 + σ)
δ[1 − γ] − γm (1 + σ)θ
θ − δ(2 − γf + γm ) log
> 0. (21)
+ γm
1−γ
δ[1 − γ] − γ(1 + σ)θ


δ(1−γ)
. Analogously to the
The maximum θ for which the problem is well defined is γ(1+σ)
proof of Proposition 3, the last logarithmic term goes to infinity in the limit. However, the
expression multiplying the log term is negative for all θ less or equal to the limit. Since
all other terms are finite, it follows that for large enough θ the expression is negative.
Hence, men prefer the patriarchy regime for sufficiently large θ. Finally, the result that
the optimal regime is independent of α follows from condition (19), in which α does not
appear.
2

Proof of Proposition 5: Under dynamic voting, a vote for empowerment in a given period T shifts the consumption allocation between husbands and wives at time T in favor
of the wives, it lowers the fertility rate at time T , and it leads to an increase in all future
human capital levels by the factor:
eE
m,T

ePm,T

θT
=

eE
f,T

ePf,T

θT
=

γ[δ − γ2m (a2 + b3 )θT ]
.
γm [δ − γ2 (a2 + b3 )θT ]

Future decisions on the relative consumption allocation, fertility, and education are not
affected by the vote. By plugging the decisions under votes for empowerment and patriarchy, respectively, into the male utility function and taking the difference (where most
terms drop out), we find that men will vote for empowerment in period T if:

2(1 + σ) log

1+σ
2


− 2σ log(σ)


 
γ
(1 + σ)
(1 + σ)
log
−δ
+ 2 θT γm
+ 2θT γm
1−γ
γm
1−γ


δ[2 − (1 − β)γm − βγf ] − γm (1 + σ)θT
> 0. (22)
× log
δ[2 − (1 − β)γm − βγf ] − γ(1 + σ)θT

This condition is similar to inequality (19) that was derived in the proof of Proposition 3,
and the arguments of that proposition can also be applied here to show that there exists a
threshold θ̃ such that (22) is met for all θT that satisfy θ̃ < θT < θ  , where θ  is defined in
equation (20). Hence, for sufficiently high θT men will vote for empowerment. Moreover,
comparing condition (19) in Proposition 3 with condition (22) above, we find that in (22)
the constant term (i.e., the first line) as well as the factor multiplying the logarithmic
term in the last line are lower than in condition (19), which implies that the threshold θ̃
is higher than the threshold θ̄ derived in Proposition 3, i.e., θ̃ > θ̄.
2

47

References
Acemoglu, Daron and James A. Robinson. 2000. “Why Did the West Extend the Franchise? Democracy, Inequality and Growth in Historical Perspective.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 115 (4): 1167–99.
. 2006. Economic Origins of Dictatorship and Democracy. New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Aiyagari, S. Rao, Jeremy Greenwood, and Nezih Guner. 2000. “On the State of the
Union.” Journal of Political Economy 108 (2): 213–44.
Albanesi, Stefania and Claudia Olivetti. 2007.
Progress.” NBER Working Paper 13179.

“Gender Roles and Technological

Amador, Manuel. 2003. “A Political Economy Model of Sovereign Debt Repayment.”
Unpublished Manuscript, Stanford University.
Anderson, Kermyt G. 2006. “How Well Does Paternity Confidence Match Actual Paternity? Evidence from Worldwide Nonpaternity Rates.” Current Anthropology 47 (3):
513–20.
Attanasio, Orazio and Valerie Lechene. 2002. “Tests of Income Pooling in Household
Decisions.” Review of Economic Dynamics 5 (4): 720–48.
Barro, Robert J. and Gary S. Becker. 1989. “Fertility Choice in a Model of Economic
Growth.” Econometrica 57 (2): 481–501.
Becker, Gary S. and Robert J. Barro. 1988. “A Reformulation of the Economic Theory of
Fertility.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 103 (1): 1–25.
Behrman, Jere R., Andrew D. Foster, Mark R. Rosenzweig, and Prem Vashishtha. 1999.
“Women’s Schooling, Home Teaching, and Economic Growth.” Journal of Political
Economy 107 (4): 682–714.
Bertocchi, Graziella. 2007. “The Enfranchisement of Women and the Welfare State.”
IZA Discussion Paper 2922.
Boldrin, Michele and Larry E. Jones. 2002. “Mortality, Fertility, and Saving in a Malthusian Economy.” Review of Economic Dynamics 5 (4): 775–814.
British Parliamentary Papers. 1970. Married Women’s Property Bills and Nonconformist
Marriages. Volume 2, Marriage and Divorce. Shannon: Irish University Press.
Burda, Michael C., Daniel S. Hamermesh, and Philippe Weil. 2007. “Total Work, Gender
and Social Norms.” NBER Working Paper 13000.
Case, Anne and Angus Deaton. 1998. “Large Cash Transfers to the Elderly in South
Africa.” Economic Journal 108 (450): 1330–61.
Chesnais, Jean Claude. 1992. The Demographic Transition. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Chiappori, Pierre-André. 1988. “Rational Household Labor Supply.” Econometrica 56
(1): 63–89.

48

. 1992. “Collective Labor Supply and Welfare.” Journal of Political Economy 100
(3): 437–67.
Chused, Richard H. 1985. “Late Nineteenth Century Married Women’s Property Law:
Reception of the Early Married Women’s Property Acts by Courts and Legislatures.”
American Journal of Legal History 29 (1): 3–35.
Combs, Mary Beth. 2005. “A ‘Measure of Legal Independence:’ The 1870 Married
Women’s Property Act and the Portfolio Allocations of British Wives.” Journal of
Economic History 65 (4): 1028–57.
Cunha, Flavio, James J. Heckman, Lance Lochner, and Dimitriy V. Masterov. 2005. “Interpreting the Evidence on Life Cycle Skill Formation.” NBER Working Paper 11331.
Cunningham, Hugh. 1996. “Combating Child Labor: The British Experience.” In Child
Labor in Historical Perspective: Case Studies from Europe, Japan, and Colombia, 41–55.
UNICEF.
Degler, Carl N. 1980. At Odds: Women and the Family in America from the Revolution to the
Present. New York: Oxford University Press.
Diaz, Antonia. 2000. “On the Political Economy of Latin American Land Reforms.”
Review of Economic Dynamics 3 (3): 551–71.
Doepke, Matthias. 2004. “Accounting for Fertility Decline During the Transition to
Growth.” Journal of Economic Growth 9 (3): 347–83.
Doepke, Matthias and Fabrizio Zilibotti. 2005. “The Macroeconomics of Child Labor
Regulation.” American Economic Review 95 (5): 1492–524.
Duflo, Esther. 2005. “Gender Equality in Development.” BREAD Policy Paper 11.
Echevarria, Cristina and Antonio Merlo. 1999. “Gender Differences in Education in a
Dynamic Household Bargaining Model.” International Economic Review 40 (2): 265–
86.
Edlund, Lena C. and Nils-Petter Lagerlöf. 2004. “Implications of Marriage Institutions
for Redistribution and Growth.” Unpublished Manuscript, Columbia University.
Edlund, Lena and Rohini Pande. 2002. “Why Have Women Become Left-Wing? The
Political Gender Gap and the Decline in Marriage.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
117 (3): 917–61.
Ehmer, Joseph. 2002. “Marriage.” Chapter 9 of Family Life in the Long Nineteenth Century
(1789–1913), edited by David I. Kertzer and Marzio Barbagli, Volume 2 of The History
of the European Family. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Eswaran, Mukesh. 2002. “The Empowerment of Women, Fertility, and Child Mortality:
Towards a Theoretical Analysis.” Journal of Population Economics 15 (3): 433–54.
Federici, Nora, Karen Openheim Mason, and Solvi Sogner, eds. 1993. Women’s Position
and Demographic Change. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

49

Fernández, Raquel, Alessandra Fogli, and Claudia Olivetti. 2004. “Mothers and Sons:
Preference Formation and Female Labor Force Dynamics.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 119 (4): 1249–99.
Fernández, Raquel, Nezih Guner, and John Knowles. 2005. “Love and Money: A Theoretical and Empirical Analysis of Household Sorting and Inequality.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 120 (1): 273–344.
Fishlow, Albert. 1966. “Levels of Nineteenth-Century American Investment in Education.” Journal of Economic History 26 (4): 418–36.
Funk, Patricia and Christina Gathmann. 2006. “What Women Want: Suffrage, Gender
Gaps in Voter Preferences and Government Expenditures.” Unpublished Manuscript, Stanford University.
Galor, Oded and Omer Moav. 2006. “Das Human-Kapital: A Theory of the Demise of
the Class Structure.” Review of Economic Studies 73 (1): 85–117.
Galor, Oded and David N. Weil. 1996. “The Gender Gap, Fertility, and Growth.” American Economic Review 86 (3): 374–87.
. 2000. “Population, Technology, and Growth: From Malthusian Stagnation to
the Demographic Transition and Beyond.” American Economic Review 90 (4): 806–28.
Geddes, Rick and Dean Lueck. 2002. “The Gains from Self-Ownership and the Expansion of Women’s Rights.” American Economic Review 92 (4): 1079–92.
Goldin, Claudia. 2006. “Education.” Chapter Bc of Historical Statistics of the United States,
Earliest Times to the Present: Millennial Edition, edited by Susan B. Carter, Scott Sigmund Gartner, Michael R. Haines, Alan L. Olmstead, Richard Sutch, and Gavin
Wright. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Gould, Eric, Omer Moav, and Avi Simhon. 2007. “The Mystery of Monogamy.” Forthcoming, American Economic Review.
Greenwood, Jeremy and Ananth Seshadri. 2002. “The U.S. Demographic Transition.”
American Economic Review 92 (2): 153–159.
Guttormsson, Loftur. 2002. “Parent Child Relations.” Chapter 8 of Family Life in the Long
Nineteenth Century (1789–1913), edited by David I. Kertzer and Marzio Barbagli,
Volume 2 of The History of the European Family. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Haines, Michael R. 1994. “The Population of the United States, 1790-1920.” NBER
Historical Working Paper 56.
Hansen, Gary D. and Edward C. Prescott. 2002. “Malthus to Solow.” American Economic
Review 92 (4): 1205–17.
Hassler, John, Jose V. Rodriguez Mora, Kjetil Storesletten, and Fabrizio Zilibotti. 2003.
“The Survival of the Welfare State.” American Economic Review 93 (1): 87–112.
Hecker, Eugene A. 1971. A Short History of Women’s Rights. Westport: Greenwood Press.
Holcombe, Lee. 1983. Wives and Property: Reform of the Married Women’s Property Law in
Nineteenth Century England. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.

50

Iyigun, Murat and Randall P. Walsh. 2007a. “Building the Family Nest: Premarital Investments, Marriage Markets, and Spousal Allocations.” Review of Economic Studies
74 (2): 507–35.
. 2007b. “Endogenous Gender Power, Household Labor Supply, and the
Quantity-Quality Tradeoff.” Journal of Development Economics 82 (1): 138–55.
Jack, William and Roger Lagunoff. 2006. “Dynamic Enfranchisement.” Journal of Public
Economics 90 (4–5): 551–72.
Jones, Ethel B. 1991. “The Economics of Women Suffrage.” Journal of Legal Studies 20
(2): 423–37.
Jones, Larry E. and Alice Schoonbroodt. 2007. “Complements versus Substitutes and
Trends in Fertility Choice in Dynastic Models.” NBER Working Paper 13680.
Kaestle, Carl F. and Maris A. Vinovskis. 1980. Education and Social Change in NineteenthCentury Massachusetts. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kertzer, David and Marzio Barbagli. 2001. Family Life in the Long Nineteenth Century
1789-1913. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Khan, B. Zorina. 1996. “Married Women’s Property Laws and Female Commercial Activity: Evidence from United States Patent Records, 1790-1895.” Journal of Economic
History 56 (2): 356–88.
Knowles, John. 2007. “Why Are Married Men Working So Much? The Macroeconomics
of Bargaining between Spouses.” IZA Discussion Paper 2909.
Krusell, Per and José-Vı́ctor Rı́os-Rull. 1999. “On the Size of U.S. Government: Political Economy in the Neoclassical Growth Model.” American Economic Review 89 (5):
1156–81.
Laibson, David. 1997. “Golden Eggs and Hyperbolic Discounting.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 112 (2): 443–77.
Laitner, John. 1991. “Modeling Marital Connections among Family Lines.” Journal of
Political Economy 99 (6): 1123–41.
Lee, Ronald D. and Roger S. Schofield. 1981. “British Population in the Eighteenth
Century.” In The Economic History of Britain since 1700, edited by Richard Floud and
Donald McCloskey. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Leibowitz, Arleen. 1974. “Home Investments in Children.” Journal of Political Economy
82 (2): S111–S131.
Lizzeri, Alessandro and Nicola Persico. 2004. “Why Did the Elites Extend the Suffrage?
Democracy and the Scope of Government, with an Application to Britain’s ‘Age of
Reform’.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 119 (2): 705–63.
Lott, John R., Jr. and Lawrence W. Kenny. 1999. “Did Women’s Suffrage Change the
Size and Scope of Government?” Journal of Political Economy 107 (6): 1163–98.

51

Lundberg, Shelly J., Robert A. Pollak, and Terence J. Wales. 1997. “Do Husbands and
Wives Pool Their Resources? Evidence from the United Kingdom Child Benefit.”
Journal of Human Resources 32 (3): 463–80.
Mason, Mary Ann. 1994. From Father’s Property to Children’s Rights: The History of Child
Custody in the United States. New York: Columbia University Press.
Maynes, Mary Jo. 2002. “Class Cultures and Images of Proper Family Life.” Chapter 6
of Family Life in the Long Nineteenth Century (1789–1913), edited by David I. Kertzer
and Marzio Barbagli, Volume 2 of The History of the European Family. New Haven:
Yale University Press.
Miller, Grant. 2008. “Women’s Suffrage, Political Responsiveness, and Child Survival
in American History.” Forthcoming, Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Nelson, Claudia. 2007. Family Ties in Victorian England. Westport: Praeger.
Nolte, Sharon H. 1986. “Women’s Rights and Society’s Needs: Japan’s 1931 Suffrage
Bill.” Comparative Studies in Society and History 28 (4): 690–714.
Norton, Caroline. 1855. A Letter to the Queen on Lord Chancellor Cranworth’s Marriage and
Divorce Bill. London: Longman, Brown, Green and Longmans.
Oswald, Andrew J. and Nattavudh Powdthavee. 2006. “Daughters and Left-Wing
Voting.” Unpublished Manuscript, University of Warwick.
Peters, Michael and Aloysius Siow. 2002. “Competing Premarital Investments.” Journal
of Political Economy 110 (3): 592–608.
Phelps, Edmund S. and Robert A. Pollak. 1968. “On Second-Best National Saving and
Game-Equilibrium Growth.” Review of Economic Studies 35 (2): 185–99.
Pitt, Mark M. and Shahidur R. Khandker. 1998. “The Impact of Group-Based Credit
Programs on Poor Households in Bangladesh: Does the Gender of Participants Matter?” Journal of Political Economy 106 (5): 958–96.
Pollak, Robert A. and Shelly J. Lundberg. 1993. “Separate Spheres Bargaining and the
Marriage Market.” Journal of Political Economy 10 (6): 988–1010.
. 2008. “Family Decision-Making.” In The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics,
edited by Stephen N. Durlauf and Lawrence E. Blume, 2nd Edition. London: Palgrave Macmillan.
Ross, Susan M. 2006. American Families Past and Present: Social Perspectives on Transformations. New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press.
Salmon, Marylynn. 1986. Women and the Law of Property in Early America. Chapel Hill:
The University of North Carolina Press.
Sear, Rebecca, Ruth Mace, and Ian A. McGregor. 2000. “Maternal Grandmothers Improve Nutritional Status and Survival of Children in Rural Gambia.” Proceedings of
the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 267 (1453): 1641–47.
Shanley, Mary Lyndon. 1986. “Suffrage, Protective Labor Legislation, and Married
Women’s Property Laws in England.” Signs 12 (1): 62–77.

52

Southard, Barbara. 1993. “Colonial Politics and Women’s Rights: Woman Suffrage
Campaigns in Bengal, British India in the 1920s.” Modern Asian Studies 27 (2): 397–
439.
Stanton, Elizabeth C. 1848. “The Seneca Falls Declaration of Sentiments and Resolutions.” In Documents of American History, Volume 1, 1988, edited by Henry Steele
Commager and Milton Cantor, Tenth. New York: Prentice Hall.
Steinbach, Susie. 2004. Women in England, 1760–1914: A Social History. London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson.
Stone, Lawrence. 1977. The Family, Sex and Marriage in England 1500-1800. New York:
Harper & Row.
. 1993. Broken Lives: Separation and Divorce in England 1660–1857. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Tertilt, Michèle. 2005. “Polygyny, Fertility, and Savings.” Journal of Political Economy 113
(6): 1341–71.
Turner, Chad, Robert Tamura, Sean E. Mulholland, and Scott Baier. 2007. “Education
and Income of the States of the United States: 1840–2000.” Journal of Economic Growth
12 (2): 101–58.
Udry, Christopher. 1996. “Gender, Agricultural Production, and the Theory of the
Household.” Journal of Political Economy 104 (5): 1010–46.
Voland, Eckart and Jan Beise. 2002. “Opposite Effects of Maternal and Paternal Grandmothers on Infant Survival in Historical Krummhörn.” Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology 52 (6): 435–43.
Washington, Ebonya. 2008. “Female Socialization: How Daughters Affect Their Legislator Fathers’ Voting on Women’s Issues.” Forthcoming, American Economic Review.
Wroath, John. 1998. Until They are Seven: The Origin of Women’s Legal Rights. Winchester:
Waterside Press.
Yalom, Marilyn. 2001. A History of the Wife. New York: HarperCollins Publishers.

53

