NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CURRENT ACCOUNT PATTERNS AND NATIONAL REAL ESTATE MARKETS
Joshua Aizenman
Yothin Jinjarak
Working Paper 13921
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13921

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2008

Financial support from the College of Humanities, Arts, and Social Sciences at NTU is gratefully acknowledged.
We thank Jess Moyer (Investment Property Databank), Ong Qiyan, Francis Ng, and Jiang Zhimin
for their helps with real estate data. We would like to thank Marty Feldstein for very useful comments.
Any errors are ours. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Joshua Aizenman and Yothin Jinjarak. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Current Account Patterns and National Real Estate Markets
Joshua Aizenman and Yothin Jinjarak
NBER Working Paper No. 13921
April 2008, Revised October 2008
JEL No. F15,F21,F32,R21,R31
ABSTRACT
This paper studies the association between the current account and real estate valuation across countries,
subject to data availability [43 countries, of which 25 are OECD], during 1990 - 2005. We find robust
and strong positive association between current account deficits and the appreciation of the real estate
prices/(GDP deflator). Controlling for lagged GDP/capita growth, inflation, financial depth, institution,
urban population growth and the real interest rate; a one standard deviation increase of the lagged
current account deficits is associated with a real appreciation of the real estate prices by 10%. This
real appreciation is magnified by financial depth, and mitigated by the quality of institutions. Intriguingly,
the economic importance of current account variations in accounting for the real estate valuation exceeds
that of the other variables, including the real interest rate and inflation. Among the OECD countries,
we find evidence of a decline overtime in the cross country variation of the real estate/(GDP deflator),
consistent with the growing globalization of national real estate markets. Weaker patterns apply to
the non-OECD countries in the aftermath of the East Asian crisis.

Joshua Aizenman
Department of Economics; E2
1156 High St.
University of California, Santa Cruz
Santa Cruz, CA 95064
and NBER
jaizen@ucsc.edu
Yothin Jinjarak
NTU
Division of Economics
S3-B2A-06 Nanyang Avenue
Singapore 637698
yjinjarak@ntu.edu.sg

1.

Introduction and overview
The financial liberalization wave in emerging markets during the 1990s has frequently

led to boom-bust cycles, when the initial boom had been often followed by a financial crisis.
Significant literature has focused on the dynamics of financial liberalization in emerging
markets, accounting for some of these boom/bust dynamics as a reflection of the
“Overborrowing syndrome” [McKinnon and Pill (1996)]. Accordingly, financial liberalization
has led to large inflows of capital, bankrolling growing current account deficits, investment and
consumption booms. Frequently, these booms were manifested in sizable real estate and real
exchange rate appreciations, and in the buildup of balance sheet vulnerabilities. These
vulnerabilities had been magnified in countries using a fixed exchange rate, where occasionally
incipient capital flights and sudden stops led to financial crises, abrupt real deprecation, and to a
bust in the real estate market and to V type recessions. Observers frequently noted that the real
estate market played a key role in the propagation of the boom and bust cycle. A frequent
concern has been that capital inflows tend to magnify the welfare costs of preexisting distortions
(like moral hazard), as they may increase the size of the distorted activities, deepening the bust at
the end of the cycle.1
Most of the above literature dealt with East Asia and Latin America, implicitly presuming
that the US and Europe are less exposed to the vulnerabilities that come with such cycles. The
ability of OECD countries to borrow in their currency, the greater reliance on flexible exchange
rate regimes, and the presumption of better institutions suggests that the potential volatility
induced by real estate boom/bust cycles is indeed larger in developing countries. Yet, there is
little evidence regarding the degree to which countries share similar qualitative links between
current account patterns and national real estate markets. The purpose of our paper is to provide
evidence on the robustness of the current account/real estate channel across all countries, subject
to data availability. Our main finding is that, indeed, this channel is potent across all countries,
subject to interactions with other domestic variables.
1

See Kiyotaki and Moore (1997) and Aghion et al. (2004) for models of credit cycles in the closed and
open economy, respectively. For further discussion of the association between capital inflows, asset
valuation and financial fragility, see Calvo, Leiderman and Reinhart (1996), Krugman (1998), Edison,
Luangaram and Miller (1998), Quigley (2001), and Kim and Lee (2002). See Aizenman (2004) for an
overview of the policy challenges facing financial opening, and the magnification of domestic distortions
associated with capital inflows. See Debelle and Galati (2007), Edwards (2004), Chinn and Ito (2005),
Freund (2005) and Faruqee and Lee (2008) for overviews of current account patterns in recent decades.

1

We don’t pertain to deal with causality, as we don’t model and control for the factors that
may induce capital flows. Instead, we take the view that current real estate valuation has a
sizable dependence on lagged macroeconomic variables. This is consistent with the notion that
adjustment to changing macro conditions is more protracted in real estate markets than in stock
markets [see Glaeser and Gyourko (2007) and Case and Shiller (1989)].2 We provide evidence
consistent with the view that the price adjustment of equities (assets traded in well organized
liquid markets, subject to low trading costs) is faster than that of real estate (less liquid assets,
subject to high trading costs). We also study regressions that account for the real appreciation of
the housing stock, controlling for lagged variables, including GDP per capita, real interest rate,
inflation, and the current account. We find that lagged current account patterns are important in
accounting for the real appreciation of the real estate market. In addition, the current account
changes interacted with other macro variables are important in accounting for future real
valuation of housing. Specifically, a one standard deviation increase of the lagged current
account deficits [by 4% in our sample] is associated with real appreciation of real estate prices by
about 10%. This real appreciation is magnified by financial depth [about 2%], and mitigated by
the quality of institutions [about 3%]. Intriguingly, the economic importance of current account
variations in accounting for the real appreciation of real estate prices exceeds that of the other
variables, including the real interest rate -- a one standard deviation drop of the lagged real
interest rate [by 2.5% in our sample] is associated with real appreciation of real estate prices by
about 7%. Among the OECD we find evidence of decline overtime in the cross country
variation of the relative real estate prices, consistent with the deeper globalization of national real
estate market. Weaker patterns apply to the non-OECD countries in the aftermath of the East
Asian crisis. Finally, we subject our analysis to various robustness checks.
Sections 2 and 3 review the methodology and the data, respectively; the estimation and
results are summarized in section 4. Section 5 closes the paper with concluding remarks.

2

Adjustments in the real estate markets are subject to significant transaction costs on behalf of
consumers, and time consuming installation costs on behalf of producers. These features imply that
demand-side factors play important and persistent roles in explaining protracted adjustment in the real
estate market. See Brock (1988) for an open economy analysis of these issues. For empirical studies of

2

2.

Methodology
The possibility that financial flows are a contributing factor explaining real estate

dynamics have been discussed recently by Reinhart and Rogoff (2008):
“… a large chunk of money has effectively been recycled to a developing
economy that exists within the United States’ own borders. Over a trillion dollars
was channeled into the sub-prime mortgage market, which is comprised of the
poorest and least credit worth borrowers within the United States. .. we note that
although this paper has concentrated on the United States, many of the same
parallels hold for other countries that began experiencing housing price duress
during the 2007, including Spain, the United Kingdom and Ireland.”
The purpose of our paper is to investigate empirically, subject to data limitations, the
merits of the linkages between capital inflows and real estate valuation in all countries. Our
empirical analysis is inspired by models that focused on credit market imperfections, including
Kiyotaki and Moore (1999) in a closed economy, and Aghion et al. (2004) in the open economy.
Specifically, agency and moral hazard considerations imply that agents can borrow today up to a
fraction μ of their wealth, WB . This fraction may depend negatively on the real interest rate, r.
Assuming lags in processing mortgages and closing transactions in the housing market, housing
prices today PH would reflect the lagged borrowing capacity μWB ,−1 , and the lagged foreign
*,d

demand for domestic houses, H −1 . The supply of housing, H s , impacts negatively the
equilibrium housing prices. In these circumstances, the reduced form of real estate valuation is
postulated as
+

+

+

−

PH = PH [WB ,−1 , μ (r ), H −*,1d ; H s ]; μ ' ≤ 0.
Capital inflows may impact the real estate valuation via several channels: it may increase directly
the demand [ H *,d ], it may increase domestic wealth by bidding up the relative prices of other
domestic assets, and may reduce domestic interest rates. The above specification reflects the
presumption that, due to a multitude of reasons, real estate price adjustment is protracted.3
the determinants of the real estate prices see Englund and Ioannides (1997), Case, Goetzmann and Geert
(2000), Case, Quigley, and Shiller (2005), da Mata (2007), and Shiller (2007).
3
Housing transactions occur through time consuming bilateral negotiations associated with heterogonous
assets; the liquidity of the housing market is constrained because of the existence of high transaction costs
and agency considerations; borrowers rely heavily on external finance; real estate is widely used as
collateral; and the supply of houses is adjusting slowly to market conditions. All these factors suggest

3

Consequently, our empirical specification aims at explaining the real estate relative price by
lagged variables including income growth, population, inflation, financial depth, the real interest
rate, and capital inflows.
The above methodology presumes that the short/intermediate run dynamics of real estate
prices differs from that of stocks. This may reflect differential adjustment and financing costs,
the greater heterogeneity of real estate, and the different market structure underlying these two
asset markets. In the next sections we provide evidence consistent with the above presumptions
– we find that real estate relative prices are more persistent and less volatile than equity relative
prices, and more correlated with the lagged current account. We also apply univariate and
multivariate regression analysis; and find a much weaker association between lagged current
accounts and equities than between lagged current accounts and real estate valuations.
While our focus is on the impact of past current accounts on the present real estate
relative prices, the life cycle model of consumption implies that real estate appreciation may be
associated with higher wealth, triggering higher consumption, thereby increasing the current
account deficit. Hence, there may be a two-way causality between housing wealth and the
current account. We examine the possibility of such a two-way feedback and the importance of
the “housing wealth” channel using three different tests. We find that the case for “reverse
causality,” from real estate prices to current account deficits, is not supported in our 43 countries,
1990-2005 sample. We also apply the simultaneous-equations and instrumental-variables
estimation. Based on the 3SLS, the effect of current account deficits on the real estate
appreciation is positive and significant, but not the other way around. Finally, we use the
Granger Causality tests on the quarterly data of current account deficits and various real estate
indices in the US and the UK. Using this relatively long (30 years) and high frequency data, we
find that the causality can run in both directions, varying across locations and types of national
real estate markets. Our inference from these tests is mixed – there may be a two way feedback.
Yet, one may need longer and more frequent data to validate it, something that is not available at
present for a large panel of countries.

that the adjustment of real estate valuations to shocks is much more time consuming than that of equity
valuations.

4

3.

Data Description

We obtained price indices of national real estate markets from the Datastream and the
Global Property Guide. The data appendix provides a description and the primary sources of
these indices. We gathered the real estate data from 1978 to 2008 for the countries, subject to
data availability. Using the national real estate indices is subject to important limitations:
‘national indices’ cover diverse and potentially different sectors of real estate markets for
different countries; some residential, others industrial, office or retail.4 To get a broader
perspective, we collect indices tracking real estate returns in several countries where the markets
are considered investable by international investors. These ‘investable indices’ are compiled by
companies that invest in real estate markets internationally, so the indices reflect the investable
portion of the national real estate markets and offer detailed information at the sectoral level, in a
consistent manner across countries. However, the coverage of these investable indices is limited,
and they are subject to sample selection: the lack of data in any country is a result of the lack of
interest and investment opportunities in the real estate markets there. For country-level data at
an annual frequency, the investable indices cover 12 countries from 1998 to 2007. For city-level
data at a quarterly frequency, the investable indices cover 6 cities from 1998:01 to 2007:04.
Because of the short span and limited country coverage of the investable indices, our estimation
focuses on the annual national indices. In addition, the UK and the US have quarterly indices
spanning back to the 1980s, of which we also collect, including the investable indices for the
UK, and the NCREIF indices and the Case&Shiller indices for the US.
The data on the current account deficits and relevant macroeconomic variables are taken
from the World Development Indicators (WDI) and the International Financial Statistics (IFS).
Following the literature, we control the annual growth of population in the urban areas (Urban
Population Growth), the annual growth of real GDP per capita (Capita GDP Growth), GDP
deflator inflation (Inflation), domestic credit provided by the banking sector as a percentage of
GDP (Financial Depth), and the domestic real interest rate. We use the real interest rate from
WDI, which is constructed from bank’s one year lending interest rate, adjusted for inflation by
the GDP deflator. While the mortgage rates will allow testing both the prime and sub-prime real
4

Another problem with the national indices is their accuracy. For example, consider the March 2008
figure in China for Shenzhen: the National Development and Reform Commission (NDRC) reported that
real estate prices dropped by 4.9%, but the Shenzhen Bureau of Land and Housing Management reported

5

estate loans, to our knowledge a panel data on the mortgage rates at that level of disaggregation
is not publicly available across the OECD and Non-OECD countries. We use International
Country Risk Guide (ICRG) scores on law & order (the higher the better) as a proxy for quality
of institutions. Though the loan-to-value ratio is available only as a cross-section variable, we
include it as potentially an important financial factor explaining real estate valuations.5 After
combining the national real estate series with the current account deficits and macroeconomic
variables, our sample covers the period of 1990 to 2005 for 43 countries, of which 25 are OECD
countries. We deflate the real estate indices in nominal terms with the country GDP deflator, and
call the resultant series “appreciation of real estate prices” or “real estate/(GDP deflator)
appreciation.” The GDP deflator is chosen over the consumer price index to maximize the
sample size.6
Table 1 provides the number of observations, sample averages, standard deviations, and
the Mackinnon approximate p-value of the Dickey-Fuller test under the null hypothesis of a unit
root. In testing the unit root, we note that the real estate prices/(GDP Deflator) appreciation
series span from 1990-2005, while the Current Account Deficits/GDP series go back to 1980 for
most of the countries in the sample. Non-OECD countries also have many missing observations
for both the real estate and current account series, particularly the Eastern European countries.
In our sample, the average number of observations (years available) for Real Estate /(GDP
deflator) appreciation is 12 for the whole sample, 10 for the Non-OECD countries, and 14 for the
OECD countries. We can see from Table 1 that the average appreciation of real estate prices in
some countries is extreme: for the 7-12 year period, the appreciation exceeds 14 % in Estonia
and Lithuania whereas the depreciation exceeds 20 % in Bulgaria and Russia. During 19902005, the average Real Estate /(GDP deflator) appreciation is .64 % per year for the whole
sample, -1.35 % per year for the Non-OECD, and 2.08 % per year for the OECD countries. The
a drop of 16.5% (Economist, 2008).
5
Warnock and Warnock (2007) find that countries with stronger legal rights for borrowers and lenders,
deeper credit information systems, and a more stable macroeconomic environment have a deeper housing
finance system. There are several important financial variables which we lack in the cross-country data,
including loan-to-value ratios, credit restrictions, and securitization of housing loans (see also BIS, 2006).
Due to limited data availability, these figures also miss the recent market turbulences; the credit shock
hitting the financial markets in 2007 has generated a decline in securitization of mortgages, which sharply
reduces the demand for housing (Deutsche Bank, 2008).
6
This is due to missing data in CPI series for a number of developing countries at the beginning of the
sample period. Another side benefit of using the GDP deflator is that it is more consistent in terms of the

6

real estate markets in Non-OECD tend to be more volatile: the average standard deviation of the
real estate appreciation deflated by GDP deflator is 17.57, compared to 5.90 for the OECD
countries. Using the Dickey-Fuller test for unit root with a trend term, most of the Real Estate
/(GDP deflator) appreciation series are found to be non-stationary: the Mackinnon approximate
p-value of 35 countries is larger than .005. As for the Current Account Deficits/GDP, some of
the outlier observations are countries running large current account surpluses: for example
Singapore and Switzerland run an average 10% surplus over a 25-year period. The average
Current Account Deficits/GDP is .25 for the whole sample, .66 for the Non-OECD, and -.04 for
the OECD countries. Similar to the real estate series, the current account deficits to GDP of the
Non-OECD tend to be more volatile: the average standard deviation of the Current Account
Deficits/GDP is 4.56, compared to 2.85 of the OECD countries. Using the Dickey-Fuller test for
unit root with a trend term, we also find that most of the current account series are nonstationary: the Mackinnon approximate p-value of 41 countries is larger than .005.
To examine further in details the stationarity of the real estate and the current account
series, Table 2 reports a summary of unit root tests, one on the individual series for each country,
and another across series in the panels. In the top panel, we can see that under the null
hypothesis of a unit root the rejection rates of these tests suggest that the stationarity properties
of these series are inconclusive.7 The augmented Dickey-Fuller test and the Phillips-Perron test
indicate that more than sixty percent of the Real Estate/(GDP deflator) Appreciation series and
around ninety percent of the Current Account Deficits/GDP series are non-stationary. On the
other hand, the Kwiatkowski-Phillips-Schmidt-Shin (1992) test indicates that most of the two
series are stationary.8 These mixed results apply to both the OECD and Non-OECD countries,
reflecting the low-power of the unit-root tests on the short time series in the sample. The bottom
panel of Table 2 reports the results from applying the panel unit root tests. Because the sample
must be a balanced panel in order to perform the existing panel test procedures, there are 12
years (1993-2004) and 25 countries that qualify.9 The test statistics correspond to specifications
changing basket and expenditure patterns across countries.
7
The test statistics correspond to specifications with time trend. Except for the Kwiatkowski-PhillipsSchmidt-Shin test, the null hypothesis is non-stationarity. The rejection of stationarity under the
Kwiatkowski-Phillips-Schmidt-Shin test is reported as a non rejection of the unit root.
8
Faruqee and Lee (2008) also find that the Kwiatkowski-Phillips-Schmidt-Shin test tends to not rejecting
the null of unit root (88 percent out of 94 countries from 1960-2003).
9
The countries available for the panel unit-root tests include 19 OECD and 6 Non-OECD: Australia,

7

with time trend, under the null hypothesis of non-stationarity for the Levin-Lin-Chu (2002) test
and the Im-Pesaran-Shin (2003) test; for the Nyblom-Harvey (2000) test, the test statistic can be
considered as the generalization of the Kwiatkowski-Phillips-Schmidt-Shin test, and a failure to
reject the null hypothesis of zero common stochastic trends is an indication that the series do not
form a cointegrated combination. Applying to the panel of Real Estate/(GDP deflator)
appreciation, the Levin-Lin-Chu and the Im-Pesaran-Shin tests reject the null of non-stationarity.
The Nyblom-Harvey test rejects the null of zero common trends for the panels of OECD and
Non-OECD, but not for the whole sample. For the Current Account Deficits/GDP panels, the
results are inconclusive: the Levin-Lin-Chu test rejects the null of unit root, but the Im-PesaranShin test cannot reject. The mixed results reflect the sample size and also a number of
limitations with the existing tests of unit root in the panels.10
Figure 1 provides the unconditional sample distribution of the average current account
deficits/GDP on the left panel, and the average real estate/(GDP deflator) appreciation on the
right panel, between the early 1990s and the early 2000s in the top row. The bottom row
disaggregates the sample to the OECD and the non-OECD countries. Note that the distribution
of the current account is more dispersed for the non-OECD countries. The mean of the CA
Deficits/GDP is 3 % and the standard deviation is 4.0 %. For the real estate prices, the
distribution for the non-OECD countries is more skewed to the left than for the OECD countries.
The figure also suggests a general appreciation trend for the recent period; based on the kernel
density estimates, the cross-sectional distribution of the real estate appreciation has shifted to the
right during the 2000-05 period, in comparison to the 1991-95 period.11 There is an increase in
the dispersion, with the mass of the distribution being less concentrated around the mean of zero
(for 1991-95, the average appreciation = 1.2 percent per year) and shifting out toward the higher
positive tails (for 2001-05, the average appreciation = 22.5 percent per year). The peakedness,
measured by the kurtosis, of the sample distribution suggests that more of the variance is due to
infrequent extreme deviations in the real estate markets in the early 1990s, as opposed to
frequent and modest size deviations in the early 2000s.
Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Indonesia, Ireland, Italy,
Japan, Korea, Malta, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Singapore, Sweden, Switzerland, Taiwan,
Thailand, United Kingdom, and United States.
10
See for example the discussion in Enders (2004), pp.156-230.
11
The density estimates are based on the Epanechnikov Kernel function.

8

Figure 2 shows the patterns of the current account deficits/GDP, real exchange rates, real
estate /(GDP deflator) appreciation, and for the stock markets/(GDP deflator) appreciation during
1990 through 2005, for 18 non-OECD countries, 24 OECD countries ex. US, and for the US.
The bust of the global real estate markets in the early 1990s, and the Asian financial crisis of
1997 are clearly evident in Figure 2. We can also see a positive association between the real
estate/(GDP deflator) appreciation and the current account deficits/GDP during that period. The
estimates of the AR(1) process for these series, reported below Figure 2, show that the current
account deficits/GDP is the most persistent variable overtime, and the real estate/(GDP deflator)
appreciation is more persistent than the stock markets/(GDP deflator) appreciation, but less than
the real exchange rates appreciation. Figure 3 depicts similar patterns using the real appreciation
of investable real estate and investable stock markets (using MSCI indices) at the annual
frequency. At the country-level we find that the real estate/(GDP deflator) appreciation is more
persistent over time than the stock markets/(GDP deflator) appreciation, as is confirmed by the
estimates of AR(1), reported below Figure 3. Figure 4 presents the patterns of investable indices
at the sectoral level: residential, office, retail, and industrial. It confirms the strong comovements of these indices. Table 3 provides the correlations between the different types of real
estate indices, both at the country level (8 countries) and city level (3 cities). We include the city
level series as they take into account differences across localities within a country. With the
exception of two observations out of 24, the correlations between residential housing valuation
and other segments of the national real estate markets (office, retail and industrial) are positive
and large.12
To get a sense of whether the cross-country dispersion in the appreciation of real estate
prices corresponds to the dispersion in the current account deficits, real exchange rates, and stock
markets appreciation, Figure 5 reports the standard deviation of these series for the OECD and
the Non-OECD groups during the sample period. The dispersion rates of these series among the
Non-OECD countries tend to be higher than that among the OECD countries. A tighter
connection between the real estate and the stock markets characterizes the OECD countries: the
12

Yet, there is a significant heterogeneity. At the country level, the correlations between the residential
and the office real estate markets are positive in 7 out of the 8 countries, six of which are above 0.5. The
correlations between the residential and the retail real estate markets are positive for 7 out of the 8
countries, 4 of which are above 0.5. The correlations between the residential and the industrial real estate
markets are positive for all 8 countries, 4 of which are above 0.5.

9

correlation between the standard deviation in the real estate markets and that in the stock market
is .77 for the OECD countries, but only .06 for the Non-OECD countries. In the real estate
markets, the standard deviation of Real Estate/(GDP deflator) appreciation declines on the order
of .02 % per year (p-value .05) among all countries, .26 % (p-value .06) among the OECD
countries, and .0004 % (p-value .99) among the Non-OECD countries.13 In the stock markets,
the standard deviation of Stock Price /(GDP deflator) falls .01 % per year (p-value .21) among all
countries, .02 % (p-value .01) among the OECD countries, and .002 % (p-value .89) among the
Non-OECD countries. This global convergence in both the real estate markets and the stock
markets is quite compelling. Figure 6 shows the correlations between the Current Account
Deficits/GDP with the real exchange rates, the Real Estate /(GDP deflator) appreciation, and the
Stock Markets/(GDP deflator) appreciation. We also plot as references of international interest
rates the 3-month nominal interest rates using the U.S. Treasury Bill, the Japan Financing Bill,
and the London Interbank Offer Rate (LIBOR, pound sterling). During the sample period, the
correlations between the appreciation of real estate prices and the current account deficits
increase by .041 % per year (p-value 0.0) among all countries, .029 % (p-value .006) among the
OECD countries, and .036 % (p-value .283) among the Non-OECD countries.14 Regressing the
correlations between current account deficits and real estate appreciation on the LIBOR, the
estimated coefficient is -.061 (p-value .000) for all countries, -.051 (p-value .000) for the OECD
countries, and -.048 (p-value .449) for the Non-OECD countries.
The above results confirm our prior that real estate prices exhibit greater persistency and
lower volatility than stock prices (see our earlier discussion in Section 2).15 We turn now to
analyze the degree to which real estate and stock prices are correlated with lagged current
account/GDP.16 Tables 4 and 5 provide the cross-correlograms of each series with the current
13

Let σ denote the standard deviation and t the time trend, the approximate convergence rate (b1) is
derived from running the OLS regression of ln (σ ) = a1 + b1t + ω1 ; where ω1 is an error term.

14

Let ρ denote the correlation and t the time trend, the approximate convergence rate (b2) is derived from
running the OLS regression of ρ = a2 + b2t + ω2 ; where ω2 is an error term.
15
While the stock market wealth may not exceed the real estate (and housing) wealth as a share of
national wealth in most countries, stock market wealth is more liquid, traded with relatively low
transaction costs, hence more readily convertible to consumption than real estate wealth. This applies
especially in countries in which home equity loans are not widely available; as is the case for most
countries, except the US.
16
The much lower transaction costs of trading equities relative to real estate suggests that pricing of
equities is more forward looking than that of real estate, hence one expects a higher correlation between

10

account deficits/GDP using the national and investable real estate indices, respectively. Using
the national real estate indices, Table 4 reveals a significant association between the lags/leads of
the current account deficits/GDP and the real estate/(GDP deflator) appreciation (column 1), and
a much weaker association between the current account deficits/GDP and the stock market/(GDP
deflator) appreciation (column 3). In addition, the correlation between the current account
deficits/GDP and real exchange rates that is found to be tenuous in high-frequency data, but
more robust in low-frequency data (see Krugman 1991, 2007), also characterizes the present
sample (Table 4, column 2). At the annual frequency and country level, we also find that the
current account/GDP deficit is a good leading indicator of real estate markets for France, the UK,
Japan, South Korea, the Netherlands, and the US. On the other hand, we find no statistical
association between the lags/leads of the current account deficits and the stock markets/(GDP
deflator) appreciation.17 Table 5 reports the degree to which current account deficits/GDP is a
good leading indicator of the real estate and equity prices in Bangkok, Hong Kong, Kuala
Lumpur, and the UK. It uses the city-level data, applying investable real estate indices at a
quarterly frequency. The evidence reported in Table 5 confirms that the current account tends to
forecast the real estate prices better than the stock prices.18
Before the formal econometric tests in the next section, Table 6 provides the simple ttests, adopted from Case, Goetzmann, and Rouwenhorst (2000),19 under our null hypothesis that
the real appreciation of national real estate markets are correlated through their current account
patterns. We first remove the effects of a country’s own current account deficits on its real
estate/(GDP deflator) appreciation series using a linear regression of the real estate/(GDP
deflator) appreciation on the contemporaneous current account deficits to GDP:
⎛ Real Estate
⎞
⎛ Current Account Deficits ⎞
appreciation ⎟ = φ1 + φ2 ⎜
(1) ⎜
⎟ + ψ i ,t
GDP
⎝ GDP Deflator
⎠ i ,t
⎝
⎠i ,t

lagged current account/GDP and real estate valuation.
17
We run the OLS of the cross-correlograms between each variable and the CA Deficits/GDP, and report
the coefficient estimates in the bottom panel of Tables 4 and 5.
18
The coefficient estimates from the OLS of the cross-correlograms between the current account
deficits/GDP and real estate/(GDP deflator) appreciation on the lags/leads are statistically significant and
larger, with lower standard deviation than those of the correlograms of the stock markets/(GDP deflator)
appreciation.
19
They apply the test to sectoral real estate returns with the GDP factor in a smaller set of countries.

11

Then we compare the correlation matrices of the raw appreciation of real estate prices,
⎛ Real Estate
⎞
appreciation ⎟ , to the regression residuals, ψ i ,t . In the last step, we conduct a
⎜
⎝ GDP Deflator
⎠i ,t

paired t-test of the off-diagonal elements in the raw appreciation and the residual correlation
matrices to determine whether the difference in the means of correlations is significant.
Specifically, let ρi j denote the correlation of the real estate/(GDP deflator) appreciation in
country i and country j, and ρ~i j denote the correlation of the corresponding residuals from

equation (1). The off-diagonal elements for the tests using N=43 countries are:
⎡ .
⎢ ρ1
⎢ 2
⎢ ρ31
⎢ 1
⎢ ρ*
⎢⎣ ρ 1N

.
.

.
.

.
.

ρ
ρ
ρ

.

.

ρ
ρ

.

2
3
2
*
2
N

3
*
3
N

ρ N*

.⎤
⎡ .
⎢ ~1
⎥
.⎥
⎢ ρ2
.⎥ and ⎢ ρ~31
⎢ ~1
⎥
.⎥
⎢ ρ*
⎢ ρ~ 1
.⎥⎦
⎣ N

.

.

.

.
~
ρ2

.

.

.
ρ~ 3

.
.
~
ρ*

3
2
*
2
N

ρ~
ρ~

*

ρ~N3

N

.⎤
⎥
.⎥
.⎥
⎥
.⎥
.⎥⎦

If the null hypothesis of equality of the correlations in raw appreciation ρi j and the
correlations in residuals ρ~i j is rejected, then this would suggest that the co-movements of the
national real estate markets are associated with common factors driving the current account
patterns. Let σ denote standard deviation, the means of correlations of the raw real estate /(GDP
deflator) appreciation are .089 (σ = .382 ) across all countries, .027 (σ = .361) across the NonOECD countries, 0.147 (σ = .366) across the OECD, and .158 (σ = .438) between the OECD and
Non-OECD countries. After removing the effects of the current account deficits, the correlations
are .024 (σ = .377) across all countries, -.030 (σ = .366) across the Non-OECD countries, .058 (σ
= .337) across the OECD countries, and .116 (σ = .446) between the OECD and the Non-OECD
countries. The t-tests reject the null of equality of means of correlations for all-country pairs
(though the test barely rejects that for the OECD versus Non-OECD countries pairs). Thus,
removing the effects of own-country current account deficits results in a statistically significant
drop in mean correlation of the real estate/(GDP deflator) appreciation across countries. The
most significant drop is for the OECD countries. We can also see that removing the effects of
current account deficits decreases the variance of the Real Estate/(GDP deflator) appreciation by
2.7 %. Nevertheless, these t-test results are only suggestive as it utilizes no particular procedure

12

to control for common factors behind current accounts of individual countries.20
4.

Estimation and Results

Further insight regarding the association between the current account deficits/GDP and
the real estate/(GDP deflator) appreciation is gained by applying a battery of panel regressions,
controlling for relevant macroeconomic variables. The previous sections suggest that the current
account deficits are contemporaneously correlated with the real appreciation of real estate prices
across countries. However, the real estate markets are more likely to adjust along with the
current account deficits with lags. This is also true for the effects of other macroeconomic
variables that we consider, including Urban Population Growth, Capita GDP Growth, Inflation,
Financial Depth, Institution, and Real Interest Rates.21 To account for the lagged effects and also
for the non-stationarity of these macro time series, we make the following variable
transformation. First, we include in the panel estimation the lagged values of the Current
Account Deficits/GDP and other macroeconomic variables. The current account variable enters
the panel regressions with a maximum of five lags, and other macro variables with one lag.
While the choice of five lags is arbitrary, we test and report the results using other lag
specifications. Later, we also supplement the benchmark estimation with additional results using
the average and the cumulative change of the variables, though the results are not directly
comparable to the panel regressions using annual data because the cross-section regressions do
not take into account the lag structure and short- to medium-run dynamics. Second, trend and
non-stationarity not only characterize the Real Estate /(GDP deflator) appreciation and the
Current Account Deficits/GDP reported in Table 1, but also apply to other macro time series in
the sample. The trends in these series can contain both stochastic and deterministic components:
differencing can remove the former, and detrending can remove the latter. As we have seen with
20

In addition, a meaningful current account dynamics would be generated by idiosyncratic factors – if all
countries were subjected to common and identical shocks, all countries would have common and identical
macroeconomic dynamics, leaving no need for adjustments via the current accounts.
21
Another relevant variable, but beyond the scope of this paper, is the government regulation on real
estate markets. The importance of this variable is highlighted in the case of China, where the published
real estate indices tend to understate the underlying trends in major Chinese cities. Zheng and Kahn
(2008) find that in Beijing, while the land prices and real estate prices decline with distance from the city
center, the residential building heights and housing unit sizes do not, indicating some binding urban
planning policies that do not reflect market forces.

13

the current accounts and the real estate series that the results of different individual and panel
unit root tests on them tend to be inconclusive. In the sample, the maximum length of time series
available is sixteen years (1990-2005): the standard Box-Jenkins methodology recommends
differencing as the form of the trend may not be essential for short-term forecasts, but the form
of the trend becomes more important as the forecast horizon expands. Yet, some series may
have a deterministic trend, a stochastic trend and a stationary component (trend plus noise
series). For our baseline estimation, we adopt a parsimonious approach to these macroeconomic
variables by first-differencing the time-series already in percentage changes [(Real Estate /(GDP
deflator) appreciation; Urban Population Growth; Capita GDP Growth; Real Interest)],
converting to percentage change for those variables in levels [(Financial Depth; Institution;
Current Account Deficits/GDP)], and then de-trending. This transformation is not perfect, but
the Augmented Dickey-Fuller tests reject the null of unit root with trend in the resultant series.
We also provide estimation results using other variable transformations, including a signpreserving detrended current account series (to take into account the persistent trend feature of
the current accounts) and non-transformed series (of which the estimates are not consistent and
the statistical inference do not hold). After constructing the lags and transforming the
macroeconomic variables, we have 354 observations and 41 countries available for the panel
estimation. Table 7 provides the sample correlations among these variables.
We apply the dynamic equation, with the Real Estate/(GDP deflator) Appreciation as the
dependent variable (yi,t; %change per year).
(2)

yi ,t = α yi ,t −1 + γ ′xi ,t −1 + β ′( L) zi ,t −1 + θ ′ ⎡⎣ xi ,t −1 × zi ,t −i ⎤⎦ + λt + ηi + υi ,t

where x is a set of main explanatory variables, including Urban Population Growth, Capita GDP
Growth, Inflation, Financial Depth, Institution, Real Interest rate; z is a vector of past Current
Account Deficits/GDP; β(L) a vector of polynomials in the lag operator; λt a time effect common
to all countries; ηi a permanent but unobservable country-specific effect; υi,t an error term. To
provide a comparison between the equation (2) and alternative specifications, Table 8 reports the
benchmark results, with the ‘Dynamic Panel’ regressions (equation (2)) in columns 1-5 using
Arellano and Bond’s (1991) GMM estimators; the ‘Fixed Effects’ regressions using the least
squares dummy variable (LSDV) estimation in columns 6-7; and the pooled OLS in column 8.

14

Across the econometric specifications, the lagged Real Estate /(GDP deflator)
appreciation is negatively associated with its current value. The lagged Urban Population
Growth and the lagged Capital GDP Growth are positively associated with the appreciation of
real estate prices. A higher lagged Inflation is associated with a lower Real Estate/(GDP
deflator) appreciation in the next period. The effects of the Financial Depth and the lagged
Institution are statistically insignificant. The effect of the lagged real interest rates is significant
with the expected sign: the higher the cost of borrowing, the lower the appreciation of real estate
prices. Most significantly, we find that the lagged Current Account Deficits/GDP is positively
associated with the appreciation of real estate prices across the specifications. The effects are
stronger for the lags 1-3 according to the benchmark dynamic panel specification. Based on the
fixed-effects and the OLS estimation, the positive effects of the Current Account Deficits/GDP
on the Real Estate /(GDP deflator) appreciation persist five years, and are statistically significant.
For the interaction between the current account and other key macro variables, we find that the
effects of the current account deficits are magnified by the level of inflation and financial depth.
A deeper Financial Depth in itself has no statistical association with the real estate prices, but it
increases the effects of the current account deficits on the real estate market appreciation. The
interaction between the CA Deficits/GDP and the Institution is negative and significant: the
effects of the current account deficits on the real estate appreciation tend to be smaller in a
country with a better quality of institution. Overall, the results are consistent across the
benchmark and alternative specifications. Our estimation explains around 70 % of the variation
in the real estate/(GDP deflator) appreciation across countries.
We then use the present panel methodology to examine several important issues. First,
we compare the conditional correlations between the real exchange rates-the current accounts
with that between the real estate appreciations-the current accounts. This is done by applying a
version of equation (2), replacing the real estate appreciation with the real exchange rates as the
dependent variable. Table 9 reports the findings. The real exchange rate appreciation is
significant but weakly associated with the current account deficits at the 3-5 year lags (column
1), while it is significant and strongly associated with the current account deficits at the 1-3 year
lags in the case of the real estate appreciation (Table 8). Second, we compare the association
between the current accounts-the real estate prices with the association between the current
accounts-the stock prices. Table 10 reports the results of replacing the real estate appreciation

15

with stock market appreciation as the dependent variable in a variant of equation (2). Consistent
with the findings in previous sections, the relationship is weak; it is negatively significant only at
the one year lag. This suggests that, in our sample, a current account signal is fully internalized
within one period.22 Finally, we verify the possible role of real estate financing patterns, adding
the ‘loan to value’ (LTV) ratio to the explanatory variables, subject to data limitations: the LTV
is available only in a cross-section. Of the 43 countries in the sample, the 2000-05 average of
LTV ratios ranges from 90 percent in Estonia to 40 in the Czech Republic. Interacting the LTV
ratio with the current account deficits, we find that the positive effects of current account deficits
at 2 and 3 year lags remain [see Table 11]. The LTV ratio interacted with the current account
deficits/GDP turned out to have a positive, but insignificant association with the real estate/(GDP
deflator) appreciation.23
We check the sensitivity of the estimation with respect to the choices of real estate
variables in Table 12. We re-estimate the main regressions in Table 8, for different types of real
estate markets, using the investable indices of twelve countries. While this sample is smaller, it
is more balanced than the one in Table 8, enabling us to include more lags for the real estate
indices and the LTV interactions.24 We find that inflation and real interest rates are still
negatively associated with the real estate markets. The results indicate that current account
deficits/GDP have positive effects on the real appreciation of office, retail, and industrial markets
with the one-year lag, and the residential/housing market with the two-year lag. We also find
that a higher LTV mitigates the real estate appreciation associated with higher current
account/GDP deficit. While statistically significant, this effect is very small -- mitigating about
1.5% of the induced real appreciation.
22

These results are in line with the view that the price adjustment of equities (assets traded in well
organized liquid markets, subject to low trading costs) is faster than that of real estate (less liquid assets,
subject to high trading costs).
23
The availability of panel information on LTV would allow future research to examine in detail the role
of monetary policy and capital account openness on real estate markets. For example, in China some real
estate developers, facing a tightening credit environment, turn to external financing, including foreign
hedge funds which are eager to lend to the Chinese property companies: not only can they charge higher
interest rates (25% or more), they also expect to gain from the continuing appreciation of the Chinese
Renminbi (Economist, 2008). See Ahearne et al. (2005) for the relationship between house prices and
monetary policy in OECD countries.
24
Due to the short sample length of the investable indices, we include only two lags of the current
account deficits to preserve the degree of freedom; nevertheless lags 3 to 5 are statistically insignificant
once included in the estimation.

16

Table 13 provides additional results from other econometric specifications. First, we split
the movements of real estate prices into the appreciation and the depreciation, then apply the
panel Tobit estimation. We find that the positive effects of the current account deficits/GDP on
the real estate prices are more significant for the appreciation or boom period (top left panel,
censoring “appreciation of real estate price” <0). We also run a dynamic panel estimation using
the average and the cumulative change of the explanatory variables. Because these cross-section
regressions ignore the short- to medium-run dynamics and the lag structure of the current
account deficits, they are not directly comparable to the benchmark estimation using annual data
in Table 8. Nevertheless, using the average and the cumulative change of the explanatory
variables, we can see in the bottom panel of Table 13 that the effects of Inflation and Real
Interest Rates remain, as well as the positive effects of the interaction of Inflation and Financial
Depth with the Current Account Deficits/GDP.
Table 14 reports additional estimation, taking into account two features of the CA
Deficits/GDP patterns. The first feature is the persistency of the current account series:25 a
country can run current account deficits for an extended period, followed by a reversal. To
account for this trend pattern, we follow Faruqee and Lee (2008) by de-trending the current
accounts with the sign-preserving trend:

(3)

sgn ( CAi ,t −1 ) × trend ;sgn ( CAi ,t −1 ) =

CAi ,t −1
CAi ,t −1

.

Using the sign-preserving detrended current account series, we can see in Table 14
columns 1-5 that our baseline findings remain: the current account deficits are positively
associated with the real estate appreciation, the effects which increase (via interaction) with the
rate of inflation, the level of financial depth, and the lower quality of institution. The size of the
coefficient estimates on the five lags of the current account deficits are also similar, though
smaller, than those obtained using the normal de-trended current account series in Table 8.
The second feature of the current account is that the sustainability of the imbalances can
be related to the country’s size.26 Figure 7 plots the lagged 3-year cumulative correlations
25
26

See Taylor (2002).
Aizenman and Sun (2008) find that, with the exception of the US, the length of current account deficit

17

between the Real Estate/(GDP deflator) appreciation and the Current Account Deficits/GDP,
against the countries’ GDP Size. The observed association is rather weak in the present sample,
though excluding large G7 countries uncovers a small and non-linear correlation between the
country size and real estate-current accounts appreciation. To account for this size feature, we
include the interaction between the Current Account Deficits/GDP and the country’s GDP Size
as another explanatory variable. Because our estimation period is 1990-2005, we use the GDP
Size as the average over the period of 1980-1989. Table 14 column 7 provides the results from
including the GDP Size interactions of five lags, for both the normal de-trended and the signpreserving de-trended current account series. We find that the main results continue to hold.
The country-size effects are negative at all lags, but only statistically significant at one year lag
in the regression using the sign-preserving de-trended current account series.
Theory suggests that causality between real estate valuation and the current account may
operate in both directions. To illustrate, an exogenous increase in the availability of international
capital may increase the demand for real estate assets in a capital-recipient country, leading to a
real estate appreciation there. Alternatively, the permanent income hypothesis and the present
value model of the current accounts predicts that a real estate boom that increases households’
perceived wealth may lead consumers to increase their consumption and thus generates current
account deficits. In both cases, we may observe a positive correlation between the real estate
appreciation and the current account deficits. Furthermore, although real estate may be viewed
as an asset class that can be the target of international investment (thus having the characteristics
of tradables), the dominant portion of real estate remains nontradable, providing a conceptual
affinity to the analysis of nontradable prices in the present value model of the current account.27
To sort out these possibilities, we provide three additional sets of evidence. First, Table
15 reports the results of reversing the baseline specification (reported earlier in Table 8), using
the current account deficits as the dependent variable and the real estate/(GDP Deflator)
appreciation and its lags as explanatory variables. We find that the case for “reverse causality,”
from real estate prices to current account deficits, is not supported in the present panel sample.
Table 16 proceeds with another approach, using the simultaneous-equations and instrumentalvariables estimation. We include the real exchange rate and the percentage of population older
spells is negatively related to the relative size of the countries’ GDP.
27
See Bergin and Sheffrin (2000).

18

than 65 years as additional instruments for the current account deficit/GDP.28 Based on the
three-stage estimation (3SLS), the effect of current account deficits on the real estate
appreciation is positive and significant, but not the other way around. In Table 17, we use the
Granger Causality tests on the quarterly data of current account deficits and various real estate
indices in the US and the UK. Using this relatively long and high frequency data, we find that
the causality can indeed run in both directions, varying across locations and types of national real
estate markets. In the UK, the causality tests suggest two way feedbacks between the current
account deficits and the real estate appreciation for all types of real estate returns and market
sectors.

The US findings may be a case of a large real estate market in a large country,

“driving” the business cycles.29 While the composite indices (both the NCREIF and the
Case&Shiller data) display reverse causality from the real estate appreciation, there are
differences at the regional level: the current account deficits/GDP “drives” the real estate
markets in the Midwest, whereas the real estate/(GDP deflator) appreciation in the West “drives”
the US current account deficits.
We summarize the key factors accounting for real estate/(GDP deflator) variation in our
sample by reporting the economic significance of the explanatory variables in our benchmark
regression (Table 8, column 1). This is done in Figure 8, reporting the association between a one
standard deviation change in each of the conditioning variables and the real estate/(GDP
deflator). The estimated response of the appreciation of real estate prices (yi,t; % change per year
of real estate prices/(GDP deflator) in Table 8), are calculated for each macroeconomic variable
(xi,t; zi,t; xi,t-1 x zi,t-1) by multiplying a one standard deviation increase (σ) of the variable with its
estimated coefficient (γ, β, θ). The importance of the various factors accounting for variations
of the real estate/(GDP deflator) is gauged in Figure 8. A one standard deviation increase of the
current account deficit (about 4%) is associated with a cumulative real estate/(GDP deflator)
appreciation of about 10%.30 The impact of the current account deficit on the real estate/(GDP
deflator) appreciation is further magnified by financial depth (about 1.8%)31, and mitigated by
28

See Lee and Chinn (2006) for the structural relationship between real exchange rates and the current
account, and Campbell and Cocco (2007) for the relationship between house prices, age structure, and
consumption.
29
See Leamer (2007).
30
The 10% change is the product of a one standard deviation current account shock (4%) times the sum of
the coefficients of its lags = 4.0x(1.02+0.57+0.64+0.18+0.14) ≈ 10 %.
31
The 1.8% change is the product of a one standard deviation of (Financial Depth*CA Deficits), (= .14)

19

better quality of institutions (about 2.8%). Intriguingly, the most important factor accounting
for the appreciation of the national real estate is a one standard deviation increase of the current
account deficit (associated with 10 % real estate/(GDP deflator) appreciation), exceeding the
adjustment to a one standard deviation drop of the real interest rate (about 7 % appreciation),
and a one standard deviation increase of the GDP/Capita growth (about 2% appreciation).
5.

Concluding remarks and interpretations

Our results are consistent with the notion that for all countries, current account deficits
are associated with sizable real appreciation of the real estate. This effect holds controlling for
the real interest rate, GDP growth, inflation, and other conditioning variables. We also find
evidence consistent with growing globalization of national real estate markets. These findings
are consistent with various scenarios explaining patterns of capital flows across countries,
including differential productivity trends and varying saving patterns. In the absence of preexisting distortions, financial inflows are unambiguously welfare improving. Yet, in a secondbest environment, public finance considerations imply that inflows of capital may magnify
distorted activities, increasing thereby the ultimate costs of these distortions. Arguably, the
experience of emerging markets in the aftermath of financial liberalizations during the 1990s
illustrated these concerns. Needless to say, this second-best assertion is not an argument against
financial integration, but a cautionary tale -- greater financial globalization implies the need to be
more assertive in dealing with moral hazard and other pre-existing domestic distortions.

times its estimated coefficient = 0.14 x 12.76 = .14*12.76 ≈ 1.8 %.

20

References
Aghion, Philippe, Philippe Bacchetta and Abhijit Banerjee. (2004), “Financial Development and the
Instability of Open Economies,” Journal of Monetary Economics 51(6): 1077-1106.
Ahearne, Alan G., John Ammer, Brian M. Doyle, Linda S. Kole, and Robert F. Martin. (2005), “House
Prices and Monetary Policy: A Cross-Country Study,” International Finance Discussion Papers
841, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
Aizenman, Joshua. (2004), "Financial Opening: Evidence and Policy Options", in "Challenges to
Globalization", R. Baldwin and A. Winters, eds., pp. 473-498, University of Chicago Press.
Aizenman, Joshua and Yi Sun. (2008), "Globalization and the Sustainability of Large Current Account
Imbalances: Size Matters" NBER working paper # 13734.
Bardhan, Ashok Deo; Edelstein, Robert H. and Leung, Charles. (2004), "A Note on Globalization and
Urban Residential Rents." Journal of Urban Economics, 56(3), pp. 505-13.
Bank for International Settlements. (2006), “Housing finance in the global financial market,” CGFS
Papers No. 26.
Bergin, Paul R., and Steven M. Sheffrin (2000), “Interest Rates, Exchange Rates and Present Value
Models of the Current Account,” Economic Journal, 110, pp. 535-558.
Brock, Philip. L. (1988) “Investment, the current account, and the relative price of non-traded goods in a
small open economy,” Journal of International Economics, 24 (3-4), pp. 1235-253.
Calvo Guillermo A.; Leiderman, Leonardo and Reinhart, Carmen M.. (1996), “Inflows of Capital to
Developing Countries in the 1990s” The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 10, 2, pp. 123-139.
Campbell, John Y., and Joao F. Cocco (2007), “How do house prices affect consumption? Evidence from
micro data,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 54, pp. 591-621.
Case, Bradford; Goetzmann, William N. and Rouwenhorst, K. Geert. (2000), "Global Real Estate Markets
- Cycles and Fundamentals," NBER Working Papers No. 7566.
Case, Karl and Shiller, Robert. (1989), “The Efficiency of the Market for Single-Family Homes”,
American Economic Review, 79, 1, pp. 125-137.
Case, Karl E.; Quigley, John M. and Shiller, Robert J. (2005), "Comparing Wealth Effects: The Stock
Market Versus the Housing Market." Advances in Macroeconomics, 5(1).
Chinn, Menzie D. and Hiro Ito (2005). “Current Account Balances, Financial Development and
Institutions: Assaying the World ‘Savings Glut’". NBER Working Paper # 11761.
da Mata, D.; Deichmann, U.; Henderson, J. V.; Lall, S. V. and Wang, H. G. (2007), "Determinants of City
Growth in Brazil." Journal of Urban Economics, 62(2), pp. 252-72.
Debelle, Guy and Galati, Gabriele. (2007), “Current Account Adjustment and Capital Flows,” Review of
International Economics, 15(5), pp. 989-1013.
Deutsche Bank. (2008), “US Housing Outlook for 2008,” January 7, Global Economic Perspectives.
Economist (2008), “Boom to bust: China's property bubble is about to burst,” June 20.
Edison, Hali J., Luangaram, Pongsak and Miller, Marcus. (1998), “Asset Bubbles, Domino Effects and
‘Lifeboats’: Elements of the East Asian Crisis,” Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System, International Finance Discussion Papers, # 606.
Edwards, S. (2004). “Thirty years of current account imbalances, current account reversals, and sudden
stops.” IMF Staff Papers Vol. 51, Special Issue, pp. 1-49.
Enders, Walter. (2004), Applied Econometric Time Series, John Wiley & Sons, New Jersey.
Englund, Peter and Ioannides, Yannis M. (1997), "House Price Dynamics: An International Empirical
Perspective." Journal of Housing Economics, 6(2), pp. 119-36.
Faruqee H. and J. Lee. (2008), “Global Dispersion of Current Accounts: Is the Universe Expanding?”
manuscript, the IMF.
Freund, Caroline. (2005), “Current Account Adjustment in Industrial Countries,” Journal of International
Money and Finance, 24(8), pp. 1278-98.
Glaeser Edward L. and Gyourko, Joseph. (2007), “Arbitrage in housing markets,” NBER working paper
#13704.
Hale, David. (2006), "The Global Driver: How Housing Is Driving the World Economy," International
Economy.

21

Henderson, J. Vernon and Wang, Hyoung Gun. (2007), "Urbanization and City Growth: The Role of
Institutions." Regional Science and Urban Economics, 37(3), pp. 283-313.
Im Kyung So, M. Hashem Pesaran, and Yongcheol Shin. (2003), “Testing for Unit Roots in
Heterogeneous Panels. Journal of Econometrics,” 115, 53-74.
Kim Yong Jin and Jong-Wha Lee. (2002), “Overinvestment, collateral lending, and economic crisis,”
Japan and the World Economy, 14, 2, pp. 181-201.
Kim Kyung-Soo and Jaewoo Lee. (2001), “Asset price and current account dynamics,” International
Economic Journal, 85, 15, pp. 85-108.
Krugman Paul. (1991), “Has the adjustment process worked?” Policy Analyses in International
Economics, 34, September.
Krugman Paul. (1998), “What Happened to Asia?” manuscript, MIT, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Krugman Paul. (2007), “Will there be a dollar crisis?” Economic Policy, 22, pp. 435-467.
Kwiatkowski, Denis, Phillips, Peter C. B., Schmidt, Peter, and Shin, Yongcheol. (1992). “Testing the null
hypothesis of stationarity against the alternative of a unit root: How sure are we that economic
time series have a unit root?” Journal of Econometrics, 54, 159-178.
Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro and John Moore (1997), “Credit Cycles,” Journal of Political Economy 105, 211-248.
Leamer, E. E. (2007), “Housing IS the Business Cycle,” NBER Working Paper No. 13428, September.
Lee, Jaewoo, and Menzie D. Chinn (2006). “Current Account and Real Exchange Rate Dynamics in the
G7 Countries,” Journal of International Money and Finance, 25, 257-274.
Levin, Andrew, Lin, Chien-Fu and Chia-Shang James Chu. (2002). “Unit Root Tests in Panel Data:
Asymptotic and Finite Sample Properties,” Journal of Econometrics, 108, 1-24.
McKinnon, Ronald I. and Pill, Huw. (1996), “Credible Liberalizations and International Capital Flows:
The ‘Overborrowing Syndrome’” in Takatoshi Ito and Anne O. Krueger, eds., Financial
deregulation and integration in East Asia. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 7–42.
Nyblom, Jukka and Harvey, Andrew. (2000), “Tests of common stochastic trends,” Econometric Theory,
16, 176-199.
Quigley, John M. (2001), "Real Estate and the Asian Crisis." Journal of Housing Economics, 10(2), pp.
129-61.
Reinhart, Carmen M. and Ken S. Rogoff (2008). "Is the 2007 US Sub-Prime Financial Crisis So
Different? An International Historical Comparison." NBER Working Paper # 13761.
Shiller, Robert J. (2007), "Low Interest Rates and High Asset Prices: An Interpretation in Terms of
Changing Popular Economic Models," NBER Working Papers No. 13558.
Taylor, Alan M. (2002), "A Century of Current Account Dynamics." Journal of International Money and
Finance, 21(6), 725-48.
Warnock, Veronica Cacdac and Warnock, Francis E. (2007), “Markets and Housing Finance,” NBER
Working Papers No. 13081.
Zheng, Siqi, and Kahn, Matthew E. (2008), “Land and residential property markets in a booming
economy: New evidence from Beijing,” Journal of Urban Economics, 63, 743-757.

22

Data Appendix

Table A.1 – Sources of National Real Estate Prices in 43 Countries.
The real estate series are taken from the Datastream and the Global Property Guide.
No
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43

C o untry
A ustra lia
A ustria
B elgium
B ulgaria
C a nada
C h in a
C o lo m bia
C roatia
C zech R epu blic
D e nm ark
E stonia
F inland
F ra nce
G erm any
G re ece
H o ng K o ng
H u ngary
Indon esia
Irelan d
Isra el
Italy
Ja pan
K orea
Lithuan ia
Luxem bu rg
M alaysia
M alta
N e the rlan ds
N e w Z ealan d
N o rw a y
P hilippines
P ortuga l
R u ssia
S erbia
S in gap ore
S outh A frica
S pain
S w ed en
S w itzerland
T aiw an
T hailan d
U n ited K ingd om
U n ited S tate s

R eal E sta te P rice Ind ices
H ouse p rice in dex, 8 ca pita l cities
R eside ntia l p rope rty price index, V ienn a
R eside ntia l p rope rty price index, F lats
D w elling: A vg P rice pe r S q M eter
N ew hou sing price ind ex
P rop erty P rice Ind ex: B ld g: C M : R esiden tial
N ew hou sing price ind ex
N ew D w ellings S old P rice Ind ex: 199 5= 100
P rices of h abitable area, m u lti-d w elling
P rop erty P rice Ind ex: O ne F am ily H ouses: A ll D e nm ark
A ve . price per sq.m . of d w elling s in satisfacto ry condition, 2 room s & kitch en, T a llin n
D w ellings in o ld b locks of F la t, w ho le coun try
Inde x of prices of old reside nces, F rance
P rices of o w ne r-o ccupied flats
Inde x of prices of dw ellings, othe r urba n
P rop erty P rice Ind ex: 199 9= 100 : D o m estic P rem ise (D P )
H ouse p rice s, B ud ape st - o ld cond om inium
R eside ntia l p rope rty price index, n ew hou ses, m ajo r citie s
A ve rage P ro perty P rice: N ew
A ve rage p rice s of o w ne r occupie d d w elling s
A ve rage p rice for reside ntia l, 13 urban areas
U rban L and P rice Inde x: R E I: W hole N atio n: A ve rag e
H ouse P rice In dex
A ve . price of o ne- to tw o-room apartm e nts, V ilnius
P rice o f hab ita ble surfa ce
H ouse P rice In dex: M alaysia
H ouse P rice In dex
H ouse p rice in dex, nationw ide
H ouse p rice in dex, detached ho use s
H ouse P rice In dex: N e w D e tached : sa
A ve . price of p rim e 3-be dro om cond om inium s, M aka ti C B D
B ank e valu atio n on housing, m ainland
P rop erty P rice Ind ex: R esiden tial: P rim a ry S ales (P S ): YoY
A vg P rice of D w ellings: N ew C o nstruction: R ep ublic of S erbia
P rop erty P rice Ind ex: P rivate R e side ntia l (P R ): A ll
A B S A H ouse P rice Inde x
H ousin g P rice Index: F ree H ou se
R eal estate price index for 1 - & 2- d w elling bu ild ings
R eal E sta te P rice Ind ex: S in gle F am ily H o m e s
S inyi R e side ntia l P ro perty P rice In dex: T aiw an A rea
H ousin g P rice Index: S ingle D eta che d H ou se: in clud ing Land
H ouse P rice In dex: U K
H ouse P rice In dex: O F H E O : U n ited S tate s

23

S ou rce N am e
A usS tat
O esterreichische (A ustria) N a tion al B an k
Institut N ational de S ta tistiqu e
N ational S tatistical Institute of B ulga ria
C ana dian S tatistics
N ational B urea u of S ta tistics of C hina
D epa rtam ento A d m in istrativo N acio nal de E stadística
R epu blic of C roa tia - C e ntral B u rea u o f S ta tistics
C esky S tatisticky U rad
S tatistics D enm ark
S tatistikaa m e t
S tatF in
Institut N ational de la S tatistiqu e e t des E tude s E con om iques
B ulw einG e sa
B an k of G reece
差餉物業估價處
O tthon C entrum
B an k In done sia
D epa rtm e nt of th e E nviro nm ent, H eritage an d L ocal G o ve rnm en t
C entra l B ure au of S tatistics
N om ism a S pa R e al E sta te
財団法人 日本不動産研究所
K oo km in B a nk
Invalda R e al E sta te
S T A T E C Luxem bou rg
V alua tion a nd P rope rty S ervices D epa rtm ent, M inistry of F ina nce
C entra l B ank o f M alta
N ede rland se V ere niging van M ake laars
R eserve B a nk of N ew Z e aland
S tatistisk S entra lbyra
C olliers International
Instituto N aciona l de E statística de P ortug al
F e dera l S tate S tatistics S ervice (R osstat)
Р епубл ички Завод за С та тистику
U rba n R ed eve lo pm ent A u tho rity
ABSA
Instituto N aciona l de E stad istica
S tatistics S w e den
S w iss N atio nal B a nk
信義企業集團
ธน าค ารอาค ารส งเค ราะห
N ationw id e
O ffice of F ederal H ousing E nterp rise O versight

Table A.2 – Sources of Investable Real Estate Indices and Macroeconomic Variables.
The time series of the macroeconomic variables cover 1980-2005. WDI = World Development Indicators; IFS = International Financial Statistics.
Non-stationary series are first-differenced and de-trended for the panel estimation and VAR.
Variables
Real Estate/GDP Deflator Appreciation

Definition
National: %change per year of real estate, house, and
property prices, deflated by GDP deflator
Investable: AUS CAN DEU FIN FRA GBR IRL NLD NZL
SWE USA ZAF
Investable: Bangkok, Beijing, Hong Kong, Kuala Lumpur,
Shanghai, United Kingdom
10 Cities in United States
Annual growth (%) of population in the urban areas
Annual growth (%) of GDP per capita (constant price year
2000 US$)
GDP deflator (%)
CPI inflation (%)

Data Source: Code
National sources and government
statistics
Investment Property Databank

none, reference

Jones Lang LaSalle Research

first differenced for VAR

S&P/Case-Shiller Indices
WDI: SP.URB.GROW
WDI: NY.GDP.PCAP.KD.ZG

first differenced for VAR
first differenced; de-trended
first differenced; de-trended

WDI: NY.GDP.DEFL.KD.ZG
Datastream (quarterly; city level)

first differenced; de-trended

Financial Depth

Domestic credit provided by banking sector (% of GDP)

WDI: FS.AST.DOMS.GD.ZS

percentage change; de-trended

Institution
Real Interest
Current Account Deficits/GDP

Measure of law and order, 0-12 scale (higher=better)
Annual real interest rates (%)
End of year current account of deficits to GDP (%)

percentage change; de-trended
first differenced; de-trended
percentage change; de-trended

Stock Market/GDP Deflator Appreciation

%change per year of the stock market indices, deflated by
GDP deflator

International Country Risk Guide
WDI: FR.INR.RINR
WDI: BN.CAB.XOKA.GD.ZS
(annual)
Datastream (quarterly)
Datastream; WDI

Nominal Interest (3-month)

GDP Size
Real Exchange Rate

US Treasury Bill Rate Constant Maturity (%)
Japan Financing Bill Rate (%)
London Interbank Offer Rates (pound sterling, %)
GDP (constant year-2000 trillion US$)
Trade-Weighted Real Effective Exchange Rates

none, reference
none, reference
none, reference
none, reference
average: 1980-1989
first differenced; de-trended

Population Age above 65 Years Old
Loan to Value

Population ages 65 and above (% of total)
Estimated average loan-to-value of new mortgage loans

MSCI (Investable Indices)
IFS
IFS
IFS
WDI: NY.GDP.MKTP.KD
WDI: PX.REX.REER (annual)
JP Morgan (quarterly)
WDI: SP.POP.65UP.TO.ZS
Warnock and Warnock (2008)

Urban Population Growth
Capita GDP Growth
Inflation

24

Transformation for Estimation
first differenced; de-trended

first differenced; de-trended

first differenced; de-trended
none (cross-section)

Table 1 – Summary Statistics and Unit Root Tests.
The statistics are for the period 1980-2005 for the current account deficits/GDP, and 1990-2005 for the real estate/GDP deflator appreciation, %
per year. Local GDP deflator is chosen over the consumer price index to maximize the sample size and allow for the changing expenditure
patterns across countries. The Mackinnon approximate p-value is from the Augmented Dickey-Fuller test under the null of unit-root with trend.
The cumulative appreciation sums for the period 2001-2005 the Real Estate/GDP Deflator Appreciation for each country.
C ountry
A ustra lia
A ustria
B elgium
B ulgaria
C anada
C hina
C olom bia
C roatia
C zech R epublic
D enm ark
E stonia
Finland
France
G erm any
G reece
H ong K on g
H ungary
Indo nesia
Ire la nd
Israel
Italy
Japan
K orea
Lithuan ia
Luxem bourg
M alaysia
M alta
N etherlands
N ew Z ealand
N orw ay
P hillipines
P ortugal
R ussia
S erbia
S ingapo re
S outh A frica
S pain
S w e den
S w itzerla nd
Ta iw an
Th ailan d
U nited K ingdom
U nited S tates

C urrent A ccout D eficits/G D P (percent)
obs.
avg .
s.d.
p -value
26
4.3
1.0
.031
26
.8
1.8
.573
25
-2.5
2.9
.977
26
3.0
4.8
.266
26
1.0
2.3
.433
23
-1.4
2.4
.098
26
2.1
3.2
.356
13
5.2
5.0
.164
13
4.0
2.3
.182
25
-.2
2.7
.516
14
7.4
4.7
.506
25
-1.5
5.0
.866
26
-.2
1.3
.949
26
-1.1
2.3
.929
24
4.8
2.8
.913
8
-7.5
3.4
.004
24
4.5
3.6
.080
24
.9
3.4
.092
25
1.6
4.2
.967
25
2.1
3.6
.348
25
.3
1.6
.840
26
-2.5
1.2
.132
26
-.6
4.3
.191
13
7.1
3.3
.641
11
-10.2
1.7
.001
25
-.8
8.9
.364
25
2.6
5.1
.106
26
-3.9
2.2
.407
26
5.7
2.7
.403
26
-5.5
6.4
.406
25
2.7
3.2
.145
26
4.6
4.7
.657
12
-7.3
5.6
.718
6
6.1
2.1
.081
25
-9.2
11.0
.153
26
.3
2.9
.279
26
2.3
2.4
.948
25
-.9
3.3
.754
26
-7.3
4.7
.185
21
-5.7
3.7
.777
26
1.8
5.8
.449
26
1.3
1.9
.759
26
2.6
1.9
.954

C um ulative D eficits (perce nt)
from 200 1 to 20 05
25.8
-5.1
-14.8
41.8
-9.2
-16.0
7.5
34.7
24.9
-13.9
60.2
-30.0
1.7
-17.9
41.0
-49.7
35.7
-8.4
4.1
-6.3
4.5
-17.4
-9.7
37.7
-53.1
-48.3
15.9
-33.3
33.0
-71.9
-4.3
41.4
-47.2
8.8
-90.7
13.7
28.1
-27.2
-72.1
-34.0
-5.9
10.4
27.9

25

R eal E state/G D P D efla tor A pprecia tion (percent)
obs.
avg.
s.d.
p-value
16
4.7
7.6
.153
16
2.6
8.0
.295
15
4.2
4.3
.866
12
-20.1
10 1.3
.010
16
.1
4.3
.000
7
-1.8
3.1
.678
9
-4.5
7.8
.001
11
-1.0
6.6
.022
10
.5
7.8
.013
13
6.4
5.0
.883
9
15.2
2 2.5
.009
16
-.3
1 1.2
.207
16
2.7
8.9
.002
16
-1.0
1.5
.303
12
3.6
4.9
.017
12
-.1
1 6.5
.178
5
7.5
8.1
.100
12
-9.5
1 8.4
.100
16
7.0
5.8
.311
8
.0
8.3
.009
16
1.3
5.6
.377
16
-3.5
4.5
.000
16
-1.8
8.9
.001
7
14.4
1 6.3
.275
13
1.7
3.0
.347
5
-.1
2.6
.986
15
6.8
5.8
.177
16
5.4
5.3
.111
14
5.0
6.0
.663
16
1.0
5.0
.030
10
-6.9
9.4
.000
4
.0
2.2
.000
8
-22.8
3 0.2
.001
6
-14.6
3 1.0
.439
16
4.1
1 7.8
.027
6
11.8
8.7
.950
10
6.0
5.1
.982
16
2.8
7.5
.148
16
-2.1
4.0
.162
14
-2.0
5.3
.023
14
-.7
4.9
.012
16
3.0
9.6
.355
16
2.8
3.5
.018

C um ulative A pp reciation (percent)
from 200 1 to 2 005
37.3
15.0
42.9
90.1
19.6
-13.1
5.5
-10.6
9.5
39.3
108.9
32.9
50.3
-4.6
24.6
38.0
35.9
-10.9
38.1
-2.4
26.8
-26.3
25.9
96.4
7.8
-4.3
30.0
10.6
48.0
8.7
3.9
.1
-68.4
-11.5
8.5
74.2
49.0
36.3
7.3
10.9
6.1
49.6
31.3

Table 2 – A Summary of Unit Root Tests.
The null hypothesis is non-stationarity for the augmented Dickey-Fuller test and the Phillips-Perron test. For the Kwiatkowski-Phillips-SchmidtShin test, the null is stationarity: a rejection of stationarity under the Kwiatkowski-Phillips-Schmidt-Shin test is reported as a non rejection of the
unit root.The null hypothesis is non-stationarity for the Levin-Lin-Chu (2002) test and the Im-Pesaran-Shin (2003) test. For the Nyblom-Harvey
(2000) test, the test statistic can be considered as the generalization of the Kwiatkowski-Phillips-Schmidt-Shin test, and a failure to reject the null
hypothesis of zero common stochastic trends is an indication that the series do not form a cointegrated combination. The test statistics correspond
to specifications with time trend. Because the sample must be a balanced panel in order to perform the existing panel test procedures, the sample
is restricted to 12 years (1993-2004) and 25 countries (19 OECD and 6 Non-OECD). ***, **, * signifies 1, 5, and 10 level of significance.
Real Estate/GDP Deflator Appreciation
Testing Procedures

Whole Sample

OECD

Current Account Deficits/GDP

Non-OECD

Whole Sample

OECD

Non-OECD

percent of rejecting unit roots:
Individual Country Series
Augmented Dickey-Fuller

44.2

40.0

50.0

7.0

8.0

5.6

Phillips-Perron

44.2

36.0

55.6

9.3

8.0

11.1

Kwiatkowski-Phillips-Schmidt-Shin

97.7

100.0

94.4

100.0

100.0

100.0

-12.002 ***

-10.196 ***

test statistics:
Panel of Series
Levin-Lin-Chu (2002)
Im-Pesaran-Shin (2003)
Nyblom-Harvey (2000)

-18.296 ***

-12.073 ***

-11.299 ***

-2.783 ***

-2.586 *

-3.014 **

-2.138

.580 *

1.556

1.556

1.556 ***

26

-2.189
1.556 ***

-4.496 *
-1.769
.561 *

Table 3: Correlations Between Different Types of Real
Estate Indices.
This table reports for each country the correlations of the real
appreciation rates of different types of real estate markets with
the housing (residential) markets. The ‘real appreciation is %
change per year of investable real estate prices/CPI inflation
for each specific location (except for Kuala Lumpur, where
the city-level CPI is not available and replaced by the national
CPI).
Correlation with housing/residential series
Office

Retail

Industrial

Annual: 1998-2007
Canada
Germany
Finland
France
Ireland
Netherlands
Sweden
United States

.73
.32
.88
.64
.72
.90
.85
-.23

-.06
.77
.55
.57
.09
.44
.76
.37

.29
.09
.89
.91
.42
.80
.78
.26

Quarterly: 1998Q1-2007Q4
Bangkok
Beijing
Kuala Lumpur

.90
.42
.67

27

.85
.22
.82

n.a.
n.a.
n.a.

Table 4: Cross-Correlograms with Current Account Deficits/GDP: National Indices, Annual.
This table provides for each country and variable the cross correlograms with current account deficits/GDP.
The variables are real exchange rate appreciation (%), the ‘real appreciation of real estate prices’=change
per year of real estate prices/GDP deflator (%), and the ‘real appreciation of stock markets’=change per
year of stock market indices/GDP deflator (%). The 12 countries included have complete time series of
these variables over the period of 1990 to 2005 (16 annual observations): AUS, AUT, CAN, CHE, DEU,
FRA, GBR, JPN, KOR, NLD, NOR, and USA.
Average Correlation with Current Account Deficits/GDP
Real Estate/GDP Deflator
Real Exchange Rates
Stock Market/GDP Deflator
Appreciation
Appreciation
Appreciation
lags/leads (years)
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4

-.10
-.10
-.14
-.18
-.16
-.07
.04
.09
.10

.03
.06
.08
.09
.08
.09
.11
.17
.18

.00
-.02
-.04
-.09
-.13
-.10
-.04
.02
.00

OLS on #lags/leads:
coefficient estimate
.03
.02
standard deviation
.01***
.01**
R-sq.
.14
.06
observations
108
108
countries
12
12
Robust standard errors, with ***, **, * signifies 1, 5, and 10 level of significance.

28

.00
.01
.00
108
12

Table 5: Cross-Correlograms with Current Account Deficits/GDP: Investable Indices, Quarterly.
This table provides for each country and variable the cross correlograms with current account deficits/GDP. The variables are the real
appreciation of investable stock markets (in %; source: MSCI investable) and the real appreciation of investable real estate prices (in %;
source: Jones Lang LaSalle Research). Three types of investable real estate markets are retail, office, and housing (residential). Real
appreciation = % change minus CPI inflation of the specific location/city (except for Kuala Lumpur, where the city-level CPI is not
available and replaced by the national CPI). For China, CA/GDP at quarterly frequency is not available and replaced by trade balance.
The 6 locations included have complete time series of these variables over the quarterly period of 1998:Q1-2007:Q4: Bangkok, Beijing,
Hong Kong, Kuala Lumpur, Shanghai, United Kingdom
Average Correlation with Current Account Deficits/GDP
Stock Market/GDP Deflator
Appreciation

Real Estate/GDP Deflator
Appreciation
lags/leads (quarters)

Housing/Residential

-10
-9
-8
-7
-6
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

-.220
-.212
-.213
-.193
-.195
-.182
-.206
-.191
-.197
-.197
-.191
-.120
-.016
.041
.049
.056
.065
.066
.061
.067
.068

Office
-.042
-.079
-.100
-.134
-.156
-.165
-.172
-.167
-.200
-.236
-.217
-.127
-.035
.004
.013
.042
.049
.038
.004
.005
.004

Retail
.028
-.020
-.029
-.045
-.034
-.064
-.095
-.116
-.097
-.137
-.143
-.114
-.028
.007
-.005
-.003
-.012
-.010
-.038
-.018
-.007

MSCI Investable
.011
-.029
-.044
-.086
-.075
-.096
-.119
-.176
-.176
-.193
-.176
-.162
-.100
-.077
-.066
-.050
-.013
-.007
-.007
.012
.014

OLS on #lags/leads:
coefficient estimate
standard deviation
R-sq.
observations
countries
Robust standard errors, with ***,

.019
.009
.004***
.003***
.309
.099
63
126
3
6
**, * signifies 1, 5, and 10 level of significance.

29

.002
.003
.002
105
5

.003
.002*
.029
126
6

Table 6 – Univariate t-tests.
The sample period is 1990-2005. The t-tests are on the hypothesis that the national real estate markets are correlated through the current account
patterns. In the first step, we remove the effects of a country’s own current account deficits on its real estate/GDP deflator appreciation series by
running a linear regression of the real estate/GDP deflator appreciation on the contemporaneous current account deficits to GDP:

⎛ Real Estate
⎞
⎛ Current Account Deficits ⎞
appreciation ⎟ = φ1 + φ2 ⎜
⎜
⎟ + ψ i ,t
GDP
⎝ GDP Deflator
⎠i ,t
⎝
⎠ i ,t
Then we compare the correlation matrices of the raw appreciation of real estate prices and of the regression residuals. In the last step, we conduct
a paired t-test of the off-diagonal elements in the raw appreciation and the residual correlation matrices to determine whether the difference in the
means of correlations is significant. A standard deviation of variable is in parenthesis.
All Countries

Non-OECD

OECD

OECD v.s. Non-OECD

Means of Correlations:
Appreciation of Real Estate Prices

.089

.027

.147

.158

(.382)

(.361)

(.366)

(.438)

Residuals of the Appreciation

.024

-.030

.058

.116

after removing the effects of CA Deficits

(.377)

(.366)

(.337)

(.446)

t-value

6.367

3.776

5.804

1.646

p-value

.000

.000

.000

.102

t-test on the equality of means of correlations:

Variance Reduction (%)

2.700

30

Table 7 – Correlations between Variables for the Panel Estimation.
Due to the construction of lag structure and data availability, there are 354 observations (41 countries) for the panel estimation.
Correlation with:

a)
b)
c)
d)
e)
f)
g)

Explanatory Variable
(Lagged Annual Observation)
Urban Population Growth
Capita GDP Growth
Inflation
Financial Depth
Institution
Real Interest
Current Account Deficits

Obs

Real Estate /
GDP Deflator
Appreciation

a)

b)

c)

d)

e)

f)

g)

354
354
354
354
354
354
354

.036
.130
.363
-.368
-.138
-.717
.192

1.000
-.118
.009
.018
.017
.002
.012

1.000
-.117
-.221
.006
.005
.030

1.000
-.119
-.098
-.773
.207

1.000
.065
.314
-.103

1.000
.137
-.066

1.000
-.277

1.000

31

Table 8 – Benchmark Estimation.
The dynamic equation for the appreciation of real estate prices (yi,t; % change per year of real estate prices/GDP deflator) is

yi ,t = α yi ,t −1 + γ ′xi ,t −1 + β ′( L) zi ,t −1 + θ ′ ⎡⎣ xi ,t −1 × zi ,t −1 ⎤⎦ + λt + ηi + υi ,t
where x={Urban Population Growth, Capita GDP Growth, Inflation, Financial Depth, Institution, Real Interest}; z=Current Account
Deficits/GDP; β(L) a vector of polynomials in the lag operator; λt a time effect common to all countries; ηi a permanent but unobservable countryspecific effect; υi,t an error term. The ‘Dynamic Panel’ regressions (columns 1-5) use Arellano and Bond (1991)’s GMM estimators. The ‘Fixed
Effects’ regressions use ‘least squares dummy variable’ (LSDV) estimation. The variables are corrected for unit root; first-differenced, detrended). The sample period is 1990 to 2005. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. ***, **, * signifies 1, 5, and 10 level of significance.
Coefficient Estimates of
5-lag
Explanatory Variables Lag
Lagged Real Estate/GDP Deflator Appreciation
1
-.49
(.10)
Urban Population Growth
1
2.53
(1.53)
Capita GDP Growth
1
.75
(.31)
Inflation
1
-.33
(.04)
Financial Depth
1
-4.90
(7.35)
Institution
1 -15.62 (11.24)

***
*
**
***

Dynamic Panel Estimation
4-lag
3-lag
2-lag
-.50
(.10) ***
-.50
(.10) ***
-.41
(.10) ***
2.47
(1.53)
2.44
(1.52)
2.43
(1.56)
.75
(.31) **
.75
(.31) **
.57
(.31) *
-.33
(.04) ***
-.34
(.04) ***
-.31
(.04) ***
-4.59
(7.34)
-4.52
(7.33)
-6.56
(7.49)
-14.53 (11.17)
-14.25 (11.15)
-16.40 (11.41)

Fixed Effects
Pooled OLS
1-lag
5-lag
3-lag
5-lag
-.43
(.10) ***
-.60
(.10) ***
-.63
(.10) ***
-.56
(.13) ***
2.43
(1.55)
1.70
(1.64)
1.65
(1.66)
1.53
(1.23)
.56
(.31) *
.57
(.30) *
.64
(.30) **
.53
(.51)
-.31
(.04) ***
-.21
(.04) ***
-.24
(.04) ***
-.18
(.07) **
-7.10
(7.41)
4.87
(7.04)
4.35
(7.08)
2.75
(9.45)
-17.04 (11.30)
-16.58
(9.36) *
-13.69
(9.33)
-16.59 (12.03)

Real Interest

1

-2.65

(.22) ***

-2.64

(.22) ***

-2.63

(.22) ***

-2.62

(.23) ***

-2.55

(.22) ***

-1.75

CA Deficits

1
2
3
4
5

1.02
.57
.64
.18
.14

(.28) ***
(.16) ***
(.15) ***
(.14)
(.14)

.98
.49
.56
.09

(.28) ***
(.14) ***
(.13) ***
(.12)

.94
.45
.52

(.27) ***
(.13) ***
(.12) ***

.77
.23

(.27) ***
(.13) *

.81

(.27) ***

.85
-.10
.59
.33
.22

1
1
1

.01
12.76
-8.52
.00
354
41

(.00) ***
(2.67) ***
(3.10) ***

.01
13.18
-8.85
.00
354
41

(.00) ***
(2.63) ***
(3.08) ***

.01
13.21
-8.86
.00
354
41

(.00) ***
(2.63) ***
(3.08) ***

.01
12.25
-7.11
.00
354
41

Inflation*CA Deficits
Financial Depth*CA Deficits
Institution*CA Deficits
p-value/R-Square
Observations
Countries

32

(.00) ***
(2.69) ***
(3.13) **

.01
14.03
-8.66
.00
354
41

(.00) ***
(2.47) ***
(2.98) ***

.04
42.46
-4.70
.73
354
41

(.23) ***
(.24)
(.16)
(.12)
(.13)
(.13)

***
***
**
*

(.00) ***
(5.47) ***
(2.80) *

-1.80

(.23) ***

-1.77

.76
-.18
.44

(.24) ***
(.16)
(.11) ***

.77
-.05
.63
.38
.27

.03
39.03
-5.78
.72
354
41

(.00) ***
(5.33) ***
(2.78) **

.04
43.02
-4.37
.74
354
41

(.75) **
(.37)
(.24)
(.25)
(.15)
(.12)

**
**
**
**

(.01) ***
(16.37) ***
(2.95)

Table 9 – Replacing Real Estate Appreciation with Real Exchange Rates.
The dynamic equation for the appreciation of real exchange rates (yi,t; %) is

yi ,t = α yi ,t −1 + γ ′xi ,t −1 + β ′( L) zi ,t −1 + θ ′ ⎡⎣ xi ,t −1 × zi ,t −1 ⎤⎦ + λt + ηi + υi ,t
where x={Urban Population Growth, Capita GDP Growth, Inflation, Financial Depth, Institution, Real Interest}; z=Current Account
Deficits/GDP; β(L) a vector of polynomials in the lag operator; λt a time effect common to all countries; ηi a permanent but unobservable countryspecific effect; υi,t an error term. The ‘Dynamic Panel’ regressions (columns 1-5) use Arellano and Bond (1991)’s GMM estimators. The ‘Fixed
Effects’ regressions use ‘least squares dummy variable’ (LSDV) estimation. The variables are corrected for unit root; first-differenced, detrended). The sample period is 1990 to 2005. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. ***, **, * signifies 1, 5, and 10 level of significance.
Coefficient Estimates of
Explanatory Variables Lag
Lagged Real Exchange Rates
1
Urban Population Growth
1
Capita GDP Growth
1
Inflation
1
Financial Depth
1
Institution
1

5-lag
-.47
(.05) ***
-.03
(.92)
-.08
(.20)
-.18
(.24)
-5.25
(4.35)
10.57
(6.66)

Dynamic Panel Estimation
4-lag
3-lag
-.44
(.05) ***
-.44
(.05) ***
-.04
(.95)
-.01
(.95)
-.12
(.21)
-.10
(.21)
-.17
(.24)
-.13
(.24)
-5.20
(4.49)
-5.18
(4.48)
6.97
(6.81)
6.86
(6.80)

2-lag
-.44
(.05) ***
-.02
(.95)
-.12
(.20)
-.12
(.24)
-5.30
(4.45)
7.23
(6.77)

1-lag
-.44
(.05) ***
-.02
(.95)
-.12
(.20)
-.12
(.24)
-5.28
(4.45)
7.22
(6.75)

-.47
.56
.01
-.29
-5.31
7.89

Fixed Effects
5-lag
3-lag
(.05) ***
-.47
(.05) ***
(1.04)
.58
(1.06)
(.20)
.01
(.21)
(.23)
-.14
(.23)
(4.44)
-4.71
(4.56)
(6.08)
4.33
(6.20)

Real Interest

1

-.30

(.31)

-.30

(.32)

-.25

(.32)

-.24

(.32)

-.24

(.32)

-.56

(.31) *

CA Deficits/GDP

1
2
3
4
5

.03
-.12
-.21
-.36
-.32

(.17)
(.15)
(.11) *
(.09) ***
(.08) ***

.15
.00
-.02
-.11

(.18)
(.16)
(.11)
(.08)

.19
.02
.02

(.17)
(.16)
(.10)

.17
-.00

(.17)
(.15)

.17

(.17)

.10
-.02
-.12
-.34
-.30

(.16)
(.14)
(.10)
(.09) ***
(.08) ***

Inflation*CA Deficits
Financial Depth*CA Deficits
Institution*CA Deficits
p-value/R-Square
Observations
Countries

1
1
1

-.01
1.40
.73

.00
4.37
1.86

(.05)
(4.53)
(1.90)

.00
5.30
1.98

(.05)
(4.49)
(1.90)

.01
5.31
2.01

(.04)
(4.46)
(1.87)

.01
5.31
2.01

(.04)
(4.45)
(1.87)

-.04
.94
.75
.15
344
40

341
40

(.05)
(4.44)
(1.87)

341
40

341
40

341
40

33

341
40

(.04)
(4.76)
(1.76)

Pooled OLS
5-lag
-.46
(.12) ***
.32
(.75)
.09
(.14)
-.02
(.11)
-4.54
(2.29) **
11.01
(5.80) *

-.41

(.32)

-.20

(.23)

.21
.05
.05

(.16)
(.15)
(.10)

.13
.00
-.06
-.29
-.27

(.09)
(.07)
(.05)
(.09) ***
(.11) **

-.02
5.70
1.82
.10
344
40

(.05)
(4.76)
(1.79)

-.04
.53
.53
.23
344

(.03)
(2.81)
(.74)

Table 10 – Replacing Real Estate Appreciation with Stock Market Appreciation.
The dynamic equation for the appreciation of stock markets (yi,t; %change per year of stock indices/GDP deflator) is

yi ,t = α yi ,t −1 + γ ′xi ,t −1 + β ′( L) zi ,t −1 + θ ′ ⎡⎣ xi ,t −1 × zi ,t −1 ⎤⎦ + λt + ηi + υi ,t
where x={Urban Population Growth, Capita GDP Growth, Inflation, Financial Depth, Institution, Real Interest}; z=Current Account
Deficits/GDP; β(L) a vector of polynomials in the lag operator; λt a time effect common to all countries; ηi a permanent but unobservable countryspecific effect; υi,t an error term. The ‘Dynamic Panel’ regressions (columns 1-5) use Arellano and Bond (1991)’s GMM estimators. The ‘Fixed
Effects’ regressions use ‘least squares dummy variable’ (LSDV) estimation. The variables are corrected for unit root; first-differenced, detrended). The sample period is 1990 to 2005. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. ***, **, * signifies 1, 5, and 10 level of significance.
Coefficient Estimates of
Explanatory Variables Lag
5-lag
Lagged Stock Market Appreciation/GDP Deflator
1
-.32
(.05) ***
Urban Population Growth
1 11.77
(3.69) ***
Capita GDP Growth
1
-.46
(.78)
Inflation
1
.21
(.21)
Financial Depth
1
-1.38 (16.72)
Institution
1 -20.83 (30.70)

Dynamic Panel Estimation
4-lag
3-lag
2-lag
-.32
(.05) ***
-.33
(.05) ***
-.32
(.05) ***
11.64
(3.69) ***
11.70
(3.69) ***
11.86
(3.68) ***
-.47
(.78)
-.44
(.77)
-.38
(.77)
.17
(.21)
.20
(.20)
.16
(.19)
-1.09 (16.72)
-1.04 (16.70)
-.54 (16.69)
-16.42 (30.10)
-18.20 (29.99)
-15.68 (29.83)

Real Interest

1

1.14

(.67) *

1.14

(.67) *

1.15

(.67) *

CA Deficits/GDP

1
2
3
4
5

-1.40
-.17
-.17
-.08
.25

(.66) **
(.48)
(.34)
(.35)
(.34)

-1.46
-.28
-.32
-.26

(.65) **
(.48)
(.32)
(.30)

-1.39
-.23
-.23

(.65) **
(.48)
(.31)

Inflation*CA Deficits
Financial Depth*CA Deficits
Institution*CA Deficits
p-value/R-Square
Observations
Countries

1
1
1

.04
-9.34
11.55
343
41

(.06)
(13.24)
(8.90)

.03
-10.54
10.45
343
41

(.06)
(13.07)
(8.71)

.04
-8.78
10.80

(.06)
(12.89)
(8.69)

343
41

.98
-1.29
-.09

.02
-10.24
9.01
343
41

34

(.63)
(.63) **
(.43)

(.05)
(12.74)
(8.35)

1-lag
-.32
(.05) ***
11.85
(3.67) ***
-.38
(.77)
.13
(.14)
-.18 (16.68)
-15.61 (29.79)
.95
-1.26

.02
-12.06
9.19
343
41

(.61)
(.63) **

(.03)
(8.48)
(8.31)

-.32
9.75
.13
.67
-3.52
14.91

Fixed Effects
5-lag
3-lag
(.06) ***
-.33
(.06) ***
(4.31) **
9.82
(4.30) **
(.84)
.17
(.83)
(.49)
.68
(.48)
(18.51)
-3.45 (18.46)
(29.07)
16.08 (28.47)

Pooled OLS
5-lag
-.22
(.15) ***
9.24
(4.74)
-.41
(1.25)
.60
(.78)
-7.78 (14.90) **
4.46 (23.44) *

1.62

(.76) **

1.61

(.76) **

1.27

-1.51
-.24
-.31
-.16
.16

(.65) **
(.50)
(.37)
(.36)
(.34)

-1.49
-.25
-.30

(.65) **
(.49)
(.33)

-1.15
-.43
-.35
-.40
-.00

.17
-19.97
3.47
.09
347
41

(.15)
(17.08)
(9.11)

.17
-19.04
3.01
.09
347
41

(.14)
(16.54)
(8.91)

.11
-12.30
3.49
.18
347

(.89)
(.72)
(.74)
(.26)
(.37) ***
(.32) **
(.23)
(20.54)
(4.43)

Table 11 – Adding Loan to Value Ratio to the Explanatory Variables.
The dynamic equation for the appreciation of real estate prices (yi,t; %change per year of real estate prices/GDP deflator) is

yi ,t = α yi ,t −1 + γ ′xi ,t −1 + β ′( L) zi ,t −1 + θ ′ ⎡⎣ xi ,t −1 × zi ,t −1 ⎤⎦ + λt + ηi + υi ,t
where x={Urban Population Growth, Capita GDP Growth, Inflation, Financial Depth, Institution, Real Interest, Loan to Value}; z=Current
Account Deficits/GDP; β(L) a vector of polynomials in the lag operator; λt a time effect common to all countries; ηi a permanent but unobservable
country-specific effect; υi,t an error term. Loan to Value is available as a cross-section approximate and enters as an interaction term. The
‘Dynamic Panel’ regressions (columns 1-5) use Arellano and Bond (1991)’s GMM estimators. The ‘Fixed Effects’ regressions use ‘least squares
dummy variable’ (LSDV) estimation. The variables are corrected for unit root; first-differenced, de-trended). The sample period is 1990 to 2005.
Robust standard errors are in parentheses. ***, **, * signifies 1, 5, and 10 level of significance.
Coefficient Estimates of
5-lag
Explanatory Variables Lag
Lagged Real Estate/GDP Deflator Appreciation
1
-.49
(.10)
Urban Population Growth
1
2.52
(1.52)
Capita GDP Growth
1
.74
(.31)
Inflation
1
-.33
(.04)
Financial Depth
1
-4.94
(7.33)
Institution
1 -14.53 (11.29)

***
*
**
***

Dynamic Panel Estimation
4-lag
3-lag
2-lag
-.49
(.10) ***
-.50
(.10) ***
-.41
(.10) ***
2.47
(1.52)
2.44
(1.52)
2.43
(1.56)
.74
(.31) **
.75
(.31) **
.56
(.31) *
-.33
(.04) ***
-.34
(.04) ***
-.31
(.04) ***
-4.68
(7.32)
-4.61
(7.31)
-6.67
(7.47)
-13.44 (11.20)
-13.15 (11.18)
-15.33 (11.44)

Real Interest

1

-2.66

(.22) ***

-2.65

(.22) ***

-2.65

(.22) ***

-2.64

CA Deficits/GDP

1
2
3
4
5

-2.12
.56
.63
.16
.13

(3.23)
(.16) ***
(.15) ***
(.14)
(.14)

-2.41
.49
.56
.09

(3.20)
(.14) ***
(.13) ***
(.12)

-2.50
.45
.52

(3.20)
(.13) ***
(.12) ***

-2.58
.23

(3.28)
(.13) *

-2.38

Inflation*CA Deficits
Financial Depth*CA Deficits
Institution*CA Deficits
Loan to Value*CA Deficits
p-value/R-Square
Observations
Countries

1
1
1

.01
12.69
-9.19
.05

(.00) ***
(2.67) ***
(3.16) ***
(.05)

.01
13.06
-9.54
.05

(.00) ***
(2.63) ***
(3.12) ***
(.05)

.01
13.10
-9.58
.05

(.00) ***
(2.63) ***
(3.13) ***
(.05)

.01
12.15
-7.81
.05

(.00) ***
(2.68) ***
(3.18) **
(.05)

.01
13.94
-9.34
.05

354
41

354
41

354
41

354
41

35

(.23) ***

Fixed Effects
Pooled OLS
1-lag
5-lag
3-lag
5-lag
-.42
(.10) ***
-.60
(.10) ***
-.62
(.10) ***
-.55
(.13) ***
2.43
(1.54)
1.74
(1.64)
1.69
(1.65)
1.56
(1.24)
.55
(.31) *
.56
(.30) *
.62
(.30) **
.51
(.52)
-.31
(.04) ***
-.21
(.04) ***
-.23
(.04) ***
-.18
(.07) **
-7.20
(7.39)
4.99
(7.03)
4.53
(7.07)
2.84
(9.55)
-16.04 (11.33)
-15.81
(9.37) *
-12.98
(9.33)
-15.98 (11.91)
-2.57

354
41

(.22) ***

-1.76

(.23) ***

-1.81

(.23) ***

-1.78

(.75) **

(3.24)

-2.87
-.12
.58
.31
.21

(3.00)
(.16)
(.12) ***
(.14) **
(.13)

-3.66
-.20
.44

(3.00)
(.16)
(.11) ***

-2.40
-.07
.61
.36
.25

(4.16)
(.24)
(.24) **
(.15) **
(.12) **

(.00) ***
(2.47) ***
(3.03) ***
(.05)

.04
42.92
-5.69
.05
.73
354
41

(.00) ***
(5.48) ***
(2.91) *
(.04)

.03
39.79
-6.89
.07
.72
354
41

(.00) ***
(5.35) ***
(2.87) **
(.04)

.04
43.26
-5.16
.05
.74
354

(.01) ***
(16.43) ***
(2.99) *
(.06)

Table 12 – Using Investable Indices by Types of Real Estate Markets.
The dynamic equation for the appreciation of real estate prices (yi,t; % change per year of real estate prices/GDP deflator) is

yi ,t = α yi ,t −1 + γ ′xi ,t −1 + β ′( L) zi ,t −1 + θ ′ ⎡⎣ xi ,t −1 × zi ,t −1 ⎤⎦ + λt + ηi + υi ,t
where x={Urban Population Growth, Capita GDP Growth, Inflation, Financial Depth, Institution, Real Interest, Loan to Value};
z=Current Account Deficits/GDP; β(L) a vector of polynomials in the lag operator; λt a time effect common to all countries; ηi a
permanent but unobservable country-specific effect; υi,t an error term. Loan to Value is available as a cross-section approximate and
enters as an interaction term. The estimation uses Arellano and Bond (1991)’s dynamic panel GMM estimators. The variables are
corrected for unit root; first-differenced, de-trended). The sample period is 1995 to 2007, covering twelve countries with investable
indices compiled by the Investment Property Databank (IPD). Robust standard errors are in parentheses. ***, **, * signifies 1, 5, and
10 level of significance.
Coefficient Estimates of
Explanatory Variables Lag
Lagged Real Estate/GDP Deflator Appreciation
1
Lagged Real Estate/GDP Deflator Appreciation
2
Urban Population Growth
1
Capita GDP Growth
1
Inflation
1
Financial Depth
1
Institution
1

Dynamic Panel Estimation using Investable Indices by Types of Real Estate Markets
Total
Residential/Housing
Office
Retail
Industrial
-.15
(.09)
.02
(.14)
-.00
(.07)
-.37
(.13) ***
-.23
(.10) **
-.21
(.09) **
.03
(.12)
-.23
(.07) ***
-.21
(.15)
-.11
(.09)
-.27
(.88)
9.42
(4.07) **
.30
(1.01)
-.72
(1.01)
-.21
(.84)
.46
(.27) *
1.12
(.33) ***
.75
(.31) **
.42
(.31)
.38
(.25)
-1.13
(.46) **
-1.09
(.59) *
-.81
(.50)
-1.41
(.56) **
-1.48
(.45) ***
-4.35
(3.05)
-9.31
(4.08) **
-12.42
(3.33) ***
-3.99
(3.34)
-8.03
(2.82) ***
14.47 (10.30)
23.29 (19.36)
6.05 (11.76)
20.84 (11.87) *
3.95 (11.07)

Real Interest

1

-.65

(.38) *

CA Deficits/GDP

1
2
1
1
1

5.28
-2.66
-.36
-2.84
.84

(1.78) ***
(2.53)
(.15) **
(3.78)
(1.89)

-2.51
7.35
-.24
-11.27
6.08

(2.66)
(2.65) ***
(.24)
(5.96) *
(6.81)

7.64
4.68
-.27
2.53
1.25

1
2

-.08
.04
.00
61
12

(.03) ***
(.04)

.03
-.11
.00
38
8

(.04)
(.04) ***

-.11
-.07
.00
62
12

Inflation*CA Deficits
Financial Depth*CA Deficits
Institution*CA Deficits
Loan to Value*CA Deficits
Loan to Value*CA Deficits
p-value
Observations
Countries

-.34

36

(.53)

-.46

(.41)

-.88

(.46) *

-.70

(.37) *

(1.99) ***
(2.82) *
(.18)
(4.24)
(2.18)

5.92
-5.07
-.32
-1.39
.28

(2.32) **
(2.84) *
(.18) *
(4.35)
(2.23)

3.06
-1.49
-.16
-3.27
2.96

(1.68) *
(2.38)
(.15)
(3.66)
(2.01)

(.03) ***
(.04)

-.09
.08
.00
61
12

-.05
.02
.00
60
12

(.02) *
(.04)

(.03) ***
(.04) *

Table 13 – Alternative Specifications.
The top left panel applies panel Tobit regression to the sample censoring negative appreciation of the real estate prices (including only % change
per year of real estate prices/GDP deflator greater than zero). The bottom two panels ignore the short- to medium-run dynamics and lagged effects
of the current account deficits. The ‘Average Change’ sample uses n-year average %change per year of the explanatory variables. The
`Cumulative Change’ sample uses n-year cumulative %change per year of the explanatory variables. The sample period is 1990 to 2005.
Standard errors are in parentheses. ***, **, * signifies 1, 5, and 10 level of significance.
5-lag

Lagged Explanatory
Appreciation/Depreciation
of Real Estate/GDP Deflator
Lagged Real Estate/GDP Deflator Appreciation
Urban Population Growth
Capita GDP Growth
Inflation
Financial Depth
Institution
Real Interest
CA Deficits (-1)
CA Deficits (-2)
CA Deficits (-3)
CA Deficits (-4)
CA Deficits (-5)
Inflation*CA Deficits
Financial Depth*CA Deficits
Institution*CA Deficits
p-value
Observations
Countries

4-lag

3-lag

2-lag

5-lag

4-lag

"Appreciation of Real Estate Prices" > 0
-.32
.77
-.70
-.08
-.73
-5.16
-.27
.20
.40
.05
.04
.09
.02
5.66
-.45
.00
354
41

Average/Cumulative Changes
of the Explanatory Variable
Lagged Real Estate/GDP Deflator Appreciation
-.26
Urban Population Growth
-.42
Capita GDP Growth
-2.64
Inflation
-.46
Financial Depth -57.25
Institution -13.59
Real Interest
-9.53
CA Deficits
-.18
Inflation*CA Deficits
.21
Financial Depth*CA Deficits 118.71
Institution*CA Deficits
84.41
p-value
.00
Observations
354
Countries
41

(.09)
(1.23)
(.24)
(.04)
(5.37)
(6.74)
(.21)
(.18)
(.11)
(.14)
(.13)
(.10)
(.00)
(4.38)
(2.09)

***
***
**

***

***

-.32
.77
-.70
-.08
-.86
-4.79
-.27
.18
.39
.04
.02
.02
5.27
-.60
.00
354
41

(.09)
(1.24)
(.24)
(.04)
(5.38)
(6.76)
(.21)
(.18)
(.11)
(.14)
(.13)

***
***
**

***

(.00) ***
(4.39)
(2.10)

-.32
.76
-.70
-.08
-.87
-4.74
-.27
.18
.39
.04

.02
5.14
-.62
.00
354
41

(.09)
(1.24)
(.24)
(.04)
(5.39)
(6.75)
(.21)
(.17)
(.11)
(.14)

***
***
**

***

(.00) ***
(4.34)
(2.10)

***

***
*
***
***
***
***

-.20
-.19
-1.09
-.78
-14.92
.12
-7.91
-1.93
.35
52.37
24.06
.00
354
41

(.05)
(6.00)
(1.37)
(.11)
(28.60)
(33.82)
(.71)
(.70)
(.04)
(8.46)
(12.99)

***

***

***
***
***
***
*

-.08
-3.07
-.78
-.78
8.96
-6.96
-5.85
-1.06
.25
6.65
26.96
.00
354
41

2-lag

"Appreciation of Real Estate Prices" < 0
Panel Tobit Estimation
-.32
(.09) ***
-.42
.77
(1.24)
1.90
-.70
(.24) ***
-.24
-.08
(.04) **
-1.94
-.89
(5.38)
-3.50
-4.64
(6.75)
-1.45
-.26
(.21)
-3.06
.18
(.17)
.24
.38
(.11) ***
.05
.24
.22
.22
.02
(.00) ***
.06
5.16
(4.33)
11.59
-.62
(2.10)
-4.36
.00
.00
354
354
41
41

(.10)
(1.82)
(.47)
(.76)
(6.77)
(10.29)
(.46)
(.28)
(.35)
(.49)
(.33)
(.26)
(.02)
(12.52)
(3.88)

***

**

***

***

Average Changes
(.04)
(5.55)
(1.76)
(.13)
(34.00)
(37.63)
(.74)
(.92)
(.03)
(17.51)
(20.00)

3-lag

-.45
(.08) ***
1.53 (1.49)
-.39
(.29)
-2.39
(.16) ***
-3.65 (5.89)
-1.79 (8.30)
-3.32
(.23) ***
.15
(.24)
.14
(.25)
-.06
(.11)
-.01
(.10)

-.45
(.08) ***
1.53 (1.49)
-.38
(.29)
-2.38
(.15) ***
-3.62 (5.88)
-1.83 (8.29)
-3.31
(.22) ***
.15
(.23)
.14
(.25)
-.06
(.10)

-.46
(.08) ***
1.55 (1.50)
-.33
(.27)
-2.34
(.14) ***
-3.40 (5.89)
-1.54 (8.37)
-3.30
(.22) ***
.18
(.23)
.16
(.25)

.07
(.01) ***
4.14 (5.78)
-2.70 (2.25)
.00
354
41

.07
(.01) ***
4.30 (5.50)
-2.69 (2.25)
.00
354
41

.07
(.01) ***
4.70 (5.47)
-3.00 (2.22)
.00
354
41

Cumulative Changes
(.05)
(4.41)
(.97)
(.09)
(21.06)
(25.16)
(.52)
(.77)
(.02)
(3.33)
(9.46)

37

***

***
***
**
***

Dynamic Panel Estimation
-.45
(.06) ***
-.27
(.04) ***
.58
(2.21)
-.08 (1.10)
.37
(.54)
-.53
(.35)
-.62
(.06) ***
-.10
(.03) ***
4.26 (13.09)
-11.01 (6.74)
-9.14 (16.40)
-2.75 (7.46)
-4.80
(.31) ***
-1.94
(.15) ***
.13
(.42)
-.03
(.18)
.07
(.01) ***
.01
(.00) ***
-.89
(1.15)
4.76
(.69) ***
17.17
(3.76) ***
3.45
(.79) ***
.00
.00
354
354
41
41

-.20
(.05) ***
-.03 (1.50)
-.27
(.34)
-.19
(.03) ***
-3.60 (7.14)
-.04 (8.46)
-1.98
(.18) ***
-.48
(.17) ***
.02
(.00) ***
3.27
(.53) ***
1.51
(.81) *
.00
354
41

-.08
-1.01
-.26
-.26
3.01
-2.37
-1.95
-.36
.03
.74
3.00
.00
354
41

(.05)
(1.47)
(.32)
(.03)
(7.00)
(8.39)
(.17)
(.26)
(.00)
(.37)
(1.05)

***

***
***
**
***

-.45
(.06) ***
.29 (1.10)
.18
(.27)
-.31
(.03) ***
2.13 (6.54)
-4.61 (8.20)
-2.40
(.15) ***
.06
(.21)
.02
(.00) ***
-.22
(.29)
4.29
(.94) ***
.00
354
41

Table 14 – Sign-Preserving Trend Current Accounts and GDP Size Interactions.
Countries may run current account deficits/surpluses for an extended period, followed by a brief reversal. To account for this trend pattern, the

(

)

(

)

current accounts can be de-trended using the sign-preserving trend: sgn CAi ,t −1 × trend ;sgn CAi ,t −1 =

CAi ,t −1
CAi ,t −1

. The GDP Size is the average

over 1980-1989. The sample period for the estimation is 1990 to 2005. Standard errors are in parentheses. ***, **, * signifies 1, 5, and 10 level
of significance.
Coefficient Estimates of
Explanatory Variables Lag
5-lag
Lagged Real Estate/GDP Deflator Appreciation
1
-.51
(.10) ***
Urban Population Growth
1
2.46
(1.57)
Capita GDP Growth
1
.81
(.31) **
Inflation
1
-.33
(.04) ***
Financial Depth
1
-7.15
(7.52)
Institution
1 -16.29 (11.51)

Sign-Preserving Trend Current Accounts
4-lag
3-lag
2-lag
-.51
(.10) ***
-.51
(.10) ***
-.41
(.10) ***
2.40
(1.57)
2.38
(1.57)
2.46
(1.60)
.81
(.31) **
.81
(.31) **
.65
(.32) **
-.33
(.04) ***
-.33
(.04) ***
-.30
(.04) ***
-6.63
(7.53)
-6.51
(7.51)
-8.59
(7.68)
-15.14 (11.46)
-14.96 (11.44)
-16.21 (11.73)

Real Interest

1

-2.76

(.23) ***

-2.75

(.22) ***

-2.75

(.22) ***

-2.73

CA Deficits

1
2
3
4
5

.93
.53
.64
.19
.19

(.29) ***
(.15) ***
(.14) ***
(.14)
(.14)

.89
.44
.55
.09

(.29) ***
(.13) ***
(.13) ***
(.13)

.86
.41
.52

(.29) ***
(.13) ***
(.13) ***

.74
.27

Inflation*CA Deficits
Financial Depth*CA Deficits
Institution*CA Deficits

1
1
1

.01
10.22
-5.24

(.00) ***
(2.79) ***
(3.33)

.01
10.87
-6.01

(.00) ***
(2.74) ***
(3.27) *

.01
10.87
-5.98

(.00) ***
(2.73) ***
(3.27) *

.01
9.24
-3.19

GDP Size*CA Deficits

1
2
3
4
5

p-value
Observations
Countries

.00
354
41

.00
354
41

.00
354
41

.00
354
41

38

(.23) ***
(.29) **
(.13) **

(.00) ***
(2.77) ***
(3.27)

GDP Size Interactions
1-lag
Normal Trend
Sign-Preserving Trend
-.43
(.10) ***
-.48
(.10) ***
-.49
(.10) ***
2.46
(1.59)
2.55
(1.54) *
2.32
(1.52)
.63
(.32) **
.70
(.31) **
.63
(.31) **
-.30
(.04) ***
-.33
(.04) ***
-.33
(.04) ***
-9.20
(7.61)
-4.34
(7.38)
-4.04
(7.32)
-16.93 (11.62)
-15.38 (11.29)
-13.08 (11.20)

No Variable Transformation
5-lag
.03
(.02)
.03
(1.06)
1.10
(.19) ***
-.04
(.06)
.06
(.04)
-3.96
(1.37) ***

-2.66

(.23) ***

-2.64

(.22) ***

-2.63

(.22) ***

.70

(.12) ***

.85

(.29) ***

1.43
.65
.79
.27
.20

(.42) ***
(.21) ***
(.18) ***
(.17)
(.17)

1.83
.48
.78
.28
.24

(.48) ***
(.20) **
(.19) ***
(.18)
(.19)

-1.03
-.54
.21
-.26
-.03

(.94)
(.19) ***
(.20)
(.20)
(.19)

.01
11.47
-5.14

(.00) ***
(2.55) ***
(3.12) *

.01
13.77
-8.50

(.00) ***
(2.83) ***
(3.13) ***

.01
15.33
-7.73

(.00) ***
(2.80) ***
(3.12) **

.07
.00
.09

(.02) ***
(.00)
(.18)

.00
354
41

-.36
-.17
-.29
-.16
-.10
.00
354
41

(.24)
(.19)
(.19)
(.21)
(.22)

-.68
-.13
-.38
-.20
-.15
.00
354
41

(.34) **
(.26)
(.26)
(.32)
(.33)
.00
354
41

Table 15 – Reverse Causality.
The dynamic equation for the Current Account Deficits/GDP (%) is

zi ,t = α zi ,t −1 + γ ′xi ,t −1 + β ′( L) yi ,t −1 + θ ′ ⎡⎣ xi ,t −1 × yi ,t −1 ⎤⎦ + λt + ηi + υi ,t
where x={Urban Population Growth, Capita GDP Growth, Inflation, Financial Depth, Institution, Real Interest}; y = appreciation of real estate
prices (yi,t; %change per year of real estate prices/GDP deflator); β(L) a vector of polynomials in the lag operator; λt a time effect common to all
countries; ηi a permanent but unobservable country-specific effect; υi,t an error term. The ‘Dynamic Panel’ regressions (columns 1-5) use Arellano
and Bond (1991)’s GMM estimators. The ‘Fixed Effects’ regressions use ‘least squares dummy variable’ (LSDV) estimation. The variables are
corrected for unit root; first-differenced, de-trended). The sample period is 1990 to 2005. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. ***, **, *
signifies 1, 5, and 10 level of significance.
Coefficient Estimates of
Explanatory Variables Lag
Lagged CA Deficits/GDP
1
Urban Population Growth
1
Capita GDP Growth
1
Inflation
1
Financial Depth
1
Institution
1

5-lag
-.16
(.07) **
-.01
(.70)
-.03
(.13)
-.12
(.19)
-.90
(2.66)
-5.50
(6.09)

4-lag
-.15
(.07) **
.07
(.52)
.01
(.10)
.01
(.03)
-.51
(2.43)
-4.36
(5.15)

Dynamic Panel Estimation
3-lag
-.14
(.06) **
.05
(.44)
.01
(.09)
-.02
(.01)
-.58
(2.22)
-1.02
(3.53)

2-lag
-.13
(.06) **
-.09
(.41)
-.06
(.08)
-.00
(.01)
-.40
(1.85)
-.87
(2.50)

1-lag
-.08
(.03) ***
-.14
(.36)
-.03
(.07)
-.00
(.01)
.23
(1.70)
-1.90
(2.42)

-.15
.03
-.03
-.12
-.80
-6.44

Fixed Effects
5-lag
3-lag
(.07) **
-.13
(.06) **
(.70)
.00
(.46)
(.13)
.02
(.09)
(.18)
-.02
(.01)
(2.64)
-.54
(2.16)
(5.78)
-1.73
(3.45)

Pooled OLS
5-lag
-.14
(.10)
-.07
(.20)
.01
(.08)
-.05
(.02) **
-.53
(.84)
-5.95
(9.28)

Real Interest

1

-.24

(.26)

-.09

(.10)

-.06

(.08)

.03

(.07)

.03

(.06)

-.23

(.26)

-.05

(.08)

-.14

(.09)

Real Estate/GDP Deflator Appreciation

1
2
3
4
5

-.04
-.02
-.02
-.01
-.00

(.05)
(.04)
(.03)
(.02)
(.01)

-.01
-.01
-.01
-.00

(.03)
(.03)
(.02)
(.01)

-.02
-.00
-.00

(.03)
(.02)
(.01)

-.00
.00

(.03)
(.01)

-.01

(.02)

-.03
-.02
-.02
-.01
-.00

(.05)
(.04)
(.03)
(.02)
(.01)

-.02
-.00
-.00

(.03)
(.02)
(.01)

-.03
-.02
-.01
-.01
-.00

(.01) **
(.01) ***
(.01) **
(.00)
(.00)

Inflation*Real Estate/GDP Deflator Appreciation
Financial Depth*Real Estate/GDP Deflator Appreciation
Institution*Real Estate/GDP Deflator Appreciation
p-value/R-Square
Observations
Countries

1
1
1

.00
.12
.15

(.01)
(.52)
(.83)

.00
.04
.18

(.00)
(.46)
(.46)

.00
.10
-.11

(.00)
(.39)
(.17)

.00
.43
-.04

(.00) **
(.14) ***
(.14)

(.00) ***
(.13) ***
(.13)

.00
.13
.11
-.21
245
36

(.01)
(.51)
(.82)

.00
.10
-.05
-.15
316
39

(.00)
(.39)
(.17)

.00
.06
.12
-.02
245

(.00) ***
(.13)
(.39)

210
35

245
36

281
38

39

316
39

.00
.45
.01
352
41

Table 16 – Simultaneous-Equations and Instrumental-Variables Estimation.
This table reports the estimation with both the Real Estate/GDP Deflator Appreciation (y) and Current Account Deficits/GDP (z) as dependent
variables. Write the cross-sectional equation for each dependent variable d = {y,z} as di = θ d′ xd ,i + ε d ,i where i denotes country, xd ,i is a
specific set of explanatory variables for each dependent variable; ε d ,i an error term. x y ,i includes Urban Population Growth, Capita GDP Growth,
Inflation, Financial Depth, Institution, Real Interest Rate, Loan to Value; xz ,i includes Capita GDP Growth, Real Interest Rate, Real Exchange
Rate, and Percentage of Population Age above 65 Years Old. The sample period is 1990 to 2005. The dependent variables are 2001-05 averages.
The explanatory variables are 1990-2000 averages. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. ***, **, * signifies 1, 5, and 10 level of
significance.
Coefficient Estimates of

Explanatory Variables

avg. 1990-2000:
Urban Population Growth
Capita GDP Growth
Inflation
Financial Depth
Institution
Real Interest Rate
Loan to Value
Real Exchange Rate
Population>65 Years Old

Instrumental-Variables Estimation

Zellner's Seemingly Unrelated Regression
Real Estate/GDP Deflator
Appreciation

CA Deficits/GDP

Real Estate/GDP Deflator
Appreciation

CA Deficits/GDP

Real Estate/GDP Deflator
Appreciation

CA Deficits/GDP

avg. 2001-05

avg. 2001-05

avg. 2001-05

avg. 2001-05

avg. 2001-05

avg. 2001-05

.30
-.19
.21
-.02
.05
-.50
.05

(1.87)
(.18)
(.06) ***
(.05)
(.04)
(.07) ***
(.02) **

.16

(.25)

.02

(.12)

-.26
-.07

-.69
-.31
.20
-.07
.06
-.42
.06

(2.63)
(.25)
(.08) **
(.08)
(.05)
(.12) ***
(.03) *

(.13) **
(.07)

.18

(.27)

.22

(.20)

-.26
-.07

avg. 2001-05:
CA Deficits/GDP
Real Estate/GDP Deflator Appreciation

R-Square
Countries

Three-Stage Estimation for Simultaneous Equations

.41

.25

.64
32

32

40

*
***

.18

(.24)

***
*

.22

(.18)

-.26
-.07

.44

.25
32

(1.67)
(.20)
(.07)
(.05)
(.03)
(.09)
(.02)

(.15) *
(.08)

(.33)
.52

.71

1.00
-.36
.20
-.06
.04
-.44
.04

(.12) **
(.05)

(.26) *

(.39)

.52

.61

.25
32

(.35)

Table 17 – Granger Causality Tests on Quarterly Data of Current Account Deficits and Real Estate
Appreciation.
This table reports the p-values from Granger causality tests based on the vector autoregressions of the current
account deficits/GDP and the real estate appreciation/CPI inflation for the US and UK, including 16 lags (quarters):
16

16

16

16

τ =1

τ =1

τ =1

τ =1

Δyt = α y + ∑ψ y Δyt −τ + ∑ ζ y Δzt −τ + ω y ,t ; Δzt = α z + ∑ψ z Δyt −τ + ∑ ζ z Δzt −τ + ωz ,t . The full sample is April
1978 to March 2008.
p-value under the null of no Granger causality:
From CA Deficits
to Real Estate Appreciation

IPD data
1991Q3United Kingdom
2007Q4

United States

NCREIF data
1982Q22008Q1
Case&Shiller data
1991Q32008Q1

From Real Estate Appreciation
to CA Deficits

Total
Capital
Rental
Income
Office
Retail

.010
.017
.000
.000
.000
.002

.000
.000
.002
.000
.204
.020

Total
West
Midwest
East

.371
.054
.011
.201

.090
.000
.949
.116

10 Cities

.195

.037

41

Figure 1 – Sample Distribution of Current Account Deficits/GDP and Real
Estate/GDP Deflator Appreciation.
Using 1990-2005 sample, the current account deficits/GDP is in percent annual, with
mean=-.03 and s.d.=4.0; the real appreciation of real estate prices in annual percentage
change of real estate prices/GDP deflator, with mean=2.6 and s.d.=8.2. The top panel
provides the cross-sectional sample density distribution, with the density estimates of
Epanechnikov kernel function, for 1991-95 (dash line) and 2001-05 (solid line). The
bottom panel provides the sample frequency distribution for the whole sample (grey bar),
OECD countries (thick line) and Non-OECD countries (thin line).
Real Estate Appreciation/GDP Deflator

0

0

.005

.05

.01

.1

.015

.15

.02

Current Account Deficits/GDP

-10

0

10

20

-10

-5

0

5

10

-50

0

50

100

0

0

.1

.02

.2

.3

.04

.4

.5

.06

-20

-40

42

-20

0

20

40

60

Figure 2 – Patterns of Current Account Deficits/GDP and Real Appreciation of Real Estate and
Stock Markets: National Indices, Annual.
This figure depicts cross-country averages of current account deficits/GDP (grey area, % on left-axis
scale), real exchange rate appreciation (connected Q, % on right-axis scale), the ‘real appreciation of real
estate prices’=change per year of real estate prices/GDP deflator (thick line, % on right-axis scale), and
the ‘real appreciation of stock markets’=change per year of stock market indices/GDP deflator (connected
S, % on right-axis scale). The whole sample of 43 includes USA, 24 OECD ex-USA, and 18 Non-OECD
countries.
CA Deficits/GDP (area) | Real Estate (thick)| Real Exchange Rates (Q) | Stock Market (S)

Q

S

2000

AR(1) coefficients:

40
20
-20

2005
60

Non_OECD

40
S

S

S

S
S
S
S
Q
S Q
Q Q Q
S Q Q Q Q
Q Q
S Q Q Q
Q
S
S Q
Q
S
S

S

S

-6

-40

0

1995

2000

2005

20

Q
Q
S S

S

1990

1995

0

Q

S

-40

Q
S Q
Q
S Q
Q Q
Q
Q
S
Q

S

S

0

S
Q
Q Q

0

0

40
20

S

-2

S

S

S

S

-4

2

S S
Q

S
S
S
Q
Q Q Q
Q Q Q Q
Q Q
Q
Q Q Q Q Q
Q
S

S

0

S

S

1990

-20

6

USA
S

-.5

2005

S
S

S

-20

2000

S

S

2

1995

S S

-1.5 -1

S

-20

S

0

S
S
S Q
S Q Q
Q Q Q Q Q
Q Q Q
Q
Q Q
Q Q
S
Q

S

20

0
-.5
-2 -1.5 -1

S

S

S

4

S
S

S

1990

S

S

S

S

OECD_ex_USA

.5

40

.5

Whole_Sample

S

1990

1995

2000

2005

Whole Sample

OECD ex. USA

USA

Non OECD

CA Deficits/GDP

.724
(.176)***

.876
(.154)***

.959
(.025)***

.559
(.194)***

Real Exchange Rates

.435
(.248)*

.803
(.121)***

.807
(.209)***

.440
(.265)*

Real Estate/GDP Deflator Appreciation

.378
(.172)**

.357
(.166)**

.277
(.236)

.259
(.173)

Stock Market/GDP Deflator Appreciation

-.141
(.237)

-.022
(.242)

.256
(.349)

-.153
(.192)

Robust standard errors are in parentheses. ***, **, * signifies 1, 5, and 10 level of significance.

43

Figure 3 – Patterns of Current Account Deficits/GDP and Real Appreciation of Real Estate and
Stock Markets: Investable Indices, Annual.
This figure depicts current account deficits/GDP (grey area, % on left-axis scale), the ‘real appreciation of
real estate prices’= change per year of investable real estate prices/GDP deflator (thick line, % on rightaxis scale; source: Investment Property Databank), and the ‘real appreciation of stock markets’=change
per year of investable stock market indices/GDP deflator (connected S, % on right-axis scale; source:
MSCI). The 12 countries below have complete time series of these variables over the period of 1998 to
2007 (10 annual observations).

1998

AR(1) Coefficients:

-50
-100
-20

-6

0

0
-20
4
2

S

S

S

S

0.89
0.51
0.65
0.82
0.52
-0.16
0.30
0.60
0.85
0.40
0.46
0.69

30

S

-20 -10

3

0

0

S S S

20

8
6

ZAF

10

20

2007

S
S

-40

-8

-40

S

1998

2007

0

S

Real Estate/GDP Deflator
Appreciation

S

1998

2007

Stock Market/GDP Deflator
Appreciation

(0.12)***
(0.27)*
(0.17)***
(0.17)***
(0.31)*
(0.52)
(0.30)
(0.24)**
(0.09)***
(0.26)
(0.22)**
(0.14)***

Robust standard errors are in parentheses. ***, **, * signifies 1, 5, and 10 level of significance.

44

40
20

-4

S S S

S

1998

(0.18)***
(0.20)***
(0.04)***
(0.29)**
(0.11)***
(0.18)***
(0.04)***
(0.16)***
(0.15)***
(0.04)***
(0.04)***
(0.07)***

100
50

-8
-9
-10
-2

S
S

S

-10

4

S

2

-50
2007

0

-5
-7

-6

20
0
-20
-40
40
20

NLD

S

10

-2
-4
-6
6
2
0
-2
6

S

S

5

2007

S

USA

S

S
S

S

S

0
-6

CA Deficits/GDP

S
S S

S

2007

S

1998

0.48
0.72
0.94
0.73
0.85
0.80
0.95
0.63
0.61
0.95
0.94
0.92

S

S

S S

1998

S

S S

S

S

2007

S

S

S

40

2
0

20
0
0
50

-2
-4

-20

2

4

-10

S

S

S
S

-8

6

S

S

S

S

S

1998

S

0

S

SWE

S

IRL

S

S

2007

S

10

8

S S

-10

2
1
0

-40

S

S

S

S

S

1998
20

10

NZL
S

S S

-20

0
-20

-1
-2

S
S

2007

S

S

FIN

S

S

2007

-20

S

S S

1998

4

S

S

-3

S

1998

AUS
CAN
DEU
FIN
FRA
GBR
IRL
NLD
NZL
SWE
USA
ZAF

40

GBR

S

S

S

2007

S

S S S

S

-20

-1
-2

S

3

0

S

20

40

FRA

S

S

S

1998

4

2007

S
S

20

S

1998

S

S

S

S
S

-40

-10

2

S

1

0

20
0

S

S

S

S

S

-3

4
3

S

S

DEU
S

S
S

10

5

S

S

CAN

S

S

10

30

6

AUS

1

CA Deficits/GDP (area) | Stock Market Appreciation (S) | Real Estate Appreciation (thick)

0.09
-0.11
0.32
0.12
0.34
0.69
0.19
0.54
-0.51
0.19
0.57
0.39

(0.29)
(0.40)
(0.30)
(0.42)
(0.32)
(0.18)***
(0.26)
(0.25)**
(0.25)**
(0.36)
(0.15)***
(0.25)

Figure 4 – Patterns of Different Types of Real Estate Indices.
This figure depicts cross-country averages of current account deficits/GDP (%), the ‘real
appreciation of stock markets’=change per year of investable stock market indices/GDP
deflator (%; source: MSCI investable), and the ‘real appreciation of real estate
prices’=change per year of investable real estate prices/CPI inflation (%; source:
Investment Property Databank) for three type of real estate markets: housing/residential
(H), office (O), retail (R), and industrial (I). The sample includes 12 countries with
complete time series of these variables over the period of 1998 to 2007 (10 annual
observations).
Sectoral Appreciation/CPI Inflation
Residential(H) | Office(O) | Retail(R) | Industrial(I)

10

10

Total Real Estate Appreciation/CPI Inflation

O

T

T

I
H
R

R
O
I
H

T

I

O
I
H
R

I
R
O
H

H
O

H

2
1998

2001

2004

2007

1998

2001

Stock Market Appreciation/CPI Inflation
25

2007

Current Account Deficits/GDP

S

C
C

C

C

5

S
S
S

10

C

4

S

C

S

2001

2004

C

C
C

S

3

S

5

S

1998

2004

6

S

15

20

H
R
I

T

I
O
R
H

R
I

I
O
R
H

2

T

O

O

4

T

4

T

R
I

8
T

6

6

8

T
T

O
R
H

2007

45

C

1998

2001

2004

2007

Figure 5 – Cross-Country Standard Deviation: National Indices, Annual.
This figure depicts cross-country standard deviation of current account deficits/GDP (%),
real exchange rate appreciation (%), the ‘real appreciation of real estate prices’=change per
year of real estate prices/GDP deflator (%), and the ‘real appreciation of stock
markets’=change per year of stock market indices/GDP deflator (%). There are 43
countries in the whole sample (thick line), including 25 OECD (connected O) and 18 NonOECD (connected N).

CA_Deficits
N

N

N

N N

N

O

N

N
N
O

N

O
N
N
O
O O

O

N

10

4
2

5

O O
O O O

2000

REER

2005

N

N
O O
N

N

O O

N

N

N

1990
40

20

1995

N
N

O

O O O
O O

1990

Real_Estate
N

20

N

6

8

N

N

15

10

N

25

OECD (O) | Non-OECD (N) | Whole Sample (thick)

O

O
N

N O
O

N
O
N
N
N
N
O
O O O
O
O O
N

1995

2000

2005

N
Stocks

N

30

15

N
N

1990

1995

N
O O
N

O N O
N O

O

20

N

O
N
N
O O O
O
N
N
N

N

N
N O
O

2000

O O

O

O N N

2005

46

N

O

O

O

10

5

O N O
N

0

10

O

N

O
N

1990

N

O O

O

1995

O

N N

N

O

O
N
O

2000

N
N
O O O

2005

Figure 6 – Contemporaneous Correlations with Current Account Deficits/GDP:
National Indices, Annual.
This figure depicts the statistical correlations (cross-country average) of each variable with
current account deficits/GDP (%). The variables are real exchange rate appreciation (%),
the ‘real appreciation of real estate prices’=change per year of real estate prices/GDP
deflator (%), and the ‘real appreciation of stock markets’=change per year of stock market
indices/GDP deflator (%). There are 43 countries in the whole sample (thick line),
including 25 OECD (connected O) and 18 Non-OECD (connected N). The figure also
provides 3-month market interest rates, including the pound-sterling LIBOR (connected x),
the US Treasury Bill (connected ◊), and the Japan Financing Bill (connected ∆).
OECD (O) | Non-OECD (N) | Whole Sample (thick)

0

O

O O

.6
O
N

-1

N

12

1990

1995

O
N

2000

2005

N
N

N
O

O

1990

O O
N

N
O

O

1995

0
-.5

N
N
O

N

O

2000

Stocks

9
6
3

N

O

O
N

N O
O

US Treasury Bill 3-month

N

N

N
O

N N
LIBOR 3-month (pound sterling)

O

N

.5

Interest Rates

O

N

O

0

N

N
N

-.4 -.2

-.5

O

REER

O

.4

N
O
N
N O O
O
O

N N O
O
N N
O N O
N

.2

.5

N
Real_Estate
O

O

N N
O
O

2005
N

N

N

O

N
O

N

N
O

O

O

O O N
N

O

O
N

0

-1

Japan Financing Bill 3-month

1990

1995

2000

2005

47

1990

1995

2000

2005

Figure 7 – Average GDP Size and Lagged 3 Years Cumulative Correlation with
Current Account Deficits/GDP.
This figure plots for each country on the horizontal axis the GDP Size (constant year-2000
trillion US$), averaged over the period 1980-1989, against the correlations between the
variable and the lagged current account deficits during 1990-2005. The correlations are
cumulative over previous 3 years. The variables are real exchange rate appreciation (%),
the ‘real appreciation of real estate prices’=change per year of real estate prices/GDP
deflator (%), and the ‘real appreciation of stock markets’=change per year of stock market
indices/GDP deflator (%). The top panel plots the whole sample, whereas the bottom
panel excludes Canada, U.S., Japan, Germany, U.K., France, and Italy. Excluding G7
countries, R2 from a regression of each variable on the GDP size and (GDP size)2 is 0.16
for the real exchange rate; 0.09 for the real estate appreciation; 0.01 for the stock markets
appreciation.

FRA

-.5

.5

CHN

.3

.4

0

.1

.2

.3

.4

Average GDP Size: 1980-1989

48

4

6

Excluding G7

NLD
RUS
ZAF
LTUTHA
HKG
BGR
IDN
COL
GRC
NZL
FINDNK KOR
CZE
CHN
PHL
SGP
TWNCHEAUS
IRL
BEL
AUT
SWE
ESP
ISR
LUX
NOR
MLT
HRV
HUN

ESP
RUS

-1
.2

2

MYS

BEL
CHE

HUN

USA

PRT

0

-.5

.4

6

MYS

-.5

ESP

4

DNK
TWN
LUX
SGP
HRV
THA
BGR
NZL
AUT
COL
GRC
IDN
IRL
HUN
ISR ZAF
KOR NLD
MLTPHL NOR SWE
CZE
AUS
PRT
HKG

RUS

IRL NOR
AUT
GRC
HRV
SGP
MYS
ISR
BGR
SWE
KOR
NLD
PHL
COL
PRT
TWN
IDN
DNK
HKG
AUS
THA
MLT
NZL ZAF
LUX
LTU
FIN

2

Excluding G7
LTU FIN

CHN
CHE

.1

0

.5

6

0

4

CZE

.2

.5

.5
0

2

JPN

NLD
RUS
ZAF
LTU
HKG
THA
BGR
IDN
GRC FRA
COL
NZL
FIN
DNK
ITA
CZE
CHN
KOR
SGP
PHL
TWN
AUS
CHE
IRL
BEL DEU
AUT
GBR
SWE
ESP
ISR
LUX
NOR
MLT
HRV
HUN
CAN

BEL
CHE

Excluding
BEL G7

0

JPN

Whole Sample

MYS

USA

-1

0

-.2

MYS

-.5

JPN

HUN

0

DNK
TWN
LUX
SGP
HRV
THA
BGR
NZL
CAN DEU
ESP
AUT
GBR
COL
ITA
GRC
IDN
RUS
IRL
NLD
HUN
ISR
ZAF
KOR
PHL
NOR
MLT
SWE
CZE
AUS
PRT
HKG

USA

Stock_Markets_Appreciation

Whole Sample

CHN
FIN
LTU

0

.4
-.4

-.2

0

.2

CZE
CHN
RUS
CHE
NOR
IRL
AUT
ESP
CAN
GRC
HRV
SGP
MYS
ISR
BGR
SWE
KORGBR
NLD
PHL
COL
PRTITA
TWN
IDN
DNK
HKG
AUS DEU
THA
MLT
ZAF
NZL
LUX
LTU
FIN

-.4

Lagged 3 Years Cumulative Correlation
with CA Deficits/GDP: 1990-2005

Real_Estate_Appreciation

0

Real_Exchange_Rate
BEL FRAWhole Sample

PRT

0

.1

.2

.3

.4

Figure 8 – Real Estate /GDP Deflator Appreciation and Macroeconomic Variables.
Based on the ‘Dynamic Panel’ estimation with lagged 5 years (Table 8, first column). Each bar represents the estimated response of the
appreciation of real estate prices (yi,t; %change per year of real estate prices/GDP deflator), calculated for each macroeconomic variable (xi,t; zi,t) by
multiplying a 1-standard deviation increase (σ) of the variable with its coefficient estimate (γ, β, θ). For instance, a 10.03% CA Deficits shock is
the outcome of (a one s.d. of CA Deficits = 4.0)x(coefficients of its lags) = 4.0x(1.02+0.57+0.64+0.18+0.14) ≈ 10 percent. For the economic
significance of the interaction between Financial Depth*CA Deficits: (one s.d. of Financial Depth*CA Deficits = .14) x 12.76(its coefficient
estimate) = .14*12.76 ≈ 1.79 percent. The sample comprises 41 countries from 1990-2005. The dynamic equation for the appreciation of real
estate prices (yi,t) is

yi ,t = α yi ,t −1 + γ ′xi ,t −1 + β ′( L) zi ,t −1 + θ ′ ⎣⎡ xi ,t −1 × zi ,t −1 ⎦⎤ + λt + ηi + υi ,t
where x={Urban Population Growth, Capita GDP Growth, Inflation, Financial Depth, Institution, Real Interest}; z=Current Account
Deficits/GDP; β(L) a vector of polynomials in the lag operator; λt a time effect common to all countries; ηi a permanent but unobservable countryspecific effect; υi,t an error term. All variables are stationary (no unit root; first-differenced and de-trended).
Urban
Population
Growth
(σ=0.5)

Capita GDP
Growth
(σ=2.8)

Inflation
(σ=4.0)

Financial
Depth
(σ=0.1)

Institution
(σ=0.1)

Real Interest
(σ=2.5)

11.00

CA Deficits
(σ=4.0)

Inflation*CA
Deficits

Financial
Depth*CA
Deficits

Institution*CA
Deficits

10.03

9.00

7.00

5.00

3.00

2.11

1.79

1.33
1.00

.04

-1.00

-.63
-1.31

-1.41

-3.00

-2.78

-5.00

-7.00

-6.70

49

