NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

GENDER DIFFERENCES IN SEEKING CHALLENGES:
THE ROLE OF INSTITUTIONS
Muriel Niederle
Alexandra H. Yestrumskas
Working Paper 13922
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13922

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2008

Muriel Niederle thanks the NSF and the Sloan Foundation for generous support, and the Institute for
Advanced Study at Princeton and the economics department at Harvard for its hospitality. The experiments
in this paper are part of Alexandra Yestrumskas's honors thesis at Stanford (Yestrumskas 2004). The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Muriel Niederle and Alexandra H. Yestrumskas. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Gender Differences in Seeking Challenges: The Role of Institutions
Muriel Niederle and Alexandra H. Yestrumskas
NBER Working Paper No. 13922
April 2008
JEL No. C91,J0,J16,J24
ABSTRACT
We examine whether women and men of the same ability differ in their decisions to seek challenges.
In the laboratory, we create an environment in which we can measure a participants performance level
(high or low), where a high performance level participant has on average higher earnings from solving
a hard rather than an easy task, and vice versa. After we identify each participant's performance level,
they choose the difficulty level (easy or hard) for the next two tasks (only one of which will be chosen
for payment). Although there are no gender differences in performance, or beliefs about relative performance,
men choose the hard task about 50 percent more frequently than women, independent of performance
level. Gender differences in preferences for characteristics of the tasks cannot account for this gender
gap. When we allow for a flexible choice high performing women choose the hard task significantly
more often, at a rate now similar to the decision of men. Such a flexible choice makes challenging
choices easier when participants are either risk averse, or uncertain about their ability. Our results
highlight the role of institution design in affecting choices of women and men, and the resulting gender
differences in representation in challenging tasks.

Muriel Niederle
Department of Economics
579 Serra Mall
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and NBER
niederle@stanford.edu
Alexandra H. Yestrumskas
Harvard Law School
Cambridge
MA
ayestrumskas@yahoo.com

I. INTRODUCTION
Even though women have made significant advances in terms of catching up
economically with men, gender differences in wages and in representation in high profile
jobs remain (e.g. Bertrand and Hallock 2001). The most common hypotheses for the
gender disparity are discrimination and gender differences in abilities and in preferences
for types of jobs (in terms of both field, as well as workload).1 The psychological
literature suggests that women and men may differ in other dimensions that affect
economic decisions. Women and men seem to differ in their self-perception of ability in
many domains (Beyer 1990, and Beyer and Bowden 1997). Furthermore, these
perceptions of competence are intimately tied to expectancies, aspirations, persistence
and preference for challenging tasks (e.g. Boggiano, Main and Katz 1988, Cutrona et al
1994, Elliot and Dweck 1988 and Harackiewic and Elliot 1993). Hence, women are
found to have lower expectancies of future performance than males in many areas of
achievement (e.g. Beyer 1990, Elliot & Harackiewicz 1994). Women are not only often
less certain about their abilities, they are also found to be more risk averse, and less
willing to explore and test their abilities (see also Dweck 2000 and Byrnes, Miller and
Shafer 1999). It follows that if women and men have different perceptions about their
own abilities to perform in new environments, and different tendencies to act on such
perceptions, they are likely to make different choices.
If women shy away from more challenging tasks, then they may be
underrepresented given their actual abilities, which in turn may result in gender
differences in economic outcomes. In this paper, we study whether for a given ability
women and men differ in their preference to perform a more challenging task. We study
the impact of these differences on economic outcomes, and place special emphasis on
understanding underlying causes. Finally, we also investigate which changes in
institutions can affect the choices of women and men, such that choices reflect the
participants’ performance levels rather than their gender.
To study gender differences in preferences for harder tasks, we want to eliminate
other factors that are presented as causes for why women may shy away from challenging
1

See Black and Strahan (2001), Goldin and Rouse (2000), Altonji and Blank (1999). For a general
overview of gender differences in labor market outcomes, see Blau and Kahn (2000).

1

tasks. These are in general issues of greater time commitment of challenging tasks and
differences in ability. We therefore use a laboratory experiment in which individuals
choose between task difficulties in an environment in which performance is measured
objectively and the time commitment is the same for both difficulty levels.
We create an environment with an easy and a hard task, such that the hard task is
harder for each participant and such that high performing (or more able or motivated)
participants perform better than low performing participants in each task.2 The task we
use is mazes to be solved on paper for 10 minutes.3 Finally, in our environment, high
performing participants have higher earnings from the hard task from than the easy task
(with the appropriate incentive schemes), while it is the other way around for low
performing participants. To be able to analyze the choices of women and men between
hard and easy tasks we not only need meaningful labels of hard and easy, we also make
participants aware of the distinction.
The first treatment checks whether we found an appropriate environment.
Participants perform an easy version of the task, followed by another easy and then a hard
task. Participants with a task 1 performance in the top 40% are of high performance level
(i.e. have higher expected earnings from the subsequent hard than from the subsequent
easy task), while others are low performing (i.e. have higher expected earnings from the
easy task). This is true for women and men, who perform similarly in the initial easy task.
Furthermore, women and men have similar beliefs, or more specifically similar point
predictions, about their relative performance in the first easy task.4 We therefore created a
level field in which we can evaluate the choices of task difficulty of women and men.
In the main treatment, participants first perform in the easy task, which allows us
to predict their money-maximizing choices. Participants are then informed of the
calibration, but not their performance level. They subsequently choose simultaneously the
difficulty level for the next two tasks, of which only one will be randomly chosen to be
payoff relevant.
2

This implies that the hard and easy task do not involve completely different sets of skills, rather
participants are either good or not at both.
3
This task was previously used by Gneezy, Niederle and Rustichini (2003).
4
We therefore have an environment in which we can predict the money-maximizing choices of any
participant, and in which there is no gender difference in performance, nor in the money-maximizing task
difficulty for any given performance level. Furthermore, women and men hold similar beliefs about their
first performance, which we use to predict money maximizing choices.

2

Men choose the hard task fifty percent more often than women do, even
controlling for performance in the first task. Compared to predicted payoff maximizing
choices, high performing women choose the hard task too seldom, while low performing
men choose the hard task too often.
In the remainder of the paper, we tease apart different explanations for this gender
difference and study how institutional changes affect the choices of women and men. One
possible explanation for the gender gap in choosing the hard task is that women and men
simply differ in how much they enjoy performing a challenging task. Another possibility
is that the preferences for the tasks are driven by preferences to receive feedback about
one’s relative performance. Only by performing in each task once, and comparing
respective earnings, can participants receive information about their performance level.
Finally, it could be that gender differences in choices are driven by gender differences in
risk aversion, or in uncertainty about one’s ability to perform in more challenging tasks.5
To assess the effect of pure task preference, we change the environment so that
the potential influence of other factors on the choice of task difficulty is minimized. After
the first easy task, participants learn not only about the task calibration, but in addition
also what performances in that first task constitute a high performance level. Participants
largely choose the task that maximizes earnings. That is, we do not find strong evidence
for gender differences in preferences for challenging tasks.
One remaining possible explanation rests on some characteristics of the task; it
remains possible that women and men differ in their preferences for receiving feedback
about their relative performance. Only by performing in the hard task once can a
participant receive information about their performance level. Hence, gender differences
in preferences for feedback can cause differences in seeking out challenges.
A second possible explanation is that women and men differ in how certain they
are in their beliefs about their ability to perform well in harder tasks. Furthermore, even
for given beliefs about one’s performance, risk averse participants may choose the
familiar task, the task with more certain payoffs (such as the easy task in our experiment),

5

For example, a woman and a man who hold similar beliefs about their initial performance (have the same
modal prediction) may still differ in how much they believe that their initial performance is driven by luck
or actual ability, which has an impact on the beliefs about their performance level.

3

at a higher rate than the task with more variable payoffs (such as the hard task in our
experiment).
In the last treatment, we want to tease this last explanation, which we will
summarize as risk aversion and uncertainty, from the explanation of feedback aversion.
Now, participants decide upon the task difficulty as in the initial choice treatment but
under a reduced commitment. They choose the difficulty level for the second task only,
perform that task, and only afterwards decide on the difficulty level for the third task.
That is, their second choice of task difficulty in the third performance can be influenced
by information they receive from their performance in the second task, which was not the
case in the initial choice treatment. We changed the environment in a way that
participants whose task choice is largely driven by preferences regarding feedback are not
affected. On the other hand, the change in institution may affect the choices of
participants whose decision is influenced by risk preferences, or their (lack of) certainty
in their ability to perform in challenging environments.
We find that in the reduced commitment treatment, both high performing men and
women choose the hard task more frequently. We conclude that for high performing
women, risk aversion or greater uncertainty in their ability to perform well in the hard
task is a major driving force leading to easy choices in the initial choice treatment. The
initial gender gap in choices is therefore not due to large gender differences in feedback
aversion or preferences for hard tasks per se.
This last treatment also provides a small institutional change that affects the
decisions of women and men. Providing feedback aligned choices to money maximizing
choices even for low performing men, but it may often be hard to provide a test that is
such a good predictor for performances at various difficulty levels outside of the lab.
We start with a brief discussion of the factors that may cause women and men to
choose different difficulty levels. We present our experimental design, followed by the
results from the calibration treatment. The main results are presented in sections V
through VIII. Finally, we compare our results to other findings in the literature, notably
gender differences in competitive attitudes, and report on broader implications and other
empirical evidence outside of the laboratory that supports our findings.

4

II. THEORY
In this paper we determine whether women and men differ in their choices of task
difficulty and why. An obvious explanation for gender differences in choices is that
women and men differ in their ability to perform challenging and easy tasks, hence they
should select different task difficulty levels to maximize earnings.
A main contribution of this paper is to generate an environment in which we can
predict the money-maximizing choice of participants and compare this to their actual
choice of task difficulty. Controlling for ability, we consider four possible explanations or
hypotheses why women and men may not choose the same difficulty levels.

Explanation 1-- Task Preferences: Men, more than women, prefer the hard task.
Men, more than women, may have an urge to perform at the highest level and seek out
challenges. Nurture as well as nature may cause such differences. First, we tend to raise
boys and girls differently. Boys are in general encouraged to be assertive, while girls are
raised to be egalitarian, and show empathy (Ruble, Martin and Berenbaum 2006).
Furthermore, there exist gender differences in self-presentational style resulting in
women exhibiting modesty and men displaying bravado (see Daubman 1992). A woman
may therefore be less inclined to select the hard task, which would be a clear display of
self-confidence, for fear of appearing arrogant or overconfident. Conversely, a man may
seek to avoid looking unconfident or incompetent and be therefore more inclined to select
the hard task even when such a choice is not based on his actual beliefs about his ability
or performance. Another possibility is that women, compared to men, may be subject to a
stigma that women are inferior in challenging tasks. If women internalize this stigma to
some extent, then, to protect their self-esteem, they may in turn avoid and disengage from
situations in which this stigma applies (Crocker and Major 1989). That is, women may
prefer not to opt into the challenging task.
Evolutionary psychology brings forth explanations that focus on the fact that a
man’s death does not influence his current success, while a woman’s death causes the
loss of her current offspring. These differences in parental care and reproductive success
may make women less eager to enter challenging environments. These evolutionary
explanations are also used to explain why men are more confident in their relative

5

performance and less risk averse. Such gender differences may also influence the
decision to enter challenging environments (Daly and Wilson 1983 and Campbell 2002).
Explanation 2-- Feedback Aversion: Women are more averse to receiving
feedback about their relative performance than men are. It could be that gender
differences in task difficulty reflect gender differences in preferences to receive feedback
about one’s performance level (rather than gender differences in seeking out challenging
tasks). In our experiment, to receive information about their performance level,
participants need to compare their earnings in the hard and easy tasks. Since all
participants perform in the easy task anyway, choosing the hard task provides more
feedback. The psychology literature suggests that women and men may respond
differently to feedback, which may lead to gender differences in seeking it. There is
evidence that women incorporate negative feedback more than men do (Roberts and
Nolen Hoeksama 1989, 1994). Furthermore, women more than men may view a negative
signal as more indicative of their self-worth rather than simply their specific performance
(see e.g. Dweck 2000). Mobius, Niederle, Niehaus and Rosenblat (in progress) in a largescale experiment directly show a gender difference in preferences for feedback. If
participants care about holding positive beliefs about themselves, these factors may
contribute to women shying away from feedback, and as such from situations and tasks
that provide such feedback (for a theoretic exploration see Köszegi (2006)).
Explanation 3-- Average Beliefs: Women have lower beliefs about their
relative ability. A substantial psychological literature suggests that men are more
overconfident than women (who are often also overconfident, just less so), see e.g.
Lichtenstein, Fischhoff and Phillips (1982), Beyer (1990), and Beyer and Bowden
(1997). Niederle and Vesterlund (2007) confirm this pattern, though they find a
substantially larger gender gap in beliefs about relative performance in a competitive task
than a noncompetitive task (see also Niederle, Segal and Vesterlund, 2007). Mobius and
Rosenblat (2006) find however no gender differences in beliefs about absolute future
performance in a 10 minutes maze task. If there are gender differences in beliefs about
relative performance, then there will be gender differences in beliefs about whether the
initial absolute performance corresponds to a performance characteristic of a high or a
low performance level.

6

Explanation 4: Risk Aversion & Certainty: Consider a man and a woman who
do not have strong preferences over the different tasks, and who do not differ in their
preference to receive feedback about their relative performance. Suppose such a man and
woman hold the same point estimates about their relative performance in the easy task.
They may still differ in their propensity to select the challenging task. There are two
broad reasons for that.
First, women may be more risk averse than men, and so, for the same belief about
relative ability may opt to not choose the hard task. In the experiment, the payment of the
hard task varies much more with the performance level than the payment of the easy task,
and as such is more risky. Studies on gender differences in risk attitudes over monetary
gambles find that either women are more risk averse than men, or that there is no gender
difference. Eckel (forthcoming) summarizes the experimental literature in economics and
concludes that women exhibit greater risk aversion in choices (see also Eckel and
Grossman forthcoming). Furthermore, participants have not experienced the hard task,
which may also contribute to the hard choice being more risky. Byrnes, Miller and Shafer
(1999) provide a meta-analysis of 150 risk experiments in the psychology literature, and
show that while women in some situations are significantly more averse to risk, many
studies find no gender difference. They find larger and more reliable differences when
studying the engagement in risky behavior, rather than choices over lotteries.
A second possibility is that women and men may differ in how certain they are
about whether they are able to perform well in the hard task (e.g. Beyer 1990 and Elliot
& Harackiewicz 1994). This lack of strength in belief can stem from two sources: first it
could be that women simply have a higher variance in their beliefs about their ability, so
are simply less certain. This higher level of uncertainty may be exacerbated when it
comes to harder tasks (see also Dweck 2000). Second it seems that women compared to
men seem to attribute positive outcomes, in this case a high initial performance which
would indicate a high performance level, more to luck than actual underlying ability. This
could simply be driven by the fact that women have lower expectations about their
performance. In the psychology literature, Deaux (1984) argued that performance that is
consistent with expectations leads to attributions to stable causes (e.g. ability), whereas
performances that are inconsistent with expectations lead to attributions to unstable

7

causes (e.g. luck).6 Hence women may view a high initial performance as less indicative
of a high performance level than men (and potentially the other way round for a low
initial performance).

Our experiment is designed to shed light on the role played by these alternative
explanations. Specifically, we want to investigate whether choices of task difficulty of
women and men can largely be explained by the characteristics of the tasks (hypotheses 1
and 2). In that case, gender differences in choices may not pose a great concern, and there
may not be a strong urge to investigate changes in institutions that affect the choices of
women and men, and align them with money-maximizing choices. If, however, gender
differences in confidence or risk aversion (hypotheses 3 and 4) drive the gender gap in
challenging tasks, then changes in the institutions may help both women and men to
move towards money-maximizing choices. Our goal is therefore to both evaluate the
importance of alternative hypotheses and provide institutional changes that affect the
choices of women and men.

III. THE EXPERIMENT
We establish an environment in which we can evaluate the choices of men and women
concerning the difficulty level of the task which they perform. We use a task that is
available in two difficulty levels, and in which high and low performing participants
receive higher earnings from the hard and easy task respectively. A high correlation in
performance among these two tasks allows us to (i) identify the performance level (high
or low) of participants after they performed in only one (the easy) task, and use that to (ii)
predict the participants’ money-maximizing choice. This allows us to address whether
choices of task difficulty are driven by actual performance levels. We are interested in
whether women choose the hard and challenging task more or less often than men.
Furthermore, we want to assess whether men and women with the same performance
differ in their choices, and why. This makes it crucial to have an environment in which
we can predict money-maximizing choices for each participant. The tasks we use are
6

From the psychology literature (see also e.g. Beyer 1990) it is however not clear whether this is true
above and beyond differences that would be observed due to Bayesian updating.

8

mazes to be solved on paper. Mazes are either “Easy” mazes or “Hard” mazes.7 In each
treatment, we have three rounds of performance in which participants have 10 minutes to
solve as many mazes as they can.8 If participants, when marking their way through the
maze, made a mistake, they could cross out the portion that was incorrect and continue
again from the point where they had gone wrong. (An example was included in the
instructions.) Participants could skip up to three mazes (which they had to cross out with
an X) during the 10-minute period. They were paid only for entirely solved mazes in
which they did not cross any of the maze boundary lines.
We conducted the experiment at Stanford University with 308 students, 151 men
and 157 women, where everyone participated only once.9 The experiment lasted just
under an hour. Subjects participated in the experiment in groups with an average size of
ten. Overall, we conducted 30 sessions. Participants received $5 as a show up fee, and
average earnings were $14.23 including the show up fee.
Participants could ask questions at the start of each of the three tasks and raise
their hands for questions during the 10 minute performance, but they were not allowed to
talk to one another for the duration of the experiment. Each 10-minute segment was
timed, and participants were told when they had five minutes left, one minute left, and
when time was up. The general design of all four treatments is the following:

Task 1: Easy Mazes: Participants solve “Easy” mazes for 10 minutes, and
receive $0.25 per completed maze. At the end of the task, participants can count the
number of mazes they completed.

We will show that the performance on task 1 is a very good predictor of whether a
participant has higher expected earnings from the easy or the hard task. We therefore
know for each participant their predicted money-maximizing choice of difficulty level.

7

The mazes were printed from http://games.yahoo.com/games/kidsmz.html. “Easy” mazes were the easiest
mazes offered and “Hard” mazes were the hardest offered. These mazes have first been used in Gneezy,
Niederle and Rustichini (2003).
8
Participants received 30 mazes (one per page) for Easy mazes, and 15 for Hard mazes. Only two
participants who both solved Hard mazes raised their hand to ask for more mazes.
9
Gender was not emphasized during recruitment nor mentioned during the experiment. Participants ranged
in age from 18 to 23 years old, and all were university students.

9

While all participants are paid for task 1, they are paid for only either task 2 or
task 3. The task for which they are paid is randomly determined at the end of the
experiment by a coin flip. This reduces the possibility of using the decision and
performance of task 3 to hedge against the decision and outcome of the preceding task 2.
There are two versions of task 2 and task 3, easy and hard. Whenever participants
choose the difficulty level of mazes to complete in tasks 2 and 3, they have at their
disposal two sample mazes: one easy maze and one hard maze. Furthermore, they are told
that, based on previous performances in the experiment, participants whose initial task 1
performance is in the top 40% of all participants are more likely to achieve higher
monetary earnings from hard mazes, while others from easy mazes. We will see that this
is indeed the result of treatment 1, the first treatment we ran, and therefore is a true
statement at the time we make the statement. However, in general participants only know
their absolute performance, but not whether it was in the top 40%. Participants had one
minute to make the decision, that is, they could not actually experience completing a
difficult maze before selecting their level(s) of difficulty.

Task 2 and Task 3: Easy Mazes: Participants solve “Easy” mazes for 10
minutes. If the task is selected for payment, they receive $0.50 per maze. At the end of
the task, participants can count the number of mazes they completed.

Task 2 and Task 3: Hard Mazes: Participants solve “Hard” mazes for 10
minutes. If the task is selected for payment, they receive $0.25 per maze for the first four
mazes, and $3.50 for each maze completed past the fourth. At the end of the task,
participants can count the number of mazes they completed.

Hard mazes are more difficult to solve than easy mazes, as they are more complex, and
by introducing a kinked payment scheme we made it even more difficult to receive high
earnings from hard mazes.

While the structure in terms of remuneration for each task difficulty is the same in each
treatment, there are differences in whether and how participants decide upon the task

10

difficulty, and whether they receive feedback about their performance before their choice
of task difficulty.

Treatment 1: Benchmark Treatment: Participants, after performing in task 1, cannot
choose the difficulty levels for tasks 2 and 3; they perform the easy task 2 and the hard
task 3. At the end of the experiment, we ask each participant to guess how their
performance in task 1 compared to past participants (in performance quartiles), with 1
being among the top 25% and 4 indicating a performance in the bottom 25%. Participants
received an additional $1 if they were correct.

The performances of women and men in tasks 2 and 3 will serve as a benchmark of
potential earnings under each task difficulty for a given task 1 performance. The results
of this treatment also confirm the calibration of high and low performance levels. A task
1 performance of 11 or more results in higher earnings from the subsequent hard than the
easy task (and hence indicates a high performance level), while a task 1 performance of
10 or less indicates a low performance level (i.e. earnings from the subsequent easy task
are higher compared to those in the hard task). Finally, the question on beliefs will allow
us to see whether hypothesis 3 can account for gender differences in task choice.

Treatment 2: Choice (with Commitment): Participants, after task 1, have to decide at
once the difficulty levels for both task 2 and task 3, namely easy or hard. That is,
participants can choose among four possibilities: easy-easy, easy-hard, hard-easy, and
hard-hard. Participants are reminded that they make their decision for the next two rounds
and will be unable to change their decisions after completing task 2.

Treatment 2 will establish whether, for a given task 1 performance, women and men
differ in their choices of task difficulty. We only pay either task 2 or task 3 to reduce
incentives for participants to hedge and choose a mixture of task difficulty.

To understand the role of explanation 1 – gender differences in preferences for hard tasks
per se – and see whether it can account for the gender gap in choices of challenging tasks,

11

we change the environment such that explanations 2, 3 and 4 (that is gender differences
in feedback aversion, confidence, and risk aversion and certainty respectively) are not
relevant. We achieve this in the next treatment by providing participants with perfect
feedback, that is, any uncertainty about their performance level, or any aversion (or
preference for) receiving feedback about their relative performance has no impact on the
decision of task difficulty.

Treatment 3: Feedback: In addition to all statements made in the choice treatment,
participants in the feedback treatment are told that based on previous participants, those
completing 11 or more easy mazes in task 1 were in the top 40% of performers, while
those completing 10 or fewer mazes in task 1 were not. This gave participants feedback
on their performance level. They too had to decide on the difficulty level for the next two
tasks at once. 10

For the last treatment (Treatment 4), we have two objectives. The first is to assess
the role of feedback aversion versus risk aversion and certainty, that is, we want to tease
apart explanations 2 and 4. Specifically, we try to assess whether gender differences in
choices are driven by large gender differences in feedback aversion. A second objective
stems from the possibility that task choices may not reflect preferences that pertain to the
underlying characteristics of the task (in terms of both the actual task, and the amount of
feedback the task provides). Differences in task choice may rather be driven by the fact
that women are less certain about their capacity to perform in the hard task, or more risk
averse than men. We aim to find a simple change in the institution that would allow
women and men to improve the quality of their choices.
While providing feedback is an institution that helped both women and men, there
are some drawbacks: A first, practical concern is that it may often not be possible to
provide perfect feedback. Rarely may there be such a good predictor on how women and
men would perform on the next, more difficult level. Furthermore, in this experiment,
participants took that “perfect test” (i.e. their performance in the first easy task) without

10

We ran this treatment last, to minimize the risk of information leaking to other participants about the
cutoff performance that determines the performance level and higher expected earnings from the hard task.

12

knowing what it was, and results may be different in case they were aware that they were
taking a test that is predictive of their underlying abilities. Indeed, Claude Steele in a
series of papers shows that the performance of minorities, who may suffer from a
stereotype that they should not perform so well, differs in a test described as predictive of
abilities rather than simply a difficult random test (Steele 1997, Steele and Aaronson
1995, and Spencer, Steele & Quinn 1999). This may especially be the case if women are
feedback averse, and employ some self-handicapping techniques (Keller 2002). We
therefore opt for an institutional change that may be feasible to implement, while still
possibly having a large impact on participants’ choices.

Treatment 4: Choice with Reduced Commitment: The instructions are similar to those
in the choice treatment. However, participants now do not choose the task difficulty level
for both tasks 2 and 3 at once. Rather, participants choose a difficulty level for task 2, and
only after they performed do they choose the difficulty level for task 3.

A simple analysis confirms that a participant who is uncertain about her ability may
choose the easy task twice in the choice (with commitment) case, but choose a first hard
task in the choice with reduced commitment treatment.11 In the treatment with reduced
commitment, choosing the hard mazes in task 2 gives the additional benefit of providing
feedback and information about which task leads to higher earnings for the third choice.
Therefore choosing the hard task has an additional value than simply the expected
earnings from performing in the hard task. This additional value is not present in the
choice treatment (treatment 2). That is, if gender differences in hard task choices are
driven by uncertainty, then they may be reduced by this institutional change. However, if

For a very simple stylized model, let p be the probability with which a participant believes that the
performance is in the top 40%. Let x be the expected payoff from choosing the easy task. If the participant
chooses the hard task, the monetary earnings are x+y if the participant is actually of high performance, and
x-y otherwise. Furthermore, assume that a choice of the hard task reveals the participants type (high or low
performing) perfectly, while the easy task provides no further information, since a participant already
knows how they perform in the easy task. A participant that makes a once and for all decision about the
task difficulty prefers the hard task iff pu(x+y)+(1-p)u(x-y) ≥ u(x) that is iff p ≥ [u(x)-u(x-y)]/[u(x+y)-u(xy)]. In case the participant decides for a first task, and then a second task based on the information received
from the first task, the participant prefers the first task to be the hard iff p2u(x+y)+(1-p)[u(x-y)+u(x)] ≥
2u(x), that is p ≥ [u(x)-u(x-y)]/[2u(x+y)-u(x)-u(x-y)]. This second boundary for p is strictly lower than the
former one if u(x+y) > u(x).
11

13

choices are largely driven by preferences for feedback, then the choices should be similar
to those in treatment 2.12

IV. THE BENCHMARK TREATMENT
IV.A. Performance
The goal of this treatment is to verify that we have an environment with a
correlation in performance (and earnings) between the easy and hard task such that we
can group performances of participants into high and low level performances using the
easy task 1 performance. Furthermore, low performing participants (should) have higher
earnings from subsequent easy tasks relative to hard tasks, while high performing
participants from hard tasks. In this treatment, we observed the performances of 32
women and 30 men.
In task 1, the first round of easy mazes, men solve on average 10.03 mazes (with a
standard deviation of 2.98), while women solve 9.25 mazes (s.d. of 2.86). There is no
significant gender difference in performance; a two-sided Mann-Whitney test comparing
the performance distributions of the 30 men to the 32 women yields p = 0.37.13 Table I
shows the number of easy mazes completed by men and women in task 1 (roughly by
performance quartiles).
Table I
89,10
11,12
13+
10
6
8
6
Men
15
5
6
5
Women
Task 1 performances of 32 women and 30 men in the Benchmark treatment.
In task 2, the second round of easy mazes, men solve on average 12.4 (s.d. 3.89)
mazes, while women solve 11.4 (s.d. 3.05). The difference is not significant, a two-sided
Mann Whitney test yields p = 0.44. Both genders significantly increase their performance
by about 2.2 (in each case a one sided t-test yields p-values less than 0.01).14
In task 3, in which participants completed hard mazes, men solve on average 5.4
mazes (s.d. 1.75), while women solve 4.6 (s.d. 1.72). This difference is on the verge of
12

If the difference in cost of receiving information about one’s performance level between women and men
is very small, then the simple change to sequential choice may overcome this difference as well.
13
Two-sided t-test yield similar results unless otherwise noted.
14
There is no significant gender difference in the increase in performance, a Mann Whitney test yields p =
0.89.

14

being significant: A two-sided Mann Whitney test yields p = 0.108, a two-sided t-test
yields p = 0.08.
The performance of participants exhibits a strong correlation. Spearman rank
correlations are of the order of 0.8 (comparing task 1 performance to either task 2 or task
3 performance, for both men and women), with p-values less than 0.01 when testing for
independence.
TABLE II
Average earnings in $ from the easy (E2) and hard (H3) task for each number of
easy mazes completed in task 1 (E1).
E1 E2 Payoff E2 Payoff H3 Payoff H3 Payoff H3 – E2 H3 – E2 H3 – E2
Male
Female
Male
Female
Payoff
Male
Female
3
- (3) 3
- (0.75) 0.75
-2.25
--2.25
4 - (3.13) - (4) - (0.69) - (0.63) ---5
3.25
5
0.63
0.5
-3.28
-2.63
-4.50
6
3.67
4
0.92
0.5
-3.05
-2.75
-3.50
7
5
5.14
4.5
1.82
-4.13
-0.50
-3.32
8
5.17
4.5
2
2.63
-3.83
-3.17
-1.88
9
5.25
5.25
2.75
1.88
-3.20
-2.50
-3.38
10
6.88
6
4.5
4.5
-2.20
-2.38
-1.50
11
6.33
6.33
10.33
9.17
3.40
4
2.83
12
7
7.17
10.1
9.17
2.70
3.10
2
13
8
7.25
11.5
9.75
2.90
3.50
2.50
14
8.5
8.25
11.5
8
0.70
3
-0.25
15
8.5
- (8.5) 11.5
- (11.5) 3
3
-16
9.5
- (9.5) 15
- (15) 5.50
5.50
-In parentheses are values that are obtained through interpolation, or by using the
outcome of the other gender.
Table II summarizes the average earnings of participants from the easy and hard
mazes they completed in tasks 2 and 3 respectively, grouped by the number of easy
mazes completed in task 1. The rows in bold indicate levels at which participants had
higher earnings from the hard than the easy mazes. This group consists approximately of
the top 40% (26/62) of all participants, those who completed 11 or more mazes in task 1.
In fact, of the 62 participants in the benchmark treatment, 61 follow the pattern that a task
1 performance of 11 or more results in higher future earnings from a hard rather than an
easy task, while it is the other way round for participants who solve 10 or less mazes in

15

task 1.15 While women differed somewhat from men in their performance in the hard
task, the last two columns show that nonetheless women follow the same earnings pattern
as men. Table II also shows the average difference in payoffs between the hard and easy
task.
We will use these results in further treatments, to provide a crude estimate for the
expected earnings in an easy and a hard task conditional on the participants’ task 1
performance. That is, we will assume that a male participant, who solved, say, 12 easy
mazes in task 1, would earn $7 when choosing easy mazes and $10.1 when choosing hard
mazes in tasks 2 and 3.
Note that the earnings difference between the hard and the easy task is dependent
only on whether the participant is of a high or low performance level, but not on the
actual task 1 performance within each category. Specifically, a linear regression on the
earnings difference across tasks as a function of task 1 performance yields coefficients
not significantly different from zero, for both high and low performing participants
separately, and for both genders joint or separately.16 That is, e.g. each high performance
level participant who chooses the easy task has the same expected monetary losses,
independent of their task 1 performance (as long as it is 11 or higher, and hence
corresponds to high performance).
IV.B: Confidence
While women and men have similar performances, and we prescribe the same choice of
task difficulty for any given task 1 performance to maximize the participant’s earnings, it
could be that women and men hold different beliefs about their relative task 1
performance. This in turn could account for possible gender differences in choice of task
difficulty (see hypothesis 3). To measure their beliefs, participants guessed at the end of

15

Only one participant, a woman, completed 14 easy mazes in Task 1, 18 easy mazes in Task 2, and 5 hard
mazes in Task 3, meaning that she actually would have earned more money with the easy mazes ($9) than
the hard mazes ($4.50), which is opposite to the pattern exhibited by all other participants.
16
A regression of the earnings difference between task 2 and task 3 yields a constant of 3.36 (p = 0.02) and
a coefficient on the task 1 performance of -0.09 (p = 0.62) for the 36 low performing men and women. For
the 20 women only, the coefficients are 4 (p = 0.02) and -0.14 (p = 0.50), and for the 16 men they are 2.35
(p = 0.33) and 0.01 (p = 0.98) respectively. Similarly, for all 26 high performing participants, the
coefficients are -3.88 (p = 0.54) and 0.08 (p = 0.87), while for the 12 women they are -11.13 (p = 0.33) and
0.74 (p = 0.41) and for the 14 men they are -1.94 (p = 0.81) and -0.13 (p = 0.84).

16

the experiment how their performance compared to past participants’ performances (in
performance quartiles), with 1 being among the top 25% and 4 indicating a performance
in the bottom 25%.17
TABLE III
Guessed rank of Women and Men in the benchmark Treatment
Guess
Men
Women
Quartile
Optimal Guess
Wrong
Optimal Guess
Wrong
11
8
3
9
8
4
1 (top)
7
11
6
4
14
9
2
5
9
6
8
7
4
3
7
1
1
11
3
1
4 (bottom)
Total
30
29
16
32
32
18
Table III shows for women and men the optimal guess, that is, the most optimistic
possible guessed performance quartile that is correct given their performance, their
guessed relative performance, and the number of wrong guesses.18 There is no gender
difference in the distribution of guesses, a Fisher’s exact test yields a p-value of 0.72.19
Furthermore, an ordered probit regression shows that the believed relative performance is
correlated with performance for both men and women without any significant gender
difference.20
Given the results of the subsequent treatments, and the beliefs we showed so far,
we wanted to further study whether participants have strong beliefs about the relative
abilities of women and men. We therefore asked the last 66 participants that participated
in our experiment (in the feedback treatment) whether among the first 200 participants,
they thought there were more women or men were among those who solved 11 easy
mazes in task 1, and hence had a high performance level. In total 22/66 (33%) guessed
that men had done better, while 44/66 thought women had done better.21
17

One man did not fill out this questionnaire properly and is hence absent from our data.
The optimal guesses (and whether a guess is right or not) have been calculated given the entire sample,
which is not necessarily what participants were paid for, as they were paid based on the sample up to their
session. We recalculate optimal guesses to have comparability across all participants within that treatment.
19
Men and women do not differ in their optimal guesses, a Fisher’s exact test yields p = 0.50.
20
An ordered probit regression on the guessed rank as a function of performance yields coefficients of -0.3
(p = 0.00) for 28 men and -0.21 (p = 0.02) for 29 women. Furthermore, a combined ordered probit
regression on guessed ranks yields coefficients -0.25 (p = 0.00) on task 1 performance, and 0.18 (p = 0.55)
on a male dummy (for 57 women and men with a guessed rank of 1 to 3). Similar results are obtained when
we include all guesses, or code guesses of the third and fourth quartile into one category.
21
In fact, among the first 200 participants, 46 women and 34 men completed more than 11 easy mazes in
Task 1. Each participant who guessed correct, namely women, received $1 for guessing correctly.
18

17

To summarize, we found a task in which the performance in the first, easy task
predicts the participants’ performance level, high or low. Approximately the top 40% of
performers in the first easy task, all those who solve 11 or more mazes, have a high
performance level. Furthermore, the performance level predicts whether earnings are
maximized with a subsequent hard task (for high performing participants) or a subsequent
easy task (for low performing participants). Finally, there is no gender difference in
performance in the first easy task, or in the classification into high or low performance
levels.22 Therefore, for both women and men, the following is a true statement: “Based
on all the people who have previously participated in this experiment, if you perform in
the top 40% of all people completing mazes, you are likely to make more money by
selecting the Hard mazes, while if you are not in the top 40% of participants, you are
likely to make more money by selecting the Easy mazes.”
Participants also do not exhibit any gender difference in beliefs about their
relative performance in the first easy task. We also found no evidence of any overall
belief that men have a higher chance to have a first task performance indicative of a high
performance level. That is, any gender difference in choices of challenging tasks is
probably not driven by gender differences in beliefs about relative performance in task 1.
Therefore, hypothesis 3 does not seem to have much explanatory power in this
environment.

V. CHOOSING THE HARD TASK
In this second treatment, we evaluate whether men and women differ in their
propensity to choose the hard (and easy) task. In the choice (with commitment) treatment,
participants, after performing in task 1, simultaneously choose the difficulty levels of task
2 and task 3. Only one of the two tasks is randomly selected for payment at the end of the
experiment. Before choosing the difficulty levels, participants are informed that the top
40% performers in the first task have on average higher earnings from choosing the hard
task, the others from choosing the easy task.23 While participants know their absolute task
22

Among all 308 participants, 118 (38%) have a task 1 performance of 11 or higher. Among the 159
women, there are 64 (40.2%) high performing participants, and among the 149 men there are 54 (36.2%).
23
Given that only either task 2 or task 3 is reimbursed, there is no room for participants to use a mixed
choice Easy-Hard or Hard-Easy as a means of insurance.

18

1 performance, they are not informed of their relative performance level. We have 42
women and 43 men.
V.A: Task 1 Performance
In task 1, men solve on average 9.81 (s.d. 2.61) mazes, while women solve 10.19
(s.d. 2.39) mazes. The difference is not significant (a two-sided Mann-Whitney test
delivers p = 0.17), though the proportion of high performing women is significantly
higher than that of high performing men (though this is not true in the total sample, see
footnote 19).24 Table IV shows the number of easy mazes completed by men and women
in task 1.
Table IV
89,10
11,12
13+
13
19
5
6
Men
10
9
18
5
Women
Task 1 performances of 42 women and 43 men in the Choice treatment
V.B: Choosing the Hard Task
Results from the benchmark treatment predict that all participants who solve 11 or
more mazes in the first task (which corresponds to roughly 40% of all participants) have
higher earnings by choosing hard mazes, while others should choose the easy task. Given
the performance in task 1, we expect 23/42 women (54.8%) and 11/43 men (25.6%) to
choose the hard task. We find that 90.7% of men make at least one hard choice,
compared to 61.9% of women, a significant difference (a two-sided Fisher exact test
delivers p = 0.00). Similarly, 58.1 % of men make all hard choices compared to 38.1% of
women (a two-sided Fisher exact test delivers p = 0.08 ).25 Figure I shows for various
task 1 performances the proportion of hard choices in tasks 2 and 3 for women and men
separately.26

24

Furthermore, there is no difference in task 1 performance between treatment 1 and 2, as a whole or for
each gender separately.
25
There are 10 women and 14 men who choose two different tasks. While it is unclear why they made
these choices, any tendency for probability matching would lead participants to diversify (for a review on
the probability matching literature see e.g. Vulkan 2000).
26
A participant who chooses the hard task for both tasks makes 100% hard choices, while one who chooses
one hard and one easy task has only 50% hard choices.

19

1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0

Men
Women
8-

9, 10

11, 12

13 +

FIGURE I
For various task 1 performances, the proportion of hard choices of the 42
women and 43 men in the choice treatment.
To estimate the impact of the performance level on choices we code the variable
choice as 0 for a choice of Easy-Easy; 1 for a choice of either Easy-Hard or Hard-Easy;
and 2 for a choice of Hard-Hard. Furthermore, we use a dummy variable, high, that is 1
for participants of a high performance level and is 0 otherwise.
TABLE V
Ordered probit of the hard task choice as a function of the performance level and gender
Men Women All 1 All 2 E1<11 E1>10
High
0.62
0.38
0.47
0.40
(0.16) (0.29) (0.09) (0.25)
Male
0.84
0.79
0.82
0.99
(0.00) (0.02) (0.01) (0.06)
High*Male
0.16
(0.77)
N
43
42
85
85
51
34
Coefficient and p-values
The results in table V show that neither the choices of women nor of men are highly
dependent on their performance level. However, there is a significant gender difference in
choosing the hard task, even when we control for performance levels. Gender differences
in choices are significant for both performance levels. In all cases, men choose the hard
task more often than women do. When we use the actual task 1 performance, e1, instead
of a high performance dummy, the results are very similar. 27
27

The only difference is that the men’s decisions to choose the hard task depend on their task 1
performance, and more so than the decisions of women, which do not respond to the task 1 performance.
The result seems to be driven by the very high performing men, who all select the challenging task. The

20

Table VI shows the proportion of participants who chose at least one hard task
and then the proportion of hard choices. It confirms that, whichever measure is chosen,
men choose the hard task significantly more often.28 Among both high and low
performing participants, men choose the hard task about 30% to 60% more often than
women.

Men
Women
Fisher exact

All
90.7
61.9
0.00

TABLE VI
Proportion of Hard Choices
At least 1 hard choice
Percent of hard choices
910 - 11 + 12 +
All
910 - 11 + 12 +
88
87.5
100
100
74.4
70
70
86
93.8
56.2
58
65
41.7
50
40.6
42
57
37.5
0.03 0.04 0.03 0.02

Compared to predicted money-maximizing choices, low performing men choose
the hard task too often, while high performing women do not choose the hard task often
enough. In fact, men always choose the hard task more often than women, which means
men and women differ in how their choices do not conform to predicted moneymaximizing choices.
Before we try to understand the underlying causes of this behavior, we want to
confirm that the choices of women and men do not reflect some unobserved private
information about their performances in easy and hard tasks.
V.C: Economic Consequences of Choices
We estimate the effect of choices on monetary payments and seek to confirm that
high performing participants (i.e. e1>10) receive, on average, higher earnings when

regression for men yields a task 1 performance coefficient of 0.25 (p = 0.02). In the All 1 regression the
coefficient on task 1 is 0.09 (p = 0.105), the coefficient on male is 0.75 (p = 0.00). In the All 2 regression,
the coefficients are 0.00 (p = 1.00) on task 1, -1.41 (p = 0.25) on male and 0.23 (p = 0.08) on the task 1 *
male interaction. We obtain virtually the same results when we consider only the decision of the second or
only of the third task.
28
When we condition on either only the first choice, or only the second choice, gender differences in
choice of task difficulty are significant for low performing participants, those solving 10 or fewer mazes in
task 1. For high performing participants differences are only marginally significant, though they are
significant at conventional levels for participants who solve 12 or more mazes in task 1. Fisher exact tests
for each decision separately reveal a significant gender difference of 0.07 or less for the choice in both task
2 and task 3 for participants with a task 1 performance of 10 or less and 12 or more. In the case of 11 and
more, the p-values for task 2 and task 3 choice are 0.11 and 0.14 respectively. For performances of 9 and
less, the p-values are 0.05 and 0.12 respectively.

21

selecting the hard task, while others from the easy task. That is, we want to confirm that
the observed non-conforming choices of participants do not reflect performances that
deviate from the pattern we found in the benchmark treatment.
Table VIIA shows the mean difference between the earnings for the chosen task
and the average earnings for the not chosen task (as predicted by the benchmark
treatment). Because women and men perform somewhat differently, for each participant,
we use the earnings that relate to their gender. We then average across all participants.
The table shows means, standard errors in parentheses and finally the p-value of the one
sided t-test.29 For 7 of the 8 cases we find significantly higher earnings for the task that
conforms with the prescribed choice and significantly lower earnings for the opposite
task. The only exception is in the case of low performing participants who chose the hard
task in task 3 instead of the easy task, where the difference, while negative, is not
significant. Therefore, we find as predicted that, compared to earnings estimates based on
the benchmark treatment, almost all participants who choose the task that does not
conform to their performance level incur significant losses, in the order of 15 to 20% of
their total earnings for the experiment. That is, it does not seem that participants who
choose the alternate task difficulty are especially good at performing at this level,
compared to the average participant in the benchmark treatment. Similarly, participants
have significant gains from choosing the task that corresponds to the prescription based
on the benchmark treatment.
To check that the selection into task difficulties is not due to extraordinary
performance patterns, we can also compare the performance of participants who choose a
specific difficulty level to the performance of participants who were assigned that
difficulty level in the benchmark treatment. In all eight cases of Table VIIA, apart from
low performing participants who choose the hard task in task 3, we find that the
performance of participants is not significantly different from those that were assigned
the chosen difficulty level in the benchmark treatment.30
29

We restrict attention to performances between 3 and 16, because there we have data from the benchmark
treatment.
30
The differences in earnings between participants who chose a difficulty level, and those of the
participants in the benchmark treatment who were assigned that difficulty level, are in five instances less
than 0.40 (with one-sided p-values of t-tests of 0.24 and higher). Among high performing participants who
choose the hard task, the differences are not significant, though higher in magnitude (for task 2: 1.05 (s.e.

22

TABLE VIIA
Task 2
Task 3
2<e1<11
10<e1<17
2<e1<11
10<e1<17
2.43
-2.72
2.93
-2.59
Chose Easy
(0.39)
(0.21)
(0.38)
(0.44)
Actual-Hard
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
-2.42
3.96
-0.68
2.22
Chose Hard
(0.46)
(1.37)
(0.78)
(0.85)
Actual-Easy
0.00
0.00
0.19
0.01
18 / 33
10 / 23
23 / 28
13 / 20
N
The tables show means, standard errors in parenthesis and finally the p-value
of the one sided t-test. The number of observations N1/N2 is read as N1
observations for the top cell and N2 for the lower cell in each column.
One possibility why women and men may overall gain from choosing the non-prescribed
task difficulty is that there could be large learning effects when performing in the same
task twice. For example, it could be that low performing participants who choose the hard
task twice have such a high performance the second time they perform that, in
expectation, it outweighs the losses from the first performance, even if only one of the
two tasks is payoff relevant. Note that this additional learning possibility was not present
in the benchmark treatment, as task 2 and task 3 were of different task difficulty.
TABLE VIIB
Women
Men
Task 2 & 3
Task 2 & 3
2<e1<11 10<e1<17
2<e1<11
10<e1<17
6.34
-4.80
5.14
Chose
(1.04)
(0.46)
(2.00)
--Easy-Easy
Actual-2*Hard
0.00
0.00
0.04
-2.06
3.76
-2.46
14.55
Chose
(3.97)
(2.08)
(1.43)
(2.14)
Hard-Hard
Actual-2*Easy
0.32
0.05
0.05
0.00
8/5
8 / 11
4 / 17
-- / 7
N
The tables show means, standard errors in parenthesis and finally the pvalue of the one sided t-test. The number of observations N1/N2 is read as
N1 observations for the top cell and N2 observations for the lower cell in
each column.
1.37, p = 0.45) for the one sided t-test, and for task 3 -0.64 (s.e. 0.79, p = 0.43); that is, high performing
participants in the choice treatment who choose the hard task for task 2 earn on average one dollar more
than high performing participants in the benchmark treatment, though they earn 0.64 dollar less in task 3).
Low performing participants in the choice treatment who choose the hard task in task 3 earn on average
$1.74 more than low performing participants in the hard task in the benchmark treatment, a difference that
is significant (s.e. 0.84, p = 0.05 of the one sided t-test).

23

To account for this possibility, table VIIB shows the average difference of actual
earnings to the predicted earnings for the alternate task for participants who choose the
same task twice, for women and men separately. We find for all participants that
choosing the same task twice does not change the predicted earnings pattern. In all cases
(apart from one) we estimate that participants receive significant gains from choosing the
task corresponding to the performance level, and significant losses from choosing the
alternate task. The exception consists of low performing women who choose the hard
task twice. While they incur losses, they are not significant, but there are only 5 such
women.31
We have a final test to address whether non-confirming choices are driven by
unusual performance patterns. We want to show that the choice of the hard task for low
performing men and the choice of the easy task for high performing women do not result
in higher earnings than those from the prescribed difficulty level. We can compare
earnings across tasks of participants who choose two different difficulty levels. Low
performing women and men who choose two different difficulty levels earn significantly
more from the easy than the hard task (on average 2.97, with a standard error of 0.48 and
a p-value of a one sided t-test of 0.00).32 High ability women who choose the hard and
the easy task (n = 4) make on average 1.38 more from the hard task (s.e. 4.09, p = 0.38).33
Therefore, we found a task in which women and men perform equally well and
have similar beliefs about their relative performance (that is, explanation 3 seems not to
be relevant in this environment for our results). Nonetheless, when simultaneously
choosing the task difficulty for the next two tasks, men choose the hard task significantly
more often than women, for each performance level. Compared to predicted moneymaximizing choices, high performing women do not choose the hard task often enough,

31

Of these five women are 4 who have losses compared to the expected earnings delivered by the
benchmark treatment.
32
For the 11 men only, the numbers are 3.07; s.e. 0.56; p = 0.00; for the 6 women only they are 2.79, s.e.
0.95, p = 0.02.
33
The only group that does not follow the predicted pattern are high performing men. Those who choose
the hard task and the easy task (n = 3) lose 4.16 from the hard task. Indeed, every one of the three men who
have an e1 performance of 11, 11 and 12 respectively and choose once the hard and once the easy task
make losses from the hard task, with a payoff difference of 3, 2.5 and 7. However, the sample is very small
and in general high performing men choose the hard task a lot, and on average have very high earnings
from the hard task. The choices of men that require an explanation are rather the low performing men who
choose the hard task (not the few high performing men who choose sometimes an easy task).

24

while low performing men choose it too much. Furthermore, we provided evidence that
the choices that do not follow the prescribed pattern result in monetary losses, often
significant (about 15 to 20% of total earnings) and do not seem to reflect private
information about unusual performance patterns.
This finding is very much in the spirit of the findings in the literature on gender
differences in entering competitive environments (see Niederle and Vesterlund, 2007),
even though in this case, the choices are between more and less challenging tasks, as
opposed to a choice of a competitive or non-competitive incentive scheme (see the
conclusions for a general review of the literature).

VI. GENDER DIFFERENCES IN PREFERENCES OVER TASKS?
There are several reasons why women and men may choose different difficulty
levels of the task which they perform, even in an environment in which there is no gender
difference in performance or in beliefs about relative performance.
A first possibility is that women and men may simply have different preferences
concerning the characteristics of the task which they want to perform (hypothesis 1). That
is, participants may not only maximize monetary earnings, but derive some (dis)utility
from performing in specific tasks. Specifically, women may have a cost of solving harder
mazes, while men may get a kick out of it. In this case, the different choices of men and
women may not pose a serious reason for concern for their welfare (as long as task
choices are not used for some later purpose, or have different educational value). There is
no small change in the institution that would affect the choices of women and men if they
reflect their underlying strong preferences for various tasks. Therefore, we want to
address the importance of preferences for performing different tasks in accounting for
gender differences in the choice treatment.
Note however that our participant pool consists of Stanford undergraduate
students, and hence finding that women prefer easy over hard tasks would be quite
devastating in terms of trying to promote and engage high performing women in difficult
tasks. Similarly, of course, we want to show that men do not simply try the hard task, no
matter how low their performance level actually is.

25

VI.A. Design of the Feedback Treatment
The feedback treatment is designed such that in this environment gender differences in
choice reflect gender differences in preferences for the hard and easy task per se. To
achieve this we eliminate other possible explanations for choices of task difficulty by
providing participants with feedback about their relative performance, telling them their
performance level and hence which task maximizes their future earnings. In the former
choice treatment, before choosing the difficulty level for tasks 2 and 3, participants were
informed that high performing participants on average received higher earnings from the
hard task, while others from the easy task. In the feedback treatment, participants are
additionally informed of which task 1 performances are among the top 40%
performances, and hence represent a high performance level (namely 11 or more).
By providing participants with this feedback, gender differences in choices of task
difficulty cannot be due to (possible) gender differences in feedback aversion (hypothesis
2), gender differences in beliefs about relative performance (hypothesis 3) or gender
differences in risk aversion and certainty (hypothesis 4). If choices conform to the
recommendation then there does not seem to be strong preference for the other task.34 We
have 47 women and 35 men in the feedback treatment.
Men completed on average 10.29 (s.d. 2.79) easy mazes in task 1, while women
completed 8.70 easy mazes (s.d. 2.83). Unlike in the two previous groups, we find that
this difference is significant, with men performing significantly better than women do (a
Mann Whitney test yields p = 0.02).35 However, the proportion of high performing men is
not significantly different than that of high performing women (p = 0.22 of a two-sided
Fisher exact test).

34

While the converse seems also reasonable, that non-conforming choices reflect a preference for the other
task per se, there is an additional reason for such behavior: Some participants may believe that their task 1
performance is not indicative of their performance level. For example a participant could think to have a
better than average ability to improve on first round performance, and therefore would “beat the odds” in
the next rounds.
35
From the data it appears that this significant difference was substantially caused by the extremely low
performance of 5 women out of the total 47, all of whom completed 5 or fewer easy mazes in Task 1.
Overall, across all four treatments, we had 9 women perform at 5 or lower, more than half of which are in
this treatment. Furthermore, overall, there is no significant gender difference in task 1 performance. The
average performance of men is 10.11 compared to 9.60 for women, a Mann Whitney test yields p = 0.41
and a two-sided t-test yields p = 0.13.

26

Table VIII
89,10
11,12
13+
9
13
7
6
Men
20
16
8
3
Women
Task 1 performances of 47 women and 35 men in the Feedback treatment.
VI.B: Hard Choices after Feedback
Figure II shows the proportion of hard choices for various task 1 performances, for
women and men separately. After receiving feedback, women and men basically choose
the hard task when they are in the top 40% (a performance of 11 and more), and the easy
task otherwise. There are no significant gender differences in task choice. An ordered
probit regression of task choice yields a high performance level dummy coefficient of
2.26 (p = 0.00) and a male coefficient of 0.14 (p = 0.63).36
1
0.8
0.6
0.4

Men

0.2

W omen
0
8-

9, 10

11, 12

13 +

FIGURE II
Proportion of hard choices of women and men in the feedback treatment.
Table IX shows the proportion of hard task choices given task 1 performances.
There are no gender differences either in the proportion of participants who choose the
hard task at least once or in the proportion of overall hard task choices.
When participants choose the task difficulty level after having received
information about their relative performance, men and women do not make different
choices, and their choices of task difficulty largely correspond to money-maximizing
36

An ordered probit regression shows that for women the high performance level dummy is a significant
predictor of a hard task choice, the coefficient is 1.85 (p = 0.00). We cannot run the same regression for
men, as all high performing men choose the hard task twice, so, there is no variation.

27

choices. That is, it does not appear that gender differences in choice of difficulty level are
driven by large gender differences in preferences for performing in the hard or easy task
per se.
TABLE IX

Men
Women
Fisher exact

Proportion at least 1 Hard Choice
All
910 - 11 + 12 +
57.1 28.6 31.8
100
100
55.3 41.9 41.7
100
100
1.00 0.51 0.58
---

Proportion of Hard choices
All
910 - 11 + 12 +
52.9 21.4
25
100
100
41.5
29
27.8 86.4 83.3

VII. REDUCED COMMITMENT
There are two kinds of remaining explanations for the gender gap in hard task choices.
The first has to do with the characteristics of the task. While the feedback treatment ruled
out that there is a large gender difference in preferences for performing either of the two
tasks per se, there can still be gender differences in preferences over receiving feedback
about one’s performance level. All participants are told that those whose task 1
performance is in the top 40% have on average higher earnings from the hard rather than
the easy task, and the other way round. Since all participants perform the easy task (task
1), choosing the hard task (at least once) can provide feedback about one’s relative task 1
performance. If there is a gender difference in preferences for feedback (hypothesis 2),
this can account for both the gender gap in choices of task difficulty in the choice
treatment and the lack of one in the feedback treatment.
A second remaining explanation for the results so far is that women differ from
men in their risk attitudes and certainty. Specifically, women may be more risk averse,
and hence prefer the task for which earnings are more certain and have a lower variance
(hypothesis 4). Alternatively, women may be less certain in their beliefs about their
ability to perform the harder tasks. One source for this difference can be a difference in
beliefs about whether the initial task 1 performance is due to luck or ability. If women
attribute “success” (i.e. high performance) more to luck and “failure” more to ability, and
vice versa for men, then they will have different beliefs about truly being of a high
performance level, even for similar beliefs about the relative initial task 1 performance.
We summarize all these explanations as differences in risk aversion and certainty. The

28

aim of this treatment is to distinguish between these two classes of explanations,
hypothesis 2 (feedback) versus hypothesis 4 (risk aversion and certainty).
If the choices of women and men represent preferences over the characteristics of
the tasks (e.g. providing more or less feedback about one’s relative performance), then
choices that do not maximize monetary earnings may not be a cause for great concern (as
long as choices have no impact on future economic outcomes). If, however, choices do
not reflect preferences over the tasks per se, there are potential welfare gains from
institutional changes.
Finally, we wish to find an alternative institution that aligns choices with moneymaximizing choices and specifically increases the proportion of high performing women
choosing the hard task. While providing feedback was such an institutional change, it
may often be very difficult to provide such a clear prediction of one’s ability to perform
in new and more difficult tasks.
VII.A: The Design of the Reduced Commitment treatment
In the reduced commitment treatment, women and men did not have to decide
simultaneously which task difficulty they preferred for their next two performances, but
rather decided for each task one at a time. Overall, in this treatment, participants could
make one of four possible choices, which are the same as in the choice treatment, namely
easy/easy, hard/hard, easy/hard, or hard/easy. The only difference is the degree of
commitment with which participants had to make their decisions. In the reduced
commitment treatment, participants could try out one difficulty level and then, upon
experiencing it, decide whether to continue at the same level of difficulty. If preferences
for hard and easy tasks are driven largely by strong preferences for feedback, this change
should not affect the choices. If uncertainty about the ability to perform well in the hard
task or a gender difference in the willingness to tolerate this uncertainty is a major
driving factor for the gender difference in entering challenging tasks, then a reduced
commitment can affect both the choices of women and men.
We have 38 women and 41 men who perform in this treatment. In task 1, men
solve on average 10.34 (s.d. 3.62) easy mazes, and women solve 10.34 (s.d. 3.36). This

29

difference is not significant, a Mann Whitney test yields p=0.58. Table X shows the
number of easy mazes completed by men and women in task 1.
813
Men
11
Women
Task 1 performances of
treatment.

Table X
9,10
11,12
13+
12
7
9
9
9
9
38 Women and 41 Men in the Reduced Commitment

VII. B: Hard task choices
Figure III shows the proportion of hard task choices for various performance
levels (which roughly correspond to performance quartiles), for men and women
separately. Figure III suggests that both high performing women and high performing
men mostly choose the hard task. However, only low performing women choose the easy
task.
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
Men
Women

0.2
0
8-

9, 10

11, 12

13 +

FIGURE III
For various task 1 performances, the proportion of hard choices of the 37
women and 41 men in the reduced commitment treatment.
An ordered probit regression on the choice of task difficulty as a function of a high
performance level dummy confirms that while there is a gender difference in choices
among low performing participants, there is no such difference among high performing
participants. Furthermore, for women, but not for men, the performance level predicts the
choice of task difficulty, see Table XI.37
37

We obtain similar results if we use the actual task 1 performance, compared to a high performance
dummy. The differences are: In the All 2 regression, the coefficient on task 1 is 0.23 (p = 0.00), on male is

30

TABLE XI
Ordered probit on the hard task choice in the reduced commitment treatment
Men Women All 1 All 2 E1<11 E1>10
High
0.35
1.51
0.95
1.53
(0.39) (0.00) (0.00) (0.00)
Male
0.77
1.23
1.24
0.04
(0.01) (0.00) (0.00) (0.92)
High*Male
-0.19
(0.04)
N
41
38
79
79
45
34
Ordered probit on the hard task choice as a function of
performance and gender. Coefficient and p-values
Table XII shows the proportion of hard task choices for different task 1 performances, for
women and men separately. We confirm a gender gap in choosing the hard task among
low performing participants, but not among high performing participants.

Men
Women
Fisher exact

TABLE XII
Proportion at least 1 Hard Choice
All
910 - 11 + 12 +
85.4 80.9
84
87.5 91.7
60
30.8
35
88.9 86.7
0.02 0.01 0.00 1.00 1.00

Proportion of Hard choices
All
910 - 11 + 12 +
75.6
69
72
81.3 83.3
52.6 23.1 27.5 80.6 76.6

Compared to a fixed choice, introducing reduced commitment succeeds in having high
performing women choose the hard task at a rate similar to the choices of high
performing men. That is, it does not appear that women shy away from the hard task
because they do not want to receive information about their relative performance, at least
that this feedback concern is not large in terms of monetary compensation. Rather it
appears that women are not certain enough about their ability to perform in the hard task,
and therefore do not choose it when they do not have the option to change their choice.
On the other hand, a gender difference in choices remains among participants of a
low performance level. Low performing men choose the hard task at a significantly
higher rate than low performing women. Of the 25 men of a low performance level, 21
(84%) choose the hard task for the task 2 performance. However, only 6 out of the 21
then switch to the easy task in the third performance round. If (low performing) men
2.07 (p = 0.04) and on task 1 * male is -0.13 (p = 0.17). We obtain virtually the same results when we
consider only the decision of the second or third task.

31

chose the hard task simply to receive some feedback on their performance, there would
be no need to choose the hard task twice. That is, it does not appear that a strong
preference of men to receive feedback on their relative performance can account for the
large proportion of low performing men who choose the hard task twice.
To more closely examine the reasons for the hard task choices of low performing
men, we examine the feedback those participants receive from choosing the hard task.
While participants know their earnings from the hard task (since they just performed it),
they have to estimate what they would have earned from choosing the easy task, or
choose it for the next task, task 3. One estimate that is available to participants is the
number of easy mazes they solved in the first task, which was an easy task. They can
multiply this number with $0.5 per maze, to form an estimate for their earnings from the
easy task. We can compare the earnings from the hard task to this earnings estimate from
the easy task, for each of the 21 low performing men who chose the hard task. A total of
8 have lower earnings with the hard task, 5 have exactly the same earnings and 8 have
higher earnings. Of the 13 men who did not increase their earnings, 5 (38%) changed to
the easy task, and of the 5 men who have lower earnings by $2.5 or more, 3 changed their
choice and chose the easy task for their third performance. That is, a fair number of men
seem to take that information of somewhat lower earnings into account.38
Note, however, that this earnings difference is not the correct comparison to
calculate which choice maximizes earnings. In the benchmark treatment, between the
first and the second performance in the easy task, men (and women) improve their
performance, in a way that corresponds to $1.3 in a regime in which easy mazes are
rewarded by $0.5 each. When we compare earnings of participants in the reduced
commitment treatment in the second task to $0.5 times the number of mazes solved in
task 1, only 2 of the 21 men increased their earnings by $2 or more, 3 by $1.5 and 16 by
$1 or less. Since the easy task carries an increase of $ 1.3 on average, the vast majority
has expected losses from choosing the hard task. That is, it appears that the feedback low
performing participants who choose the hard task receive is noisy, specifically, they may

However, the differences in proportions are not significant, two-sided Fisher exact tests yield p-values of
about 0.33.

38

32

not realize that they will improve their performance in the easy task. That is participants
may not realize they actually have losses from choosing the hard over the easy task.

VIII. THE EFFECT OF INSTITUTIONS
We have an environment in which women and men perform similarly in a first easy task
which is a good predictor of their performance level, high or low, and hence of their
money-maximizing task difficulty, hard or easy respectively. Furthermore, in this
environment women and men do not differ in their beliefs about their relative
performance in the first easy task. We had three environments in which participants, after
we assessed their performance level, could choose the task difficulty level which to
perform. Figure IV shows the proportion of hard choices in each treatment, for high and
low performing women and men.
100
80
60
40
20

HIGH
LOW

0
C-W

F-W

RC-W

Women

C-M

F-M

RC-M

Men

FIGURE IV
For each treatment, Choice (C), Feedback (F) and Reduced Commitment
(RC), the proportion of hard choices, both among high (e1>10) and low
(e1<11) performing women (1st part, filled) and men (2nd part, hollow).
We see that in the initial choice treatment, the gap in hard choices between high
and low performing participants is less than 20% for both women and men.39 Women are
significantly more prone to choose the easy task than men, for either performance level.
This results in monetary losses for high performing women (who do not choose the hard

39

While the gap is not significant for each gender separately, it is when we pool women and men.

33

task often enough) and low performing men (who choose the hard task too often). That is,
in terms of pushing participants towards money maximizing choices, a change in
institution should affect the choices of high performing women and low performing men.
Note that simple policies, such as encouraging all participants to choose the hard task
more or less often, will fail one of the genders.
Compared to the initial choice treatment, providing perfect feedback, that is
information about one’s performance level, results in a significant increase in the
responsiveness of participants’ choices to their performance level.40 This is due to high
performing women entering the hard task more often, while low performing men enter
the hard task less often.41 This implies that the task choices in the original treatment were
not driven by large gender differences over task preferences, that is, women do not have a
much higher cost than men to perform the hard task (and vice versa for the easy task).
We therefore found an institution in which participants make money-maximizing
choices. We provided participants with perfect information or feedback about their
performance level, in essence prescribing a choice, which they largely followed. This
institution is however very demanding, in that it requires that (i) a very good test of
abilities in harder tasks exists, and (ii) administering the test to participants, who know it
is a diagnostic test, does not distort performance. While in our experiment the “test” was
administered without the participants’ knowledge, this is probably not feasible outside of
the lab, especially if it is a design feature practiced over several years. That is, both
requirements seem fairly implausible for many applications, the second largely for
learning and psychological reasons (see the earlier discussion on stereotype threat).
A second institutional change we considered was expected to affect participants
who are risk averse or uncertain about their abilities to perform in different environments:
we had participants make choices sequentially. When participants receive noisy feedback

40

An ordered probit regression of the hard task choice of the 89 women in the choice (C) and the feedback
(F) treatments yields coefficients of 0.40 (p = 0.26) on a high performance level dummy, -0.41 (p = 0.20)
on a dummy for the feedback treatment, and 1.35 (p = 0.02) on a high performance level and feedback
interaction dummy. We cannot run the same regression on men, as all high performing men in the feedback
treatment choose the hard task twice.
41
An ordered probit regression of the hard task choice of the 34 high performing women in the choice (C)
and the feedback (F) treatments yields coefficients of 0.89 (p = 0.06) on a feedback treatment dummy. For
the 54 low performing men the coefficient is -1.33 (p = 0.00), while it is not significant for the 55 low
performing women (coefficient: -0.43, p = 0.19).

34

on their performance level after their second performance in task 2, in the reduced
commitment treatment, high performing women still choose the hard task significantly
more than low performing women. The choices of task difficulty of women are very
similar to the case in which they receive perfect feedback.42 And most notably, high
performing women choose the hard task significantly more than in the initial choice
treatment.43 That is, women could try out the hard task then choose it once more if they
proved to perform well. We found that this change had effects just like the perfect test or
feedback administered secretly; high performing women choose the hard task at a very
high rate.
The choices of men in the reduced commitment treatment on the other hand
mirror the decisions in the initial choice treatment, rather than the decision when men
have perfect feedback. Both high and low performing men choose the hard task with a
high probability.44 This institution failed to entice low performing men to change to the
easy task, maybe because the feedback of a low performing participant is harder to
interpret.
The results suggest that initial task choices were mostly not driven by gender
differences in strong preferences over receiving feedback about one’s performance.
Rather it seems that gender differences in choices are driven by gender differences in risk
aversion, or uncertainty.

IX. CONCLUSION AND DISCUSSION
This paper contributes to the growing literature that tries to uncover why women are
underrepresented in many high profile jobs and across whole professions.45 Explanations
that have been focused on so far, namely gender differences in preferences (over fields of
42

An ordered probit regression of the hard task choice on a feedback treatment dummy yields for the 56
low performing women in the feedback (F) and the reduced commitment (RC) treatments a coefficient of
0.04 (p = 0.91). For the 29 high performing women the coefficient is 0.19 (p = 0.71).
43
An ordered probit regression of the hard task choice on a reduced commitment dummy yields for the 41
high performing women in the choice (C) and the reduced commitment (RC) treatments a coefficient of
0.70 (p = 0.07). For the 39 low performing women the coefficient is -0.54 (p = 0.24).
44
An ordered probit regression of the hard task choice on a reduced commitment dummy yields for the 47
low performing men in the feedback (F) and the reduced commitment (RC) treatments a coefficient of 1.32 (p = 0.00). An ordered probit regression of the hard task choice on a reduced commitment dummy
yields for the 57 low performing men in the choice (C) and the reduced commitment (RC) treatments a
coefficient of 0.07 (p = 0.82).
45
For a general survey on gender differences in economic settings, see e.g. Croson and Gneezy (2005).

35

study) and ability or discrimination are likely to play an important role. However, we
argue that another reason may be that in many environments women and men respond
differently to challenges, which leads to gender differences in self-selection for given
abilities. As such, the paper is also part of the growing literature on the effect of noncognitive skills and attitudes, and how gender differences in these skills and attitudes
affect economic outcomes.
Past research on gender differences in choice of task difficulty has shown that
men choose harder tasks than women. Gneezy, Niederle and Rustichini (2003) provide an
example in which women and men at a technical university in Israel (the Technion)
decide between various levels of task difficulty, and in which men choose harder tasks
than women. However, in that paper, the tasks were not calibrated, and neither
researchers nor experimental participants knew whether harder tasks provided higher
earnings for a specific participant than easier tasks. Furthermore, no attempt could be
made to study whether these choices were money-maximizing or to investigate
underlying causes for these gender differences.
The contribution of this paper is to create an environment in which (i) participants
are of one of two performance levels, low or high, each of which corresponds
(empirically) to a specific money-maximizing choice (easy tasks for low performing
participants, and hard tasks for the others); and (ii) we can measure the participants’
performance level before they choose the task difficulty in a way that does not reveal the
performance level to the participants. (All participants who had a task 1 performance of
11 or higher, and hence were among the top 40% of performers in task 1, had a high
performance level, while it was low for the other participants.) Finally, participants were
aware of the calibration, that is the labels hard and easy were meaningful, but participants
did not necessarily know their performance level when choosing the task difficulty.
Furthermore, in this environment women and men did not differ in their beliefs about
their relative performance in task 1. This set-up allows us to show that women and men
of equal performance react differently when given a choice to enter tasks that are more
difficult: women avoid challenges, while men are drawn to them.
We find that simply strong preferences for the characteristics of the task
(including the feedback participants can receive about their ability level from performing

36

various tasks) cannot account for the choices of women and men. Gender differences in
preferences for challenging tasks rather are driven by differences in certainty in one’s
ability to perform in more challenging environments or differences in attitudes toward
that specific risk or uncertainty in general. That is for example, women compared to me
may be more uncertain in their beliefs that they are high performing (though for beliefs
about low performances this would have to be the opposite). This could, for example, be
driven by gender differences in beliefs about how much the initial task 1 performance
corresponds to luck versus real ability. Specifically, women may attribute success to luck,
and failure to ability, and the other way round for men.46
Another recent string of papers investigated a specific way in which women may
be more averse to a particular challenge than men: women and men may differ in their
propensity to engage in competitive tasks. The results of Gneezy, Niederle and Rustichini
(2003) and Gneezy and Rustichini (2004) suggest that women may not be as adept as
men in performing in competitive environments. Furthermore, women may also be less
prone to enter gender balanced competitive environments compared to men (see Gneezy
and Rustichini (2005), Datta, Poulsen and Villeval (2005), and Gneezy, Leonard and List
(2006)). Niederle and Vesterlund (2007) show that men and women who perform
similarly in both a competitive and a non-competitive environment, and hence have the
same money-maximizing choice between these incentive schemes, differed in their
decision to enter a subsequent tournament. Men entered the tournaments more than
women, for any performance level. The major explanations for this gender gap in the
propensity to compete are gender differences in preferences for competitive environments
per se, but also gender differences in confidence (about the performance in the hard,
competitive environment), and only to some extent gender differences in risk and
feedback aversion. The gender differences can also be due to differences in beliefs about
future performance. This is also a possible explanation for the current paper. Using
various incentive schemes, Dohmen and Falk (2005) similarly showed that women prefer

46

Note that a combination of hypotheses that includes small gender differences in feedback aversion or
differences in preferences over tasks is also possible to account for our results. Our treatments can only
show that choices seem not driven by large gender differences in preferences either over tasks or in
receiving feedback about one’s performance level only.

37

environments in which there is no uncertainty about the earnings participants can
achieve.
Overall, the literature shows the importance of understanding non-cognitive
motives in self-selection into various tasks and environments. Only by understanding
gender differences can we start to design institutions that will accommodate both
genders. The papers show furthermore that simple changes in institutions can have a big
effect on the self-selection of women and men.
The paper enhances the spectrum and applicability of the research on gender as it
is often easier to think of some tasks as harder and more challenging than others, without
necessarily having an extremely competitive element. For example, a major in “hard”
sciences is often viewed as a more difficult major than English or comparative literature.
However, in a sense, one could argue that a Ph.D. in many humanities is more
competitive than, say, in Economics, as there are many fewer jobs per student. On the
other hand, such Ph.D.’s could be viewed as less competitive, as the ranking among
students may be less clear, less obvious, and as such, the daily competitive aspect may
feel very different.47 We showed that women and men differ in their propensity to choose
to perform challenging tasks that have no competitive aspect.
Second, this paper proposes a change in the institution, reduced commitment, that
in theory of course helps all participants who make choices, but especially helps high
performing women to move into the hard and challenging task.
While several laboratory studies replicate our general finding, there is also
evidence to suggest that gender differences in behavior under competition may extend to
other domains. For example, Babcock and Laschever (2003) explore the possibility that
gender differences in labor market outcomes may arise because women are poor
negotiators and generally dislike and avoid the process of negotiating. To the extent that a
negotiation can be seen as a more challenging task than simply accepting a wage offer,
their results appear consistent with our findings.

47

And as every economist that presented at a seminar or conference in which there were not only
economists but also historians, psychologists or philosophers can attest, economics seminars or seminar
participants are more lively, i.e. there are more questions, more questioning of underlying assumptions or
the interest of the paper at hand, in a way often to shock the participants from other fields, many of whom
would say that the seminars are more “aggressive” rather than more “lively”.

38

Furthermore, we predict that gender differences should be reduced when the
environment allows for participants to try out various tasks, without a strong initial
commitment. A report by the NSF (1996) shows that women, who in the years 1991-95
accounted for approximately one-third of all science and engineering doctorates holders,
are more likely than their male colleagues to have had their undergraduate education at
baccalaureate colleges. In the sciences the proportion is 20% of female doctorates
compared to 16% of male doctorates, while in engineering, 7% of female doctorates
compared to 4% of male doctorates come from baccalaureate colleges. The differences of
liberal arts colleges is that they offer a more balanced education, with fewer specialized
classes, and so may make it easier to ease into science without a total initial commitment.
It is generally agreed that ability alone cannot explain the absence of women in
male dominated fields. In natural settings, issues such as discrimination, the amount of
time devoted to the profession, and the desire of women to raise children may provide
some explanation for the choices of women. However, in this paper we have examined an
environment in which women and men perform equally well, and in which issues of
discrimination, or time spent on the job do not have any explanatory power. Nonetheless,
we find large gender differences in the propensity to choose challenging tasks. It appears
that these differences are driven by gender differences in risk aversion, and certainty in
the ability to perform in a harder and new task.
A novel feature of this paper is that we not only document gender differences, but
also directly address which institutional changes would enhance the decisions of women
and reduce gender differences.

39

REFERENCES
Altonji, Joseph G., and Rebecca Blank "Race and Gender in the Labor Market" in O.
Ashenfelter and D. Card, eds, Handbook of Labor Economics Volume 3c
(Amsterdam, The Netherlands, Elsevier Science B.V. 1999): 3144-3259.
Babcock, Linda, and Sara Laschever. Women Don't Ask: Negotiation and the Gender
Divide. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, (2003).
Bertrand, Marianne, and Kevin F. Hallock, “The Gender Gap in Top Corporate Jobs,”
Industrial and Labor Relations Review, v. 55, (2001), 3-21.
Beyer, Sylvia, “Gender Differences in the Accuracy of Self-Evaluations of Performance,”
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, v. 59, (1990), 960-970.
Beyer, Sylvia, and Edward M. Bowden, “Gender Differences in Self-Perceptions:
Convergent Evidence from Three Measures of Accuracy and Bias,” Personality
and Social Psychology Bulletin, v. 23, (1997), 157-172.
Black, S. E. and P. E. Strahan, “The division of spoils: Rent-sharing and discrimination in
a regulated industry,” American Economic Review, v.91, no.4, (2001), p.814-831.
Blau, Francine, and Lawrence M. Kahn, “Gender Differences in Pay,” Journal of
Economic Perspectives, v. 14, (2000), 75-99.
Boggiano, A. K., D. S. Main, and P. A. Katz, “Children’s preference for challenge-the
role of perceived competence and control,” Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, v. 54, no.1, (1988), 134-141.
Byrnes, James P., David C. Miller, and William D. Schafer, “Gender Differences in Risk
Taking: A Meta-Analysis,” Psychology Bulletin, v. 75, (1999), 367-383.
Campbell, Anne, A Mind of Her Own: The Evolutionary Psychology of Women (Oxford,
UK: Oxford University Press, 2002).
Crocker, Jennifer and B. Major (1989) “Social stigma and self-esteem: The selfprotective properties of stigma,” Psychological review, 96, 608 – 630.
Croson, Rachel and Uri Gneezy, “Gender differences in preferences”, working paper,
2005.
Cutrona, C.E., V. Cole, N. Colangelo, S.G. Assouline, D.W. Russell, “Perceived parental
social support and academic-achievement- an attachment theory perspective,”
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, v.66, no. 2, (1994), 369-378.
Daly, Martin, and Margo Wilson, Sex, Evolution, and Behavior, 2nd ed. (Belmont, CA:
Wadsworth Publishing Company, 1983).
Datta Gupta, Nabanita, Anders Poulsen and Marie-Claire Villeval, “Male and female
competitive behavior: Experimental evidence.” Working paper, 2005.
Daubman, Kimberly A., “Gender and the Self-Presentation of Academic Achievement,”
Sex Roles, v. 27, no. 3-4, (1992), 187-204.
Deaux, K., “From individual differences to social categories: Analysis of a decade’s
research on gender,” American Psychologist, v. 38, (1984), 105-116.
Dohmen, Thomas and Armin Falk, “Performance Pay and Multi-dimensional Sorting:
Productivity, Preferences and Gender,” IZA working paper, 2005.
Dweck, Carol S., Self-Theories: Their Role in Motivation, Personality, and Development,
(Philadelphia. PA: Psychology Press, 2000).
Eckel, Catherine C. and Philip J. Grossman, "Forecasting Risk Attitudes: An
Experimental Study Using Actual and Forecast Gamble Choices." Journal of
Economic Behavior and Organization, forthcoming.

40

Eckel, Catherine C. "Experiments on Gender Differences." Forthcoming in The New
Palgrave Dictionary of Economics, 2nd edition, edited by Steven N. Durlauf and
Lawrence E. Blume, Palgrave Macmillan (Basingstoke and New York).
Elliot, A. J., and Harackiewicz, J. M., “Goal setting, achievement orientation, and
intrinsic motivation: A mediational analysis,” Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, v. 66, (1994), 968-980.
Elliott, E. S., and C. S. Dweck, “Goals: An approach to motivation and achievement,”
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, v. 66, (1988), 369-387.
Gneezy, Uri, Muriel Niederle, and Aldo Rustichini, “Performance in Competitive
Environments: Gender Differences,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, (Aug.
2003), 1049-1074.
Gneezy, Uri and Aldo Rustichini, “Gender and competition at a young age”, American
Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, XCIV (2004), 377-381.
Gneezy, Uri and Aldo Rustichini. 2005. “Executives versus teachers,” Mimeo.
Gneezy, Uri, Kenneth L Leonard, and John A. List. 2006. “Gender differences in
competition: The role of socialization,” Mimeo.
Goldin, Claudia, and Cecilia Rouse, “Orchestrating Impartiality: The Impact of “Blind”
Auditions on Female Musicians,” American Economic Review, XC (2000), 715–
742.
Harackiewicz, J. M., and A. J. Elliott, “Achievement goals and intrinsic motivation,”
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, v. 65, (1993), 904-915.
Keller, Johannes, (2002). Blatant stereotype threat and women's math performance: Selfhandicapping as a strategic means to cope with obtrusive negative performance
expectations. Sex Roles, 47, 193-198.
Köszegi, Botond, “Ego Utility, Overconfidence and Task Choice”, Journal of the
European Economic Association, June 2006, 4(4), 673-707.
Lichtenstein, S., Fischhoff, B., & Phillips, L. D., “Calibration of probabilities: The state
of the art to 1980,” (1982), In D. Kahneman, P. Slovic, & A. Tversky, Judgment
under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases (pp. 306-344). New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Mobius, Markus, Muriel Niederle, Paul Niehaus and Tanya Rosenblat, “Do women react
differently to feedback than men?”, work in progress.
Mobius, Markus M. and Tanya Rosenblat “Why Beauty Matters”, American Economic
Review, March 2006, vol. 96, no 1, 222-235.
National Science Foundation, Undergraduate Origins of Recent (1991-95) Science and
Engineering Doctorate Recipients, Detailed Statistical Tables, NSF 96-334
(Arlington, VA, 1996).
Niederle, Muriel, and Lise Vesterlund, “Do Women Shy Away from Competition? Do
Men Compete too Much?,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, August 2007, Vol.
122, No. 3, 1067-1101.
Niederle, Muriel, Carmit Segal and Lise Vesterlund, “How Costly is Diversity?
Affirmative Action in Light of Gender Differences in Competitiveness”, working
paper, 2007.
Roberts, Tomi-Ann and Susan Nolen-Hoeksama, “Sex Differences in Reactions to
Evaluative Feedback”, Sex Roles, XXI (1989), 725-747.

41

Roberts, T.-A., and Nolen-Hoeksema, S., “Gender comparisons in responsiveness to
others’ evaluations in achievement settings,” Psychology of Women Quarterly, v.
18, (1994), 221-240.
Ruble, Diane N., Carol L. Martin and Sheri A. Berenbaum , “Gender Development” In
Handbook of Child Psychology, 6th edition, 2006. Damon, W., and Lerner, R.M.
eds. Vol. 3, Chapter 14, pp. 858-932.
Spencer, S. J., Steele, C. M., & Quinn, D. M., “Stereotype threat and women’s math
performance”, Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 35, 1999, 4-28.
Steele, Claude M., “A Threat in the Air: How Stereotypes Shape Intellectual Identity and
Performance,” American Psychologist, LII (1997), 613 – 629.
Steele, C. M., & Aronson, J., “Stereotype threat and the intellectual test performance of
African-Americans”, Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 69, 1995,
797-811.
Vulkan, Nir 2000. An economist’s perspective on probability matching. Journal of
Economic Surveys, 14: 101–118.
Yestrumskas, Alexandra, “Should I choose the harder path? Gender differences in an
experiment on task choice”, Stanford honors thesis, 2004.

42

APPENDIX : Example of an Easy maze

Example of a Hard maze

43

Sample INSTRUCTIONS

Welcome
In the experiment today you will be asked to complete four different tasks. None of these
will take you more than 10 minutes. Before each task we will describe in detail how your
payment is determined.
Your total earnings from the experiment depend on your performance during the
experiment, and you will also receive a $5 show-up fee. At the end of the experiment you
will be asked to come to a side room where you will be paid in private.

Task 1—Easy Mazes
For Task 1 you will be asked to correctly complete as many mazes of difficultly level
“easy” as you can in 10 minutes. To complete a maze, you must begin at the beginning
on the left-hand side and draw a continuous line to the finish on the right-hand side of the
maze without crossing any of the maze boundary lines. If you make a mistake, you may
cross out the portion of the line that is incorrect and begin again at the point where you
went wrong. An example of how to cross out your mistake will be shown to you before
you begin. When you complete a maze, you may immediately proceed to the next maze
and continue completing mazes until time has expired and you are asked to stop working.
Your answers to the mazes are anonymous.
You are allowed to skip up to three mazes during the 10 minutes. If you decide to skip a
maze, draw an X through the entire maze. You will not be paid for these mazes.
You will receive $0.25 per maze you solve correctly in the 10 minutes.
Please do not talk to one another for the duration of the experiment. If you have any
questions, please raise your hand.

ARE THERE ANY QUESTIONS BEFORE WE BEGIN?

Task 2- Easy Mazes
As in Task 1, in Task 2 you will once again be asked to correctly complete as many
“easy” mazes as you can in 10 minutes. At the end of Task 2, time will be called and you
are to stop working. The same rules about crossing out your mistakes apply as before.
You may skip up to three mazes. If you skip a maze, draw a large X through the entire
maze. Again, your responses will remain anonymous.

44

At the end of the experiment, you will be paid either for the mazes you completed in Task
2 or Task 3. The task for which you will be paid will be randomly determined at the end
of the experiment. If Task 2 is the one randomly selected, you will receive $0.50 per
maze you complete correctly.
Please do not talk to one another. If you have any questions, please raise your hand.

ARE THERE ANY QUESTIONS BEFORE WE BEGIN?
Task 3- Hard Mazes
In Task 3 you are asked to correctly complete as many mazes as you can in 10 minutes.
This time the mazes will be difficult. At the end of Task 3, time will be called and you
are to stop working. The same rules about crossing out your mistakes apply as before.
You may skip up to three mazes. If you skip a maze, draw a large X through the entire
maze. Again, your responses will remain anonymous.
At the end of the experiment, you will be paid either for the mazes you completed in Task
2 or Task 3. The task for which you will be paid will be randomly determined at the end
of the experiment. If Task 3 is the one randomly selected, you will receive $0.25 per
maze for the first 4 mazes you complete correctly, and $3.50 for each maze you complete
past the fourth.
Please do not talk to one another. If you have any questions, please raise your hand.

ARE THERE ANY QUESTIONS BEFORE WE BEGIN?

45

Subject # ______________

Decision
You have just completed a round of easy mazes. There are two rounds of mazes
remaining. Before we continue, you are asked to make a choice. You must choose the
level of difficulty you would prefer for the next two rounds of mazes.
At the end of the experiment, you will be paid either for the mazes you completed in Task
2 or Task 3. The task for which you will be paid will be randomly determined at the end
of the experiment. If you have completed Easy mazes in the task that is selected, you will
be paid $0.50 per maze. If you have completed Hard mazes in the task that is selected,
you will be paid $0.25 per maze for the first 4 mazes you complete correctly, and $3.50
for each maze you complete past the fourth.
Based on all the people who have previously participated in this experiment, if you
perform in the top 40% of all people completing mazes, you are likely to make more
money by selecting the Hard mazes, while if you are not in the top 40% of participants,
you are likely to make more money by selecting the Easy mazes.
Remember, at this time you are being asked to make your decision for both Task 2 and
Task 3. After completing Task 2, you are not allowed to change your choice.

Please select one of the following choices with an X:
______

Task 2: EASY

Task 3: EASY

______

Task 2: HARD

Task 3: HARD

______

Task 2: EASY

Task 3: HARD

______

Task 2: HARD

Task 3: EASY

46

