NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ASSESSING JOB FLOWS ACROSS COUNTRIES:
THE ROLE OF INDUSTRY, FIRM SIZE AND REGULATIONS
John Haltiwanger
Stefano Scarpetta
Helena Schweiger
Working Paper 13920
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13920

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2008

We are grateful to Robin Burgess, Laurence Kahn, Adriana Kugler, Julian Messina, Carmen Pages,
John Shea, John Sutton, Luis Serven, James Tybout and the participants at the World Bank Conference
on the 'Microeconomic of Growth' (Washington, D.C., May 18-19, 2006), at the Annual Conference
of the European Association of Labour Economists (EALE, Prague, September 21-23, 2006), at the
World Bank and IZA 2nd Conference on 'Employment and Development' (Bonn, June 8-9, 2007) and
at the 2008 Annual Meetings of the American Economic Association (New Orleans, 4-6 January, 2008)
for their insightful comments. The views expressed in this paper are our own and do not necessarily
represent those of the institutions of affiliation. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by John Haltiwanger, Stefano Scarpetta, and Helena Schweiger. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Assessing Job Flows Across Countries: The Role of Industry, Firm Size and Regulations
John Haltiwanger, Stefano Scarpetta, and Helena Schweiger
NBER Working Paper No. 13920
April 2008
JEL No. J23,J53,K31
ABSTRACT
This paper analyzes job flows in a sample of 16 industrial and emerging economies over the past decade,
exploiting a harmonized firm-level dataset. It shows that industry and firm size effects (and especially
firm size) account for a large fraction in the overall variability in job flows. However, large residual
differences remain in the job flow patterns across countries. To account for the latter, the paper explores
the role of differences in employment protection legislation across countries. Using a difference-in-difference
approach that minimizes possible endogeneity and omitted variable problems, our findings show that
hiring and firing costs tend to curb job flows, particularly in those industries and firm size classes that
require more frequent labor adjustment.

John Haltiwanger
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
haltiwan@econ.umd.edu
Stefano Scarpetta
OECD
Directorate for Employment,
Labour and Social Affairs
2, rue Andrè-Pascal
75775 Paris Cedex 16, France
stefano.scarpetta@oecd.org

Helena Schweiger
EBRD, Office of the Chief Economist
One Exchange Square
London EC2A 2JN United Kingdom
helena.schweiger@gmail.com

1

Introduction

Over the past decade, a growing body of evidence has accumulated suggesting that the
reallocation of factors of production - including labor - plays a major role in driving productivity growth (see for example Olley and Pakes [1996], Griliches and Regev [1995], Foster
et al. [2001], Foster et al. [2002] and Bartelsman et al. [2004]). New firms enter the market
and create new jobs, while other unprofitable firms exit the market contributing to job
destruction (see e.g. Sutton [1997], Pakes and Ericson [1998], Geroski [1995]). Incumbent
firms are in a continuous process of adaptation in response to the development of new products and processes, the growth and decline in markets and changes in competitive forces
(Davis and Haltiwanger [1999]). Market conditions and institutional factors play a major
role in shaping the magnitude of job flows and their characteristics (Davis et al. [1996]).
For example, smaller businesses are inherently more dynamic, in part because they tend
to be young ventures and adjust through a learning-by-doing process (Dunne et al. [1988],
Dunne et al. [1989]). In addition, some industries have inherently higher job flows than
others in all countries, given the smaller size of their typical business and lower inherent
entry costs (for example, Foster et al. [2002] report that job flows in the United States
retail sector are 1.5 times higher than in the manufacturing sector).
Technological and market driven factors are coupled with a host of regulations in driving job flows. For example, regulations affecting start-up costs or bankruptcy procedures
are likely to affect firm turnover and the associated labor mobility. Likewise, employment protection legislation may stifle labor reallocation by raising labor adjustment costs.
Assessing the role of regulations in affecting job flows, over and above that played by technological and market-driven factors, is of great importance. While labor reallocation is
indeed important to promote productivity growth, it is also painful for the affected workers, who face significant search and other adjustment costs (see for example Mortensen and
Pissarides [1999a], Mortensen and Pissarides [1999b] and Caballero and Hammour [2000b]).
Several models predict that labor regulations reduce gross job flows (e.g. Bertola [1992],
Hopenhayn and Rogerson [1993], Koeniger and Prat [2007]), but the empirical evidence
is still inconclusive. While several empirical papers find a negative effect of employment
protection legislation on worker turnover (Bentolila and Bertola [1990], Nickell and Layard
[1999]), the effects on job turnover are more nuanced (Bertola and Rogerson [1997], Boeri
[1999]). Countries with different types of labor regulations are observed to have fairly
similar gross job flows. The lack of a causal relationship between regulations and gross
job flows at the aggregate level may be due to different elements. Stringent labor regulations may be associated with other regulatory and institutional factors that also affect
job flows. For example, Bertola and Rogerson [1997] argue that the greater compression

3

of wages in Europe than in the U.S. can compensate the differences in labor regulations
and so explain the similarity of the turnover rates. A more fundamental problem is that
cross-country analyses of job flows may be flawed by severe omitted variable problems and
measurement errors, including differences in the distribution of activity across industries
and size of firms, as well as different cut-off points in the enterprise surveys from which job
flow data are obtained. To try to tackle these problems, a few papers have recently assessed
the impact of changes in labor regulations on job flows in individual countries exploiting
reform episodes that were targeted at specific groups in the labor market (exploiting “natural experiments”) and generally found a significant negative effect of strict employment
protection on job flows as well as substitution effects (see Kugler [2007]).1
In this paper, we draw from a harmonized and integrated firm-level dataset including
16 developed, emerging and transition economies of Eastern Europe. With these data, we
explore in detail the industry and size dimensions of the job flows, and relate them to institutional differences across countries. Two recent papers exploit job flows across industries
within countries to investigate the role of employment protection: Micco and Pages [2006]
and Messina and Vallanti [2006]. Messina and Vallanti [2006] focus on cyclical and secular
variation in job turnover. The paper that is closest to ours in terms of questions and approach is Micco and Pages [2006]. The latter paper exploits industry level gross job flows
data for manufacturing for 18 countries and uses a difference-in-difference specification close
to the specification we consider in this paper. Our analysis differs from this study along
a number of related key dimensions. First, we use a harmonized firm-level database that
covers all firms with at least one employee for both manufacturing and non-manufacturing
sectors. Second, we exploit country, industry and firm size variation in our analysis. Interestingly, we find that firm size is by far the most important factor accounting for variation
in the job flows across country, industry and firm size classes. This suggests that exploiting data by firm size is important both to provide greater within country variation in job
flows for our empirical identification strategy but also that distortions to job flows across
countries may very well interact with the flow and firm size relationship. Finally, our data
allow distinguishing between job flows generated by the entry and exit of firms and those
generated by the reallocation of labor by incumbent firms. As shown in the paper, this
sheds additional light on labor reallocation and the role of regulations in labor and product
markets.
1

Kugler [2007] summarizes a number of empirical studies that have looked at the effects of reform
episodes on job flows in Italy, France, Spain, Germany and the United States. These episodes provide
“natural experiments” that allow comparing groups of workers targeted by the reform to groups of workers
not directly affected by the reform before and after the policy change in what is otherwise the same
macroeconomic and regulatory environment. The main conclusion of these studies is that increasing the
strictness of employment protection legislation reduces job (and worker) flows, while the composition of
employment is also swayed against young and female workers.

4

To give a preview of our results, we find that countries share a number of features
of job flows along the industry and size dimensions. All countries are characterized by
large job flows. These vary significantly and systematically across industries, pointing to
technological and market-driven factors, but they vary especially across firms of different
sizes. To provide perspective on the importance of firm size, we find that industry effects
alone account for about 5 percent of the variation in job reallocation rates across industry,
size and country classes while firm size effects alone account for about 47 percent of the
same variation. However, even after controlling for industry and size effects, there remain
notable cross-country differences in job flows. In this paper, we develop a formal test of
the role that hiring and firing regulations have in explaining these differences, and also
test for the robustness of our results to the inclusion of other regulations affecting business
operations. We use a difference-in-difference approach whereby we identify an industry
and size class’s baseline job reallocation from the United States data. The advantage,
compared with standard cross-country/cross-industry empirical studies, is that we exploit
within country differences between industry×sizes based on the interaction between country
and industry×size characteristics. Thus, we can also control for country and industry×size
effects, thereby minimizing the problems of omitted variable bias and other misspecifications. Interestingly, we find support for the general hypothesis that hiring and firing costs
reduce turnover, especially in those industries and size classes that require more frequent
labor adjustment. Moreover, stringent labor regulations have more of an impact on job
flows resulting from the entry and exit of firms than from reallocation among incumbents.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents our harmonized
firm-level dataset and discusses the different concepts we have used to characterize labor
reallocation. Section 3 analyzes the main features of job flows, highlighting the role of
firm dynamics, industry and size compositions. Section 4 introduces the difference-indifference approach used in the econometric analysis and discusses the empirical results for
the baseline and policy augmented specifications of the job flow equations. It also describes
a battery of robustness tests. Finally, section 5 presents concluding remarks.

2

Data

Our analysis of job flows draws from a harmonized firm-level database that includes 16
industrial, emerging and transition economies (Germany, Finland, France, Italy, Portugal,
the United Kingdom and the United States, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Slovenia, Argentina,
Brazil, Chile, Colombia and Mexico) and covers the 1990s (the time period covered varies

5

by country - see Table A.1).2 The data collection was conducted by an active participation
of local experts in each of the countries, and involved the harmonization of key concepts
to the extent possible (such as entry and exit of firms, job creation and destruction, and
the unit of measurement), as well as the definition of common methods to compute the
indicators (see Bartelsman et al. [2007] for details).3
The key features of the micro-data underlying the analysis are as follows:
Unit of observation: Data used tend to conform to the following definition:“an organizational unit producing goods or services which benefits from a
certain degree of autonomy in decision-making, especially for the allocation of
its current resources” (EUROSTAT [1998]). Generally, this will be above the
establishment level.
Size threshold: While some registers include even single-person businesses
(firms without employees), others omit firms smaller than a certain size, usually in terms of the number of employees (businesses without employees), but
sometimes in terms of other measures such as sales (as is the case in the data
for France). Data used in this study exclude single-person businesses. However,
because smaller firms tend to have more volatile firm dynamics, remaining differences in the threshold across different country datasets should be taken into
account in the international comparison.
Industry coverage: Special efforts have been made to organize the data
along a common industry classification (ISIC Rev.3) that matches the OECDStructural database (STAN). In the panel datasets constructed to generate the
tabulations, firms were allocated to the single STAN industry that most closely
fit their operations over the complete time-span.
The firm-level and job flows data come from business registers (Finland, the United
Kingdom and the United States, Estonia, Latvia, Slovenia), social security databases (Germany, Italy, Mexico) or corporate tax rolls (Argentina, France, Hungary). Annual industry
surveys are generally not the best source for firm demographics, due to sampling and reporting issues, but have been used nonetheless for Brazil, Chile, and Colombia. Data for
Portugal are drawn from an employment-based register containing information on both
2

The database also includes Indonesia, South Korea and Taiwan (China) as well as Canada, Denmark,
the Netherlands, Romania and Venezuela, but annual data on job flows are not available for these countries
or are not fully reliable.
3
Micco and Pages [2006] compiled a dataset from different country sources covering 2-digit manufacturing sector information for 18 countries. Their dataset does not include transition countries, and does not
allow differentiating job flows by firm status and firm size for all the countries.

6

establishments and firms. All these databases allow firms and jobs to be tracked over time
because addition or removal of firms from the registers reflects the actual entry and exit of
firms.
We define four size classes based on the number of firm employees: 1- 19 workers,
20-49 workers, 50-99 workers, and 100 or more workers. The job reallocation rate (sum)
is defined as the sum of job creation and job destruction rates,4 and we allow those to
vary by the type
rate is defined
P of firm: entering, exiting or continuing firms. Job creation
P
i∈SC + ∆Esict
i∈SC − ∆Esict
as possict = 0.5(Esict +Esic,t−1 ) and job destruction rate as negsict = 0.5(Esict +Esic,t−1 ) , where i
represents industry, s represents size class, c represents country, t represents time and E
denotes employment. Capital letters S and C refer to a set of size classes or countries,
respectively. The symbol ∆ denotes the first-difference operator, ∆Et = Et − Et−1 .5

3

Basic Facts about Job Turnover in Industrial and
Emerging Economies of Latin America and Central
and Eastern Europe

This section reviews the main stylized facts emerging from our analysis of job flows across
countries, industries and firm size.6 We review these stylized facts below to motivate our
multivariate analysis. A slightly longer list of the basic facts as well as their more detailed
description can be found in Haltiwanger et al. [2006].
1. Large Job Turnover in All Countries
The first stylized fact emerging from the data is the large magnitude of gross job flows (the
sum of job creation and job destruction) in all countries, both at the level of total economy
and in manufacturing (see Haltiwanger et al. [2006]). Gross job flows range from about
25 percent of total employment on average in the OECD countries, to about 30 percent in
Latin America and the transition economies (see Table B.1 in the appendix). By contrast,
net employment changes were very modest if not nil in the OECD and the Latin America
samples, while the transition economies recorded a significant net job growth in the period
covered by the data, after the substantial job losses of the early phases of the transition.
The high measured pace of reallocation in all countries may reflect many factors.
Taken at face value, the patterns suggest a high degree of dynamism in virtually all
4

We take averages of pos and neg, and then calculate sum.
See also Davis et al. [1996].
6
See Geroski [1995] for a summary of the main stylized facts characterizing firm demographics.
5

7

economies. However, as discussed in the introduction, there may be many different countryspecific factors that influence the overall pace of job reallocation. Accordingly, identification
of the impact of regulations requires exploiting more than simply cross-country variation.
2. Firm Turnover Plays a Major Role in Total Job Flows
The second stylized fact is the strong contribution of firm creation and destruction to job
flows. Entering and exiting firms account for about 30-40 percent of total job flows (see
Table B.1 in the appendix). In the transition countries, entry was even more important in
the early years of transition to a market economy, while the exit of obsolete firms became
more predominant in the second half of the 1990s, both for the total economy and in
manufacturing, when market contestability strengthened.7
3. Small Firms Contribute Disproportionately to Job Flows
Small firms account disproportionately for job flows and firm turnover in all countries of
our sample. Figure 1 presents job reallocation rates by firm size classes and countries. In
general, job reallocation is highest in firms with less than 20 employees, and the lowest in
firms with 100+ employees. In the United States, job turnover declines monotonically with
firm size, and the decline is particularly marked among large units (100+). Latin American
countries follow similar patterns to those of the United States, while the European countries,
with the exception of France, have a less marked drop of job reallocation among larger units.
The transition countries, on the other hand, show a steeper slope in smaller size classes,
especially in the early years of transition. Our data also suggest similar patterns for firm
turnover by size class and country (results not presented here). It is this variation of job
flows by size class as well as the variation across industries and countries that we exploit
in our empirical analysis.
The analysis of size specific job reallocation rates should be complemented with a
decomposition of the overall job reallocation into that due to firms of different sizes. We
find small firms account for the largest share of firm turnover and also for a significant,
albeit less dominant, share of total job flows. In terms of shares of job reallocation by size
class, we find a U-shaped relationship that reflects two offsetting effects – first, job flows
are higher for small firms as evidenced in Figure 1 and second, employment is concentrated
in larger firms.
4. Analysis of Variance
The next step is to assess the relative importance of the different dimensions – country,
industry and size – in explaining the overall variance in job flows. Table 1 presents the
7

The large job flows in the transition countries are not surprising. The process of transition started in
the early 1990s and it included downsizing or exit of existing firms as well as the entry of new firms as the
economies progressed toward a market economy.

8

Figure 1: Job Reallocation across Firms of Different Sizes, Total Economy

Source: Own calculations based on harmonized firm-level database.
analysis of variance of job flows, for the unbalanced total economy sample.8 We consider
different indicators of job flows - gross job reallocation, excess job reallocation, job reallocation from entry and exit and job reallocation for continuers. We also assess the contribution
to total variance of industry, size, country and industry×size effects separately, and, in addition, differentiate the analysis of variance by region (OECD, transition economies and
Latin America).
It is noticeable that technological and market structure characteristics that are reflected in the industry-specific effects explain only 5.1 percent of the overall variation in
gross job reallocation across industry, size and country classes, although they account for a
higher share in Latin America (18.4 percent). By contrast, differences in the size structure
of firms explain as much as 47 percent of the total variation in cross-country gross job
reallocation in all regions. Even country effects explain more of the variation in gross job
reallocation than the industry effects, except in Latin America. Hence, even though there
8

The total economy sample is unbalanced in the sense that it covers manufacturing only for United
Kingdom, Brazil, Chile and Colombia - see Table A.1 for details.

9

are similarities among countries within a region, there is still significant variation across
them. Overall, the combined industry×size effects explain the bulk of the variation in
gross job reallocation: 52.2 percent overall, 46.7 percent in OECD countries, 64.3 percent
in Latin American countries and 55.8 percent in transition countries in the second half of
the 1990s.
Size heterogeneity plays a particularly strong role in explaining the variation of job
creation by new firms and job destruction by exiting firms. Size heterogeneity is particularly
important in Latin America, where it accounts for 80 percent of the heterogeneity in job
reallocation from entry and exit. In the OECD countries, size heterogeneity plays a smaller
role in both job reallocation from entering and exiting firms.9 It is also interesting that
size and industry×size effects account for a substantially larger fraction of entry and exit
variation than for continuers. Apparently, a key component that accounts for variation in
job reallocation across industry×size and size classes is differences in the pace of entry and
exit. Put differently, it suggests that the margin of adjustment that is used to accommodate
higher job flows is entry and exit and, as such, our working hypothesis is that it may be
this variation that is especially sensitive to distortions.
5. The Correlation of Industry×Size Job Flows Across Countries
It is also of importance to assess the correlation of industry job flows across countries. If
market-driven and technological factors were the only factor at play, we should observe a
strong correlation across countries. However, industry-level job flows in each country are
also influenced by the institutional environment in which firms operate. Lack of correlation may not therefore imply that market-driven and technological factors do not play a
significant role, but rather that policy and institutions distort job flows. Job flows are
part-and-parcel of the creative destruction process, and an unfavorable institutional environment will cause this process to stagnate (Caballero and Hammour [2000a]). To minimize
the possible interference of the policy environment, we present the rank correlation of industry job flows, which may provide a better proxy for the true correlation if the policy
environment affects levels but not the rank order of industry×size flows.
Industry×size-level correlations with the U.S. are particularly strong for some Latin
American countries, e.g. Brazil (0.90) and Colombia (0.92), despite the very different
9

In unreported results, we have examined the analysis of variance separately for entry and exit. The
most interesting aspect of this latter exercise is the finding that in the transition economies there is a strong
difference between the factors accounting for variation in job creation and destruction. The variation of
job creation by entrants is strongly influenced by size heterogeneity, while the importance of size effects
for variation in job destruction by exiters is relatively small. The reason for the latter is that there are
offsetting forces influencing exit in the transition economies. As in most countries, many young businesses
fail in the early phases of their life, but in the transition economies (particularly in the early phases of their
economic transformation) structural changes also involved the exit of many large, state owned enterprises.

10

Table 1: Analysis of Variance, Total Economy (Unbalanced Panel)
Gross Job
Excess Job Job Reallocation
Job Reallocation
Reallocation Reallocation
- Entry&Exit
- Continuers
INDUSTRY EFFECTS
All
0.0511
0.0373
0.0074
0.0924
OECD
0.0730
0.0111
-0.0386
0.1660
LAC
0.1836
0.1120
0.0580
0.2585
Transition
-0.0274
0.0200
-0.0386
-0.0008
SIZE EFFECTS
All
0.4690
0.4576
0.5008
0.1924
OECD
0.4100
0.4430
0.4226
0.1750
LAC
0.4724
0.5043
0.7023
0.1169
Transition
0.5220
0.4894
0.4557
0.2966
COUNTRY EFFECTS
All
0.1527
0.1311
0.1342
0.2172
OECD
0.1910
0.1775
0.2115
0.2015
LAC
0.1474
0.1158
0.0382
0.3640
Transition
0.0758
0.0842
0.1020
0.1232
INDUSTRY×SIZE EFFECTS
All
0.5215
0.4898
0.5069
0.2805
OECD
0.4688
0.4251
0.3762
0.3157
LAC
0.6430
0.5993
0.7958
0.2737
Transition
0.5584
0.5319
0.4236
0.3328
Adjusted R-squared is reported. Late 1990s data are used for transition countries.

Source: Own calculations based on harmonized firm-level database.
degree of economic development, as well as for Great Britain (0.90) (Table 2).10 Some of
the lowest correlations are found for some EU countries, in particular France (0.54). It is
also interesting to see that transition economies had a much stronger correlation of their
job flow patterns by industry and size class with the United States in the sample that
covers the entire 1990s than in the sample used in this paper that focuses on the 1996-2001
period (see Haltiwanger et al. [2006]). This could be surprising, since the early phases of
the transition were characterized by massive job reallocation and the unique need to change
the structure of the economy. One working hypothesis that we develop later in the paper is
that after the initial phases of transition, these countries have moved toward the job flow
patterns observed in EU countries, with whom they share several policy and institutional
factors.
6. The U.S. vs. Other Countries in the “Slope” of the Industry×Size Re10

Correlations are on average higher if we focus only on manufacturing, see Haltiwanger et al. [2006] for
more details.

11

Table 2: Rank Correlations with the U.S. Job Flows, Total Economy (Unbalanced Panel)
Gross Job
Excess Job Job Reallocation
Reallocation Reallocation
- Entry&Exit
OECD
0.7515
0.7044
0.7223
Germany
0.8468
0.8634
0.9191
Finland
0.6946
0.5837
0.3532
France
0.5418
0.4670
0.7385
United Kingdom
0.8994
0.8330
0.8229
Italy
0.6901
0.6835
0.6896
Portugal
0.8363
0.7957
0.8106
LAC
0.8528
0.8124
0.8542
Argentina
0.8844
0.8491
0.8421
Brazil
0.8987
0.8526
0.9095
Chile
0.6787
0.5444
0.7543
Colombia
0.9170
0.9054
0.8975
Mexico
0.8853
0.9104
0.8676
TRANSITION
0.7556
0.7546
0.6905
Estonia
0.7364
0.6932
0.6236
Hungary
0.8321
0.8157
0.8560
Latvia
0.7005
0.7392
0.7215
Slovenia
0.7534
0.7702
0.5609
Late 1990s data are used for transition countries.

Job Reallocation
- Continuers
0.6254
0.7214
0.7742
0.1762
0.6565
0.6628
0.7611
0.5622
0.7316
0.8135
-0.1212
0.6062
0.7807
0.5903
0.6338
0.6897
0.4204
0.6171

Source: Own calculations based on harmonized firm-level database.

allocation Relationship
The findings from the previous two sub-sections suggest that industry×size effects account
for a large fraction of the variation in job flows across industry, size and country classes,
and also strong correlations between the rank order of job flows by industry and size in any
given country with that in the United States. These findings help motivate our empirical
analysis of regulations below since they clearly indicate that there are common factors underlining the patterns of job flows across countries and across industry and size classes. As
discussed above, these patterns plausibly reflect technology, demand and cost fundamentals
(including the distribution of idiosyncratic shocks and the costs of reallocation) that vary
across industry and size classes. Before going to a more formal empirical analysis of the
effects of policy-induced distortions on job flows, we run a simple descriptive regression in
which we quantify how the “slope” of the industry×size relationship varies between the
U.S. and the rest of the world. We take the U.S. as our benchmark because it is the country with arguably relatively low policy-induced distortions. In particular, we estimate the

12

following regression:
JF lowsic = β0 + β1 U SJF lowsi +

C
X

γc Dc + sic

(1)

c=1

where Dc are country c (c = 1, . . . , C) dummies, U SJF lowsi is the U.S. job flow variable
in size class s and industry i, and  is the iid error term. This specification enables us to
quantify the relationship or slope between cross-industry×size differences in gross job flows
between the United States and other countries in our sample. In this descriptive analysis,
we start with a baseline specification in which we only include the U.S. job flow benchmark
and the country dummies (equation (1)). We then allow the coefficient of the U.S. job flow
variable to vary by region and by firm size class.11
As expected, the estimated coefficient on the U.S. job flow in column (1) in Table 3
is highly significant, confirming the bivariate correlation analysis discussed above. However, the estimated coefficient is significantly less than one, suggesting that, other things
being equal, the responsiveness to market and technologically driven factors that affect
reallocation in the U.S. is less than one in the other countries. Indeed, taking the U.S.
job flow rate as the benchmark for the propensity for the industry×size class to exhibit
reallocation from technology and market fundamentals, this finding suggests that when,
for example, the propensity increases from one industry×size class to another in a fashion
that induces a ten percent increase in job reallocation in the U.S., we observe only a 6.6
percentage point increase in job reallocation from the same industry×size class to the other
in other countries in the sample. In a suggestive sense, the coefficient being less than one
is consistent with the view that countries around the world have factors that distort the
reallocation process.12
If we then allow the coefficient on U.S. job flows to vary by region (EU, transition
countries and Latin America) (column (2)), we notice that there is a closer link between
cross-industry×size differences in gross job flows between the United States and the Latin
American countries than between the United States and the European Union countries.
However, the coefficients are significantly less than one in all regions. Moreover, the coefficients on U.S. job flow for the European Union countries and for transition countries are
not significantly different from each other at 1 per cent significance level (but they are dif11

The measure of job flows is the sum of job creation and job destruction rates (sum) and all variables
are time averages over the available annual observations (see the next section for more details).
12
Appropriate caution needs to be used in interpreting the magnitude of the coefficient since measurement
error can drive the coefficient below one. Still, we find it interesting that this coefficient is, in general,
less than one, and that the pattern of variation in the magnitude of this coefficient across regions and size
classes is consistent with our interpretation.

13

Table 3: Job Flows - U.S. vs. Other Countries
USA SUM

(1)
0.6621***
[0.0188]

USA SUM×EU

(2)

(3)

0.5746***
[0.0284]
0.6878***
[0.0352]
0.7493***
[0.0340]

USA SUM×Transition
USA SUM×LAC
USA SUM×<20 Workers

0.5385***
[0.0252]
USA SUM×20-49 Workers
0.3875***
[0.0350]
USA SUM×50-99 Workers
0.3169***
[0.0393]
USA SUM×100+ Workers
0.2090***
[0.0649]
Country effects
YES
YES
YES
Observations
940
940
940
Adjusted R-squared
0.69
0.69
0.73
All regressions include an intercept. Robust standard errors in brackets. ∗ = significant at 10%, ∗∗ = significant at 5%, ∗∗∗ = significant at
1%. USA SUM: industry×size job reallocation in the United States.
EU denotes the OECD European countries. Transition denotes the
countries in Central and Eastern Europe. LAC denotes the countries
in Latin America.
Source: Own calculations based on harmonized firm-level database.
ferent at 5 per cent significance level). The Wald test for the equality of the coefficients on
U.S. job flow for transition countries and for Latin American countries cannot be rejected
at any of the usual significance levels.
Next, we allow the coefficient on U.S. job flows to vary by firm size (column (3))
and we find - perhaps not surprisingly - that the coefficient is the highest for the smallest
size class (1-19 employees) and declines monotonically for the larger size classes. In other
words, the patterns of cross industry job flows in the United States and other countries are
more similar among small firms than among larger firms, possibly because small firms are
exempt from certain regulations and/or can more easily avoid other regulations. Hence,
small firms show a degree of dynamism that is closer to that of the non-distorted (U.S.)

14

economy. For larger firms, regulations are likely to be more binding, especially in those
industries that are inherently more volatile. The equality of all pairs of coefficients can
be rejected at 1 per cent significance level; the highest values of Wald test are obtained in
pairs with the coefficient for the smallest size class, indicating that the coefficient for the
smallest size class is highly significantly different from those of larger size classes.

4
4.1

Empirical Analysis
The Framework

In this section, we develop an empirical analysis of the determinants of the observed differences in job flows across countries, industries and size classes. We base our empirical
analysis on three important results discussed in the previous section: 1) a significant share
of the total variance in job flows observed in the data is explained by industry×size effects, 2) there is a high correlation of industry×size job flows across countries, and 3) other
countries tend to have less variation across industry×size classes in the magnitude of reallocation than the U.S. The first two results are consistent with the hypothesis that the
distribution of idiosyncratic profit shocks affecting desired employment and the costs that
influence the adjustment to such shocks varies systematically by industry and size class.
For example, demand characteristics in some industries imply that firms face higher volatility in their product demand than other industries. Likewise, technological characteristics
may require more frequent re-tooling of the production process with the associated need to
adjust the workforce. Alternatively, certain technological characteristics may require firms
to use highly specialized workers and thus make them less likely to frequently adjust their
workforce to respond to idiosyncratic shocks. Demand and technological characteristics
also affect the composition of firms within each industry and their response to shocks. For
example, some industries are characterized by the presence of small firms which tend to be
more volatile than large businesses in all countries. As discussed in the prior section, the
third result is suggestive that there are factors that impede reallocation differences across
industry×size classes in other countries relative to the U.S. Our empirical analysis in this
section is designed to identify and quantify such factors. Before proceeding to that empirical analysis, it is instructive to review the insights from the recent literature on adjustment
costs and reallocation (see, e.g., Caballero et al. [1997]).
Adjustment costs governing responses to idiosyncratic shocks vary not only by industry and size, due to underlying market and technological factors, but also across countries,
due to differences in institutions and policy settings. To the extent that institutions vary
15

Figure 2: Distribution of productivity shocks and fixed adjustment costs - two-sector case

more by country than industry and size, our working hypothesis is that the impact of institutions that hinder adjustment in any given country will be more binding on industry×size
16

cells with the greatest propensity for reallocation in that country. The amount of job reallocation in a particular sector hence depends on the distribution of productivity shocks
(z) and adjustment costs.
A simple (S, s) model with fixed costs of adjustment can be used to illustrate the
logic behind our argument. First, consider two sectors, 1 and 2, where sector 2 has a higher
variance of productivity shocks and both sectors have the same thresholds of adjustment,
z◦1 = z◦2 and z1◦ = z2◦ , as illustrated in Panel A of Figure 2 where f1 (z) and f2 (z)
represent the probability density function of productivity shocks. The sector with a higher
variance of productivity shocks has a larger fraction of firms in the tails - the range of
activity where the firms adjust to the new conditions - and in an associated manner more
mass of the distribution at the adjustment thresholds. Hence, as our working hypothesis
suggests, more volatile sectors are more sensitive to regulations or institutional factors that
raise adjustment costs for firms, since they have a higher fraction of firms in the range of
activity impacted by such adjustment costs.
Second, Panel B of Figure 2 considers the case of two sectors with the same variance
of productivity shocks; however sector 2 has higher adjustment costs and hence a wider
range of inactivity (which is illustrated by z◦2 < z◦1 and z2◦ > z1◦ ). If adjustment costs
in a country increase for both sectors because of more stringent regulations - for example,
stricter employment protection legislation - the thresholds will be pushed to z◦1∗ < z◦1 ,
◦
◦
< z1◦ . Sectors with originally lower adjustment costs will be
z1∗
< z1◦ , z◦2∗ < z◦2 and z1∗
more adversely affected, since increase in adjustment costs will push a higher fraction of
firms from the range of adjustment (reallocation) to the range of inactivity (no reallocation).
This simple (S, s) model illustrates the basic argument for incumbent firms, but it
is straightforward to extend its argument to include the entry and exit of firms. Indeed,
standard models of entry and exit (e.g., Jovanovic [1982], Hopenhayn and Rogerson [1993],
Melitz [2003], Asplund and Nocke [2006]) posit that new entrant firms do not know, ex
ante, their productivity type and must pay an entry fee before learning their type. Firms
enter the market until the expected present discounted value of profits from entry is just
equal to the entry cost. Firms with low productivity draws exit ex post. Higher adjustment
costs – including labor adjustment costs – reduce the present discounted value of ex ante
profits, especially for sectors with a high variance of productivity shocks (for the reasons
discussed above). This yields a lower pace of entry as well as an implied lower pace of exit
in the steady state. The model that illustrates this effect most directly is Hopenhayn and
Rogerson [1993] who show that higher employment adjustment costs lead to a lower pace
of job and firm turnover.

17

4.2

The Estimation Model

We explore the links between the regulatory environment in which firms operate and
job turnover by exploiting the observed industry×size variations through a difference-indifference approach (see Rajan and Zingales [1998]).13 The test is constructed as follows: we
identify an industry×size propensity for job reallocation from the United States data. Under the assumption that regulations in the labor and goods markets in the United States are
among the least restrictive in our sample, variation in job reallocation across industry×size
cells in the United States should proxy for the technological and market driven differences
in job reallocation in the absence of policy induced adjustment costs. Under the additional
assumption that these technological and market driven differences in the demand for job
reallocation carry over to other countries, we assess whether industry×size cells that have
a greater propensity for job reallocation are disproportionally affected by regulations that
raise adjustment costs. This would imply that, ceteris paribus, industry×size cells with
more volatile idiosyncratic profit shocks and more frequent adjustment of factors should
be more strongly affected by regulations raising adjustment costs than those industry×size
cells with less volatile idiosyncratic profit shocks and less frequent adjustment. The advantage of our approach compared to standard cross-country/cross-industry empirical studies
is that we exploit within country differences between industry×size cells based on the interaction between country and industry×size characteristics. Thus, we can also control for
country and industry×size effects, thereby minimizing problems of omitted variable bias
and other misspecifications.
The core model specifications used in our empirical analysis can be summarized as
follows:
JF lowsic = β0 +

S×I
X
si=1

γsi Dsi +

C
X

γc Dc + β2 (U SJF lowsi × Rc ) + sic

(2)

c=1

where Dsi are industry×size si (si = 1, . . . , I × S) dummies, Dc are country c (c = 1, . . . , C)
dummies, U SJF lowsi is the U.S. job flow variable in size class s and industry i, and  is
the iid error term. Controlling for country effects sweeps out any country-specific variation,
controlling for industry×size effects sweeps out the large common factors associated with
industry and size, and the key interaction term between the U.S. flow in the industry×size
class and the country regulation allows us to identify how the measured regulatory environment affects the variation across industry×size classes within countries. The U.S.
13

The difference-in-difference approach has already been used in the corporate literature (e.g., Classens
and Laeven [2003]), in the analysis of firm dynamics (Klapper et al. [2006]) and in the analysis of output
and employment growth as well as job flows (Micco and Pages [2006]).

18

flow here is used to quantify the propensity for the industry×size class to reallocate and,
as discussed, reflects the fundamental driving forces underlying job reallocation across
industry×size classes.
In what follows, the measure of job flows used in the empirical analysis is the sum
of job creation and job destruction rates (sum). The results are largely unaffected by the
use of excess job reallocation, that is, the difference between the sum and the (absolute
value of) net employment change. All our variables are time averages over the available
annual observations. The sample is unbalanced and covers fewer years for some countries
than others (see Table A.1). Time averaging allows us to reduce the possible impact of
business cycle fluctuations in the years for which we have the data and the possibility that
such fluctuations were not synchronized (and thus could be captured by common time
dummies). We use the period from 1989 to 2001 for OECD and Latin American countries
and sample from 1996 to 2001 for the transition economies. The choice of the restricted
sub-sample for the transition economies is motivated by two interrelated factors. First
and as discussed in the previous section, the initial years of the transition process (1991
to 1995) were characterized by unprecedented reallocation of labor - and other factors of
production - across industries, firms and locations. The magnitude and direction of the
observed flows were only temporary and, indeed, job flows declined towards the standards of
the OECD countries over time, and also became more balanced within each industry×size
cell.14 Second, the early years of transition were characterized by major regulatory reforms
to conform countries’ institutional settings to those of market economies. For these two
reasons, focusing on the second half of the 1990s for the transition economies is more
appropriate in our comparative analysis of job flows.15
In addition to the core specification, we consider some closely related specifications.
As a robustness check, we estimate an augmented model that also considers business sector
regulations. In addition, we explore specifications that focus on, alternatively, job flows
from entry and exit or continuing firms.

4.3

Regulations in Labor and Product Markets

In the empirical analysis, we consider synthetic indicators of the stringency of regulations in
the labor and product markets, as well as the degree of enforcement of laws and regulations.
Our primary source for these is the “Economic Freedom of the World (EFW)” database
(see Gwartney and Lawson [2004]). This database has been developed under the auspices
14
15

Results for the whole sample for transition economies are available in Haltiwanger et al. [2006].
Dataset used in the paper is available at http://www.helenasch.net.

19

of the Fraser Institute in Canada with the aid of a worldwide network of economists and
research institutes. In particular, we use indicators referring to hiring and firing practices,
regulation of business activities and integrity of the legal system.
Other indicators of the stringency of labor regulations in developing and emerging
economies are available in the literature (e.g., the World Bank Doing Business database),
but they generally refer to the most recent past and may thus not properly capture the
regulatory environment over the period covered by our data (the 1990s). By contrast, the
EFW tracks changes in regulations over time and is thus more suitable for our analysis of
job flows that have indeed been influenced by policy changes over the period covered by
our data (see Table C.1 for more detailed definitions of the variables used in our analysis
and Table C.2 for their summary statistics).
The EFW indicator of hiring and firing restrictions is measured on a scale of 0 to 10,
with 10 being the worst (most restrictive). The average of this indicator is the highest in
transition countries (5.70), followed by the OECD sample (5.43) and Latin America (4.68).
This synthetic indicator passes simple validation tests. For example, its correlation with
a similar indicator of employment protection legislation developed by the OECD is 0.85,
statistically significant at the 1 percent level.16
In the sensitivity analysis, we also consider an EFW synthetic indicator of regulations in the product market. Regulations affecting markets for goods and services have a
strong impact on the degree of competition and the pace and effectiveness of reallocation
of resources, including labor. Thus, more restrictive regulations that stifle product market
competition are also likely to influence job flows. The business regulation indicator is a
simple average of five different indicators17 that are designed to identify the extent to which
regulatory restraints and bureaucratic procedures limit competition and the operation of
goods and services markets. Business regulation is measured on a scale from 0 to 10, with
10 being the most restrictive. This indicator is on average the highest in Latin America
(4.21), followed by transition countries (3.32) and OECD countries (3.07).
16
We check the robustness of our results by using an alternative measure of employment protection
legislation, the OECD EPL index. Since this measure is not available for Latin America and transition
countries in the early 1990s, we augmented it in two ways. First, for transition countries we used data on
EPL collected by Haltiwanger et al. [2003]. Second, for Latin America we imputed EPL by regressing a
measure of hiring and firing practices from the Fraser Institute on EPL for transition and OECD countries
and then using the estimated coefficient to calculate EPL. EPL is measured on a scale from 0 to 4, with
4 being the worst (most restrictive). It is on average the strictest in OECD (2.35) and the least strict in
Latin America (1.73).
17
The detailed indicators used to construct the synthetic indicator are: price controls, administrative
conditions and new business, time with government bureaucracy, starting a new business, and irregular
payments.

20

Previous research (see, e.g., Caballero et al. [2004], Heckman and Pages [2004]) suggests that the degree of enforcement of labor regulations - as well as other regulations - can
significantly affect their impact on the economy. Available indicators suggest a significant
variation in the rules of law and the degree of enforcement of laws and regulations in our
sample of OECD, Latin American and transition economies. Not only are some firms and
jobs not registered in Latin America and increasingly in the transition economies and some
Southern European countries, registered firms may also not fully comply with the existing
rules and regulations. As an indication of the different degree of enforcement of laws and
regulations, we consider the law and order indicator from the Fraser Institute (based on the
Political Risk Component I (Law and Order) from the International Country Risk Guide,
ranging from 0 to 10, 10 being the worst).18 The indicator shows the highest compliance
with laws and regulations in the OECD sample of countries (average of 0.47), followed with
the transition economies (average of 1.76), and by the Latin American countries (average
of 4.95).
To control for possibly differing degrees of enforcement of laws and regulations we
adjust our regulatory variable as follows:19


Law&Order
Rc,adj = 1 −
× Rc .
(3)
10

4.4

Regulations and Job Flows

Tables 4 and 5 present the empirical results of the estimation of our core specification
(2) and various extensions. Recall that in (2) we specify a difference-in-difference analysis
that identifies the impact of regulations via the interaction effect of U.S. job flows in the
industry×size class with the country-specific regulation. The estimated coefficient on the
interaction between the U.S. job flow and the adjusted labor regulation (Table 4) is strongly
significant overall, and in each of the sub-regions when we allow the coefficient of the interaction to vary. Consistent with the working hypothesis, more volatile industries and size
classes are impacted more in countries with more stringent hiring and firing regulations.20
18

Micco and Pages [2006] also make an attempt at controlling for different degrees of enforcement of
regulations by using an indicator of rules of laws and government effectiveness (see Kaufmann et al. [2004]).
We used the Fraser index of law and order because it is available for the time period for which our job
flows data are available for the different countries.
19
There is no indication in Gwartney and Lawson [2004] that the original regulatory variables consider
the enforcement of regulations in addition to the statutes.
20
In our longer working paper version (see Haltiwanger et al. [2006]), we have also considered a related
specification where instead of controlling for industy×size effects we have included the U.S. industry×size
flow separately to control for industry×size effects. In this alternative specification, we also include country

21

Table 4: Job Flows and the Role of Labor Regulations (Difference-in-Difference Analysis)
(1)
-0.0450***
[0.0082]

USA SUM×EPL (Adj)

(2)

USA SUM×EPL (Adj)×EU

-0.0478***
[0.0080]
USA SUM×EPL (Adj)×Transition
-0.0370***
[0.0103]
USA SUM×EPL (Adj)×LAC
-0.0449***
[0.0128]
Country effects
YES
YES
Industry×size effects
YES
YES
Observations
940
940
Adjusted R-squared
0.77
0.77
All regressions include an intercept. Robust standard errors in
brackets. ∗ = significant at 10%, ∗∗ = significant at 5%, ∗∗∗ =
significant at 1%. USA SUM: industry×size job reallocation in
the United States. EU denotes the OECD European countries.
Transition denotes the countries in Central and Eastern Europe.
LAC denotes the countries in Latin America. EPL (Adj) is an
indicator of stringency of hiring and firing regulations adjusted
to take into account different degrees of enforcement of regulations (see main text).
Source: Own calculations based on harmonized firm-level database.
How sizable is the estimated impact of labor regulation on job flows? Using the
coefficient on the interaction term in column (1) of Table 4, we estimate that the difference
in job reallocation between industry×size cells with a high flexibility requirement (90th
percentile of the flexibility distribution in the United States) and industry×size cells with
a low flexibility requirement (10th percentile of the same distribution) will be 4.4 percentage
points lower in a country with the highest index of hiring and firing regulations compared
to the United States, the country with the least restrictive regulations. Considering that
the average job reallocation rate is around 25 percent in the sample used in the regression,
effects. This alternative specification is more parsimonious since far fewer degrees of freedom are used
to control for industry×size effects. Interestingly, we find virtually identical results for this alternative
specification and for purposes of brevity do not report those results here. It is also interesting that
the estimated coefficient of the U.S. job flow benchmark is closer to unity than when we do not control
for enforcement (see Table 3). This finding suggests that part of the less than perfect correlation in the
magnitude of job flows in the countries in the sample with the United States can be explained by restrictive
labor regulations that raise labor adjustment costs.

22

Table 5: Job Flows and the Role of Labor and Product Market Regulations (Differencein-Difference Analysis)
(1)
-0.0505***
[0.0104]

USA SUM×EPL (Adj)
USA SUM×EPL (Adj)×EU

(2)

-0.0397***
[0.0109]
-0.0789***
[0.0170]
-0.0647*
[0.0363]

USA SUM×EPL (Adj)×Transition
USA SUM×EPL (Adj)×LAC
USA FIRM TURNOVER×Bus. Reg. (Adj)

0.0277
[0.0290]

USA FIRM TURNOVER×Bus. Reg. (Adj)×EU

-0.0021
[0.0311]
USA FIRM TURNOVER×Bus. Reg. (Adj)×Transition
0.1962***
[0.0600]
USA FIRM TURNOVER×Bus. Reg. (Adj)×LAC
0.0832
[0.0900]
Country effects
YES
YES
Industry×size effects
YES
YES
Observations
940
940
Adjusted R-squared
0.77
0.78
All regressions include an intercept. Robust standard errors in brackets. ∗ =
significant at 10%, ∗∗ = significant at 5%, ∗∗∗ = significant at 1%. USA SUM:
industry×size job reallocation in the United States. EU denotes the OECD European countries. Transition denotes the countries in Central and Eastern Europe. LAC denotes the countries in Latin America. EPL (Adj) is an indicator of
stringency of hiring and firing regulations adjusted to take into account different
degrees of enforcement of regulations. Bus. Reg. (Adj) is an indicator of stringency of business regulations adjusted to take into account different degrees of
enforcement of regulations (see main text).
Source: Own calculations based on harmonized firm-level database.
the estimated impact is indeed sizeable.21
21

The estimated value is obtained as follows:
β [(U SJF low90th − U SJF low10th ) (HFmax − HFmin )]

where β is the estimated coefficient, and U SJF low and HF are the job reallocation in the United States
and the indicator of hiring and firing regulations corrected for the degree of enforcement, respectively.
Micco and Pages [2006], using a similar approach, estimated an impact of 5.7 percentage points. Their

23

There are a number of reasons why it is important to assess the robustness of our
results on labor regulations to the inclusion of regulations in product markets. First,
the exclusion of product market regulations may lead to an omitted variable bias insofar
as regulations in different markets tend to be highly correlated, i.e. countries that impose
strict rules of hiring and firing also tend to impose more restrictive regulations on the goods
and services markets.22 There are also specific aspects of product market regulations that
can influence job flows over and above labor regulations. For example, since a significant
fraction of overall job flows is due to the entry and exit of firms, regulations affecting the
start up of a new business, as well as bankruptcy rules that affect the exit of low performing
units, may affect job flows directly and the way incumbents react to strict labor regulations.
Koeniger and Prat [2007], for example, argue that product and labor market regulations
are complementary: by isolating incumbents from the competition of potential entrants,
barriers to entry allow incumbents to bear the firing costs more easily. Likewise, regulations
affecting price setting by firms and their relations with the public administration and their
clients can all influence incentives for firms to expand, adopt new technologies and adjust
their workforce.
To assess the robustness of our empirical results we thus augment our job flows
specification by adding a synthetic indicator of the stringency of business sector regulations.
As for labor regulations, we adjust this variable for the degree of enforcement (Table 5) and
interact it with the US employment-weighted firm turnover. We use firm turnover rather
than job flows here in the interaction term since business regulations primarily impact
the entry and exit of firms. Thus, the more relevant propensity for reallocation is the
reallocation component from firm turnover.23 The estimated effects of labor regulations
on job flows remain strongly significant overall and in the different regions. By contrast,
the estimated coefficient of business regulations is estimated with a large standard error
overall. When we differentiate the coefficient by region, we find that the estimated effect
of business regulations is positive and significant for transition economies. As we have
discussed above, the transition economies exhibited unusual patterns of entry and exit by
size class over at least some of the 1990s as large state owned firms exited which may be
relevant for this pattern.24
country sample and period of observation are different from ours but the results are close.
22
There is also ample evidence that regulations in product and labor market tend to be correlated across
countries (see e.g. Nicoletti and Scarpetta [2005]).
23
We have also used US job flows rather than firm turnover as the industry×size interacting factor:
the results are largely similar to those reported in the paper and are available on request. We find some
sensitivity in the specifications that also interact with region but the robustness of the labor regulations
holds in this alternative.
24
Indeed there are models that yield a positive relationship between business regulations impacting entry
and exit and job turnover. For example, Koeniger and Prat [2007] have a model with both intensive and
extensive (i.e. through firm entry and exit) margins of adjustment, and fixed and/or start-up costs imposed

24

So far we have focused on the effects of labor regulations on overall job reallocation.
It is also interesting to shed light on whether such regulations have a different impact on
the different margins of reallocation, namely on job flows due to the entry and exit of firms
in the market and those due to reallocation among incumbents (see Table 6).25
Table 6: Job Flows by Entering, Exiting and Continuing Firms - the Role of Labor Market
Regulations (Difference-in-Difference Analysis)

USA SUM (Entry&Exit)×EPL (Adj)

Entry & Exit
(1)
-0.1073***
[0.0102]

Continuers
(2)

USA SUM (Continuers)×EPL (Adj)

0.0154
[0.0137]
Country effects
YES
YES
Industry×size effects
YES
YES
Observations
946
934
Adjusted R-squared
0.78
0.62
All regressions include an intercept. Robust standard errors in brackets. ∗ = significant at 10%, ∗∗ = significant at 5%, ∗∗∗ = significant at 1%.
USA SUM (Entry&Exit): industry×size job reallocation due to entering and exiting firms in the United States. USA SUM (Continuers):
industry×size job reallocation due to continuing firms in the United
States. EPL (Adj) is an indicator of stringency of hiring and firing regulations adjusted to take into account different degrees of enforcement of
regulations (see main text).
Source: Own calculations based on harmonized firm-level database.
Column (1) of Table 6 shows the results of estimating the job flow regressions for
entering and exiting firms, controlling for labor market regulations corrected by the degree
of enforcement. Column (2) does the same for continuing firms. The results suggest a
negative and statistically significant effect of labor market regulation (interacted with U.S.
job reallocation) on labor mobility generated by entering and exiting firms. By contrast,
the effect of labor regulations on continuing firms is not statistically significant.26
by product market regulations. They find that product market regulations lead to higher job turnover, as
the competition for workers is alleviated by the firm selection effect, the costs of adjusting the labor force
decrease and thus firms have less incentive to smooth out their labor demand schedule.
25
We focus on the combined flows due to entry and exit of firms because of the very high correlations
between entry and exit across industries in most countries. This in turn suggests that entries and exits are
largely part of a creative destruction process in which entry and exit reflect within industry reallocation
reflecting idiosyncratic differences across firms within industries (see Bartelsman et al. [2004] for evidence
based on the same dataset used in this paper, as well as Geroski [1991], Baldwin and Gorecki [1991]).
26
In Table 6, we use the U.S. job reallocation for entry and exit as the propensity for entering and exiting

25

That it is the entry and exit component of job turnover rather than the continuer
component of job turnover that is impacted by labor market regulations is an interesting
result that is somewhat surprising from a theoretical perspective but perhaps not surprising given the findings from our analysis of variance. From a theoretical perspective, the
implications from standard adjustment cost models discussed above suggest we should observe an impact for continuers and entry and exit. Taken at face value, the results provide
support for the theory in terms of the entry and exit component but not for the continuer
component of job turnover. It may be that a richer model needs to be developed to account
for this finding – one interesting idea suggested by this result is that labor regulations distort the entry and exit margin to such an extent that job turnover patterns for continuers
are not impacted. That is, overall job turnover is stifled via labor market regulations but
with a substitution towards adjustment of continuing firms relative to adjustment via entry
and exit.
While exploring the implications of this result are of interest both theoretically and
empirically, we note however that the analysis of variance as reported in Table 1 provides
insights on interpreting this empirical result. The analysis of variance results show that
variation in job flows across industry×size effects is dominated by variation in the entry and
exit component of job turnover. Thus, an important part of the variation that we are exploiting for identification and, in like fashion an important component of the variation that
can be distorted by regulations, is the variation across industry×size classes in entry and
exit rates. This interpretation suggests that the variation we are exploiting is best suited
for identifying an effect coming from entry/exit since that is where the variation is most
pronounced. To identify the impact on continuing businesses using this type of differencein-difference approach, it may be important to find another dimension of variation across
firms with sufficient variation across continuing firms.
Overall, these results confirm the importance of labor market regulations in shaping
labor adjustment patterns, particularly so in those industries and size classes where technological and market factors require more frequent employment changes. Controlling for
other regulations influencing firm behavior does not significantly alter the results. There is
also evidence in our data that labor market regulations are important mainly for entering
and exiting firms.
firms and the U.S. job reallocation for continuers as the propensity for reallocation for continuers. We have
also considered alternative specifications where for both propensities we use the overall job reallocation
for the industry×size class and obtain very similar results. We also estimate the job flow regressions for
entering and exiting firms separately and find that labor market regulations affect both entry and exit
margins.

26

4.5

Sensitivity Analysis

In the empirical analysis, we control for country and industry×size effects, as well as
for unobservable effects using a difference-in-difference approach. Moreover, we test the
robustness of results for hiring and firing regulations by including other regulatory variables.
In addition, we test the sensitivity of our results by using excess job reallocation instead
of gross job reallocation, restricting our analysis to industry×size cells with more than five
firms in a given cell and to manufacturing industries only (not reported here but available
upon request). However, the use of quasi panel data may still run the risk that results
are affected by the inclusion of a specific country or industry in the sample that drives the
results in a given direction. The use of an unbalanced panel on the industry dimension
makes this risk potentially more serious.
Figure 3: Sensitivity Analysis: Estimated Coefficient on Enforcement Adjusted Hiring
and Firing Regulations Interacted with U.S. Job Reallocation and 95% Confidence Intervals, Excluding One Country or One Industry at a Time, Labor
Market Regulations (Column (1) from Table 4)

Source: Own calculations based on harmonized firm-level database.
To test for the robustness of results to changes in the sample, we re-estimate our
preferred specification - column (1) in Table 4 - removing one country, or one industry,
at a time from the sample. The results in Figure 3 show a remarkable stability of the
estimated coefficient for the interaction term to changes in the sample along the country or
the industry dimension. The point coefficient estimates for the interaction term are always
negative and statistically significant. The coefficient is somewhat sensitive to the exclusion
of Chile or Portugal, with both leading to a stronger estimated effect of regulations.

27

5

Conclusion

This paper exploits a rich new database with harmonized data on job flows across industries
and size classes for 16 industrial and emerging economies over the past decade. We find
that all countries in our sample exhibit sizeable annual gross job flows. Industry and
size-class effects together account for a very large share of the overall variability in job
flows across country, industry and size class cells (e.g., over 50 percent of the variation
in the summary measure of job reallocation is accounted for by industry and size effects
interacted together). Interestingly, the most important factor here is employer size. Small
businesses exhibit a substantially higher pace of job creation and destruction and this
pattern is pervasive across industries and countries. Industry effects also play a significant,
albeit much smaller, role in shaping job flows. Taken together, it is clear that some form of
technology, cost and demand factors that are common across countries account for the bulk
of the variation in job flows. Nevertheless, even after controlling for industry/technology
and size factors, there remain significant differences in job flows across countries that could
reflect differences in business environment conditions.
Our harmonized firm-level dataset allows us to look at two factors shaping the business
environment - regulations on the hiring and firing of workers and product market regulations. To minimize the possible endogeneity and omitted variable problems associated with
cross-country regressions, we use a difference-in-difference approach. The empirical results
suggest that stringent hiring and firing regulations (and their consistent enforcement) reduce job turnover, especially in industry and size-class cells that inherently exhibit more
job turnover. To capture the latter, we use the United States patterns as a benchmark to
identify and quantify industry×size class cells with inherently higher job turnover. Labor
regulations also appear to distort the patterns of flows across industry and size classes
within a country. Stringent labor regulations mainly affect the entry and exit of firms and
their associated job creation and destruction. Controlling for product market regulations
does not alter these results significantly.
Much work remains to be done to understand the implications of our findings. They
provide evidence that stringent labor regulations have an impact on reallocation dynamics.
It is a much larger step to demonstrate that stringent labor regulations have an adverse
impact on the efficient allocation of labor in a manner consistent with the predictions
of Hopenhayn and Rogerson [1993]. To explore the latter, we need to measure not only
reallocation but also productivity at the micro level. A number of studies have found
that allocative efficiency is important for understanding differences in the level and growth
of productivity across time, industries and countries (see, e.g., Foster et al. [2001] and
Bartelsman et al. [2007]). Putting those findings together with those in this paper certainly
28

suggests that stringent labor market regulations may have an important adverse impact
on allocative efficiency and in turn productivity levels and growth. However, much work
(including additional data infrastructure development) is needed to bring all of the pieces
together to explore these important issues.

References
Marcus Asplund and Volker Nocke. Firm Turnover in Imperfectly Competitive Markets.
Review of Economic Studies, 73(2):295–327, 2006.
John R. Baldwin and P. K. Gorecki. Entry, Exit and Productivity Growth. In Paul A.
Geroski and Joachim Schwalbach, editors, Entry and Market Contestability: An International Comparison, pages 244–256. Blackwell, Oxford, 1991.
Eric J. Bartelsman, John C. Haltiwanger, and Stefano Scarpetta. Microeconomic Evidence
of Creative Destruction in Industrial and Developing Countries. Working Paper 3464,
World Bank, December 2004.
Eric J. Bartelsman, John C. Haltiwanger, and Stefano Scarpetta. Measuring and Analyzing
Cross-Country Differences in Firm Dynamics. In Timothy Dunne, J. Bradford Jensen,
and Mark J. Roberts, editors, Producer Dynamics: New Evidence from Micro Data.
NBER, 2007.
Samuel Bentolila and Giuseppe Bertola. Firing Costs and Labor Demand: How Bad is
Eurosclerosis? Review of Economic Studies, 57(3):381–402, July 1990.
Giuseppe Bertola. Labor Turnover Costs and Average Labor Demand. Journal of Labor
Economics, 10(4):389–411, 1992.
Giuseppe Bertola and Richard Rogerson. Institutions and Labor Reallocations. European
Economic Review, 41(6):1147–1171, June 1997.
Tito Boeri. Enforcement of Employment Security Regulations, On-the-job Search and
Unemployment Duration. European Economic Review, 43(1):65–89, January 1999.
Ricardo J. Caballero and Mohamad L. Hammour. Institutions, Restructuring, and Macroeconomic Performance. Working Paper 7720, NBER, May 2000a.
Ricardo J. Caballero and Mohamad L. Hammour. Creative Destruction and Development:
Institutions, Crises, and Restructuring. Working Paper 7849, NBER, 2000b.

29

Ricardo J. Caballero, Eduardo M. R. A. Engel, and John C. Haltiwanger. Aggregate
Employment Dynamics: Building from Microeconomic Evidence. American Economic
Review, 87(1):115–137, 1997.
Ricardo J. Caballero, Kevin N. Cowan, Eduardo M.R.A. Engel, and Alejandro Micco. Effective Labor Regulation and Microeconomic Flexibility. Discussion Paper 1480, Cowles
Foundation, September 2004.
Stijn Classens and Luc Laeven. Financial Development, Property Rights and Growth.
Journal of Finance, 58(6):2401–2436, December 2003.
Steven J. Davis and John C. Haltiwanger. On the Driving Forces Behind Cyclical Movements in Employment and Job Reallocation. American Economic Review, 89(5):1234–
1258, December 1999.
Steven J. Davis, John C. Haltiwanger, and Scott Schuh. Job Creation and Destruction.
The MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 1996. 260 pages.
Timothy Dunne, Mark J. Roberts, and Larry Samuelson. Patterns of Firm Entry and Exit
in U.S. Manufacturing Industries. RAND Journal of Economics, 19(4):495–515, Winter
1988.
Timothy Dunne, Mark J. Roberts, and Larry Samuelson. Plant Turnover and Gross Employment Flows in the U.S. Manufacturing Plants. Journal of Labor Economics, 7(1):
48–71, January 1989.
EUROSTAT. Enterprises in Europe, Data 1994-95. Fifth Report of the Eropean Comission.
EUROSTAT, Luxembourg, 1998.
Lucia Foster, John C. Haltiwanger, and C. J. Krizan. Aggregate Productivity Growth:
Lessons from Microeconomic Evidence. In Edward Dean, Michael Harper, and Charles
Hulten, editors, New Developments in Productivity Analysis. University of Chicago Press,
2001.
Lucia Foster, John C. Haltiwanger, and C. J. Krizan. The Link Between Aggregate and
Micro Productivity Growth: Evidence from Retail Trade. Working Paper 9120, NBER,
2002.
Paul A. Geroski. Market Dynamics and Entry. Basil Blackwell, Oxford, UK; Cambridge,
USA, 1991. 306 pages.
Paul A. Geroski. What do We Know about Entry. International Journal of Industrial
Organization, 13:421–440, 1995.
30

Zvi Griliches and Haim Regev. Firm Productivity in Israeli Industry 1979-1988. Econometrica, 65:175–203, 1995.
James Gwartney and Robert Lawson. Economic Freedom of the World. 2005 Annual
Report. Fraser Institute, Vancouver, B.C., 2004.
John C. Haltiwanger, Stefano Scarpetta, and Milan Vodopivec. How Institutions Affect
Labor Market Outcomes: Evidence from Transition Countries. Mimeo, April 2003.
John C. Haltiwanger, Stefano Scarpetta, and Helena Schweiger. Assessing Job Flows across
Countries: The Role of Industry, Firm Size and Regulations. Discussion Paper 2450, IZA,
2006.
James J. Heckman and Carmen Pages, editors. Law and Employment: Lessons from Latin
America and the Carribean. NBER Conference Series Report. University of Chicago
Press, Chicago and London, 2004.
Hugo Hopenhayn and Richard Rogerson. Job Turnover and Policy Evaluation: A General
Equilibrium Analysis. Journal of Political Economy, 101(5):915–938, 1993.
Boyan Jovanovic. Selection and the Evolution of Industry. Econometrica, 50(3):649–670,
1982.
David Kaufmann, Aart Kraay, and Massimo Mastruzzi. Governance Matters III: Governance Indicators for 1996, 1998, 2000, and 2002. World Bank Economic Review, 18:
253–287, 2004.
Leora Klapper, Luc Laeven, and Raghuram G. Rajan. Entry Regulation as a Barrier to
Entrepreneurship. Journal of Financial Economics, 82(3):591–629, 2006.
Winfried Koeniger and Julien Prat. Employment Protection, Product Market Regulation
and Firm Selection. Economic Journal, 117(521):302–322, 2007.
Adriana Kugler. The Effects of Employment Protection in Europe and the USA. Els
Opuscles del CREI, (18):1–48, 2007.
Marc Melitz. The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocation and Aggregate Industry
Productivity. Econometrica, 71-6:1695–1725, 2003.
Julián Messina and Giovanna Vallanti. Job Flow Dynamics and Firing Restrictions: Evidence from Europe. Discussion Paper 2045, IZA, March 2006.

31

Alejandro Micco and Carmen Pages. The Economic Effects of Employment Protection:
Evidence from International Industry-Level Data. Discussion Paper 2433, IZA, November
2006.
Dale T. Mortensen and Christopher A. Pissarides. New Developments in Models of Search
in the Labor Market. In Orley Ashenfelter and Richard Layard, editors, Handbook of
Labor Economics, Vol. 3B. Handbooks in Economics, Vol. 5, pages 2567–2627. Elsevier
Science, North Holland, Amsterdam, New York and Oxford, 1999a.
Dale T. Mortensen and Christopher A. Pissarides. Job Reallocation, Employment Fluctuations and Unemployment. In John B. Taylor and Michael Woodford, editors, Handbook of
Macroeconomics, Vol. 1B. Handbooks in Economics, Vol. 15, pages 1171–1228. Elsevier
Science, North Holland, Amsterdam, New York and Oxford, 1999b.
Stephen Nickell and Richard Layard. Labor Market Institutions and Eeconomic Performance. In Orley Ashenfelter and Richard Layard, editors, Handbook of Labor Economics,
Vol. 3C. Handbooks in Economics, Vol. 5, pages 3029–3084. Elsevier Science, North Holland, Amsterdam, New York and Oxford, 1999.
Giuseppe Nicoletti and Stefano Scarpetta. Product Market Reforms and Employment in
OECD Countries. OECD, Economics Department Working Paper 472, 2005.
G. Steven Olley and Ariel Pakes. The Dynamics of Productivity in the Telecommunications
Equipment Industry. Econometrica, 64(6):1263–1297, 1996.
Ariel Pakes and Richard Ericson. Empirical Implications of Alternative Models of Firm
Dynamics. Journal of Economic Theory, 79(1):1–45, 1998.
Raghuram G. Rajan and Luigi Zingales. Financial Dependence and Growth. American
Economic Review, 88(3):559–586, June 1998.
John Sutton. Gibrat’s Legacy. Journal of Economic Literature, 35(1):40–59, 1997.

32

Table A.1: Data Sources Used for Firm Demographics and Job Flows

33

Country
OECD
Finland

Source

Period

Max. industry coverage
(number of industries)

Business register

1988-1998

All (17)

France

Fiscal database

1989-1997

All (17)

Germany (West)

Social security

1977-1999

Italy
Portugal

Social security
Employment-based
register
Business register
Business register

1986-1994
1983-1998
1980-1998
1988-1997

All but civil service,
self employed (11)
All (19)
All but public
administration (19)
Manufacturing (10)
Private businesses (19)

Register, based on Integrated
System of Pensions
Census
Annual Industry
Survey (ENIA)
Annual Manufacturing
Survey (EAM)
Social security

1995-2002

All (19)

Emp ≥ 1

1996-2001
1979-1999

Manufacturing (13)
Manufacturing (13)

Emp ≥ 1
Emp. ≥ 10

1982-1998

Manufacturing (13)

Emp. ≥ 10

1985-2001

All (17)

Emp ≥ 1

1995-2001
1992-2001
1996-2002
1992-2001

All
All
All
All

Emp
Emp
Emp
Emp

United Kingdom
United States
LAC
Argentina
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Mexico
TRANSITION
Estonia
Hungary
Latvia
Slovenia

Business register
Fiscal register (APEH)
Business register
Business register

(19)
(19)
(18)
(19)

Threshold
Emp ≥ 1
Turnover:
Man: Euro 0.58m
Serv: Euro 0.17m
Emp ≥ 1
Emp ≥ 1
Emp ≥ 1
Emp ≥ 1
Emp ≥ 1

≥
≥
≥
≥

1
1
1
1

Table B.1: Average Job Flows in the 1990s, Overall and by Region, Total Economy (Unbalanced Panel)
OVERALL
Variable
Obs Mean Std. Dev.
Job Creation Rate
1048 0.147
0.067
Job Destruction Rate
1048 0.131
0.062
Net Employment Growth
1048 0.015
0.065
Job Reallocation Rate
1048 0.278
0.112
Excess Job Reallocation Rate 1048 0.231
0.098
Job Creation Rate (Entry)
1048 0.055
0.043
Job Destruction Rate (Exit)
1048 0.046
0.029
OECD
Job Creation Rate
448 0.127
0.046
Job Destruction Rate
448 0.127
0.060
Net Employment Growth
448 0.000
0.046
Job Reallocation Rate
448 0.254
0.096
Excess Job Reallocation Rate 448 0.223
0.085
Job Creation Rate (Entry)
448 0.045
0.030
Job Destruction Rate (Exit)
448 0.045
0.028
LAC
Job Creation Rate
300 0.148
0.061
Job Destruction Rate
300 0.140
0.066
Net Employment Growth
300 0.008
0.053
Job Reallocation Rate
300 0.288
0.114
Excess Job Reallocation Rate 300 0.248
0.103
Job Creation Rate (Entry)
300 0.056
0.040
Job Destruction Rate (Exit)
300 0.053
0.032
TRANSITION
Job Creation Rate
300 0.174
0.088
Job Destruction Rate
300 0.128
0.061
Net Employment Growth
300 0.046
0.087
Job Reallocation Rate
300 0.303
0.123
Excess Job Reallocation Rate 300 0.227
0.109
Job Creation Rate (Entry)
300 0.070
0.056
Job Destruction Rate (Exit)
300 0.039
0.025

Min
0.000
0.000
-0.299
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

Max
0.647
0.419
0.419
0.875
0.732
0.357
0.216

0.033
0.029
-0.282
0.072
0.058
0.003
0.000

0.288
0.411
0.148
0.57
0.472
0.195
0.216

0.033
0.041
-0.214
0.086
0.066
0.000
0.003

0.431
0.419
0.286
0.785
0.732
0.227
0.152

0.000
0.000
-0.299
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

0.647
0.385
0.419
0.875
0.608
0.357
0.135

Source: Own calculations based on harmonized firm-level database.

34

Table C.1: Definitions of Institutional Variables
Variable
Definition
Hiring and Firing Practices Flexibility in hiring and firing (5B(ii)) from Fraser Institute, hiring and firing practices of companies are determined by private contract (World Economic Forum: Global
Competitiveness Report); scale [0,10], 10 being the worst.
Business Regulations
Regulation of business activities (5c) from Fraser Institute
(World Economic Forum: Global Competitiveness Report);
scale [0,10], 10 being the worst.
Law and Order
Integrity of Legal System (2e) from Fraser Institute, which
is based on Political Risk Component I (Law and Order)
from the International Country Risk Guide; scale [0,10], 10
being the worst.
Table C.2: Institutional Variables, 1990s
OVERALL
Variable
Hiring and Firing Practices
Law&Order adj. Hiring and Firing Practices
Business Regulations
Law&Order adj. Business Regulations
Law and Order
EU & USA
Hiring and Firing Practices
Law&Order adj. Hiring and Firing Practices
Business Regulations
Law&Order adj. Business Regulations
Law and Order
LAC
Hiring and Firing Restrictions
Law&Order adj. Hiring and Firing Restrictions
Business Regulations
Law&Order adj. Business Regulations
Law and Order
TRANSITION
Hiring and Firing Restrictions
Law&Order adj. Hiring and Firing Restrictions
Business Regulations
Law&Order adj. Business Regulations
Law and Order

Mean
5.261
4.113
3.490
2.490
2.280

Std. Dev.
1.515
2.019
1.389
1.233
2.818

Min
2.878
0.000
1.100
0.000
0.000

Max
7.700
7.209
5.900
4.600
10.000

5.427
5.084
3.074
2.822
0.469

1.804
1.559
1.682
1.349
1.121

2.878
2.878
1.100
1.100
0.000

7.400
6.600
5.600
4.600
3.000

4.679
2.249
4.206
1.811
4.949

0.943
1.642
1.297
1.321
2.769

3.230
0.000
2.617
0.000
2.280

5.740
4.431
5.900
3.320
10.000

5.696
4.742
3.323
2.757
1.763

1.705
1.846
0.669
0.716
1.119

3.586
3.079
2.650
1.776
0.637

7.700
7.209
4.200
3.486
3.300

Source: Own calculations based on harmonized firm-level database and Gwartney and
Lawson [2004].
35

