NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HOW COSTLY IS DIVERSITY? AFFIRMATIVE ACTION IN LIGHT OF GENDER
DIFFERENCES IN COMPETITIVENESS
Muriel Niederle
Carmit Segal
Lise Vesterlund
Working Paper 13923
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13923

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2008

We are grateful to the NSF and the Harvard Business School for generous support. We thank the following
institutions for their hospitality: Institute for Advanced Study at Princeton and the Department of Economics
at Harvard (Niederle), Harvard Business School (Segal) and CEBR at Copenhagen Business School
(Vesterlund). The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Muriel Niederle, Carmit Segal, and Lise Vesterlund. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

How Costly is Diversity? Affirmative Action in Light of Gender Differences in Competitiveness
Muriel Niederle, Carmit Segal, and Lise Vesterlund
NBER Working Paper No. 13923
April 2008
JEL No. C91,J16,J24
ABSTRACT
Recent research documents that while men are eager to compete, women often shy away from competitive
environments. A consequence is that few women enter and win competitions. Using experimental
methods we examine how affirmative action affects competitive entry. We find that when women
are guaranteed equal representation among winners, more women and fewer men enter competitions,
and the response exceeds that predicted by changes in the probability of winning. An explanation for
this response is that under affirmative action the probability of winning depends not only on one's
rank relative to other group members, but also on one's rank within gender. Both beliefs on rank and
attitudes towards competition change when moving to a more gender-specific competition. The changes
in competitive entry have important implications when assessing the costs of affirmative action. Based
on ex-ante tournament entry affirmative action is predicted to lower the performance requirement for
women and thus result in reverse discrimination towards men. Interestingly this need not be the outcome
when competitive entry is not payoff maximizing. The response in entry implies that it may not be
necessary to lower the performance requirement for women to achieve a more diverse set of winners.

Muriel Niederle
Department of Economics
579 Serra Mall
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and NBER
niederle@stanford.edu
Carmit Segal
Department of Economics and Business
Universitat Pompeu Fabra
Jaume I building
Ramon Trias Fargas, 25-27
Barcelona, 08005
Spain
carmit.segal@upf.edu

Lise Vesterlund
Department of Economics
University of Pittsburgh
4916 W.W. Posvar Hall
Pittsburgh, PA 15260
vester@pitt.edu

I. INTRODUCTION
Despite decades of striving for gender equality, large differences still remain between men and
women in the labor market. Perhaps most noteworthy is the gender segregation across different
types of jobs. While there is substantial horizontal segregation, with women more likely to
hold clerical or nurturing jobs and men more visible in manufacturing, the vertical segregation
within a sector is particularly striking (Weeden, 2004, and Grusky and England, 2004, Ander,
1998). Across fields men are disproportionately allocated to professional and managerial
occupations. In a large sample of US firms Bertrand and Hallock (2001) show that women only
account for 2.5 percent of the five highest paid executives.1 While it may be argued that such
segregation is a result of past history, and that these differences will diminish over time, it is
noteworthy that women are underrepresented among the people who have the minimum
training frequently required for senior management. Only 30 percent of students at top tier
business schools are women, and, relative to their male counterparts, female MBA’s are more
likely to work in the non-profit sector, work part time, or entirely drop out of the work force.2
It is commonly argued that discrimination, preference differences for child rearing, and
ability differences can explain the absence of women in upper level management.3 Recent
research suggests that an additional explanation is that women are more reluctant to put
themselves in a position where they have to compete against others (see e.g., Gneezy and
Rustichini, 2005, Gupta, Poulsen and Villeval, 2005, and Niederle and Vesterlund, 2007,
henceforth NV).4 For example, NV examines compensation choices in an environment where
men and women are equally good at competing. They find that the majority of men select the
competitive tournament whereas the majority of women select the non-competitive piece rate.
While low ability men are found to compete too much, high ability women compete too little,
and few women succeed in and win the tournament.
From the firm’s perspective it is particularly costly if the upper tail of the performance
distribution does not enter competitions for jobs or promotions. As explained by B. Joseph
White, president of University of Illinois, “Getting more women into MBA programs means
1

Similarly only about 17 percent of the partners at major law firms nationwide were women in 2005 (Timothy
O’Brien, The New York Times, March 19, 2006).
2
E.g., Hewlett and Luce, 2005. See also Blau and Kahn, 2004.
3
See Altonji and Blank (1999), Black and Strahan (2001), and Goldin and Rouse (2000).
4
The Babcock and Laschever (2003) finding that women are more reluctant to negotiate may also be seen as
evidence of gender differences in willingness to compete.

1

better access to the total talent pool for business”.5 An additional argument for increasing the
number of women in top managerial positions is that diversity in and of itself may benefit the
firm.6 Indeed US corporations are concerned by their inability to attain and recruit women, and
they are increasingly developing programs to improve the number of women employees.7
When instituting programs to alter the gender composition in certain jobs it is of course
important that we understand how these programs influence behavior. To begin this process,
we use experiments to investigate how affirmative action may affect participants’ willingness
to compete. Specifically, we consider a quota system which requires that out of two winners of
a tournament at least one must be a woman.8 We examine the consequences such a system may
have on the individual’s decision to compete and thereby on the resulting gender composition
of the applicant pool. Accounting for this response we ask how costly it is to secure that
women be equally represented among those who win competitions. In particular, how much
lower will the performance threshold be for women? How many better performing men will
have to be passed by to hire a woman? To what extent will reverse discrimination arise? These
questions are particularly interesting in light of the non-payoff maximizing tournament-entry
decisions documented by NV.
We find that the introduction of affirmative action results in substantial changes in
tournament entry. While the entry of women increases, that of men decreases, and the response
exceeds that predicted by changes in the probability of winning. We attribute the excessive
response in the gender gap to three different factors. One is that the mere mention of
affirmative action increases women’s willingness to compete. The other two factors both relate
to the fact that affirmative action makes the competition more gender specific. The requirement
that at least one of two winners must be a woman implies that a woman will win the
tournament if she is either the best performing woman in her group or among the top two
performers in the group overall. In contrast a man will win the tournament if he is both the top
performing man in his group and among the two best performers in the group overall. There
appears to be two reasons why a more gender-specific competition affects behavior: first,
participants hold different beliefs on relative performance within versus across gender, and
5

The University Record, May 22, 2000, http://www.ur.umich.edu/9900/May22_00/8.htm.
See e.g., Page, 2007.
7
For example, corporations such as Ernst and Young, Goldman Sachs, IBM, and PricewaterhouseCoopers have
all adopted substantial female retention and attraction programs (see e.g., The Economist, July 21, 2005).
8
Affirmative action programs in the US have historically been of two forms: preferential treatment and quota.
6

2

second, participants seem to view competition as either less intimidating or enjoyable when
competing against groups where the opposite gender is more poorly represented.9
The substantial tournament-entry response to affirmative action has important
implications when assessing the sacrifice in performance required to secure a more diverse
group of winners. The costs of affirmative action depend on how much lower the minimum
performance threshold will have to be to secure gender parity, compared to that found for a
group in which gender is not taken into account. Ignoring the change in entry, it is anticipated
that equal representation of women will result in a decrease in the minimum performance
requirement for women and that many better performing men will be passed by. The change in
tournament entry implies that women become better represented among the set of entrants, and
in particular that more high performing women are in the applicant pool. Thus it becomes
much less costly to achieve equal representation and the resulting minimum performance
threshold is unchanged under affirmative action. We therefore find that when women shy away
from competition and don’t enter when it is payoff maximizing to do so, it need not be costly
to use affirmative action to achieve a more diverse set of winners.
In the next section we discuss why affirmative action may alter the tournament-entry
decisions of men and women. We then describe our experimental design which builds on that
of NV and discuss how it helps us investigate the potential effects of affirmative action. We
introduce our analysis by first showing that our basic results replicate those of NV. We then
proceed by determining the extent to which we can account for the changes in tournament
entry under affirmative action. Finally we conclude by examining how changes in tournament
entry mitigate the costs anticipated from affirmative action.

II. POTENTIAL EFFECT OF AA ON GENDER GAP IN TOURNAMENT ENTRY
NV finds that the gender gap in tournament entry in part can be explained by men being more
overconfident than women, and by men and women having different attitudes towards
competitions. The central question in this paper is whether and how an institution such as
affirmative action affects the gender gap in tournament entry. We consider a quota system
where at least one of two winners must be a woman. There are several factors that may result
9

This argument is similar to that given for the benefits of single sex education for girls: it may be easier for girls
to compete when competing against only girls (See Solnick, 1995, and Harwarth, Maline, and DeBra, 1997). See
also Gneezy, Niederle and Rustichini (2003) for performance in single versus mixed sex competitions.

3

in tournament entry changing with this system. We will discuss the most obvious ones and
explain how our experiment is designed to account for them.
Factor 1. Change in the probability of winning: The direct effect of affirmative action is that it
distorts the probability of winning the tournament in favor of women and against men. To the
extent that participants respond to changes in incentives, tournament entry is expected to
increase for women and decrease for men. To control for this effect we condition on the
probability of winning.
Factor 2. Within-gender beliefs: The NV study documented a significant gender difference in
overconfidence and showed that this difference helps explain the gender gap in tournament
entry. A consequence of affirmative action is that the tournament-entry decision does not only
depend on the individual’s perception of rank within the whole group, but also on the
perception of rank within their gender. Specifically, a woman should enter either if she thinks
she is the best performing woman or among the top two performers overall. In contrast a man
should enter if he thinks he is both the best performing man and among the top two performers
overall. If participants hold different beliefs on relative performance within versus across
gender then this may cause the gender gap in tournament entry to change under affirmative
action. We elicit the participant’s within-gender beliefs to determine if they differ across
gender and how they may affect tournament entry.
Factor 3. Affirmative action context effect: Another reason why participants may respond
differently to the affirmative-action tournament is that the mere mention of affirmative action
may discourage men and encourage women to select the competitive compensation. To control
for this possibility we examine compensation choices under the affirmative action rule when
these choices do not require a future competitive performance.
Factor 4. Competing against own gender: Finally a factor that may influence the decision to
enter and actively compete in an affirmative-action tournament is that the competition becomes
more gender specific. For women the competition is no longer simply a competition against all
other members of the group, but rather a competition against the other women in the group. If

4

women do not generally shy away from competitions, but rather shy away from competing in
mixed-gender groups, then their behavior may be quite different under affirmative action.10
Changes may also be seen for men as affirmative action implies that it is no longer sufficient to
be among the top two performers overall, rather a man also needs to be the best performing
man. Having controlled for Factors 1 through 3, we will ascribe any unexplained response to
affirmative action as evidence that Factor 4 influences behavior.11

III. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN
The experiment was conducted at the Harvard Business School, using students from the CLER
subject pool. Our design builds on that of NV. One to three groups of 6 participants, three
women and three men, participated in each session. The gender composition of the group was
made clear to participants as they were seated in the laboratory, and they were shown who the
other 5 members of their group were. A total of 14 groups participated in the experiment for a
total of 42 men and 42 women.12
Participants were asked to perform a real task under varying compensation schemes.
The task was to add up sets of five 2-digit numbers. Participants were not allowed to use a
calculator, but could use scratch paper. The numbers were randomly drawn and each problem
was presented in the following way:
21 35 48 29 83
For each problem participants were asked to fill in the sum in the blank box. Once the
participant submitted an answer on the computer, a new problem appeared jointly with
information on whether the former answer was correct.13 A record of the number of correct and
incorrect answers was kept on the screen. Participants had 5 minutes to solve as many
problems as they could. A stop watch was shown at the front of the room via a projector and a
buzzer would go off at the end of the 5 minutes. The participant’s final score was determined
10

Gneezy, Niederle and Rustichini (2003) find that women are as good as men at competing in single-sex but not
in mixed-sex tournaments. Such differences are often emphasized by advocates of single-sex schooling. It may be
that girls do not dislike competition per se, but rather that they dislike competing against boys. Thus girls in allgirl schools may be more competitive (see Harwarth, Maline and DeBra 1997 for an overview).
11
This captures the possibility that men and women are more comfortable competing against women than men.
12
In one session (two groups) the stop watch malfunctioned for the fourth task. This session is excluded from our
analysis. The behavior and performance prior to the fourth task resemble those of the other sessions.
13
The program was written using the software zTree (Fischbacher 2007).

5

by the number of correctly solved problems. An attractive feature of this 5-minute addition
task is that it requires both skill and effort.
Participants were told that they had to complete six tasks of which one was randomly
chosen for payment at the end of the experiment. By paying only for one task, we diminish the
chance that decisions in a given task may be used to hedge against outcomes in other tasks. In
addition to their payment for performance each participant also received a $10 show-up fee,
and an additional $5 for completing the experiment. Participants were informed of the nature
of a task only immediately before performing the task. While participants knew their absolute
performance on a task, i.e., how many problems they solved correctly, they were not informed
of their relative performance until the end of the experiment. The specific compensations and
order of tasks were as follows.14
Task 1 – Piece Rate: Participants are given the 5-minute addition task and receive 50 cents per
correct answer.
Task 2 – Tournament: Participants are given the 5-minute addition task. The two participants
who provide the largest number of correct answers in the group each receive $1.50 per correct
answer. The other participants receive no payment.
In the next task participants also perform the five-minute addition task, but this time they select
which of the two compensation schemes they want to apply to their future performance, piece
rate or tournament. A participant with a given performance has higher expected earnings in the
tournament when the probability of winning exceeds 33 percent.15 There are two reasons for
presenting participants with the compensations prior to their choice, first it provides them with
experience of both, and second it provides us with performance measures which enable us to
determine whether men and women of equal performance make similar compensation choices.
Task 3 – Choice: Before performing the 5-minute addition task, participants select whether
they want to be paid according to a piece rate, i.e., 50 cents per correct answer, or a
14

In the event that there are ties in a competitive task the winner was chosen randomly among the high scorers.
By paying the tournament winner per correct problem we avoid the issue of choosing a high enough fixed prize
to ensure that even high-performing participants benefit from tournament entry.

15

6

tournament. A participant who selects the tournament wins the tournament and receives $1.50
per correct answer if the participant’s task-3 score exceeds that of at least 4 of the other group
members in task 2, otherwise the participant receives no payment.
Winners of the task-3 tournament are determined by comparing their task-3
performance to the task-2 performance of the other group members, rather than others’ task-3
performance. Thus, participants compete against the past performances of others.16 As
emphasized by NV this has several advantages; first, participants are competing against
competitive performances of others; second, the tournament-entry decision only depends on
beliefs about ones relative performance, and not on the expected tournament-entry decisions of
others;17 and third, a participant’s choice does not impose any externalities on others.18
Effectively the task-3 decision is an individual-decision problem.
Next we examine entry into an affirmative-action tournament. We refer to this as an
AA tournament. In the AA tournament at least one of the winners will be a woman. Having
mentioned the group’s gender composition at the experiment’s beginning, we hope to isolate
the effect of affirmative action.
Task 4 – Affirmative-Action Choice: Before performing the 5-minute addition task,
participants select whether they want to be paid according to a piece rate, i.e., 50 cents per
correct answer, or an AA tournament. A participant who selects the AA tournament receives
$1.50 per correct answer when winning the tournament, and $0 otherwise. The two winners are
the highest performing woman and the highest performer of the remaining 5 participants. Thus,
a woman wins the AA tournament if her task-4 performance either exceeds the task-2
performance of the two other women in the group or exceeds that of at least four other group
members. A man wins the AA tournament if his task-4 performance both exceeds the task-2
performance of the two other men in the group and exceeds that of at least four other group
members.
16

Many sports competitions are not performed simultaneously, e.g., downhill skiing.
This secures that the gender composition and size of the competitive group is held constant across participants.
18
Note that our design allows for the possibility that participants who enter the tournament all lose or all win. The
absence of externalities helps us rule out that women avoid the competition to not decrease the chance that others
win. For a discussion of possible gender differences in altruism see e.g., Andreoni and Vesterlund (2001), Eckel
and Grossman (2002b), Croson and Gneezy (2004).
17

7

As argued by NV there are several reasons why men and women may differ in their
willingness to enter a competition. One explanation is that preferences for performing in a
competitive environment may differ across gender.19 Other more general explanations are that
women may have lower expectations about their relative ability, be more averse to risk, or
more reluctant to be in an environment where they receive feedback on their relative
performance.20 What distinguishes gender differences in preferences for competing from the
more general differences, is that the former relies critically on the tournament-entry decision
resulting in a subsequent competitive performance. The other explanations are more general,
and should be present in other decisions as well. To jointly control for the role played by these
three general factors we present participants with two additional environments which mimic
the tournament-entry decisions in Task 3 and 4, without involving an actual competitive
performance. Specifically we first ask participants to choose between a competitive and a noncompetitive compensation scheme for their past non-competitive task-1 piece-rate
performance, thus a choice of tournament does not require participants to subsequently
perform in a competition. As the potential thrill, anxiety or fear of performing in a competition
is absent from this choice, this decision will control for the effect general factors, such as
overconfidence, risk and feedback aversion, have on the compensation choice. Participants are
reminded of their task-1 piece-rate performance prior to their compensation choice.
Task 5 – Submit Piece Rate to a Tournament: Participants do not have to perform in this
task. They choose which compensation they want to apply to their past piece-rate performance:
a 50-cent piece rate per correct answer or a tournament. A participant who enters the
tournament receives $1.50 per correct answer if the participant’s task-1 piece-rate performance
is among the two highest scores in the group, otherwise no payment is received.
19

While the prospect of engaging in a competition may cause women to anticipate a psychic cost and deter them
from tournaments, men may anticipate a psychic benefit and be drawn to them. Nurture as well as nature may
cause women to be more reluctant to perform in a competition, see e.g., Daly and Wilson (1983), Campbell
(2002), Ruble, Martin, and Berenbaum (2006), Gneezy, Leonard and List (2006).
20
While individuals are found to be overconfident, men tend to be more overconfident than women (e.g.,
Lichtenstein, Fischhoff and Phillips, 1982, Beyer, 1990, Beyer and Bowden, 1997, and Niederle and Vesterlund,
2007). Thus men may be more likely to enter tournaments. Another dimension in which men and women are
found to differ is in their attitudes towards risk (e.g., Eckel and Grossman, 2002a, Croson and Gneezy, 2004,
Byrnes, Miller and Shafer, 1999). As tournaments involve uncertain payoffs attitudes towards risk are expected to
affect compensation choices. Finally, men and women have been found to respond differently to feedback on
relative performance (see e.g., Roberts and Nolen-Hoeksema, 1989, Dweck 2000). Since entering the tournament
results in learning whether one won or lost the tournament feedback aversion may also influence entry.

8

Finally, for participants’ last task they are asked to make a similar decision in an AA
tournament, that is, they decide whether they want to submit their piece-rate performance to an
AA tournament. This decision serves as a control for general factors in the affirmative-action
decision including the possibility that merely mentioning affirmative action results in an
excessive response in behavior.
Task 6 – Submit Piece Rate to AA Tournament: Participants do not have to perform in this
task. They choose which compensation scheme they want to apply to their past piece-rate
performance: a 50-cent piece rate per correct answer or an AA tournament. A participant who
selected the tournament receives $1.50 per correct answer when winning the tournament, and
$0 otherwise. The two winners are the highest performing woman and the highest performer of
the remaining 5 participants.
As in tasks 3 and 4 a participant’s decision does not affect the earnings of any other participant,
nor does it depend on the entry decisions of others. Thus tasks 5 and 6 are also individualdecision tasks.
Finally, at the end of the experiment participants were asked to guess their rank in the
task-1 piece rate and task-2 tournament both within the whole group of 6 participants and
within their own gender. Each participant picked a rank between 1 and 6 and between 1 and 3,
respectively, and was paid $1 for each correct guess.21 This allows us to determine if beliefs on
relative performance differ in single versus mixed gender groups, and whether such differences
affect tournament entry.
We can use Task 1, 2, 3 and 5 and across gender beliefs to determine whether we
replicate the NV findings. By comparing choices in task 3 and 4, we can then move on to
examine the effect of affirmative action on the gender gap in tournament entry. Of particular
interest is the extent to which such changes are caused by the affirmative-action competition
being more gender specific (Factor 4), or if it is accounted for by factors that are not associated
with the active competition. Such non-competitive factors involve changes in the probability of
winning (Factor 1), the fact that under affirmative action the probability of winning depends
21

In the event of ties in actual rank we counted every answer that could be correct as correct. For example, if the
performance in the group was 10, 10, 11, 12, 13, 13 then an answer of sixth and fifth was correct for a score of 10,
and an answer of first and second was correct for a score of 13.

9

both on across-gender beliefs and on within-gender beliefs (Factor 2), and that the mere
mention of affirmative action may result in an exaggerated response to affirmative action
(Factor 3). Performance in task 1 and 2 will help us control for changes in the probability of
winning (i.e., Factor 1), within-gender beliefs serve as a test of Factor 2, and we can use
choices in tasks 5 and 6 as a control for Factor 3.

IV. GENDER DIFFERENCES IN COMPENSATION CHOICES
We start by characterizing the tournament-entry decisions prior to the introduction of
affirmative action, to determine whether we replicate the findings of NV. Although the
experimental designs are similar there are several dimensions in which the two studies differ.
First, participants in this experiment were made aware that groups were gender balanced; this
may have altered behavior if it led participants to expect that gender was a variable of
interest.22 Second, we examine groups of 6 individuals with 2 winners, rather than groups of
four with one winner. Third, our return from winning is $1.5 per problem, rather than $2 per
problem as in NV. Fourth, we use students from the Harvard Business School CLER lab
subject pool, rather than the PEEL subject pool at the University of Pittsburgh. Finally, showup and completion fees were altered to follow common practice at CLER.23 Each or all of these
factors have the potential of influencing behavior. We first describe entry decisions in the
present study, and then show that despite differences we replicate the main results of NV.

IV.A. Piece Rate and Tournament: Performance and Choice
In both the piece rate and tournament we find significant gender differences in performance.
The average number of correctly solved problems in the piece rate is 10.3 for women and 12.9
for men, and in the tournament it is 12.3 for women and 14.8 for men. Two-sided MannWhitney tests show that both of these differences are significant (p = 0.03 and p = 0.06,
respectively).24 To assess the probability of winning the tournament we randomly create six22

For example, women may experience “stereotype threat” if they believe there is a stereotype against them
performing well in competition against men. This source of anxiety (conform to the stereotype and fail to compete
successfully) may lead to higher instances of “choking under pressure” when performing a task (Steele 1997).
23
Participants in Pittsburgh were given $5 show-up fee and $7 for completing the tasks.
24
While the piece rate and tournament performances are highly correlated (spearman rank correlations of 0.62 for
women and 0.79 for men), participants perform better under the tournament than the piece-rate (matched pair sign
rank tests yield p < 0.01 for each gender separately). The average increase however does not differ by gender (a

10

person groups from the observed performance distributions and determine the 2 winners.
Conditioning only on gender, the probability of winning is 43.2 percent for a man and 23.5
percent for a woman.25 Table I shows that conditional on performance the probability of
winning however is similar for women and men.26
TABLE I
PROBABILITY OF WINNING TASK-2 TOURNAMENT CONDITIONAL ON TASK-2 PERFORMANCE
8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 21 22 25 28 29 35
Women 0 0.1 0.6 2.5 8.6 21.8 40.7 58.1 71.4 80.2 87.1 92.2 -- 96.2 -- -- -- -Men
0 0.1 0.7 2.8 11.0 28.2 48.7 65.8 77.8 85.6 91.1 -- 96.6 98.1 99.2 99.6 99.9 100

Having experienced both the 50-cent piece rate and $1.50 tournament, participants are
asked which of the two compensation schemes they want to apply to their task-3 performance.
The tournament results in higher expected earnings when the probability of winning exceeds
33 percent. As seen in Table I this corresponds to participants who solve 14 or more problems.
If a participant’s performance in task 3 is exactly as in task 2, then 28.6 percent of the women
and 50 percent of the men have higher expected earnings in the tournament. This predicted
gender gap is significant (a two-sided Fisher’s exact test yields p = 0.07). Unless otherwise
noted the reported test statistics henceforth refer to a two-sided Fisher’s exact test
The actual gender gap in tournament entry is even greater than predicted: 31 percent of
women and 73.8 percent of men select the tournament. This gender gap is significant (p <
0.01) and greater than expected (p = 0.04). While men enter significantly more than predicted
by their task-2 performance (p = 0.042), women do not (p = 1.0).
To compare entry decisions of women and men, we condition their choices on their
probability of winning the tournament.27 We regress the compensation choice on the
probability of winning the task-2 tournament and on the change in the probability of winning a
two-sided Mann-Whitney test yields p = 0.73). This improvement in performance may be caused by learning or
by the performance incentives in the tournament. Two results suggest that learning may play a prominent role.
First, NV shows that tournament entry does not influence the participant’s subsequent performance. Second,
DellaVigna, Malmendier and Vesterlund (in progress) have participants perform six rounds of 3-minute
tournaments, and find a significant increase in performance from round 1 to 2, but not in subsequent rounds.
25
Of the 14 task-2 tournaments with 2 winners each, 20 were won by men and 11 by women (three cases of ties).
26
For any given performance level, say 15 for a woman, we draw 1,000,000 groups consisting of 3 men and 2
women, using the performance distribution of the 42 men and 42 women with replacement. We then calculate the
woman’s frequency of wins in this set of simulated groups.
27
Prior to the affirmative action analysis it is largely inconsequential to condition on the probability of winning
rather than actual performance, however this distinction is important when we study the AA tournament where the
probability of winning conditional on performance differs by gender.

11

task-2 tournament when using the task-2 performance versus the task-1 performance.28 Table II
shows that while the probability of winning does not influence the likelihood of tournamententry for women, it does increase it for men. Pooling men and women and conditioning on the
probability of winning, we find a significant gender gap of 36 percentage points. That is a man
with a 33 percent chance of winning the tournament, and a 16 percentage point increase in the
probability of winning with the tournament rather than the piece rate performance, would have
a 36 percentage point lower chance of entering the tournament if he were a woman.29
TABLE II
PROBIT OF TOURNAMENT CHOICE
Task-2 Performance
Women
All
-0.36
(0.00)
1.37
0.39
0.79
(0.02)
(0.26)
(0.00)
-0.62
-0.06
-0.29
(0.21)
(0.88)
(0.27)
42
42
84
Men

Female
Probability of Winning
Change in Prob. of
Winning Tour. to PR
Observations

Dependent variable: task-3 compensation choice (1-tournament and 0-piece rate). The table presents marginal
effects evaluated at an individual (a man in the last column) with a 33 percent chance of winning the tournament
and a change of 0.16 in the probability of winning when using the piece-rate performance in the tournament. pvalues are in parenthesis.

A possible explanation for the gender difference in the decision to enter the tournament
is that participants correctly anticipate a change in performance following their task-3 choice.
However, a probit regression using performance in task 3 yields similar results.30
The gender gap in tournament entry is greatest among those with high performance. Of
those who for a given task-2 performance have higher expected earnings in the tournament
than piece rate, i.e., those solving 14 or more problems, we find a significant (p < 0.01) gender
28

The change in the probability of winning the tournament when using the task-2 rather than task-1 performance
is given by pT(Task 2)- pT(Task 1), where pT(x) denotes the probability of winning the tournament with a
performance of x (note pT(x) may differ by gender).
29
The marginal effect is evaluated at the point where a participant is indifferent towards entering the tournament,
i.e., the probability of winning is 33 percent. This corresponds to having a performance between 13 and 14. For
these participants pT(Task 2)- pT(Task 1) = 0.16 on average, thus we assess the marginal effect at this point.
30
When using task-3 performance to determine the probability of winning we find a 41 percentage point (p <
0.01) gender gap in tournament entry. The task-3 performance is highly correlated with that in task-2 (spearman
rank correlations are 0.78 for women and 0.77 for men). The average increase in performance from task 2 is 0.5
for women, and this increase is not significant (matched pair signrank test yields p = 0.32, t-test p = 0.17). The
improvement of 0.69 for men is significant (matched pair signrank test p = 0.06, t-test p = 0.07). The gender
difference in the improvement is not significant (p = 0.35).

12

difference in entry, with 100 percent of the men and 33.3 percent of the women entering. In
contrast the gender gap is not significant (p=0.25) among participants who based on the task-2
performance have lower expected earnings in the tournament. For this group 47.6 percent of
the men and 30 percent of the women enter.31 From a payoff-maximizing perspective too few
high-performing women enter the tournament.

IV.B. Explanations for the Gender Gap in Tournament Entry
What factors can account for the gender differences in tournament entry? As in NV we
examine whether men are more overconfident than women and whether this explains why
fewer women enter the tournament. Combined with beliefs we then use the decision to submit
the piece-rate performance to a tournament (task 5) to distinguish between the role played by
gender differences in preferences for performing in a competition, and the more general
explanations such as gender differences in overconfidence, risk and feedback aversion.
We first determine whether men and women of equal performance have different
beliefs about their relative task-2 tournament performance.32 As men outperform women we
cannot directly compare beliefs across gender. Instead we compare beliefs conditional on the
participant’s optimal guessed rank. A participant’s optimal guessed rank is the rank that
conditional on gender and performance would maximize earnings from guessing.33 Not
surprisingly the optimal guessed ranks of women and men are significantly different (twosided Mann-Whitney p = 0.05). Ordered probit regressions show that women and men with a
higher performance and thereby a higher optimal guessed rank believe they have a higher
rank.34 This result is illustrated by Figure 1 which shows the participants’ guessed rank
conditional on the optimal guessed rank. While men are overconfident, women are not.35
Controlling for optimal guessed rank, men are more optimistic about their relative performance
31

The results are practically identical when using task-3 performance.
Recall we paid participants $1 to correctly guess how their performance ranked relative to the other members of
their group. A strong positive correlation between elicited ranks and tournament entry (Table III) suggests that
hedging against the tournament-entry decision was not a dominant motive when reporting beliefs.
33
For a given performance level, say 15 for a woman, we draw 1,000,000 groups consisting of 3 men and 2
women, sampling with replacement from the performance distribution of the 42 men and 42 women. We then
determine the woman’s rank in each of these groups and the optimal guessed rank is the mode of these ranks.
34
An ordered probit regression of guessed tournament rank on optimal guessed rank yields a coefficient of 0.42
for men and 0.34 for women, each with p < 0.01.
35
For men, testing if the distribution of guessed ranks is independent of that of actual ranks yields p = 0.09, and
comparing the distribution of guessed rank to optimal ranks yields p = 0.04. For women, the comparisons of
guessed ranks to actual ranks yields p = 0.51 and to optimal guessed ranks yields p = 0.37.
32

13

than women. An ordered probit regression of the guessed tournament rank yields coefficients
of 0.39 on the optimal guessed rank (p < 0.01) and 0.66 on a female dummy (p = 0.01).
6
Men
Women

5
4
3
2
1
0
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

FIGURE I: The mean guessed rank for each optimal guessed rank
A method for summarizing beliefs which will prove helpful in our affirmative action
analysis is to consider whether the participant’s guessed rank is consistent with the belief that
he or she will win the tournament, we refer to this measure as GuessWin.36 The results on
beliefs are very similar when we use this binary belief measure, and the correspondingly
constructed optimal guessed-win measure. Those who are most likely to win are also more
likely to report beliefs consistent with winning, and conditional on optimal guessed win, men
are significantly more likely than women to believe that they will win.37 While men are
overconfident, women are not.38
Next we examine the extent to which the overconfidence of men can explain why
conditional on performance men enter the tournament more frequently than women. Although
entry decisions are positively correlated with the participants’ beliefs on winning the
tournament, there are still substantial gender differences.39 Looking at the 54 percent of
36

While the AA tournament entry decision conditional on GuessWin is predicted to be the same for men and
women that is not the case when conditioning on guessed rank.
37
A probit regression of the guess of winning the tournament yields marginal coefficients of -0.3 on female (p =
0.01), and 0.45 on optimal guess of winning (p < 0.01), evaluated at a man whose optimal guess is winning.
38
For men, testing if the distribution of GuessWin is independent of actual win yields p = 0.05, and a comparison
of GuessWin to OptimalGuessWin yields p = 0.07. For women, the comparison of GuessWin to actual win yields
p = 0.64 and to optimal win p = 0.48. For women, the marginal coefficient of a probit regression of the guess on
winning the tournament on OptimalGuessWin yields a coefficient of 0.32 (p = 0.06) on someone whose optimal
guess is to win. For men the coefficient is 0.48 (p < 0.01).
39
A probit regression of the propensity to enter the tournament as a function of the guess of winning the task-2
tournament yields, for men: 0.45 (p < 0.01), and for women 0.45 (p < 0.01).

14

participants’ who have beliefs consistent with winning the task-2 tournament, 87 percent of
men enter the tournament, compared to 60 percent of women. Among the remaining
participants whose beliefs are consistent with loosing the task-2 tournament, 42 percent of men
enter the tournament, compared to 15 percent of women. While the gender gap is around 27
percentage points in both cases, the difference is only significant among those who believe that
they will win ( p = 0.06 and p = 0.10, respectively).
The probit regression of Table III shows tournament entry as a function of both
absolute and believed performance. When only controlling for performance the gender gap was
36 percentage points (Column 1). This gap reduces to 25 percentage points when we control
for the participants’ imputed beliefs on winning the tournament.40 Although the overconfidence
by men helps account for the gender difference in tournament entry a substantial portion of the
gap remains unexplained.
TABLE III
PROBIT OF TOURNAMENT-ENTRY DECISION (TASK 3):
Female
Probability of Winning
Change in Prob. of Winning Tour. to PR

(1)
-0.36
(0.00)
0.79
(0.00)
-0.29
(0.27)

GuessWin
Observations

84

(2)
-0.25
(0.03)
0.45
(0.02)
-0.31
(0.15)
0.35
(0.01)
84

Dependent variable: task-3 compensation choice (1-tournament and 0-piece rate). The table presents marginal
effects evaluated at a man with a 33 percent chance of winning the tournament, and a 0.16 change in the
probability of winning from a piece-rate to a tournament, who thinks that he would win the tournament (i.e., ranks
either first or second in his group of six) in column 2. p-values are in parenthesis.

To account for the unexplained gap in tournament entry we use the elicited beliefs and
task-5 compensation choice to simultaneously control for the role played by gender differences
in general factors such as overconfidence, risk and feedback aversion. In task 5 participants
choose between a competitive and a non-competitive compensation scheme for their past task1 piece-rate performance. This decision is similar to the decision to enter a tournament and
perform in a competition (task 3). The difference between the two is that only in task 3 do they
subsequently have to compete. Thus while overconfidence, risk and feedback aversion can
40

When we use belief on rank instead of GuessWin, the marginal coefficient on female in the probit regression is
reduced to -0.18 (p = 0.04).

15

influence the compensation choices in task 3 and 5, only in task 3 can differences in
preferences for performing in a competition play a role.41
Controlling both for the task-5 decision and the elicited beliefs we determine if the act
of performing in a competition creates a gap in tournament entry that cannot be explained by
these general factors. As seen in Table IV the effect of controlling for the task-5 decision is
substantial. While adding beliefs reduced the gender gap in tournament entry from 36 to 25
percentage points (Columns 1 and 2), the gender gap is further reduced to 17 percentage points
when controlling for the decision to submit the piece rate (Column 3). This decrease may be
explained both by the control for risk and feedback aversion, and by the fact that the decision
to submit the piece rate serves as an additional measure of the individual’s general degree of
confidence. It is therefore not surprising to see that the coefficient on GuessWin decreases as
we move from Column 2 to Column 3.42 Despite the explanatory power of these variables a
substantial gender gap in tournament entry remains. The remaining gap suggests that the
decision to enter the tournament is explained in part by women being relatively more averse to
choices that require a future performance in a competitive environment.
TABLE IV
PROBIT OF TOURNAMENT-ENTRY DECISION (TASK 3)
Female
Prob. Of Winning
Change in Prob. of Winning Tour. to PR

(1)
-0.36
(0.00)
0.79
(0.00)
-0.29
(0.27)

(2)
-0.25
(0.03)
0.45
(0.02)
-0.31
(0.15)
0.35
(0.01)

84

84

GuessWin
Submit the Piece Rate
Observations

(3)
-0.17
(0.04)
0.22
(0.08)
-0.11
(0.45)
0.25
(0.01)
0.15
(0.10)
84

Dependent variable: task-3 compensation choice (1-tournament and 0-piece rate). The table presents marginal
effects evaluated at a man with a 33 percent chance of winning, a 0.16 change in probability of winning, who
submitted his piece rate to the tournament (column 3), and thinks (columns 2 and 3) that he wins the tournament
(i.e., ranks first or second in his group of six). p -values are in parenthesis.

41

An indication of the differences between task 3 and task 5 is that conditional on the probability of winning a
task-1 tournament there are no gender differences in task-5 decisions.
42
When we use the belief on rank instead of GuessWin, the marginal coefficient on female is -0.15 (p = 0.04).
Thus controlling for the task-5 decision only yields a minor reduction in the gender gap in tournament entry.

16

IV.C. Comparison to NV
Although there are several differences between this study and that of NV, the overall findings
are nonetheless similar. While NV found no significant gender differences in performance, in
the present study men on average outperform women by 2.5 problems in both the piece rate
and the tournament. Interestingly the female performance in the present study is in line with
that of NV, where on average men and women solve 10.4 problems in the piece rate and 12
problems in the tournament.43 The gender differences in tournament entry are, however,
similar in the two studies. In NV the gender gap in tournament entry is 38 percentage points
when controlling only for the probability of winning the tournament. Controlling also for the
participant’s belief on winning the task-2 tournament this gap reduces to 26 percentage points,
and finally adding the decision to submit the piece rate to a tournament reduces the gap to 14
percentage points. In comparison the present study finds that the corresponding gender gaps
are 36, 25, and 17 percentage points.44 Thus the results of NV are both qualitatively and
quantitatively similar to those found here. The only difference between the two studies is that
while NV finds that low-performing men enter the tournament more often than low-performing
women, this difference is not significant in the present study.45

V. THE EFFECT OF AFFIRMATIVE ACTION ON ENTRY
Next we examine the response to the affirmative action requirement that at least one of two
winners must be a woman. In determining the role played by the factors presented in Section II
we first account for changes in the probability of winning. We then examine the effect of
beliefs and pay particular attention to the comparison of within- versus across-gender beliefs.
To account for the effect of merely mentioning affirmative action, we compare the decisions to
submit a past piece-rate performance to a standard versus an AA tournament (task 5 vs. 6).
Finally, using both beliefs and the decision to submit the piece rate we determine whether the
effect of affirmative action on tournament entry in part can be explained by participants having
to perform in a more gender-specific competition.
43

Our design does not enable us to determine what causes this gender gap in performance, in particular we can
not determine if it is caused by participants knowing that gender is a variable of interest.
44
To conform to the present study we reran the regression in NV including all participants and controlling for the
probability of winning and participants’ GuessWin. The reported numbers differ slightly from those of NV.
45
Subsequent experiments at Harvard suggest that this difference is significant in a second sample, and when
using the larger combined sample (Niederle, Segal, Vesterlund, in preparation).

17

V.A. The Effect of Changes in the Probability of Winning on AA Tournament Entry (Task 4)
The introduction of affirmative action increases the probability of winning the tournament for
women while decreasing it for men. If participants in an AA tournament had performances as
in task 2 then the predicted probabilities of winning would be 36.2 percent for women and 30.4
percent for men. Conditioning on both gender and individual performance the probabilities of
winning the AA tournament are as reported in Table V.
TABLE V
PROBABILITY OF WINNING TASK-4 TOURNAMENT CONDITIONAL ON TASK-2 PERFORMANCE:
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 21 22 25 28 29 35
Women 1.8 4.9 10.5 25.3 46.9 64.6 77.3 85.7 91.1 94.7 97.3 -- 99.3 -- -- --Men
0.1 0.4 1.6 5.5 14.2 26.8 39.6 50.6 58.6 66.8 -- 75.3 79.6 84.0 88.5 93.0 97.6

As noted earlier, anyone with a 33 percent or higher chance of winning the tournament has
higher expected earnings from the tournament than piece rate. Thus, as seen in Table V,
women with a performance of 13 or more and men with a performance of 15 or more are in
expectation better off selecting the AA tournament. Affirmative action therefore decreases the
performance at which it becomes profitable to enter the tournament by one correct problem for
women while increasing it by one correct problem for men.46
If participants’ task-4 performance is as their task-2 performance, then it is payoff
maximizing to enter the AA tournament for 40.5 percent of women and 38.1 percent of men. In
sharp contrast, we observe 83.3 percent of women and 45.2 percent of men entering, while the
entry by women is greater than predicted that by men is not (p < 0.01 and p = 0.66,
respectively). The resulting gender gap in entry into the AA tournament is significant (p <
0.01) and differs from that predicted (p < 0.01).47 Entry in the AA tournament therefore
contrasts with that of the standard tournament. While men in the standard tournament enter
more than predicted and more than women, this result is reversed under affirmative action as
women enter more than predicted and more than men.
To assess how changes in the probability of winning affect tournament entry, we
compare entry decisions under the standard and AA tournament. Figure II panel A shows the
proportion of men who enter the standard and AA tournament conditional on their probability
46

Using the task-2 performance distribution five more women and five fewer men should enter the tournament.
We calculate the difference between expected and actual gender gaps in AA tournament entry decision for
1,000,000 simulations where we draw the 42 women and 42 men with replacement (using thresholds implied by
Table V). The reported p-value is the percentage of strictly positive differences.

47

18

of winning each tournament. Panel B shows the corresponding figure for women. Both figures
use performance prior to the entry decision (i.e., task 2) to determine the probability of
winning, the figures are similar if we instead use ex-post performance (i.e., task 3 and 4). If
changes in tournament entry were solely driven by changes in the probability of winning, then
the two propensities to compete should coincide for the standard and AA tournaments.
1

1

0.8

0.8

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0

0
0 - 0.05

0.05 - 0.33 0.33 - 0.66
Men

0 - 0.05

0.66 - 1

0.05 - 0.33

0.33 - 0.66

0.66 - 1

Women
Women AA

Men AA

Panel (A)
Panel (B)
FIGURE II: Proportion of participants entering the standard or the AA tournament conditional
on probability of winning the tournament given ex-ante performance (task 2).48
Figure II shows that affirmative action reduces tournament entry by men beyond what is
warranted by changes in the probability of winning the tournament. The overreaction by
women appears even greater, as they are much more likely to compete under affirmative
action. This finding is confirmed by a probit regression of the decision to enter a tournament
on the probability of winning as well as an affirmative-action dummy (Table VI). For each
individual we use both the decision to enter the task-3 tournament, and the decision to enter the
task-4 AA tournament. We condition the tournament-entry decision on the probability
associated with winning the tournament in question and cluster on the participant to account
for the lack of independence between the two individual observations. If entry decisions by
women and men depend solely on the probability of winning the tournament, then the marginal
coefficient on the affirmative action dummy (AA) should be zero. Consistent with Figure II we

48

The bin size was chosen to secure similar numbers of participants in each bin. The number of individuals in
each bin is as follows: In panel A, in the standard tournament there are 13, 8, 8, and 13, in each of the four bins
with 13 in 0-0.05. In the AA tournament there are 13, 13, 7, and 9. In panel B, in the standard there are 15, 15, 6,
and 6, and in AA there are 11, 14, 9, and 8.

19

see that the effect of affirmative action on entry is negative for men, and positive for women.49
Similarly, as seen by the significant female and affirmative-action interaction in the pooled
regression, changes in the probability of winning do not fully account for the change in the
gender gap under affirmative action.
TABLE VI
PROBIT OF TOURNAMENT CHOICE
Female
Female*AA
AA
Prob. of Winning
Change in Prob. of Winning Tour. to PR
Observations

Task 2 Performance
Men
Women
All
-0.37
(0.00)
0.26
(0.00)
-0.29
0.51
-0.27
(0.01)
(0.00)
(0.01)
0.90
0.28
0.64
(0.00)
(0.28)
(0.00)
-0.35
0.30
-0.09
(0.22)
(0.25)
(0.61)
84
84
168

The table presents marginal effects evaluated at an individual (a man in the last column) in the standard
tournament, with a probability of winning of 0.33 and a change in the probability of winning of 0.16. We cluster
on participant to account for there being 2 observations for each of the 84 participants. p-values are in parenthesis.

V.B. Do Beliefs Explain Changes in Tournament Entry under AA?
In the standard tournament we found that conditional on optimal guessed rank, men were
significantly more optimistic about their relative performance than women, and this difference
helped explain the gender gap in tournament entry. If participants’ beliefs on winning are
similar in the AA and standard tournament then it is unlikely that beliefs will help explain the
response to affirmative action.
We first analyze beliefs on within-gender rankings in task-2. For women and men we
calculate the guess which would be money-maximizing given individual performance. Neither

49

The result is the same if we condition on the probability of winning after the entry decision, i.e., on task 3 and 4.
Both women and men improve their performance from task2 to task 4, however there is no gender difference in
the improvement (p = 0.95). The improvements in performance are 0.62 for women and 0.83 for men (matched
pair signrank tests p = 0.04 and 0.05 respectively). The improvement in performance does not vary by task-4
choice (p = 0.91 if enter, p = 0.36 if piece rate), nor is there a difference when conditioning on gender and task-4
choice (p ≥ 0.35). The improvement in performance is primarily driven by an increase in performance between
task 2 and 3. The improvement between task 3 and 4 is not significant and equals 0.12 for women and 0.14 for
men (matched pair signrank test yields p = 0.79 and 0.97, respectively). Neither men nor women who enter the
tournament have a significantly different improvement in performance in task 4 relative to task 3 (p ≥ 0.14).

20

women nor men seem overconfident. The distributions of guessed ranks within gender are not
significantly different from actual or optimal guessed rank (p = 0.60 and p = 0.21 for women,
and p = 0.45 and p = 0.45 for men, respectively).50 Ordered probit regressions confirm that the
guessed ranks within gender are correlated with optimal guesses, and that there is no gender
difference in beliefs on relative tournament performance within one’s gender. That is, women
seem as confident in their relative performance among women, as men do among men.51
While men are significantly more confident than women when assessing relative ability
in a mixed-gender group, there is no gender difference within gender. Figure III shows for each
optimal guessed rank the average guessed rank of women and men. Panel A shows the
rankings among all 6 participants, while Panel B shows rankings within one’s gender.
3

6
Men
Women

5

2

Actual

Actual

4
3

1

2

Men

1

Women

0

0

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

0

Optimal

1

2

3

Optimal

Panel (A)
Panel (B)
Figure III: Average guessed rank as a function of optimal tournament rank in the whole
group of 6 participants (A), and among group members of one’s gender (B).
To evaluate the impact of beliefs on the more gender-specific AA tournament, we
construct participants’ beliefs on whether they would have won the task-2 tournament under
AA rules (GuessAAWin). Recall that a woman wins the AA tournament if she is either the
best performing woman or among the two best performing participants in the group. A man, on
the other hand, wins the AA tournament if he is both the best performing man and among the
50

The actual rank corresponds to the highest actual rank possible in case of ties The distributions of optimal and
actual rank within gender do not differ (p = 0.74 for men and p = 1.0 for women).
51
An ordered probit regression of guessed rank on optimal rank within gender yields coefficients for men of 0.99
(p < 0.01), and 0.46 (p = 0.04) for women. Pooling all 42 women and 42 men yields coefficients of -0.04 on a
female dummy (p = 0.87), and 0.70 on optimal rank (p < 0.01).

21

top two performers overall. We compare GuessAAWin both to the actual outcomes as well as
to the belief on winning that is consistent with the participant’s optimal guessed rank. We refer
to this measure as OptimalGuessAAWin. Similar to our guessed-rank results within gender, for
GuessAAWin we find that neither women nor men are overconfident.52 Furthermore, we find
no gender differences in GuessAAWin when conditioning on OptimalGuessAAWin.53 This
result contrasts that of the standard tournament where conditional on OptimalGuessWin, men
are significantly more likely than women to believe that they will win. As expected we find
that relative to the standard tournament fewer men think that they will win the AA tournament,
whereas more women think they will win the AA tournament. Note however that this change is
only significant for men.54
To determine the impact of beliefs on changes in tournament entry under affirmative
action we condition on the guess-win measures, see Table VII. The advantage of using the
GuessWin measures is that it incorporates the differences between the standard and AA
tournament, and accounts for the gender specific incentives. Controlling for performance we
see in the first four columns that individuals who have beliefs consistent with winning are
more likely to enter the tournament, however in a two-sided test this effect is only significant
for women. Nonetheless, as seen by the coefficient on the AA dummy, for both men and
women, including beliefs on winning reduces the change in the propensity to enter a
tournament with affirmative action by about 20 percent.

52

On average the guessed AA win is not significantly different from actual AA win (p = 0.50 for men, and p =
0.51 for women), or the optimal guess AA win (p = 1.0 for men and p = 0.49 for women).
53
A probit regression of guess AA win for the 84 participants delivers the following marginal effects evaluated at
a man with an optimal guess of winning: 0.08 on female (p = 0.43); 0.40 on optimal guess AA win (p < 0.01).
Examining men and women separately yields coefficients on optimal guess AA win of 0.53 (p < 0.01) for men,
0.27 (p = 0.12) for women. Furthermore, there are no significant gender differences in distributions of optimal
guesses (p = 1.0), actual chances of winning (p = 0.65), nor guessed AA win (p = 0.66).
54
In the standard tournament 30 men (70%) guess they win the tournament, compared to 17 (40.5%) in the AA
tournament. The numbers for women are 15 (35.7%) in the standard and 20 (47.6%) in the AA tournament. The
marginal effects of a clustered probit regression of GuessWin (standard or AA) evaluated for someone in the
standard tournament who should optimally guess they win are for men: 0.40 (p < 0.01) on optimal guess and -0.15
(p < 0.01) on AA dummy. For women the coefficients are 0.36 (p = 0.03) and 0.08 (p = 0.10) respectively. A
pooled regression shows a significant gender difference in the response to affirmative action, the marginal
coefficient on a female and AA interaction is 0.06 (p = 0.00), when controlling for optimal guesses, AA and
female, and evaluating coefficients at a man in the standard tournament whose optimal belief is to win.

22

TABLE VII
PROBIT OF TOURNAMENT CHOICE
Men

Men

-0.29
(0.01)
0.90
(0.00)
-0.35
(0.22)

-0.23
(0.04)
0.70
(0.00)
-0.38
(0.15)
0.19
(0.16)
84

Women Women

Female
Female*AA
AA
Prob. Of Winning
Change Prob. Winning
Tour. To PR
GuessWin
Observations

84

0.51
(0.00)
0.28
(0.28)
0.30
(0.25)
84

0.40
(0.00)
0.06
(0.83)
0.23
(0.41)
0.38
(0.00)
84

All
-0.37
(0.00)
0.26
(0.00)
-0.27
(0.01)
0.64
(0.00)
-0.09
(0.61)
168

All
-0.29
(0.01)
0.18
(0.00)
-0.18
(0.07)
0.40
(0.00)
-0.15
(0.31)
0.27
(0.00)
168

The table presents marginal effects evaluated at an individual (a man in the last two columns), in the standard
tournament, with a 0.33 percent probability of winning and a change in the probability of winning of 0.16, with a
guess of winning (in columns 2, 4, and 6). We cluster on the participant to account for there being 2 observations
for each of the 84 participants. p-values are in parenthesis.

GuessWin is also significant in the pooled regression. Thus the change in the gender gap is in
part explained by men being overconfident about their relative performance in mixed-gender
groups, and less so in more gender-specific groups. However controlling for beliefs the
coefficient on the female and affirmative-action interaction remains significant, indicating that
changes in the gender gap in tournament entry under affirmative action is not fully explained.

V.C. Effects of Submitting the Piece-Rate Results
Next we examine the decisions to submit the piece rate to a standard or AA tournament. This
analysis helps determine whether merely mentioning affirmative action influences behavior,
and whether the response to affirmative action may result from the AA tournament requiring
performance in a more gender-specific competition.
We first compare the decisions to submit the piece rate to the standard versus the AA
tournament (task 5 vs. 6). Affirmative action will affect the decision to submit the piece rate
through changes in the probability of winning, differences in beliefs between mixed- versus
single-gender groups, and the effect of mentioning affirmative action. The probit regression in
table VIII shows that controlling both for beliefs and the probability of winning, the
introduction of affirmative action does not cause men to change their decision to submit a
piece-rate result to a tournament, the coefficient on the AA dummy is very small and at best
23

marginally significant. Women on the other hand are 28 percentage points more likely to
submit their piece-rate performance when we introduce affirmative action. In the pooled
analysis, the coefficient on the female and affirmative-action interaction is significant,
demonstrating that the gender gap in submitting the piece rate differs significantly between the
standard and AA tournament. These findings suggest that while simply mentioning affirmative
action does not affect men, it does affect women.
TABLE VIII
PROBIT OF SUBMITTING THE PIECE RATE
Men

Women

-0.04
(0.12)
0.04
(0.52)
0.83
(0.00)
84

0.28
(0.00)
0.35
(0.096)
0.55
(0.00)
84

Female
Female*AA
AA
Prob. of Winning
GuessWin
Observations

All
-0.17
(0.11)
0.10
(0.00)
-0.06
(0.17)
0.17
(0.06)
0.72
(0.00)
168

The marginal effects are evaluated at an individual (a man in the last column), in the standard tournament, with a
probability of winning of 0.33, with a guess of winning. We cluster on the participant to account for there being 2
observations for each of the 84 participants. p-values are in parenthesis.

Although the decisions to submit the piece rate and entering the tournament are very
similar the difference between them is that in the first case a tournament choice does not result
in a subsequent competitive performance. Thus the effect of affirmative action observed
between task 5 and 6 cannot be driven by participants having different attitudes toward
competing in groups where members of the opposite gender are more poorly represented. That
is, in contrast to the difference between task 3 and 4, changes in compensation choices between
task 5 and 6 cannot be explained by say women being more eager to compete in single- rather
than mixed-gender groups. To determine whether the effect of affirmative action in part is
explained by the competition being more gender specific, we use the task 5 and 6 decisions as
controls in the task 3 and 4 decisions.
Table IX examines changes in the decision to enter a tournament under affirmative
action, when we control for the probability of winning, beliefs, and the decision to submit the
piece-rate to a tournament. Conditioning on these factors affirmative action decreases the

24

probability that a man enters a tournament by 9 percentage points. This remaining effect may
represent the reduction in the thrill of competing against a group with greater male
representation. For women, the remaining effect of affirmative action is a 25 percentage point
increase in tournament entry. Pooling men and women we see that the decision to submit the
piece rate to the AA tournament helps explain the change in the gender gap, however the
female and affirmative action interaction remains significant. Thus the gender gap in
tournament entry differs significantly between the AA and standard tournament.55 We ascribe
this remaining difference to the competition being more gender specific under affirmative
action. Men may feel more pressure to compete when the fraction of male competitors
increase, whereas the fear of competing may diminish when women are in all female groups.
TABLE IX
PROBIT OF TOURNAMENT CHOICE
Men

Men

Men

-0.29
(0.01)
0.90
(0.00)
-0.35
(0.22)

-0.23
(0.04)
0.70
(0.00)
-0.38
(0.15)
0.19
(0.16)

84

84

-0.09
(0.09)
0.19
(0.01)
0.01
(0.92)
0.05
(0.39)
0.30
(0.00)
84

Women Women Women

Female
Female*AA
AA
Prob. Of Winning
Change Prob. Winning
Tour. To PR
GuessWin
Submit Piece Rate
Observations

0.51
(0.00)
0.28
(0.28)
0.30
(0.25)

0.40
(0.00)
0.06
(0.83)
0.23
(0.41)
0.38
(0.00)

84

84

0.25
(0.00)
-0.09
(0.71)
0.43
(0.11)
0.35
(0.01)
0.29
(0.07)
84

All
-0.37
(0.00)
0.26
(0.00)
-0.27
(0.01)
0.64
(0.00)
-0.09
(0.61)

All
-0.29
(0.01)
0.18
(0.00)
-0.18
(0.07)
0.40
(0.00)
-0.15
(0.31)
0.27
(0.00)

168

168

All
-0.18
(0.02)
0.07
(0.00)
-0.09
(0.11)
0.13
(0.03)
0.06
(0.42)
0.12
(0.02)
0.24
(0.00)
168

The marginal effects are evaluated at an individual (a man in the last three columns), in the standard tournament, with a
probability of winning of 0.33 and a change in the probability of winning of 0.16, who submitted the piece rate performance to
the tournament (columns 3, 6, and 9) with a guess of winning (columns 2, 3, 5, 6, 8, and 9). We cluster on the participant to
account for there being 2 observations for each of the 84 participants. p-values are in parenthesis.

55

The coefficient on the female-affirmative action interaction does not capture the change in the gender gap
between the standard and AA tournament. The change in the gender gap is given by [Pr(AA=1, F=1, AA·F=1;X) Pr(AA=1, F=0, AA·F=0;X)] – [Pr(AA=0, F=1, AA·F=0;X) - Pr(AA=0, F=0, AA·F=0;X)]. Conditioning only on
the probability of winning the change in the gap equals 0.76. The additional controls for beliefs and the decision
to submit the piece rate reduces the gap to 0.31, thus 41 percent of the change in the gap is not accounted for.

25

VI: HOW COSTLY IS AFFIRMATIVE ACTION
The primary objective of affirmative action is to secure that a more diverse pool of applicants
be selected as winners. The question of interest is how costly an improvement in diversity may
be. To evaluate the cost of affirmative action we start by examining the consequences on
earnings for the participants themselves. Since tournament entry is not payoff maximizing it is
not obvious who will and will not benefit from the requirement that women be at least equally
represented. We proceed by examining the effect affirmative action has on equity and on the
performance of the selected participants. Specifically we ask how much lower the performance
requirement will have to be for women, how many better performing men will have to be
passed by to secure equal representation, and in particular the extent to which affirmative
action will result in reverse discrimination. To answer these questions we will pay particular
attention to the effect affirmative action has on the quality and gender composition of the pool
of entrants.

VI.A. Consequences for Participants
Affirmative action affects individual payoffs through both institutional and behavioral changes,
that is, payoffs are influenced both by changes in the probability of winning and the resulting
changes in tournament entry. To decompose these two effects we compare the participant’s
expected earnings in the standard and AA tournament, as well as the earnings participants
would have made had they been subjected to the change in the probability of winning but not
changed their tournament-entry decisions. That is, we determine the expected earnings that
would result had individuals stuck by their standard-tournament entry decisions (task 3) and
been given the affirmative action probability of winning (task 4). The three expected payoff
measures are reported by gender in Table VII. As anticipated, affirmative action increases the
expected payoffs for women, while decreasing it for men. For women affirmative action
increases earnings from 6.8 to 8.4. However had their entry decisions into the AA tournament
been as those in the standard tournament, then the change in the probability of winning alone
would result in expected payoffs of 7.5. Thus 45 percent of the increase in payoffs to women is
accounted for by changes in the probability of winning, while the remainder results from
changes in their tournament entry. By comparison the decrease in payoffs of men, from 13.4 to
10.0, is primarily caused by changes in the probability of winning. Changes in the probability
26

of winning alone decrease payoffs to 10.5, thus accounting for 85 percent of the decrease. A
similar pattern is seen for the subgroup of participants who have higher expected earnings from
entering the AA tournament. Women in this group can attribute 75 percent of the increase in
payoffs to behavioral changes, while 70 percent of the decrease in payoffs for men is due to
changes in the probability of wining. Finally, men and women who in expectation are better off
not entering the AA tournament are slightly worse off under affirmative action. For women
this decrease in payoffs is driven by them making inferior tournament-entry decision under
affirmative action, whereas the behavior of men improves their earnings.

Participants
All

TABLE X
EXPECTED PAYOFFS
Prob. of winning Entry decision

Standard
Standard
AA
Standard
AA
AA
w/ positive exp. earnings from AA entry
Standard
Standard
AA
Standard
AA
AA
w/ negative exp. earnings from AA entry
Standard
Standard
AA
Standard
AA
AA

Men

Women

13.4
10.5
10.0

6.8
7.5
8.4

27.1
21.4
18.9

10.8
12.2
16.5

5.0
3.7
4.5

4.0
4.3
2.9

VI.B. Consequences for Performance and Equity
While it is clear that affirmative action by mere design results in greater diversity among the
winners, it is less clear how costly it will be for a firm to achieve this goal, nor is it clear how
inequitable the resulting outcome may be. If we view those who enter competitions as
applicants for jobs, and winners of the competition as those hired by the firm, then the costs of
affirmative action depend critically on how many better performing men a firm will have to
pass by to secure that women at least be equally represented. Passing by better performing
candidates will not only be inequitable, but also impose a cost on firms who no longer are able
to hire the best available candidates. To demonstrate these costs we examine the effect
affirmative action has on the performance threshold applicants have to reach to get hired by the
firm. Suppose a firm wants to hire say 20 applicants, then we ask what the minimum

27

performance threshold will be for applicants to be selected when equal representation of
women is or is not required. Crucial for determining these performance costs is the gender and
performance of those who enter the competition. Given changes in tournament entry there is
reason to believe that the anticipated performance costs calculated before the introduction of
affirmative action may differ substantially from those actually experienced.
1.0

60

0.8

50

0.6

40
30

0.4
Choice
AA

0.2
0.0

20

Choice

10

AA
0

-9

10-13

14-15

16+

6

minimum performance

8

10

12

14

16

18

20

minimum performance

Panel A: Proportion of participants at a given
performance who enter the tournament

Panel B: Number of entrants with
performance above a minimum threshold

Figure IV: Tournament Entry
To assess the performance costs associated with fulfilling the affirmative-action
requirement, we focus on the actual performances after the compensation choice. Since the
performance in task 4 is slightly higher than in task 3, we rely on the task-3 performance.56 We
start by examining how changes in tournament entry under affirmative action affect the
performance distributions of the pool of entrants. Figure IV Panel A shows the proportion of
people with a given task-3 performance who choose to enter the standard or AA tournament.
We see that affirmative action primarily increases entry for those who solve less than 14
problems, whereas there is little or no effect on entry for those with a performance of 14
problems or more.57 This finding is confirmed by Panel B, which shows the number of entrants
who have performances at or above a certain level. While the pool of entrants with a minimum
56

The results are similar when we use performances in task 2 or 4, or if we use performance in task-3 for entrants
in the standard tournament and in task-4 for entrants in the AA tournament. Given the higher task-4 performance
this later comparison would bias the results in favor of affirmative action.
57
Less than ten percent of participants solve more than 20 problems, thus we focus the analysis on groups with
minimum performances of 20 and below.

28

performance below 14 is greater under affirmative action, there is no change in the number of
entrants who have a minimum performance between 14 and 20.
Affirmative action changes both the performance distribution and the gender
composition of the pool of entrants. Figure V panel A shows the proportion of women among
entrants whose performance is at or above a specified performance level. While the number of
high-performing entrants is similar in the standard and AA tournament, the proportion of these
entrants who are female is very different. For example, of the entrants in the standard
tournament with a performance of 15 and higher only 26 percent are women, in contrast in the
AA tournament 50 percent of these entrants are women. This difference in gender composition
implies that when choosing participants with a performance of 15 and higher it will be costly to
fulfill the affirmative action requirement among entrants in the standard tournament, but not
when choosing among entrants in the AA tournament. Note that the same holds for entrants
with a performance of 16 or lower, while there is never an equal representation of women in
the standard tournament, at least 50 percent of these entrants are women in the AA tournament.
That is, ex-post the affirmative action requirement will not imply that more qualified men will
have to give way to less qualified women.
0.7

60

0.6

50

CH
CH w AA
AA
AA w AA

0.5
40

0.4
30

0.3
20

0.2
0.1

Choice
AA

10

0

0

6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20

6

Panel A: Proportion of entrants above a
minimum performance level who are
women in Choice (task-3) and AA (task-4)

7

8

9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20

Panel B: Number of entrants above a
minimum performance threshold in task-3
(CH), in task-3 with AA requirement of equal
representation of women (CH w AA), and for
task-4 without (AA) and with AA requirement
(AA w AA).

Figure V: Performance of Entrants

29

Figure V Panel B demonstrates the performance costs of affirmative action, when choosing
among entrants in the standard tournament (task-3) and in the AA tournament (task-4). For
each performance, say 15, panel B shows the number of entrants in the task-3 standard
tournament (CH) whose task-3 performance is 15 or higher, and similarly the number of
entrants in the task-4 AA tournament (AA) with a task-3 performance at or above this level.
Thus the CH and AA lines are identical to those of Panel B of Figure IV. In addition we also
show the number of people who can be hired among the entrants satisfying a given minimum
performance requirement, when there must be at least one woman for every man hired. For
entrants in task 3 this is shown by the CH w AA line. Given the few high-performing women
who enter the standard tournament, the enforcement of affirmative action implies that very few
participants of a given minimum performance can be hired among entrants in the standard
tournament. For example, for performances above 15, there are 23 entrants in the standard
tournament and 22 in the AA tournament. However, when we require that for every man one
woman has to be selected, then only 12 people can be hired among the standard entrants (in the
standard tournament there are only six female entrants with a performance of 15 and higher).
In contrast, all 22 entrants can be hired in the AA tournament (11 women have a performance
of 15 and higher). Furthermore, to hire another pair of entrants in the standard tournament
under the affirmative action rule, one has to lower the minimum performance requirement to
12 to add a woman, while passing by an additional 8 men with a higher performance. Using
instead entrants in the AA tournament the same requirement implies that no men of higher
performance are passed by to hire an additional woman. If we were to hire 22 entrants in the
standard tournament and fulfill the affirmative action requirement, then we would have to
lower the minimum acceptable performance threshold from 15 to 10.
While affirmative action in the standard tournament implies that many more qualified
men will be passed by to secure equal representation of women, such inequity does not arise
once affirmative action is introduced and the minimum requirement for performance is 16 or
less. This effect on reverse discrimination is further demonstrated in Figure VI, which shows
for each minimum performance level the number of better performing men that must be passed
by to secure that women be equally represented among those hired. The number of men
affected by reverse discrimination is demonstrated by CH w AA when relying on entry in the
standard tournament, and by AA w AA when relying on entry in the AA tournament.

30

20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2

CH w AA
AA w AA

0
6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20

minimum performance

Figure VI: Number of better performing men passed by to secure equal representation of
women given entry before AA (CH w AA) vs. after AA (AA w AA)
Based on tournament entry prior to the introduction of affirmative action we anticipate
substantial reverse discrimination. For example, returning to the case with a minimum
performance requirement of 15. We saw above that entry in the standard tournament would
enable us to hire 12 people under the affirmative action requirement. As shown by the CH w
AA line in Figure VI this implies that we would be passing by 6 men who have performances
in excess of the required minimum for women. The introduction of affirmative action however
cause women to be better represented among the set of applicants, and we would instead be
able to hire an equally representative pool of 22 people with a minimum performance of 15. As
demonstrated by Figure VI, entry in the AA tournament implies that the requirement of equal
representation does not cause better performing men to be passed by. Thus accounting for the
changes in tournament entry the experienced degree of reverse discrimination is much smaller
than anticipated.
The substantial difference between ex-post and ex-ante costs of affirmative action
implies that it may be very expensive, in terms of performance loss and reverse discrimination,
to apply the affirmative action rule ‘secretly’ or to introduce affirmative action after the
participants have decided to enter a standard tournament. Furthermore, perceived inequity and
performance costs may be vastly overestimated, if we fail to take into account that the pool of
entrants will change along with a well-announced introduction of affirmative action. As many
more women, and in particular many high-performing women, select to enter the AA
tournament the gender composition of tournament entrants is very different under affirmative
31

action. These changes in the entry pool imply that there are circumstances where it need not be
costly to secure a more diverse set of winners, certainly it may be much cheaper than suggested
by the pool of entrants into a standard tournament.

VII. CONCLUSION
This paper contributes to the literature that tries to understand why women are
underrepresented in many high-profile jobs and across whole professions. While
discrimination and gender differences in preferences and ability help explain this gender gap,
another explanation may be that men and women respond differently to competitive
environments (see Gneezy and Rustichini, 2005, Gupta, Poulsen and Villeval, 2005, and
Niederle and Vesterlund, 2007). Our study examines how and at what cost one can alter the
institution used to select winners to entice more women to compete. Specifically, we
investigate a quota-like affirmative action environment where we require that women be at
least equally represented among those hired. Our analysis provides a deeper understanding of
why women shy away from competition, and helps us understand which mechanisms we may
use to change this behavior. Furthermore, we are able to examine the performance costs and
reverse discrimination that may be associated with such an institutional change.
While affirmative action is expected to affect tournament entry through changes in the
probability of winning, other factors could influence entry. Decisions may change because we
mention affirmative action, and because the competition becomes more gender specific (e.g., a
woman wins as long as she is the best performing woman). A more gender-specific
competition can affect tournament entry by reducing gender differences in beliefs about
relative performance, as well as gender differences in the willingness to compete.
We find that affirmative action causes a large increase in the tournament entry by
women and a decrease in the entry by men. This change in behavior is not fully accounted for
by changes in the probability in winning, rather the factors listed above all help explain why
the gender gap in tournament entry differs under affirmative action.
Our experimental design allows us to characterize how the composition of the applicant
pool changes with affirmative action. Replicating the finding that women shy away from
competition, we find that prior to affirmative action only few high-performing women choose

32

to compete. As a result, only rarely does a woman succeed in winning the tournament.58 Using
this initial applicant pool the requirement that at least one woman must be hired for every man
implies that very few participants can be hired when a specific minimum standard of
performance has to be reached. This implies that to hire the same number of people the
minimum performance standard has to be lowered substantially. Based on entry in the standard
tournament the under representation of women causes affirmative action to be very costly as
many more qualified men would have to be passed by to secure equal representation of
women. The expected costs of affirmative action would still be substantial if the response to
the institutional change only results from changes in the probability of winning. However, as
mentioned above, we show that the introduction of affirmative action causes a response which
is greater than that predicted by the probability of winning alone. While some high-performing
men drop out of the competition, many women come in, and the overall number of highperforming participants in the entry pool is barely affected. This change in the gender
composition of the applicant pool causes the ex post performance costs of affirmative action to
be substantially smaller than those predicted ex ante.
Research on affirmative action has primarily focused on examining the consequences
of changing the demand side of the market (see e.g. Coate and Loury, 1993, Fryer and Loury,
2005, and Holzer and Neumark, 2000, for an overview). That is, the focus has been on
determining the consequences for diversity, performance, and reverse discrimination of
altering the rules for admission and hiring. We show that in assessing the costs of affirmative
action we need to also account for the indirect effects that occur through self selection into
competitions.59 Specifically, we demonstrate that the effects of affirmative action on the set of
applicants may be very large when entry decisions are not payoff maximizing. If we do not
account for such changes in behavior we will exaggerate the costs of affirmative action.

58

Note that this gender difference arises in the absence of any discrimination.
While most affirmative action studies examine the direct effect on those admitted under the program, a few
studies also account for the indirect effects on applicants. Long (2004) and Card and Krueger (2004) examine how
the elimination of affirmative action in California and Texas influenced college applications. Long (2004) finds
that fewer minority students send their SAT scores to top tier colleges, while Card and Krueger (2005) show that
the policy does not influence the decisions of highly qualified minorities. Since the UC and UT systems rely on
percentage rules whereby the top 4 vs. 10 percent of any graduating high school class are guaranteed admission,
these analyses unfortunately do not enable us to determine if absent such programs we may observe ‘sub-optimal’
application decisions from highly qualified applicants.

59

33

References:
Altonji, Joseph G., and Rebecca Blank "Race and Gender in the Labor Market." Handbook of
Labor Economics, eds. O. Ashenfelter and D. Card, eds., Volume 3c Elsevier Science
B.V., 1999, 3144-3259.
Ander, Richard, Gender and Jobs: Sex Segregation of Occupations in the World, International
Labor Office: Geneva, 1998.
Andreoni, James, and Lise Vesterlund, “Which is the Fair Sex: Gender Differences in
Altruism,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXVI, 2001, 293 – 312.
Babcock, Linda and Sara Laschever, Women Don’t Ask: Negotiation and the Gender Divide,
Princeton University Press, September 2003.
Black, Sandra, and Philip E. Strahan, “The Division of Spoils: Rent-Sharing and
Discrimination in a Regulated Industry,” American Economic Review, XCI, 2001, 814–
831.
Blau, Francine D., and Lawrence M. Kahn, “The US Gender Pay Gap in the 1990s: Slowing
Convergence,” NBER working paper 10853, 2004.
Bertrand, Marianne and Kevin F. Hallock, “The Gender Gap in Top Corporate Jobs.”
Industrial and Labor Relations Review, LV, 2001, 3-21.
Beyer, Sylvia, “Gender Differences in the Accuracy of Self-Evaluations of Performance,”
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, LIX, 1990, 960 – 970.
Beyer, Sylvia, and Edward M. Bowden, “Gender Differences in Self-Perceptions: Convergent
Evidence From Three Measures of Accuracy and Bias,” Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin, XXIII, 1997, 157 - 172.
Byrnes, James P., David C. Miller, and William D. Schafer, “Gender Differences in Risk
Taking: A Meta-Analysis,” Psychological Bulletin, LXXV, 1999, 367-383.
Campbell, Anne, A Mind of Her Own: The Evolutionary Psychology of Women (Oxford, UK:
Oxford University Press, 2002).
Card, David and Alan B. Krueger, “Would the Elimination of Affirmative Action Affect
Highly Qualified Minority Applicants? Evidence from California and Texas.”
Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 58(3), 2005, 416-434.
Coate, S. and Glenn C. Loury, “Will Affirmative-Action Policies Eliminate Negative
Stereotypes?” American Economic Review, 83, 1993, 1220-1240.
Croson, Rachel and Uri Gneezy, “Gender differences in preferences,” working paper, 2004.
Daly, Martin, and Margo Wilson, Sex, Evolution, and Behavior, 2nd ed. (Belmont, CA:
Wadsworth Publishing Company, 1983)
DellaVigna, Stefano, Ulrike Malmendier, and Lise Vesterlund, “How Robust is Overconfidence? The Effect of Noisy and Non-Noisy Signals” in progress.
Dweck, Carol S., Self-Theories: Their Role in Motivation, Personality, and Development,
2000, Psychology Press, Philadelphia.
Eckel, Catherine C. and Philip J. Grossman, 2002a, “Sex and Risk: Experimental Evidence,”
forthcoming, Handbook of Experimental Economics Results, Amsterdam, Elsevier
Science, North-Holland.
Eckel, Catherine, and Philip J. Grossman, 2002b, “Differences in the Economic Decisions of
Men and Women: Experimental Evidence.” Forthcoming in Handbook of Experimental
Results, edited by C. Plott and V. Smith. New York, Elsevier.
Fischbacher, Urs (2007), “z-Tree: Zurich Toolbox for Ready-made Economic experiments,”
Experimental Economics, 10(2), 171-178.
34

Fryer, Roland G. Jr, and Glenn C. Loury, “Affirmative Action and Its Mythology”, The
Journal of Economic Perspectives, Summer 2005.
Gneezy, Uri, Kenneth Leonard, and John List, “Gender Differences in Competition: The Role
of Socialization,” 2006, working paper.
Gneezy, Uri, Muriel Niederle, and Aldo Rustichini, “Performance in Competitive
Environments: Gender Differences,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, August 2003, p.
1049-1074.
Gneezy, Uri and Aldo Rustichini, “Executive versus Teachers: Gender, Competition and SelfSelection”, November 2005, working paper.
Goldin, Claudia, and Cecilia Rouse, “Orchestrating Impartiality: The Impact of “Blind”
Auditions on Female Musicians,” American Economic Review, XL, 2000, 715–742.
Grusky, David B. and England, Paula, Occupational Ghettos, 2004, Stanford University Press:
California.
Gupta, Nabanita Datta, Anders Poulsen and Marie-Claire Villeval, “Male and Female
Competitive Behavior – Experimental Evidence”, November 2005, GATE working
paper, Ecully, France.
Harwarth, Irene, Mindi Maline, and Elizabeth DeBra, “Women’s Colleges in the United States:
History, Issues, and Challenges,” Office of Educational Research and Improvement at
the U. S. Department of Education report, 1997.
Hewlett, Sylvia Ann and Carolyn Buck Luce “Off Ramps and On-Ramps, Keeping Talented
Women on the Road to Success,” Harvard Business Review, March 2005.
Holzer, Harry, and David Neumark, “Assessing Affirmative Action,” Journal of Economic
Literature, 2000, 483-568.
Lichtenstein, Sarah, Baruch Fischhoff, and Lawrence Phillips, “Calibration and Probabilities:
The State of the Art to 1980”, in Judgment Under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases,
Daniel Kahneman, Paul Slovic and Amos Tversky, eds., (Cambridge University Press:
1982).
Long, Mark C., “College Applications and the Effect of Affirmative Action.” Journal of
Econometrics, 121 (1-2), July-August 2004, 319-342.
Niederle, Muriel and Lise Vesterlund, “Do Women Shy Away From Competition? Do Men
Compete Too Much?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2007, 122, 3, 1067-1101.
Niederle, Muriel, Carmit Segal, and Lise Vesterlund, “Can Changing the Prizes Affect Gender
Gaps in Competitive Task Selection? An Experimental Approach” in progress.
Page, Scott E., The Difference: How the Power of Diversity Creates Better Groups, Firms,
Schools, and Societies, Princeton University Press, 2007.
Roberts, Tomi-Ann and Susan Nolen-Hoeksama, “Sex Differences in Reactions to Evaluative
Feedback”, Sex Roles, 1989, Vol.21, Nos11/12, 725-747.
Ruble, Diane N., Carol L. Martin, and Sheri A. Berenbaum, “Gender Development,” in
Handbook of Child Psychology, 6th ed., William Damon and Richard M. Lerner, eds.
(New York: Wiley, 2006), Vol. 3, Chapter 14, pp. 858–932.
Solnick, Sara J., “Changes in Women’s Majors from Entrance to Graduation at Women’s and
Coeducational Colleges,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 1995, XLVIII, 505–
514.
Steele, Claude M., “A Threat in the Air: How Stereotypes Shape Intellectual Identity and
Performance,” American Psychologist, LII, 1997, 613 – 629.

35

Weeden, Kim A. “Profiles of Change: Sex Segregation in the United States, 1910-2000.” in
Occupational Ghettos, by Maria Charles and David Grusky. Stanford: Stanford
University Press, 2004, 131-78.

36

INSTRUCTIONS
WELCOME
In the experiment today you will be asked to complete six different tasks. None of these will
take more than 5 minutes. At the end of the experiment you will receive $5 for having
completed the experiment. In addition, we will randomly select one of the tasks and pay you
based on your performance in that task. Once you have completed the six tasks we determine
which task counts for payment by drawing a number between 1 and 6. The method we use to
determine your earnings varies across tasks. Before each task we will describe in detail how
your payment is determined.
Your total earnings from the experiment are the sum of your payment for the randomly
selected task, your $5 payment for completing the experiment, and a $10 show up fee. At the
end of the experiment you will be asked to come to the side room where you will be paid in
private.
Task 1 – Piece Rate
For Task 1 you will be asked to calculate the sum of five randomly chosen two-digit numbers.
You will be given 5 minutes to calculate the correct sum of a series of these problems. You
cannot use a calculator to determine this sum, however you are welcome to write the numbers
down and make use of the provided scratch paper. You submit an answer by clicking the
submit button with your mouse. When you enter an answer the computer will immediately tell
you whether your answer is correct or not. Your answers to the problems are anonymous.
If Task 1 is the one randomly selected for payment, then you get 50 cents per problem you
solve correctly in the 5 minutes. Your payment does not decrease if you provide an incorrect
answer to a problem. We refer to this payment as the piece rate payment.
Please do not talk with one another for the duration of the experiment. If you have any
questions, please raise your hand.
ARE THERE ANY QUESTIONS BEFORE WE BEGIN?
Task 2 – Tournament
As in Task 1 you will be given 5 minutes to calculate the correct sum of a series of five 2 digit
numbers. However for this task your payment depends on your performance relative to that of
a group of other participants. Each group consists of six people, 3 men and 3 women. The five
other members of your group are located in the same row as you, that is, you are paired with
the people sitting in front of you and those sitting behind you.
If Task 2 is the one randomly selected for payment, then your earnings depend on the number
of problems you solve compared to the five other people in your group. The two individuals
who correctly solve the largest number of problems will receive $1.5 per correct problem,
while the other participants receive no payment. We refer to this as the tournament payment. If
37

there are ties the winner will be randomly determined. You will not be informed of how you
did in the tournament until all six tasks have been completed.
Please do not talk with one another. If you have any questions, please raise your hand.
ARE THERE ANY QUESTIONS BEFORE WE BEGIN?
Task 3 – Choice
As in the previous two tasks you will be given 5 minutes to calculate the correct sum of a
series of five 2-digit numbers. However, you now have to choose which payment scheme you
want for your performance on the third task. You can either choose to be paid according to the
piece rate, or according to the tournament.
If Task 3 is the one randomly selected for payment, then your earnings for this task are
determined as follows. If you choose piece rate you receive 50 cents per problem you solve
correctly. If you choose tournament your performance will be evaluated relative to the
performance of the other five participants of your group in the Task 2-tournament. Task 2tournament is the task you just completed. If you correctly solve more problems than 4
participants did in the task 2-tournament, then you receive three times the payment from the
piece rate, that is, $1.5 per correct problem. That is, at most only one participant in your group
can have a higher task 2-tournament performance than your task-3 performance. Otherwise,
you receive no earnings for this task. If there are ties, then the ranking is determined randomly.
Remember, your group consists of all individuals that sit in the same row as yourself. Every
group has 3 men and 3 women. You will not be informed of how you did in the tournament
until all six tasks have been completed.
The next computer screen will ask you to choose whether you want the piece rate or the
tournament applied to your performance. You will then be given 5 minutes to calculate the
correct sum of a series of five randomly chosen two-digit numbers.
Please do not talk with one another. If you have any questions, please raise your hand.
ARE THERE ANY QUESTIONS BEFORE WE BEGIN?
Affirmative-Action Tournament
Before we start the next task we explain the rules of an affirmative-action tournament. In an
affirmative-action tournament the winners are determined as follows. One winner will be the
best performing woman in a group. The other winner is the best performing individual among
the rest of the group members (i.e., excluding the best performing woman).
Let us look at a concrete example that illustrates how the winners in an affirmative-action
tournament are determined. We order the group members within each gender according to their

38

performance such that w1 is the best performing woman, w2 is the second best performing
woman, etc. We order the men in a similar manner, i.e., m1 is the best performing man, m2 is
the second best performing man, etc. The best performing woman, w1, is always one of the
two winners in the affirmative-action tournament. To determine the second winner we need to
find out who is the best performing individual among the remaining members of the group
(i.e., all group members excluding w1). Since there is going to be only one other winner it can
only be w2 or m1. Thus, if the performance of w2 is higher than the performance of m1, then
she is the second winner. If w2 performed worse than m1, then m1 is the second winner.
To summarize a woman will win an affirmative-action tournament if she is the best performing
woman or if she is among the two best performing individuals in the group. A man wins an
affirmative-action tournament if he is the best performing man and if he is among the two best
performing individuals in the group. Thus there is at least one woman and at most one man
among the winners in an affirmative-action tournament.
NEXT PAGE
Task 4 – Choice II
As in the previous three tasks you will be given 5 minutes to calculate the correct sum of a
series of five 2-digit numbers. Again, you now have to choose which payment scheme you
want for your performance on the fourth task. You can either choose to be paid according to
the piece rate, or according to the affirmative-action tournament.
If Task 4 is the one randomly selected for payment, then your earnings for this task are
determined as follows. If you choose the piece rate you receive 50 cents per problem you solve
correctly. If you choose the affirmative-action tournament your performance will be evaluated
relative to the performance of other participants in your group in the Task 2-tournament. Task
2-tournament is the second task you completed. The instructions for women are that you
receive $1.5 per correct problem if (1) you correctly solve more problems than 4 participants
did in the task 2-tournament, or (2) you correctly solve more problems than the other 2 women
did in the task 2-tournament. Otherwise, you receive no earnings for this task. The instructions
for men are that you receive $1.5 per correct problem if (1) you correctly solve more problems
than 4 participants did in the task 2-tournament, and (2) you correctly solve more problems
than the other 2 men did in the task 2-tournament. Otherwise, you receive no earnings for this
task. For both, women and men, if there are ties, then the ranking is determined randomly.
Remember, your group consists of all individuals that sit in the same row as yourself. Every
group has 3 men and 3 women. You will not be informed of how you did in the tournament
until all six tasks have been completed.
The next computer screen will ask you to choose whether you want the piece rate or the
affirmative-action tournament applied to your performance. You will then be given 5 minutes
to calculate the correct sum of a series of five randomly chosen two-digit numbers.
Please do not talk with one another. If you have any questions, please raise your hand.

39

ARE THERE ANY QUESTIONS BEFORE WE BEGIN?
Task 5 – Submit Piece Rate
You do not have to add any numbers for the fifth task of the experiment. Instead you may be
paid one more time for the number of problems you solved in the Task 1. However, you now
have to choose which payment scheme you want applied to the number of problems you solved
in Task 1-Piece Rate. You can either choose to be paid according to the piece rate, or
according to the tournament.
If the fifth task is the one selected for payment, then your earnings for this task are determined
as follows. If you choose the piece rate you receive 50 cents per problem you solved in Task 1.
If you choose the tournament your performance will be evaluated relative to the performance
of the other five participants of your group in the Task 1-piece rate. If you correctly solved
more problems than 4 participants did in the task 1-piece rate, then you receive three times the
payment from the piece rate, that is, $1.5 per correct problem. That is, at most only one
participant in your group can have a higher task 1 performance than you. Otherwise, you
receive no earnings for this task. If there are ties, then the ranking is determined randomly.
Remember, your group consists of all individuals that sit in the same row as yourself. Every
group has 3 men and 3 women. You will not be informed of how you did in the tournament
until all six tasks have been completed.
The next computer screen will tell you how many problems you correctly solved in Task 1, and
will ask you to choose whether you want the piece rate or the tournament applied to your
performance.
Please do not talk with one another. If you have any questions, please raise your hand.
ARE THERE ANY QUESTIONS BEFORE WE BEGIN?
Task 6 – Submit Piece Rate II
You do not have to add any numbers for the sixth and final task of the experiment. Instead you
may be paid one more time for the number of problems you solved in the Task 1. However,
you now have to choose which payment scheme you want applied to the number of problems
you solved in Task 1. You can either choose to be paid according to the piece rate, or
according to the affirmative-action tournament.
If the sixth task is the one selected for payment, then your earnings for this task are determined
as follows. If you choose the piece rate you receive 50 cents per problem you solved in Task 1.
If you choose the affirmative-action tournament your performance will be evaluated relative to
the performance of other participants in your group in Task 1-piece rate. The instructions for
women are that you receive $1.5 per correct problem if (1) you correctly solved more problems

40

than 4 participants did in the task 1-piece rate, or (2) you correctly solved more problems than
the other 2 women did in the task 1-piece rate. Otherwise, you receive no earnings for this task.
The instructions for men are that you receive $1.5 per correct problem if (1) you correctly
solved more problems than 4 participants did in the task 1-piece rate, and (2) you correctly
solved more problems than the other 2 men did in the task 1-piece rate. Otherwise, you receive
no earnings for this task. For both, women and men, if there are ties, then the ranking is
determined randomly.
Remember, your group consists of all individuals that sit in the same row as yourself. Every
group has 3 men and 3 women. You will not be informed of how you did in the tournament
until all six tasks have been completed.
The next computer screen will tell you how many problems you correctly solved in Task 1, and
will ask you to choose whether you want the piece rate or the tournament applied to your
performance.
Please do not talk with one another. If you have any questions, please raise your hand.
ARE THERE ANY QUESTIONS BEFORE WE BEGIN?

41

