                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        THE RETIREMENT CONSUMPTION PUZZLE:
                       ACTUAL SPENDING CHANGE IN PANEL DATA

                                          Michael D. Hurd
                                         Susann Rohwedder

                                        Working Paper 13929
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13929


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2008




Research support from the Social Security Administration via a grant to the Michigan Retirement Research
Center (UM04-13) and from the National Institute on Aging (P01- AG008291 and P30-AG12815)
is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Michael D. Hurd and Susann Rohwedder. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
The Retirement Consumption Puzzle: Actual Spending Change in Panel Data
Michael D. Hurd and Susann Rohwedder
NBER Working Paper No. 13929
April 2008
JEL No. D91,J26

                                            ABSTRACT

The simple one-good model of life-cycle consumption requires that consumption be continuous over
retirement; yet prior research based on partial measures of consumption or on synthetic panels indicates
that spending drops at retirement, a result that has been called the retirement-consumption puzzle.
Using panel data on total spending, nondurable spending and food spending, we find that spending
declines at small rates over retirement, at rates that could be explained by mechanisms such as the
cessation of work-related expenses, unexpected retirement due to a health shock or by the substitution
of time for spending. In the low-wealth population where spending did decline at higher rates, the
main explanation for the decline appears to be a high rate of early retirement due to poor health. We
conclude that at the population level there is no retirement consumption puzzle in our data, and that
in subpopulations where there were substantial declines, conventional economic theory can provide
the main explanation.


Michael D. Hurd
RAND Corporation
1776 Main Street
Santa Monica, CA 90407
and NBER
mhurd@rand.org

Susann Rohwedder
RAND
1776 Main Street
P.O. Box 2138
Santa Monica, CA 90407
susannr@rand.org
1. Introduction
       The simple one-good model of life-cycle consumption requires “consumption

smoothing:” the trajectory of consumption by an individual should be continuous in time.

If the trajectory is not continuous, a reallocation of consumption so as to reduce the size

of the discontinuity will increase lifetime utility without an increase in the use of

resources. However, British households apparently reduce consumption at the ages

associated with retirement, and the reduction cannot be explained by the life-cycle model

(Banks, Blundell and Tanner, 1998). Households in the Panel Study of Income

Dynamics (PSID) sharply reduced several components of consumption at retirement

(Bernheim, Skinner and Weinberg, 2001). Because the mechanisms underlying this

observed drop in consumption at retirement are not well understood, it has been referred

to as the retirement-consumption puzzle.

       There are a number of interpretations or explanations for this drop. The most

obvious has to do with the cessation of work-related expenses, but it appears that such

expenses are not large enough to explain the observed drop in consumption at retirement

(Banks, Blundell and Tanner). A second explanation, which is emphasized by Bernheim,

Skinner and Weinberg, is that workers do not adequately foresee the decline in income

associated with retirement. On reaching retirement they assess their financial resources,

and, finding them less than anticipated, reduce consumption. This interpretation is

damaging to the life-cycle model, which assumes that economic agents are forward-

looking planners. For most workers, retirement is a predicable event, and workers should

be assessing continuously their financial situation so that they will not be surprised. They

should have saved enough so that they would not have to reduce consumption at

retirement.
       A third interpretation is that workers under-saved but they were aware they had

under-saved: they were not surprised by the inadequacy of their resources. A lack of self

control caused the under-saving and the decline in income forced them to reduce

consumption. This interpretation is also damaging to the life-cycle model, which

assumes that people are both forward-looking and that they follow through on their

(optimal) plans. A fourth interpretation is that the timing of retirement is uncertain.

Some workers retire earlier than anticipated because of a health event or unemployment,

resulting in an unexpected reduction in lifetime resources, and the reduction leads to a

concurrent reduction in consumption. Such a reduction in consumption is well within the

spirit of the life-cycle model. A final explanation is that retired households have

considerably more leisure than working households. The increased leisure can be used to

purchase goods more efficiently or to substitute home-produced goods for purchased

goods. In this interpretation, spending declines, but actual consumption does not. We

note, however, that the increased leisure time could also lead to increases in purchased

goods because of complementarities such as spending on travel. If some uses of time are

substitutes for market-purchased goods and some are complements, the overall effect is

an empirical matter, but we would expect consumption to change at retirement, not that it

be smooth.

       The ideal data to study the retirement consumption puzzle are panel data on total,

non-durable and food spending with a sufficient number of individuals who transition

into retirement. Further, to shed direct evidence on mechanisms of potential spending

changes one would need information for the same individuals on relevant covariates such

as income before and after retirement, time use, health status and financial planning
horizon. To our knowledge this paper is the first to provide evidence about the

retirement-consumption puzzle based on such data.

         Our main finding, based on panel data on spending before and after retirement, is

that as calculated by the difference between pre- and post-retirement spending, spending

declines at a small rate, 1% to 6% depending on the measure.1 We cannot reject the

hypothesis of no change in spending, and the 95% confidence intervals do not cover large

changes. A change of these magnitudes could plausibly be due to the cessation of work-

related expenses, a loss of earnings due to early retirement in response to a health shock,

by the use of time to economize on spending, or by a combination of these factors.

         We analyze spending change as a function of pre-retirement wealth. In the upper

half of the distribution spending was either constant or it increased. In the low wealth

population a lack of wealth may require a decline in spending to meet the intratemporal

budget constraint and, indeed, we found declines in the lower half of the wealth

distribution. However, the decline was a surprise only in the lowest wealth quartile: in

the second quartile it was fully anticipated. The apparent explanation for most of the

decline in the lowest quartile was unanticipated early retirement associated with poor

health. A lack of forward planning made a relatively minor contribution to the decline.

The number of hours spent in activities that could be complementary to spending, and,

hence, reduce spending increased substantially. However, the increase was small in the

lowest wealth quartile apparently because of health limitations, and apparently those



1
  While we recognize the distinction between consumption and spending, mostly we will use them
interchangeably. In practice the empirical results in the literature are based either on food spending or
nondurable spending, both of which should be approximately the same as consumption of those items
because spending and consumption are almost simultaneous.
limitations put restrictions on the types of activities that could be performed after

retirement.

           We conclude that these data do not support a retirement-consumption puzzle at

the population level. In subpopulations where spending does decline at larger rates, the

main explanation seems to be early retirement associated with poor health. We found

little support for an explanation based on a lack of forward-looking planning.

An increase in available time could, in principle, lead to an increase in spending, and we

found that spending did increase substantially in the highest wealth quartile. An

unanswered research question concerns the complementarity or substitutability between

time and categories of spending.

2. Prior Literature

           The literature on this topic began with Banks, Blundell and Tanner (1998) who

found that at ages associated with retirement spending declined more rapidly than could

be explained by a simple life-cycle model.2 Their study is based on nondurable

consumption in synthetic panel in the U.K. Family Expenditure Survey. They interpret

the drop to be the result of “unanticipated shocks occurring around the time of retirement

(p. 784)” such as an over-estimate of pension income. According to Bernheim, Skinner

and Weinberg spending on consumption as approximated by spending on food and the

rental value of the residence declined sharply at retirement in the Panel Study of Income

Dynamics (PSID): the two-year change in log consumption following retirement

averaged –0.14 with the greatest decline among households in the lowest income or

wealth quartile. Bernheim, Skinner and Weinberg interpret the decline in those two

2
    See Hurst (2008) for a detailed review of the literature on this topic.
spending categories (as well as patterns of wealth holdings) to be evidence against

models of behavior in which agents are rational and forward-looking. “If households

follow heuristic rules of thumb to determine saving prior to retirement, and if they take

stock of their financial situation and make adjustments at retirement (so that the adequacy

of saving is “news”), then one would expect to observe the patterns documented in this

paper (p. 855).” If these interpretations of the retirement-consumption puzzle are correct,

they cast doubt on models of rational forward-looking economic behavior such as the

life-cycle model.

         Lower spending by those of retirement age in synthetic panel is also found by

Miniaci et al. (2007) and Battistin et al. (2007) in the Italian Survey on Family Budgets,

and for the U.S. by Aguiar and Hurst (2007a), Fisher et al. (2005) and Laitner and

Silverman (2005), all based on the Consumer Expenditure Survey (CEX). Even though

the latter three studies for the U.S. use the same data they report estimates for the decline

in spending at retirement that vary widely: Laitner and Silverman find a 16 percent drop,

while Fisher et al. find a much smaller decline of 5.9 percent in median food spending,

and even smaller in total spending (2.5 percent, Table 6 of Fisher et al.)). Aguiar and

Hurst also document a more moderate decline in non-durable spending plus housing

services and stress that once spending on food, clothing and non-durable transportation

are excluded they actually show an increase in expenditures of six percent.3 An

important caveat of synthetic cohort studies is the challenge of separating out cohort and

age effects from a time series of cross sections (Blau, 2007).


3
  Aguiar and Hurst compare spending of people in their early 60s with that of people of the same cohort in
their late 60s. Over a period of five to seven years consumption is predicted to change due to two
additional factors over and beyond retirement, which are differential mortality and life-cycle effects from
having lived additional periods.
       However, more importantly for this paper is that synthetic cohort studies do not

allow the investigation of the distribution of spending changes, and the discovery of the

households that experienced the greatest declines in spending.

       Investigations of food spending in true panel have sometimes corroborated the

results of Bernheim, Skinner and Weinberg, but not universally. Smith (2006) divided

retirees as observed in the British Household Panel Survey into two groups: voluntary

and involuntary retirees where the latter group comprises about 20 percent of the

analytical sample and whose retirement was often associated with unemployment or poor

health. For them Smith estimated a decline in food spending of about 11 percent at

retirement while the effect for those who retired as planned was small and not significant.

The involuntary retirees likely suffered a wealth shock due to early retirement and so

would be expected to reduce spending within the framework of the life-cycle model.

These findings suggest that any unexplained decline in food spending at retirement is

fairly small and not the norm in the U.K. population.

       Haider and Stephens (2007) found in the PSID and in the Retirement History

Survey that people reduce spending on food when they retire by about 5-10% depending

on the specification. In the Health and Retirement Study they found no reduction, and

there is no apparent explanation for this difference. Haider and Stephens address the

issue of the effect of unexpected retirement on food spending by asking whether the

decline could be explained by the difference between expected and actual retirement.

Controlling for the difference between them, they find that the decline in food spending is

reduced by about one third, still leaving an unexplained reduction.
        Aguiar and Hurst (2005) used the Continuing Survey of Food Intake of

Individuals, collected by the U.S. Department of Agriculture, to study the fine details of

food consumption as well as on food spending. They found that although spending on

food declines at retirement, actual consumption as measured by caloric or vitamin intake,

or by the quality of food did not decline. Their interpretation is that the extra leisure

associated with retirement is used to produce the same food consumption levels but using

smaller inputs of market purchased goods. To validate this interpretation, they used

scanner data and found that actual prices paid are indeed lower among those aged 65 or

over than among those 40-65 (Aguiar and Hurst, 2007b).4 Apparently, retirees use time

to shop more effectively, permitting a reduction in actual spending for the same

purchases.

        An entirely different approach to the retirement-consumption puzzle is via

simulation of a life-cycle model. If the model allows nonseparability between leisure and

consumption, then it will, of course, cause a discontinuous change in consumption when

hours of work change discontinuously.5 But even when leisure and consumption are

separable, uncertainty can lead to a decline in consumption at retirement as in the model

of Blau (2007). The explanation is that a negative shock, say, to health will lead to

unexpected early retirement for some and, therefore, to an unexpected decline in lifetime

resources. The discontinuous decline in resources causes a discontinuous decline in

consumption. Blau studies the resulting distribution of consumption changes in a model



4
  Scanner data are records of actual purchases by households. The purchase codes are linked to price
information at the store of purchase. The households are surveyed about demographics and income among
other data items.
5
  See French (2005) for a demonstration of the importance of non-separability of consumption and leisure
in explaining the drop in consumption at retirement in a model with uncertainty when hours of work are
continuous.
calibrated to HRS data and finds that the median change in consumption is zero and the

“mean change in log consumption associated with exit from employment is negative at

almost all ages, and is between zero and -.03 at the typical ages of retirement in the early

60s.” (p.21)

       Our summary of these papers is that, as assessed in synthetic panels, there is a

decline on average in spending at retirement. But the magnitude of the estimated decline

for the U.S. varies between very small as in Fisher et al. (2005) to much larger as in

Laitner and Silverman (2005) and others. Thus the decline needs to be validated in actual

panel data.

       The interpretation of the decline in synthetic panel depends on the distribution of

the declines in the population: at the extremes, the average could be due to a few

households having very large declines, or it could be due to all households having

approximately the average decline. The explanation for the latter could be a widespread

lack of forward-looking behavior, work-related expenses, substitution of leisure for

spending or similar mechanisms, whereas the former would suggest costly low

probability risks. However synthetic panel cannot shed light on this issue because it does

not track individuals and it cannot associate any decline with personal and financial

characteristics such as health and wealth. Finally, these papers do not address the issue

of whether any spending changes were anticipated, which could be an important part of

the retirement-consumption puzzle.

       Food spending as observed in panel declines at retirement but not over all

populations at all times. An unanswered question is what causes the difference in

measurement. This question is particularly relevant for the comparison between the HRS
and PSID in Haider and Stephens (2007). In one comparison, the sample period is

approximately the same: 1991-1999 for the PSID and 1992-1996 for the HRS. The

question formats are similar in both surveys and both surveys are said to be population

representative. Yet the log change in food spending at retirement is –0.089 (with

standard error of 0.043) in the PSID and 0.005 (0.024) in the HRS.6

           In this paper we will present evidence on the retirement consumption puzzle

based on panel data using a comprehensive measure of spending for the same people

observed retiring during the survey period. Two studies have performed a similar

exercise. Christensen (2004) used Spanish panel data in which households were

observed for 5 to 8 consecutive quarters. Investigating budget shares she found no

evidence of a drop in consumption at retirement in any of the commodity groups. But

she did not find any drop in income associated with retirement in Spain, so there would

be no reason to expect a consumption drop.7 Aguila, Attansio and Meghir (2007) use the

panel dimension of the CEX which interviews households for five consecutive quarters.

They do not find any evidence of a consumption drop in non-durable spending, but

estimate food spending to decline by about 6 percent at retirement. While suggestive, the

study is limited because the CEX lacks the richness of the HRS, preventing investigation

of heterogeneity in spending change which may shed light on the mechanisms behind any

change.

           What sets our paper apart from these panel studies is that we link the spending

data to the extensive information of the long-running panel the Health and Retirement




6
    Table 3 in Haider and Stephens (2007).
7
    Note that the analytical sample of this study is small consisting of only 209 observations.
Study, allowing us to investigate directly multiple mechanisms that have been put

forward in the literature.



3. Theoretical Background

       In its simplest form the life-cycle model (LCM) with one consumption good

specifies that individuals choose a consumption path to maximize expected lifetime

utility, and that the instantaneous utility function is unchanging over time. The shape of

the optimal consumption path is partially or wholly determined by utility function

parameters, the interest rate and mortality risk. The level of the path is determined by the

lifetime budget constraint; the difference between the level of consumption and income

determines the saving rate and the equation of motion of wealth. Auxiliary assumptions,

which are not controversial, are that the marginal utility is continuous in consumption and

that marginal utility declines in consumption. A condition for lifetime utility

maximization is that marginal utility be continuous in time: were it not continuous a

reallocation of consumption across the discontinuity from the low marginal utility state to

the high marginal utility state would increase total utility without a greater use of

resources. Such a reallocation should continue until there no longer is a discontinuity in

marginal utility. Because consumption is monotonic and continuous in marginal utility,

an implication is that consumption must be continuous in time. That is, consumption

must be smooth over time in a model where utility only depends on consumption. In

particular, consumption should be continuous over retirement.

       Continuity does not depend on whether retirement is given exogenously as, say,

by mandatory retirement or whether it is an object of choice: regardless of retirement age
consumption should be continuous in this simple model. Thus in a population with

heterogeneous tastes, which will lead to differing retirement ages, consumption will be

continuous for each individual, and therefore it will be continuous in the population.

        In a more general model, which recognizes uncertainty, individuals or households

experience unanticipated windfall gains or losses to wealth, earnings or annuities, and

then re-optimize to a new consumption path, causing a discontinuity in the consumption

path. However, wealth, earnings or annuity changes which are foreseeable should cause

no change in the consumption path because the lifetime budget constraint has not

changed. In particular consumption should not change at retirement if retirement occurs

as planned.8 But if retirement occurs sooner than expected, lifetime resources will be less

than expected so that consumption will have to be adjusted downward. The obvious

example is a stochastic health event that causes early retirement. Negative health shocks

leading to early retirement are undoubtedly empirically important, so that we should

expect to observe some unanticipated declines in consumption at retirement from these

shocks alone provided we can identify the population that experienced the shocks.

        A second generalization of the LCM specifies that utility depends on more than

one good, in particular leisure as well as consumption. Suppose that the within-period

utility function is u (c, l ) . The implications for consumption at retirement depend on

whether the utility function is separable; that is, whether the marginal utility of

consumption uc depends on l .




8
 If some of measured consumption is, in fact, work-related expenses, consumption as measured by
spending would drop at retirement, but utility-producing spending would not. This is a measurement issue.
       If the utility function is separable, uc should be continuous in time and

consumption will also be continuous. If the utility function is not separable, but

retirement is gradual so that l increases slowly, consumption will also change in a

continuous manner. But for most workers l increases abruptly by about 2,000 hours per

year. A condition of utility maximization is that the marginal utility of consumption be

the same immediately before and immediately after retirement: the argument is the same

as we gave earlier in the context of a single good model of the LCM. Now, however,

because of nonseparability and because of the sudden change in l , the LCM requires a

discontinuous change in consumption.

       Some types of leisure are substitutes for the consumption of market purchased

goods such as home repairs, some are complements with consumption such as travel, and

some are neutral such as watching television. Everyday observation and introspection

suggest that we have all types, and it is an empirical question which dominates. But the

main point is that we would not expect consumption to be smoothed over retirement.

        Because of differences in tastes and differences in economic resources we expect

heterogeneity across households in whether substitution or complementarity dominates.

For example, someone with high wealth may continue to purchase home repairs as before

retirement, but spend more on travel with a net effect of an increase in spending.

Someone with a high wage rate may have purchased home repairs before retirement but

will do them himself after retirement for a net reduction in spending.

       This can be illustrated with a three good model. Suppose that utility is given by

u ( x, y, l ) , where x and y are composite goods and l is leisure. The optimal path of x will
equate u x before and after retirement and the optimal path of y will equate u y before

and after retirement. If u xl = 0 and u yl = 0 both x and y will be continuous across

retirement. But if x is a substitute for leisure ( u xl < 0 ) and y is a complement to leisure

( u yl > 0 ), then a discontinuous but anticipated reduction in l will require a decrease in x

and an increase in y . Whether total spending increases or decreases would depend on

utility function parameters, prices and the levels of spending on each. Even with

identical preferences workers facing differing wage rates would change total spending

differently at retirement.

         We have stated nonseparability in terms of the utility function, but the

conclusions are the same in the context of home production. For example, suppose that

instantaneous utility is given by u ( f (c, l )) where f is a production function that uses

inputs of purchased goods c and of time l to produce actual consumption which

produces utility. Then nonseparability of f will cause a discontinuous change in c

when l changes discontinuously at retirement.

         In this discussion we have simplified the problem by assuming that retirement is

given exogenously. Whether retirement is chosen does not affect the discontinuity in

consumption when leisure and consumption are not separable provided the increase in

leisure is discontinuous. As an empirical matter a substantial majority of retirement is

from full-time to completely out of the labor force (Rust, 1990) and there are good

reasons for such a sharp transition.9



9
 For example, a defined benefit pension plan can have such strong incentives to retire that workers within a
wide range of tastes for retirement will all retire. Most firms will not allow a gradual reduction in work
4. Data

        Our data come from the Health and Retirement Study (HRS) and from a

supplemental survey to the HRS, the Consumption and Activities Mail Survey

(CAMS).10 The HRS is a biennial panel. Its first wave was conducted in 1992, and

additional waves have continued to the present. The initial target population was the

cohorts born in 1931-1941 (Juster and Suzman, 1995). Additional cohorts were added in

1993, 1998 and 2004 so that with the 1998 wave the HRS represented the population

from the cohorts of 1947 or earlier, and with the 2004 wave the population from the

cohorts of 1953 or earlier.

        The HRS interviewed about 20,000 subjects in 13,100 households in the year

2000 wave. A random sample of 5,000 households (38.2 percent of all households

interviewed in HRS 2000) was asked to participate in the initial wave of CAMS. CAMS

is a mail survey rather than the more usual telephone survey. For the purpose of

measuring consumption, a mail survey is highly advantageous because respondents can

consult a spouse, examine records, and answer at their convenience.11

        The questionnaires for CAMS wave 1 were sent out in September, 2001.12 In

married or partnered households it was sent to one of the spouses, chosen at random.

There were 3,866 responses in the CAMS wave 1, which corresponds to a total response

rate of 77.3 percent.




hours, so that a worker who would like to retire gradually will be forced to change employers and possibly
occupations (Hurd, 1996).
10
   The HRS is primarily funded by the National Institute of Aging (grant number NIA U01AG09740) with
additional funding from the Social Security Administration. It is conducted by the University of Michigan.
11
   The CAMS questionnaires are accessible online at
http://hrsonline.isr.umich.edu/meta/sho_meta.php?hfyle=qnaires
12
   See Hurd and Rohwedder (2005) for a more extensive description of CAMS.
        In September, 2003, CAMS wave 2 was sent to the same households.13 The

structure of the questionnaire was almost the same so as to facilitate panel analysis. The

response rate in CAMS wave 2 was 78.3 percent.14 CAMS wave 3 was fielded in

October, 2005 to the same CAMS households, and to an additional 850 households

representing the new cohort of 51-56 year-olds who were inducted into HRS in 2004.15

        CAMS has three main topics: Part A is about activities or uses of time; Part B

collects data on spending, including anticipations and realizations about changes in

spending at retirement; and Part C asks information about marital status and labor force

participation.16

        Our primary interest is total spending or nondurable spending by households. In

wave 1, the respondent was asked about spending in 26 categories of nondurables and 6

categories of durables. The categories were chosen to match published CEX aggregates,

and cover all but a small percent of spending as reported in the CEX. The rate of item

nonresponse was very low, in the single digits for most categories.17 The maximum rate

was 13.8%. For some of the categories, we imputed for item nonresponse from HRS core

data. For example, spending for rent had a relatively high rate of item nonresponse

(13.2%), but almost all was by households who, according to HRS, were home owners.

Thus with considerable confidence we imputed zero rent to such households. Because




13
   A subset of 298 respondents were excluded from wave 2 because they were chosen to participate in
another supplemental study; in wave 3 of CAMS they were included again.
14
   Response rates are lower bounds in that they are not adjusted for mortality or undeliverable
questionnaires.
15
   We do not use these new households in the analysis of this paper because we do not yet have panel data
on them: their second wave is CAMS 2007, which is not yet available.
16
   In wave 1 of CAMS section C included in addition questions about prescription drug usage.
17
   The rates of item nonresponse are similar on other waves of CAMS.
item nonresponse was so low, total imputed spending was a small fraction of total

estimated spending, just 6.0 percent.18

        Because spending data are difficult to collect, their validity is always an issue.

Hurd and Rohwedder (2005) compared CAMS wave 1 spending with CEX spending.

They find that in the age range 55-64 CAMS spending was 6% higher than CEX

spending. However, because of possible differences in the population covered and

differences in the unit of observation we do not place too much weight on this

comparison.19 A better comparison is with HRS after-tax income and what it implies

about saving rates and, therefore, wealth change in panel. As averaged over five waves

of HRS, the annual change in median wealth among couples was 2.0 percent. Active

saving is the difference between after-tax income and spending. We estimate the active

saving rate from three waves of CAMS data and the corresponding HRS waves to be

2.5% per year expressed as a fraction of wealth. That is, the active saving rate would

predict an annual change in wealth of 2.5% per year. Among singles the annual change

in median wealth was -2.7%, and the active saving rate was also -2.7%. Thus the levels

of spending are consistent with observed rates of change of wealth, lending validity to

our measure of total spending.

        Wave 2 of CAMS had the same spending categories as wave 1, but augmented by

personal care products and services, and gardening and housekeeping services. These

amount to 3.1% of total spending for households age 55 and above according to the CEX.


18
   In CAMS wave 2, the fraction of total spending that was imputed amounted to 5.0 percent and to 5.5
percent in CAMS wave 3.
19
   One example of the difficulty in comparing CEX spending with CAMS spending is the definition of age:
CEX defines “age” to be the age of the householder; HRS does not identify a householder. For the
comparison in the text we have taken the age of the husband in classifying by age. In some cases that will
correspond to the CEX householder but in some cases it will not.
Wave 3 of CAMS had the same categories as CAMS wave 2 with the addition of

household furnishings and equipment which accounts for 3.7 percent of total spending of

households age 55 and above according to the CEX. Our panel comparisons will be

spending change found by comparing spending prior to retirement with spending change

after retirement. For this comparison we will always use just those categories that are

measured in both pre- and post-retirement waves. For example, in calculating spending

change for those who retired between waves 1 and 2, we will exclude personal care

products and services, and gardening and housekeeping services from the wave 2

measure. Following this method, we construct panel measures of total spending, non-

durable spending and food spending.

        We will also use data on retirement and on anticipated and recollected spending

changes at retirement. These data come from the following question sequence in the

CAMS questionnaire:
Excerpt from the CAMS Questionnaire:

Question B38 in CAMS wave 1, B44 in CAMS wave 2, and B45 in CAMS wave 3.


        We would like to understand more about spending in retirement.
                        Are you retired?
     ______ Yes Î Complete BOX A         No Î Complete BOX B

BOX A – Retired:                                       BOX B – Not Retired:

a. How did your TOTAL spending change with             d. How do you expect your TOTAL spending
retirement?                                            to change with retirement?
   _____ Stayed the same Î Go to c                        _____ Stay the same Î Go to f
   _____ Increased                                        _____ Increase
   _____ Decreased                                        _____ Decrease

b. By how much?                                        e. By how much?
   ______%                                                ______%

c. For the items below, check (9) whether the          f. For the items below, check (9) whether you
spending increased, decreased or stayed the            expect spending to increase, decrease or stay
same in retirement:                                    the same in retirement:

We use the responses to Bd and Be to construct anticipated changes in spending at

retirement, and the responses to Ba and Bb to construct recollected changes in spending.

We link the CAMS data to the rich information obtained on the same respondents in

repeated HRS core interviews.20 For example, with respect to CAMS wave 1 we obtain

information on demographics and socio-economic status from HRS 2000. We also make

use of the panel nature of the HRS to obtain information such as self-rated health in the

wave immediately before and after a respondent’s retirement, and reasons for retirement.



5. Analysis


20
  Most HRS core variables are obtained from The RAND HRS Data file version H which is an easy to use
longitudinal data set based on the HRS data. It was developed at RAND with funding from the National
Institute on Aging and the Social Security Administration.
We will use two samples. For most of our investigations we use a sample of households

where we have panel data on actual spending pre- and post-retirement, and on the

anticipations of spending change prior to retirement and recollections of spending change

after retirement. We call this our “panel” sample. We begin with 451 retirement

transitions where the responses to the question “Are you retired?” indicate a transition

from not retired to retired. These responses are constructed from three waves of CAMS:

2001 to 2003; 2003 to 2005 and if the 2003 report is missing from 2001 to 2005. We

excluded 66 observations because we restricted the retirement age to be from 50 to 70

inclusive. Thus our analysis sample consists of 385 retirement transitions where we

observe actual spending data before and after retirement.

        Our second sample consists of 1,303 observations on retired persons for whom we

observe recollected spending change at retirement in CAMS and relevant covariates

immediately prior to retirement from the HRS core. All of these respondents retired

during the survey period of the HRS, but many of them retired prior to wave 1 of CAMS

so that we do not observe their actual retirement transitions. We call this the

“recollections” sample.

        We will present three types of statistics to study the population tendency in the

panel sample: average spending, median spending and the median change at the

household level. The average change at the household level is not a very reliable statistic

because observation error on spending can produce large outliers when spending is put in

ratio form.21



21
  The average of household-level spending change was +8.9%. This large value is mostly due to a few
very large outliers. For example the largest change was 347%, which by itself accounts for almost one
percentage point of the 8.9%.
           Table 1 shows the means and medians of total real spending before and after

retirement and the median of the change in spending calculated over 385 households

where retirement occurred between CAMS waves.22 Total spending averaged $40.5

thousand before retirement and $38.6 thousand after retirement for a decline of 4.7%.

The population median spending declined from about $34 thousand to $32 thousand, a

decline of 5.9%. The median of the changes at the household level was -5.7%. These

observed declines in spending are much smaller than those reported Bernheim, Skinner

and Weinberg (2001) or in Banks, Blundell and Tanner (1998).

           Non-durable spending declined between 0.5% and 3.1% depending on the

measure and spending on food declined by 3.0% to 3.6%. We note that our small decline

in spending on food is consistent with results in Haider and Stephens (2007) based on

data from the HRS core 1992 – 2000. Our measure is independent from their measure as

it comes from CAMS 2001 – 2005. Furthermore the survey methods are different, HRS

being a computer-assisted telephone interview and CAMS being a self-administered

paper and pencil interview. Having two independent observations lends weight to the

view that in more recent data food spending declines only modestly at retirement.

           We cannot reject the null hypothesis that the change in mean spending is zero for

total spending, for nondurable spending or for food spending, nor can we reject the

similar hypothesis for changes in the medians, or in the medians of household-level

changes. Despite the small sample size, the 95% confidence interval does not include

large changes.




22
     All spending and wealth numbers are in 2003 dollars.
        Figure 1 shows the cumulative distributions of total spending, non-durable

spending and food spending before and after retirement. There is little difference in

spending over most of the distributions, except in the lower part of the distribution.

        Thus our first and main finding is that whether measured by total spending,

nondurable spending or food spending in panel any declines in spending associated with

retirement are small, and could plausibly be due to a number of causes such as the

cessation of work-related expenses, the substitution of time for spending, or unexpectedly

early retirement due to health shocks.

        In the rest of the paper we identify subpopulations that experienced spending

declines at retirement, and we offer explanations for those declines. We will focus on

non-durable spending rather than on total spending: non-durable spending is a large

fraction of total spending and it has fewer outliers because it excludes lumpy spending on

durables. Furthermore, spending on non-durables approximately equals consumption of

non-durables, and it is consumption smoothing that we would like to measure.23



Wealth, income and spending

When earnings cease at retirement, maintaining spending requires either wealth or a

complete replacement of earnings by Social Security or pensions. If households have

little wealth and the replacement of earnings is incomplete, the intratemporal budget

constraint will require that spending declines. Table 2 shows spending levels, both mean

and median, by wealth quartile before and after retirement, percent changes in them, and

the median of the change at the household level.


23
  If time-use in home production is an important input into consumption then even spending on non-
durables mis-measures consumption of nondurables.
       As expected there is a substantial gradient in the level of spending by wealth

quartile. Prior to retirement those in the highest quartile spent about $45 thousand while

those in the lowest quartile spent about $28 thousand. Overall the change in spending

accompanying retirement was small: declines in the lowest quartiles were offset by

increases in the highest quartiles. In the lowest quartile, the decline in average spending

was about 10% and in median spending 22%. At the household level the median decline

was 7.8%, so a large decline was not the common experience even in the lowest-wealth

population. In the second wealth quartile average spending fell by about 14%, but only

by 4% at the median. In the top quartile spending increased (and possibly substantially

increased) by the three measures. The change in the top quartile is in accord with the

idea that time is required to spend money on some activities and in retirement time

previously spent working becomes available to be allocated across those activities.

       Table 3 shows household income before and after retirement as measured in the

HRS core data. Depending on the measure, income declined by 21% to 31%; yet,

nondurable spending declined by just 0.5% to 3.1% (Table 1). These figures provide

strong evidence for consumption smoothing at the population level. There were smaller

reductions in income in the first wealth quartile than in the second. This difference

reflects larger replacement rates under Social Security among those in lower income

levels. In the lowest quartile the median of household-level changes in income was -

5.0% which is very close to the median change in household spending: -7.8% (Table 2).

This relationship is almost required by the intertemporal budget constraint: As shown in

Table 4, median nonhousing wealth in the lowest wealth quartile was just $2.1 thousand
and even total wealth including housing was just $16.2 thousand at the median.24 While

there might have been resources for a few households to maintain spending by drawing

down assets, that option would not have been available to most households. A relevant

question with respect to households in the lowest wealth quartile and possibly the second

quartile is why they did not save more so as to avoid any decline. But we first ask

whether the decline was anticipated.

Anticipated and recollected spending

For our CAMS panel we use anticipated changes in spending prior to retirement and

recollected changes following retirement to study whether spending change was a

surprise. The recollections are in close temporal proximity to retirement, and less

susceptible to recall error than in the “recollections’ sample where retirement could have

occurred many years earlier. On average recollections and anticipations are very

consistent: the mean anticipated change in spending was -14.7% and the mean

recollected change was -14.3% (Table 5).25 The recollected median change was zero:

fewer than half experienced a decline.

        However, both on average and at the median, quartiles 2, 3 and 4 recollect more

spending than had been anticipated, about 5% more at the mean and 10% more at the

24
   Wealth is measured in the HRS at the wave preceding the first CAMS transition wave. For example, if a
respondent was not retired in CAMS wave 1 (2001) but was retired in CAMS wave 2 (2003) wealth would
be measured in HRS 2000. Because some wealth could have been accumulated after the 2000 interview
but prior to retirement via active saving and capital gains, the numbers in Table 4 are likely to be an
underestimate of actual wealth at retirement. Indeed if we measure wealth in HRS in the year following
retirement, median total wealth is about 26% higher and median non-housing wealth is 53% higher than the
figures given in Table 4. However, these changes are substantially confined to the upper wealth quartiles
where capital gains play a role. For example, in the first wealth quartile, the median of post-retirement
nonhousing wealth is $2.7 thousand, about the same as the median of pre-retirement nonhousing wealth.
This similarity is to be expected: in the first quartile the change in spending approximately equaled the
change in income, and households in that quartile had few variably priced assets
25
   The magnitudes cannot be directly compared with the observed changes in panel in Table 2: first, Table
2 has changes in average spending and changes in median spending whereas Table 5 has the average of
household changes. Second, Table 2 has nondurable spending whereas Table 5 refers to total spending.
median. In the lowest quartile spending fell much more than anticipated, 12% at the

mean and 15% at the median. A comparison of the discrepancy between anticipations

and recollections in the first quartile with the similar discrepancy in the other quartiles

gives a difference in the discrepancies of 17% for mean spending and 25% for median

spending, and those differences are statistically significant. Apparently most of the

population experienced greater-than-expected spending even as those in the lowest

quartile experienced less.

       Ameriks, Caplin and Leahy (2007) analyzed responses to survey questions by

TIAA-CREF participants about anticipated changes in spending at retirement among

those still working and about recollected spending changes at retirement among those not

working. They found that the mean anticipated change was −11.3% and that 54.6% of

their sample anticipated a reduction in spending. The mean recollected change was

−4.6% and that 36.2% recollected a reduction. The data are cross-section so that the

populations of workers and retirees are not the same people. Nonetheless one might

think that anticipations and realizations should be about the same. Ameriks, Caplin and

Leahy attribute the difference between anticipations and recollections to stock holdings:

some of the retired would have retired during the stock boom of the late 1990’s and were

able to increase their spending at about the time of their retirement because of

unexpectedly large gains. From this point of view the anticipations of workers would be

more reflective of a steady-state situation.

       Our results are qualitatively similar to Ameriks, Caplin and Leahy, but we extend

their results in a number of ways. First, the HRS is population representative. The

importance of having population representation comes from the strong relationship
between wealth and spending change at retirement: in Ameriks, Caplin and Leahy,

wealth is the only covariate that consistently predicts an anticipated decline in spending,

with low wealth households having greater declines than high wealth households. Yet,

the TIAA-CREF sample has much greater wealth than the population. For example, in

the sample of retired TIAA-CREF households mean financial assets is $824 thousand

whereas in our HRS sample, which is representative of the population retiring between 50

and 70, it is $249 thousand.26 Furthermore, wealth holdings in the lower part of the

distributions are very different: the 10th percentile of the distribution of financial assets

in the TIAA-CREF sample of retired households is $126 thousand whereas it is zero in

our HRS sample. This difference is important because any spending decline at retirement

may depend on wealth in a nonlinear manner, which makes it difficult to generalize the

TIAA-CREF results to the entire population. Indeed, Table 5 shows that only in the

lowest wealth quartile were recollected realizations worse than anticipated.

        A second difference is that we have true panel data. Thus we can study

anticipations and recollections of the same individuals. Based on cross-section the

discrepancies between anticipations and recollections are similar to those found by

Ameriks, Caplin and Leahy.27 For example among workers aged 50-69 in CAMS wave 1

the average anticipated reduction in spending at retirement was -20.1%. Among those

retired the average recollected spending change was -13.8%. But these discrepancies are

systematically related to the differences in the ages of workers and retirees. In panel as




26
   Comparisons between the working populations are not valid because of large age differences: the TIAA-
CREF sample has workers of all ages whereas HRS sample only has workers age 50 or older. Wealth
would differ substantially for this reason alone.
27
   See Hurd and Rohwedder, 2006.
shown in Table 5, there is no difference between anticipations and recollections on

average.

Financial planning horizon

A possible indictor of a lack of foresight is an individual’s financial planning horizon. It

is measured in the HRS by the response to the following question:


In deciding how much of their income to spend or save,
people are likely to think about different financial
planning periods. In planning your saving and spending,
which of the following time periods is most important to
you, the next few months, the next year, the next few years,
the next 5-10 years, or longer than 10 years?


We code a short financial planning horizon to be a planning period of a few months or

the next year, and code a long planning horizon to be the next few years or longer. One

interpretation of a short planning horizon is a high subjective time rate of discount.

However, even those with a high discount rate should not have a discontinuity in

consumption. A more straightforward interpretation is literally a failure to look ahead for

more than a year. As shown in Table 6, about one-fourth of the sample had such a short

planning horizon. But a short planning horizon would have the greatest effect on

consumption change at retirement among those with little wealth who would not be able

to buffer the (unforeseen) income drop by spending out of wealth. In the lowest wealth

quartile 41% had a short planning horizon versus just 9% in the highest quartile.

       A short planning horizon is associated with large changes in spending that vary

substantially across wealth quartiles. In fact the observed decline in spending in the

lowest quartile is concentrated among those with a short planning horizon. The table also
shows that having a short planning horizon by itself does not necessarily lead to

reductions in spending: rather it is the combination of a short horizon and few economic

resources. Although 24% of the population had a short horizon, it is only among those in

the lowest quartiles that spending declined. These constitute 16% of the population.

Health and its relationship to spending change

Table 7 shows the relationship between self-rated health prior to retirement, spending

before and after retirement and the change in spending. About half the sample had

excellent or very good health before retirement. They did not experience spending

declines as measured by group means or medians or by household-level change, whereas

those in good and fair or poor health did experience declines (12 percent in population

medians and 7 percent in household level median). Because those in worse health are

also more likely to leave the labor force due to a health event, these results suggest an

important role for health shocks. However, a more direct measure of an actual health

shock is whether health was an important reason for retirement, which is asked in the

core HRS in the wave following retirement. Table 8 shows the change in spending

according to that classification. About 24% of retirees said that health was an important

reason. Among them, spending declined by 9% to 17% depending on the spending

measure. Among those where health was not an important factor, there was almost no

spending change.

       Wealth is strongly related to whether health was an important reason for

retirement: about 44% in the lowest wealth quartile reported the importance of health

whereas other quartiles averaged about 20% (not shown). Because of missing data on

whether health was an important reason for retirement, our panel sample is too small to
study interactions with wealth. Therefore we use the much larger recollections sample.

That sample has a larger fraction where health was an important reason for retirement:

32 percent versus 24 percent (Table 9). There is a strong wealth gradient with more than

half of those in the lowest quartile reporting the importance of health. According to the

comparison of medians, there was no decline in spending in any of the wealth quartiles

among those where health was not an important factor. Where health was important, the

two lowest wealth quartiles had declines of about 25%. People in highest wealth quartile

are largely able to buffer the adverse effects of a health shock.28

        Having health be an important factor in retirement suggests that retirement

resulted from a health shock, and that retirement occurred earlier than anticipated.

However, it is certainly possible that those in worse health anticipated early retirement

and would have said prior to retirement that health would be an important factor in

retirement. The importance of this distinction is that in the second case there would be

no unexpected loss of earnings and, hence, no reason to reduce spending.

        We have, however, an indicator that retirement was partially unexpected among

those in the lowest wealth quartile: they tended to retire earlier than expected as

measured by their subjective probability of working past 62 or 65. This question is asked

of workers as follows:


        “On the same scale from 0 to 100 where 0 means
        absolutely no chance and 100 means absolutely certain,
        …


28
   Even those with substantial wealth who experience a loss in lifetime wealth due to an unexpectedly early
retirement should reduce spending. However, particularly with the wealthy, the loss may be a small
fraction of total wealth, requiring just a small adjustment in annual spending which may be hard to detect,
especially in small samples.
          (Thinking about work in general and not just your
          present job,) what do you think the chances are that
          you will be working full-time after you reach age 62?”


A follow-up question also asks about the target age of 65. The subjective probability of

working is predictive of actual retirement and aggregates closely to observed retirement

rates (Hurd, 1999).

          Those in the lowest wealth quartile reported average subjective probabilities of

working past 62 or 65 that were higher than those in the third and fourth quartiles; yet,

their average retirement age was lower (Table 10). This difference can be quantified by

using a Cox proportional hazards model to estimate the difference between the expected

retirement and actual retirement age. The method is to estimate the population survival

curve in full-time work to the end of work life from observed labor market transitions in

the HRS panel. We then normalize the survival curve to age 58, which is approximately

the average age when people in our panel reported their subjective probabilities of

working. This generates the population survival curve conditional on working at 58. We

then find the proportionality factor for each wealth quartile by comparing P62 or P65

with the population probability of working at 62 or 65. Applying that factor to the

population survival curve will generate the survival curve for each quartile. The resulting

curves are shown in Figure 2 for the case where we use P65 to find the proportionality

factor.

          The expected work life is the area under the survival curve. Those in the lowest

wealth quartile retired about 1.3 years earlier than anticipated whereas those in the

highest wealth quartile retired about 0.8 year later than anticipated.
       We ask whether an unexpected loss of 1.3 years of earnings could lead to a

permanent reduction in spending of the amounts we have documented in Table 2. The

average reduction in earnings in the lowest wealth quartile was about $10.6 thousand.

Thus retiring 1.3 years earlier than anticipated represents a loss of about $13.8 thousand

in addition to any loss in Social Security benefits and pension income that may have

accumulated had they worked longer. This amount is about twice as much as mean

nonhousing wealth in this quartile. The $13.8 thousand would produce an annual annuity

of about $1 thousand for a 62 year-old male with no survivor benefits. Reference to

Table 2 shows that average nondurable spending declined by about $2.8 thousand and

median spending by about $5.5 thousand. These figures suggest that the unexpected

early retirement contributed to the reduction in spending, but it was not the only cause.

       This method can shed some light on the experience of those who said health was

an important factor in their retirement. Their average value of P65 was 23.3 versus 19.7

among those where health was not an important factor. This translates into an expected

difference of about 0.3 year; that is, those whose health was a factor in retirement

expected to work slightly longer than other workers. Yet, their average retirement age

was 62.2 versus 62.7 for a difference in differences of 0.8 year. Among those workers in

the lowest wealth quartile who said health was an important factor in retirement, the

difference was greater: according to this method they retired about 1.3 years earlier than

anticipated.

Regression results

Based on the panel sample, we will present results from two median regressions. The left-

hand variable is the percent change in household spending at retirement. The right-hand
variables are those that the cross-tabulations have shown to be associated with spending

change with the addition in the second regression of education. Thus the regressions are

generalizations of the median household-level change in Table 2 and subsequent tables.

       Table 12 has the regression results. There is no systematic or statistically

significant relationship between wealth and spending change once we control for other

factors. The relationship that we have observed in previous tabulations comes from

correlations among wealth, short planning horizon and importance of health for

retirement. Wealth is associated with a spending decline among those with a short

planing horizion, but not among those with a long planning horizon. In the first

regression, for example, among those in the first two wealth quartiles and with a short

horizon, spending dropped by about 4.2% whereas it increased by 28.8% among those in

the top two quartiles and with a short horizon. When health was an important reason for

retirement, spending declined by about 22%. When education is added, the relationship

between wealth and spending change among those with a short horizon is reduced, and

short horizon is no longer significant. This happens because education is strongly related

to planning horizon: among those lacking a high school education (20% of the sample),

43% have a short horizon compared with 16% among those with some college or more.

Those lacking a high school education and having a short horizon (8.6% of the sample)

reduced spending by about 12.7%.

       Based on these regressions we conclude that the relationship between low wealth

and spending declines in retirement comes from that part of the sample that also has a

short planning horizon with an additional effect coming from those lacking a high school

education. When health was an important reason for retirement, spending also declined,
and because such retirees tend to have low wealth, spending reductions are further

concentrated in the lowest quartiles.

Time use

Hurd and Rohwedder (2003, 2006) and Aguiar and Hurst (2005) have argued that the

availability of a large amount of time that results from retirement can be use to produced

more consumption from the same amount of spending. The channels for accomplishing

this include more efficient shopping and home production, that is the substitution of own

time for goods and services that were purchased prior to retirement. For example, rather

than purchasing a prepared frozen dinner, a retiree may prepare that dinner from

(cheaper) primary ingredients. Another example is home maintenance which can be

accomplished either by the retiree or by hiring outside labor. Based on section A of

CAMS we selected seven activities that could be possible substitutes for purchased goods

or services. They are house cleaning, washing and ironing, yard work and gardening,

shopping, food preparation, finances, and home improvements. Comparing the time

spent on these activities immediately before retirement with the time spent after

retirement we found that the average increase in time spent per week was 5.2 hours. The

substitution of those hours could account for the spending declines experienced by a large

fraction of households.

      However, when health was an important factor in retirement the increase in hours

was just one hour per week. Apparently those same health problems that were an

important factor in the retirement of a worker prevented him or her from substituting time

for purchased good or services. Because those in the lowest wealth quartile are more

likely to have retired because of health, the increase in time spent in the seven activities
in that quartile was just 2.8 hours. These results have two implications. First, the decline

in spending by those in the lowest quartile where health was an important factor in

retirement can be explained less well by a substitution toward more hours spent on home

production, at least as measured by the activities we have tabulated. The second is a

welfare implication. A simultaneous decline in spending and an increase in time spent in

home production could indicate that the marginal utility of consumption was maintained

after retirement. But that was not the case in this group: as indicted by a drop in

spending and by a relatively small increase in home production, the marginal utility of

spending likely increased after retirement. Thus, their welfare could have been increased

by a reallocation of spending from pre-retirement to post-retirement.



5. Summary and conclusions

In panel data on total spending, nondurable spending or food spending, we found small

declines in spending associated with retirement. The magnitudes of the declines could

reasonably be explained by the cessation of work-related expenses or by efficiencies in

shopping made possible by the greater availability of time or by the substitution of home

production for market purchased goods and services. An additional explanation, which

we have not yet discussed, is found in the standard life-cycle model itself. In the simplest

version where the only uncertainty is mortality risk, consumption should begin to decline

when mortality risk becomes important and the rate of decline should accelerate with

increased aging. For example, mortality risk is 0.015 at age 65, so that for a single

person where the subjective time rate of discount equals the interest rate, consumption

should decline at 1.5% per year or 3% over two years. This is approximately the two-
year change we observe. Thus, there are at least three explanations in conventional

economic theory for the magnitude of the spending declines observed in Table 1. Our

main conclusion is that according to these data there is no retirement-consumption puzzle

at the population level.

       Nonetheless, the population is far from homogeneous. At the household level we

observe both substantial increases and substantial decreases in spending. Some of the

change is observation error. Our method of addressing observation error is to look for a

retirement-consumption puzzle in subpopulations using statistics that are relatively robust

to observation error such as the change in population medians and means, and the median

of household-level changes. We focused on the subpopulation with below average

economic resources which has been the object of attention in the literature and which is

important from the point of view of policy. We found declines in spending in the bottom

half of the wealth distribution. Addressing the question about foresight, we found that

those in the second wealth quartile did anticipate a decline which, in fact, was actually

somewhat smaller than anticipated. Furthermore, income in that quartile declined by 35

to 41% while spending declined by only 4 to 14%, showing a remarkable amount of

consumption smoothing. Those in the lowest quartile experienced a decline what was

substantially greater than anticipated. Although the income decline was smaller than in

the other wealth quartiles, median nonhousing wealth could not finance even one year of

the income shortfall. Thus this group under saved ex post. To address the explanation of

a lack of foresight, we use the HRS measure of planning horizon. While just 8% of those

in the top quartile had a short planning horizon, 41% of those in the lowest quartile had a
short planning horizon and, possibly, a lack of foresight. In the low wealth group with

short planning horizon median household spending change was -17.7%.

       When health was an important reason for retirement, spending declined at a

greater rate than when it was not important. However, the largest declines were confined

to the lowest wealth quartiles and a substantially greater fraction of retirees in the lowest

quartile gave health as a reason for retirement. When the actual retirement age is

compared with the expected retirement age as estimated from the subjective probability

of working past 65, it is clear that health is associated with an unexpectedly early

retirement. The amount of earnings lost was a significant amount compared with

nonhousing wealth in the lowest wealth quartile. For this group at least some of the

decline in spending can be explained by an unexpected reduction of lifetime wealth.

       In the regressions wealth quartile per se was not important. Rather it was a short

planning horizon among those in the lowest half of the wealth distribution and whether

health was an important reason for retirement. These results hold approximately whether

education is included.

       Our results are qualitatively similar to Bernheim, Skinner and Weinberg in that

they find greater declines in the lower part of the wealth distribution as we do. Of course,

theirs are quantitatively different, and that difference is important as it changes the

retirement-consumption puzzle from a question about the population to a question about

subpopulations. Subpopulations can have characteristics that offer explanations for the

puzzle, and those explanations can help us learn about behavior. Similarly our results

have an element in common with those of Smith (2007). She found a decline in food

spending only among those who experienced involuntary retirement. Our major
subpopulation with declining spending was the subpopulation where health was an

important factor in retirement: it is likely that many in that subpopulation retired

involuntarily.

       We would like to quantify the importance in the population of short planning

horizon as an indicator of the lack of forward-looking behavior. We will do this by

finding the fraction of the population that occupied cells indexed by short planning

horizon but not by importance of health in retirement, and where the predicted median

decline in the cell was substantial, say above 10%. We use the regression results for this

calculation. For example, those with less than a high school education and with a short

planning horizon but not in the upper half of the wealth distribution occupy a cell with

predicted median spending decline of 12.7%. For this we will ignore the additive wealth

quartile indicators which are not statistically significant. Similarly we will find cells

where health was an important factor in retirement as an indicator of the importance in

the population of health shocks leading to earlier than expected retirement. We will use

the regression results that include education which indicate large and significant

differences by education level

       The following table shows the percentage of the panel sample and the percentage

of the recollections sample that are in such cells. For example, 2.8% of the panel sample

had a short planning horizon, had wealth and education such that spending declined by

more than 10%, and did not state that health was an important factor in retirement. This

is almost the same percentage as in the recollections sample. Similarly 16-18% had a

large spending decline at retirement associated with health, but not with a short planning
horizon. Where a respondent has both a short planning horizon and stated that health was

important, the two samples differ by 5.5 percentage points.


       Percent of sample in cells with median spending change less than -10%
                                               Panel sample Recollections sample
Short planning horizon only (1)                          2.8                   2.6
Health important in retirement only (2)                16.4                   18.4
Short planning horizon and health                        3.3                   8.8
important in retirement (3)
N                                                       214                  1293
Notes: (1) Also restricted to education < high school and wealth quartiles 1 and 2; (2) Also restricted
to education = some college or less; (3) Also restricted to wealth quartiles 1 and 2.

According to these results, a very small percentage of people are in cells that experienced

a large decline and where a lack of foresight as measured by a short planning horizon is a

plausible explanation. A larger percentage of people (3.3 to 8.8%) were in cells where, in

addition, health was an important reason for retirement. But the largest number of people

had declines in spending associated with health. Our conclusion is that lack of foresight

as measured here does not play a large role in spending declines; rather, health and

health shocks are likely to be the main explanations in subpopulations that exhibit a

retirement-consumption puzzle.

         Even though the change in spending at retirement does not indicate widespread

suboptimal behavior, the change does not show that the spending level is optimal. To

address that issue we would need to compare spending levels with available resources in

a life-cycle setting. That is, conditions on the rate of change of spending are necessary

conditions, but not necessary and sufficient conditions for optimality.

         Because of the emphasis in the literature and in public policy on the low wealth

population, we explored explanations for the decline in spending in that group. However,

from the point of view of economic theory, the behavior of the top wealth quartile is
certainly of interest. That group increased spending by 7 to 18% depending on the

measure. The most obvious explanation is that it takes time to spend money. It is

beyond the scope of this paper to undertake this analysis, but the variation across wealth

quartiles is an example of the substantial heterogeneity in spending change at retirement

that would have to be taken into account. This variation indicates that time use is likely

to be an important explanation for the heterogeneity in spending change.
References
Aguiar, Mark and Erik Hurst, 2005, “Consumption vs. Expenditure,” Journal of Political Economy,
   113(5), pp. 919-948.
Aguiar, Mark and Erik Hurst, 2007a, "Deconstructing Lifecycle Expenditure", University of Chicago
   working paper.
Aguiar, Mark and Erik Hurst, 2007b, “Life-Cycle Prices and Production,” American Economic
   Review, 97 (5), pp. 1533-1559.
Ameriks, John, Andrew Caplin and John Leahy, 2007, “Retirement Consumption: Insights from a
   Survey,” Review of Economics and Statistics 89 (2), pp. 265-274.
Banks, James, Richard Blundell and Sarah Tanner, 1998, “Is There a Retirement-Savings Puzzle?”
   American Economic Review, 88 (4), pp. 769-788.
Battistin, Erich, Agar Brugiavini, Enrico Rettore, and Guglielmo Weber, 2007, “The Retirement
   Consumption Puzzle: Evidence from a Regression Discontinuity Approach?” Working Paper
   27/07, Department of Economics, University Ca' Foscari of Venice.
Bernheim, B. Douglas, Jonathan Skinner and Steven Weinberg, 2001, “What Accounts for the
   Variation in Retirement Wealth among U.S. Households?” American Economic Review, 91 (4),
   pp. 832-857.
Blau, David M., "Retirement and Consumption in a Life Cycle Model" (August 2007). IZA
   Discussion Paper No. 2986.
Consumption and Activities Mail Survey, 2001, 2003 and 2005. Final Releases. V2.0 for CAMS
   2001, V1.0 for CAMS 2003 and 2005. Supplemental Mail Survey to the Health and Retirement
   Study, funded by National Institute on Aging at NIH (U01 AGO9740).
Fisher, Jonathan, David S. Johnson, Joseph Marchand, Timothy M. Smeeding and Barbara Boyle
   Torrey, 2005, “The Retirement-Consumption Conundrum: Evidence from a Consumption
   Survey,” Retirement Research Center at Boston College, WP 2005-14.
Haider, Steven J. and Mel Stephens. 2007. “Is There a Retirement-Consumption Puzzle? Evidence
   Using Subjective Retirement Expectations.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 89(2):247-264.
Health and Retirement Study, Waves 1 through 8, public use datasets. Produced and distributed by the
   University of Michigan with funding from the National Institute on Aging (grant number NIA
   U01AG09740). Ann Arbor, MI, (various years).
Hurd, Michael D., 1996, "The Effect of Labor Market Rigidities on the Labor Force Behavior of Older
   Workers," in David Wise, ed., Advances in the Economics of Aging, Chicago: University of
   Chicago Press, pp. 11-58.
Hurd, Michael D., 1999, "Labor Market Transitions in the HRS: Effects of the Subjective Probability
   of Retirement and of Pension Eligibility," in Wealth, Work and Health: Innovations in
   Measurement in the Social Sciences, James P. Smith and Robert Willis, editors, University of
   Michigan Press, pp 267-290.
Hurd, Michael D., and Susann Rohwedder, 2003, “The Retirement-Consumption Puzzle: Anticipated
   and Actual Declines in Spending at Retirement,” NBER Working paper 9586, March
Hurd, Michael D. and Susann Rohwedder, 2005, “The Consumption and Activities Mail Survey:
   Description, Data Quality, and First Results on Life-Cycle Spending and Saving,” typescript,
   RAND.
Hurd, Michael D., and Susann Rohwedder, 2006, “Some Answers to the Retirement-Consumption
   Puzzle,” NBER Working Paper 12057, February.
Hurst, Erik, 2008, “The Retirement of a Consumption-Puzzle,” NBER Working Paper No. 13789,
   February.
Juster, F. Thomas, and Richard Suzman, 1995, “An Overview of the Health and Retirement Study,”
   The Journal of Human Resources, 30. Supplement, pp. S7-S56.
McClellan, Mark, 1998, “Health Events, Health Insurance and Labor Supply: Evidence from the
   Health and Retirement Survey,” in D. Wise, ed., Frontiers in the Economics of Aging, 1998,
   Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 301-346.
Miniaci, Raffaele, Chiara Monfardini and Guglielmo Weber, 2003, “Is There A Retirement
   Consumption Puzzle In Italy?” IFS Working Paper WP03/14, Institute for Fiscal Studies, London.
RAND HRS Data, Version H. Produced by the RAND Center for the Study of Aging, with funding
   from the National Institute on Aging and the Social Security Administration. Santa Monica, CA
   (February 2008).
Rust, John, 1990, “Behavior of Male Workers at the End of the Life Cycle: An Empirical Analysis of
   States and Controls,” in David Wise, ed., Issues in the Economics of Aging, Chicago: University
   of Chicago Press, pp. 317-379.
Smith, Sarah, 2006, “The Retirement Consumption Puzzle and Involuntary Retirement: Evidence from
   the British Household Panel Survey,” Economic Journal, March 2006, 116, C130-C148.
                                       Table 1
      Average and median real spending before and after retirement, panel. N = 385
                                        Total spending Nondurable                Food
Means
 Pre-retirement                                    40,465          35,749           6,188
 Post-retirement                                   38,552          34,635           5,998
 Percent change                                        -4.7            -3.1            -3.1
   95% confidence interval                     (-10.9, 1.9)     (-9.0, 3.5)    (-12.0, 6.5)
Medians
 Pre-retirement                                    34,130          29,438            5,146
 Post-retirement                                   32,109          29,282            4,960
 Percent change                                        -5.9            -0.5            -3.6
   95% confidence interval                     (-13.2, 2.6)     (-8.8, 7.6)    (-15.4, 4.6)
 Household-level change                                -5.7            -2.4            -3.0
   95% confidence interval                     (-11.8, 0.6)     (-5.6, 2.9)     (-8.8, 6.9)
Note: confidence intervals are bootstrapped.




                                        Table 2
               Real nondurable spending before and after retirement, panel.
                                       N = 385
                                           Wealth quartiles
                                lowest           2             3     highest             All
Means
 Pre-retirement                  28,207        33,223         36,697      45,125      35,749
 Post-retirement                 25,405        28,632         36,571      48,268      34,635
 Percent change                     -9.9        -13.8            -0.3         7.0        -3.1

Medians
 Pre-retirement                  25,336        27,619         32,822      34,288      29,438
 Post-retirement                 19,848        26,420         31,085      40,369      29,282
 Percent change                   -21.7           -4.3           -5.3       17.7         -0.5

 Household-level change             -7.8          -6.9          -0.5          8.6        -2.4
                                         Table 3
                   Real income changes associated with retirement, panel
                                         N = 375
                                                   Wealth quartiles
                                       1           2           3                      4          All
Means
 Pre-retirement                       36,908       51,726        68,270       128,285        71,150
 Post-retirement                      30,198       33,392        47,878       109,347        55,090
 Percent change                        -18.2        -35.4         -29.9         -14.8         -22.6

Medians
 Pre-retirement                       22,857       47,792        50,036         99,296       48,900
 Post-retirement                      17,479       28,386        38,080         58,912       33,804
 Percent change                        -23.5        -40.6         -23.9          -40.7        -30.9

  Household-level change                 -5.0        -36.0         -32.0         -16.6         -21.3
Note: Pre- and post-retirement income are measured in HRS. Most CAMS questionnaires are filled out in
October or November, so to match pre-retirement spending in year t we take income from HRS year t+1.
For example, income in 2001 is measured in HRS 2002, and it would be matched to pre-retirement
spending of someone not retired in CAMS 2001. Similarly if someone is retired in CAMS 2003 we use
income measured in HRS 2004 which covers the year 2003.




                                         Table 4
                  Non-housing and total wealth prior to retirement (2003$)
                                         N=381
                                                     Wealth quartile
                                     1            2            3             4                  All
Non-housing        Median       2,078      27,611       122,593        457,239               55,222
                   Mean         5,994      37,300       126,167        828,325              248,643
Total              Median      16,235     102,713       229,610        661,561              158,961
                   Mean        26,116     104,655       241,332      1,082,256              362,292
                                            Table 5
 Anticipated and recollected change in spending at retirement (percent) by wealth quartile, panel.
                                                           Wealth quartile before retirement
                                              Lowest              2            3       Highest        All
Average change
 Anticipated                                     -11.2          -18.9          -14.9        -13.8    -14.7
 Recollected                                     -23.0          -12.3          -12.2         - 9.4   -14.3
 Recollected minus anticipated                   -12.4            6.9            3.0           4.4     0.4
Median change
 Anticipated                                       0.0          -20.0              -5.0     -10.0    -10.0
 Recollected                                     -15.0          -10.0               0.0       0.0      0.0
 Recollected minus anticipated                   -15.0           10.0              10.0      10.0     10.0
Source: Authors’ calculations. N = 304.




                                            Table 6
Median of household-level change in real nondurable spending (percent), panel: Planning horizon
                                                                    Wealth quartile
Planning horizon                           lowest                 2            3          highest      All
Short horizon                               -17.7            -15.4              8.3         14.7     -10.0
Long horizon                                 -1.1             -0.8             -3.3          6.1      -0.1
All                                          -7.8             -6.9             -0.5          8.9      -2.7

Percent with short horizon                   40.8             24.0            22.9           8.5      24.2
Note: N = 384. A short planning horizon is a planning horizon of a year or less.
                                          Table 7
                 Real nondurable spending before and after retirement, panel
                                             Health status before retirement
                              excellent/very good          good      fair/poor                  Total
Means
 Pre-retirement                                 39,361          34,437         29,258         35,749
 Post-retirement                                39,665          29,519         29,776         34,635
 Percent change                                     0.8          -14.3             1.8           -3.1

Medians
 Pre-retirement                                 31,865          28,032         25,585         29,438
 Post-retirement                                31,837          24,776         22,529         29,282
 Percent change                                    -0.1          -11.6          -11.9            -0.5

  Household-level change                             2.5           -7.1            -6.9           -2.4

Number of observations                              192            108               85           385
Note: Health is measured in the HRS at the wave preceding the first CAMS transition wave.



                                       Table 8
 Real nondurable spending before and after retirement, panel: Importance of health as a
                                reason for retirement
                                  Not important           Important                  All
Means
 Pre-retirement                          36,957               33,419             36,101
 Post-retirement                         39,054               30,541             36,995
 Percent change                              5.7                 -8.6                2.5

Medians
 Pre-retirement                                  30,670                   31,216              30,681
 Post-retirement                                 30,780                   27,945              30,048
 Percent change                                      0.4                   -10.5                 -2.1

  Household-level change                            -3.0                   -17.0                 -0.4

Number of observations                              163                      52                   215
Note: Reasons for retirement is taken from various waves of HRS. Sample size reduced due to missing
values.
                                           Table 9
            Recollected spending change at retirement (percent) by wealth quartile
                                                Wealth quartile before retirement
Importance of health for
retirement                          Lowest             2             3      Highest           All
Means
 Important                            -24.0        -24.6         -17.7        -12.2          -21.6
 Not important                        -14.9        -15.6         -11.5         -6.4          -11.5
 All                                  -19.9        -18.6         -13.1         -7.2          -14.7

Medians
 Important                               -25.0        -25.0        -20.0          0.0        -20.0
 Not important                             0.0        -10.0          0.0          0.0          0.0
 All                                     -15.0        -20.0          0.0          0.0          0.0

Percent where health important            54.2         33.8        25.4          15.0        32.3
N=1,302


                                        Table 10
     Subjective probability of working past 62 and past 65 and actual retirement age
                                       (averages)
Wealth Quartiles                       P62                    P65                  Actual
Lowest                                 46.8                   28.7                    62.0
2                                      47.8                   23.6                    62.2
3                                      43.6                   21.3                    62.2
Highest                                39.1                   18.9                    63.1
All                                    44.3                   23.0                    62.4
Note: P62 and P65 are the subjective probabilities of working full-time past the age of 62
and 65 respectively. N=358



                                  Table 11
                     Expected and actual retirement age
                                            Wealth quartile
                            lowest          2         3 highest            All
Years of survival in            5.3       4.8       4.6      4.3           4.7
employment
Expected retirement age       63.3       62.8      62.6     62.3        62.7
Actual retirement age            62      62.2      62.2     63.1        62.4
Actual minus anticipated       -1.3      -0.6      -0.4      0.8        -0.3
                                       Table 12
         Median regression estimates for real change in spending at retirement
                                              Coeff     p-value       Coeff    p-value
lowest wealth quartile                            --          --          --         --
2                                               -4.6      0.484         -4.2     0.559
3                                               -7.4      0.324         -7.6     0.351
highest                                         -1.0      0.899         -5.5     0.525
long planning horizon                             --          --          --         --
short planning horizon                         -14.6      0.032         -9.1     0.251
short planning horizon and high wealth          33.0      0.004        24.5      0.025
health important for retirement                -22.3      0.002       -20.7      0.008
education less than high school                   --          --          --         --
high school                                       --          --       12.2      0.138
some college                                      --          --       12.3      0.091
college or greater                                --          --       21.8      0.005
missing health important for retirement         -6.5      0.205         -4.2     0.411
single at baseline                              -6.9      0.157         -4.1     0.431
constant                                        10.4      0.167         -3.6     0.704
Number of observations                                 384             383
Note: N = 383. Bootstrapped p-values (1000 replications).
                               Figure 1
         Observed Total Spending Before and After Retirement
                           Amounts in 2003 dollars




1
.8
.6
.4
.2
0




     0             25000            50000              75000   100000
                             annualized spending

                                before             after



Observed Non-durable Spending Before and After Retirement
                           Amounts in 2003 dollars
1
.8
.6
.4
.2
0




     0             25000            50000              75000   100000
                             annualized spending

                                before             after



         Observed Food Spending Before and After Retirement
                           Amounts in 2003 dollars
1
.8
.6
.4
.2
0




     0             5000             10000              15000   20000
                             annualized spending

                                before             after
                 Figure 2. Survival in employment

1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
      58   59   60   61      62    63   64     65       66       67   68    69   70   71

                Population        Lowest qtl        2        3        highest
