                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               THE CONSEQUENCES OF MORTGAGE CREDIT EXPANSION:
                EVIDENCE FROM THE 2007 MORTGAGE DEFAULT CRISIS

                                                Atif Mian
                                                Amir Sufi

                                          Working Paper 13936
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w13936


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2008




We gratefully acknowledge financial support from the Initiative on Global Markets at the University
of Chicago Graduate School of Business and the IBM Corporation. The data analysis was made possible
by the generous help of Myra Hart (Equifax Predictive Services), Jim DiSalvo (Philadelphia Fed),
Robert Shiller, Cameron Rogers (Fiserv), Greg Runk (CapIndex), and David Stiff (Fiserv). We thank
Mitch Berlin, Jonathan Guryan, Bob Hunt, Erik Hurst, Doug Diamond, Raghu Rajan, Josh Rauh, and
participants at the Chicago GSB finance lunch, Chicago GSB applied economics lunch, Emory University,
and the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia for comments and feedback. We also thank Sim Wee,
Rafi Nulman, and Smitha Nagaraja for excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Atif Mian and Amir Sufi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
The Consequences of Mortgage Credit Expansion: Evidence from the 2007 Mortgage Default
Crisis
Atif Mian and Amir Sufi
NBER Working Paper No. 13936
April 2008
JEL No. E44,E51,G21,L85,O51,R21

                                                   ABSTRACT

We demonstrate that a rapid expansion in the supply of mortgages driven by disintermediation explains
a large fraction of recent U.S. house price appreciation and subsequent mortgage defaults. We identify
the effect of shifts in the supply of mortgage credit by exploiting within-county variation across zip
codes that differed in latent demand for mortgages in the mid 1990s. From 2001 to 2005, high latent
demand zip codes experienced large relative decreases in denial rates, increases in mortgages originated,
and increases in house price appreciation, despite the fact that these zip codes experienced significantly
negative relative income and employment growth over this time period. These patterns for high latent
demand zip codes were driven by a sharp relative increase in the fraction of loans sold by originators
shortly after origination, a process which we refer to as "disintermediation." The increase in disintermediation-driven
mortgage supply to high latent demand zip codes from 2001 to 2005 led to subsequent large increases
in mortgage defaults from 2005 to 2007. Our results suggest that moral hazard on behalf of originators
selling mortgages is a main culprit for the U.S. mortgage default crisis.


Atif Mian
University of Chicago
Graduate School of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
atif@chicagogsb.edu

Amir Sufi
University of Chicago
Graduate School of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Avneue
Chicago, IL 60637
amir.sufi@chicagogsb.edu
Recent developments in the U.S. housing market are the focus of increased anxiety among

policy-makers, investors, and financial markets. After experiencing a dramatic rise in house

prices and outstanding mortgage debt, the U.S. has experienced a sharp increase in mortgage

defaults. Figure 1A shows that the average house price in the U.S increased by almost 200%

from 1996 to 2005. Figure 1B demonstrates a similar rise in outstanding mortgage debt, and also

that the rise in mortgage debt has been significantly larger than the rise in other types of

consumer debt. Figure 1C shows that the total number of accepted mortgage applications for new

home purchase increased rapidly from 2003 to 2005, suggesting the entry of new consumers in

this market during this time period.

         The rapid growth in mortgage credit and house prices has given way to grave concerns as

mortgage defaults continue to mount. For example, default rates rose by over 50% between the

fourth quarter of 2005 and the second quarter of 2007 (Figure 1D). The market value of

mortgage securities has fallen precipitously as well, with some tranches losing up to 70 to 80%

of their value in less than a year. Many believe that weakness in the U.S. housing market poses a

serious threat to financial markets and economic growth.1 The January 22nd, 2008 FOMC

statement justified a 75 basis point reduction in the federal funds rate in part because “…

incoming information indicates a deepening of the housing contraction …”

         The goal of this paper is to investigate the cause of the sharp rise in house prices and

subsequent spike in mortgage default rates. Our central finding is that a rapid expansion in the

supply of credit to zip codes with high latent demand for mortgages is a main cause of both

house price appreciation from 2001 to 2005 and the subsequent sharp increase in defaults from


1
  See Ng and Lauricella (WSJ, July 13th, 2007), Wessel (WSJ, September 13th, 2007), Lahart (August 27th, 2007),
and Bater (WSJ, November 20th, 2007). Press articles refer to the current mortgage environment as a “mortgage
crisis” (Creswell and Bajaj, NYT, March 5th, 2007) that “is comparable to some of the biggest financial disasters of
the past half-century” (Ip, Whitehouse, and Lucchetti, WSJ, December 10th, 2007).


                                                          1
2005 to 2007. The expansion in credit supply was driven by a shift in the mortgage industry

towards “disintermediation”, which we define as the process in which originators sell mortgages

in the secondary market shortly after origination.

       Our analysis is based on a new data set constructed from a number of proprietary and

public data sources. It represents one of the most comprehensive and disaggregated data sets in

the real estate and consumer credit literature. More specifically, our zip code-year level data set

covers 1996 through 2007 and includes a number of key variables of interest including

outstanding consumer debt of different types, defaults, house prices, mortgage loan application

characteristics, mortgage terms, and demographic variables such as income and crime. Given the

large number of zip codes in our sample, we are able to exploit cross-sectional variation over

time in zip code outcomes to empirically isolate our coefficients of interest.

       We identify the causal effect of expansion in the supply of mortgage credit on subsequent

changes in loan originations, house prices, and defaults by exploiting within-county across-zip

code variation in initial latent demand for mortgages. Our primary measure of initial latent

demand is the fraction of mortgage applications denied by originating institutions in the zip code

in 1996.

       The intuition behind our identification strategy can be understood through a simple

example. Consider two zip codes A and B that lie in the same county, but differ in the credit

worthiness of its households. In particular, suppose that all households in zip code A are

creditworthy enough to be given mortgages at the risk free rate. Everyone in zip code B also

applies for a mortgage loan, but only 50% of households have their applications accepted. The

remaining 50% are rejected due to a poor credit record. Then suppose there is an outward shift in

the supply of capital such that lenders are willing to lend to riskier households. Then, ceteris




                                                  2
paribus, zip code B that has high initial latent demand (i.e., unfulfilled demand) will experience a

sharp growth in credit, while zip code A will experience no change.2

           The key identifying assumption in the example above is that initial 1996 latent demand

for loans in a zip code is not positively correlated with subsequent improvements in credit

quality. For example, if households in zip code B experience a greater increase in economic

opportunities than those in A, then credit growth in B may be attributed to the increase in credit

quality rather than an increase in supply. However, we show that in our context zip codes with

higher initial latent demand for mortgages experienced negative relative income and employment

growth from 2001 to 2005.

           We implement this empirical strategy by first showing evidence of a shift in the supply of

mortgage credit toward high 1996 latent demand zip codes from 2001 to 2005. We demonstrate

that high 1996 latent demand zip codes experience a dramatic relative reduction in mortgage

denial rates during this time period. Simultaneous with the reduction in denial rates, high 1996

latent demand zip codes experience much larger increases in the debt to income ratio of accepted

mortgage applications. The source of this increase in credit availability is disintermediation: the

fraction of mortgages sold by originators in the secondary market experiences a sharp relative

increase for high latent demand zip codes from 2001 to 2005. Finally, the interest spread

between mortgages to low credit quality borrowers and high quality borrowers narrows to

historical lows during this period. Taken together, these facts demonstrate a sharp relative

increase in the supply of mortgages to high 1996 latent demand zip codes from 2001 to 2005.

           We then show the effects of the credit expansion on originated mortgage amounts, house

price appreciation, and subsequent defaults. We find that high 1996 latent demand zip codes

experience a large relative increase in both mortgage debt and house prices from 2001 to 2005.
2
    In Section III, we formalize this intuition in a simple Stiglitz and Weiss (1981) inspired model.


                                                             3
The relative increase in house prices in high 1996 latent demand zip codes occurs despite the fact

that these zip codes experience negative relative income and employment growth over this time

period. Our findings suggest that expansion in the supply of mortgage credit is a primary cause

of house price appreciation in high latent demand zip codes from 2001 to 2005.

       The expansion in credit to high latent demand zip codes is followed by a large increase in

default rates. In terms of magnitudes, a one standard deviation increase in “supply-driven”

mortgage debt from 2001 to 2005 leads to a one-half standard deviation increase in mortgage

default rates from 2005 to 2007. Furthermore, a one standard deviation increase in supply-driven

house price appreciation leads to a two standard deviation increase in mortgage default rates.

       Our findings demonstrate that the expansion in the supply of credit driven by

disintermediation is responsible for the rapid increase in new loan originations, house price

appreciation, and subsequent large increase in default rates. By allowing mortgage originators to

shed credit risk by selling loans, disintermediation significantly increased the amount of lending

to riskier borrowers. We directly link the disintermediation process to credit expansion, house

price appreciation, and ultimate defaults by showing that these changes take place in precisely

those zip codes that experienced the greatest increase in disintermediation. For example, credit

growth from 2001 to 2005 and growth in default rates from 2005 to 2007 is significantly higher

for zip codes with larger increases in disintermediation.

       Furthermore, the positive relation between disintermediation and subsequent defaults is

concentrated in zip codes in which a larger fraction of loans were sold by originators to

unaffiliated, non-commercial bank institutions. In other words, disintermediation only leads to

higher default rates when originator incentives are less aligned with buyers and when the buying




                                                 4
institution has no specialized screening skills. Taken together, these findings suggest that moral

hazard on behalf of originators is a primary culprit for the default crisis.

       Research presented here is related to recent working papers examining the rise in default

rates on subprime mortgages (Keys, Mukherjee, Seru and Vig (2008), Demyanyk and Van

Hemert (2007), and Doms, Furlong, and Krainer (2007)). Among these papers, the closest to

ours is Keys, Mukherjee, Seru and Vig (2008), who exploit credit score threshold rules used for

securitization to show that securitization leads to more defaults. Our work is also related to an

earlier strand of literature that examines the relation between housing price changes and

consumer borrowing (Poterba (1984), Case and Shiller (1989), Stein (1995), Genesove and

Mayer (1997, 2001), Hurst and Stafford (2004), Glaeser and Gyourko (2005), Himmelberg,

Mayer, and Sinai (2005), Brunnermeier and Julliard (2007)).

       This paper makes a novel contribution to this literature on several dimensions. First, and

most important, we believe that our analysis is the first to demonstrate the causal effect of

mortgage credit expansion driven by disintermediation from 2001 to 2005 on house price

appreciation and subsequent defaults. We are able to demonstrate causality given our unique

empirical strategy that exploits within-county variation across zip codes in initial latent demand

for mortgages. In addition, our zip code data on income, employment, and crime allow us to

perform tests that mitigate concerns that omitted credit quality variables are polluting the

estimates of the supply effect.

       Second, the data set we employ covers all major geographic areas of the United States.

As a result, we can utilize the microeconomic estimates to examine the macroeconomic effects

of supply expansion. Our conservative estimates based on the difference in difference within-

county estimator suggests that at least 15% of home purchase originations, and 10% of house




                                                  5
price appreciation from 2001 to 2005 can be attributed to credit supply expansion (see Section V

for details).

        Third, the causal link we establish between credit supply, house prices, and subsequent

financial crisis is not an isolated incident. Reinhart and Rogoff (2008) document that a liquidity

and asset price boom followed by financial collapse and economic slowdown is a trademark of

crises in many developed countries, including Japan, Spain, UK, and Norway. Our findings

provide important microeconomic evidence on this broader phenomenon by documenting the

precise channel through which mortgage credit expansion in the U.S. caused a rapid appreciation

in house prices and a subsequent increase in mortgage defaults.

        The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. The next section describes the data and

presents the summary statistics. Section II presents evidence of an aggregate shift in the supply

of mortgage credit from 2001 to 2005. Section III presents the empirical methodology, Section

IV presents the core results of our analysis, and Section V concludes.



I. Data and Summary Statistics

        Our empirical analysis employs a unique zip code-year level panel data set with

information on outstanding consumer debt, consumer debt defaults, house prices, mortgage

terms, and demographic variables. There are three main data sources that comprise our final data

set: Equifax data on consumer credit, Fiserv Case Shiller Weiss data on house prices, and Home

Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA) data on loan terms. In addition, we obtain demographic

information from the Decennial 2000 Census, the Census Statistics of U.S. Businesses, the

Internal Revenue Service, and CAP Index Inc. Our final data set includes 2,920 zip codes from

1996 through 2007, and these zip codes represent more than 40% of outstanding consumer debt




                                                 6
in the United States. In this section, we explain the construction of the final data set and present

summary statistics.

A. Equifax Predictive Services Data

       We collect data on outstanding consumer credit amounts and defaults from Equifax

Predictive Services. Equifax is a consumer credit rating agency that collects, organizes, and

manages credit information for U.S. consumers. The original Equifax data have credit

information for almost 170 million individuals going as far back as 1990. However, due to cost

and confidentiality concerns, Equifax aggregated the provided data at the zip code level at a

quarterly frequency from 1998Q1 to 2007Q2, and at an annual frequency from 1991 to 1997.

       We therefore have aggregate debt composition and defaults of every U.S. zip code at a

quarterly frequency from 1998 through the second quarter of 2007, and at an annual frequency

from 1991 through 1997. The outstanding consumer credit and delinquency data at the zip code

level are broken down by type of consumer loans (credit cards, mortgages, home equity lines,

auto loans, etc.), as well as consumer credit score.

       We construct aggregate measures of mortgage debt, home equity debt, and non-home

consumer debt. The latter category aggregates credit card debt, consumer loans, student loans,

and auto loans. The Equifax data record default amounts for the following varying degrees of

default: 30 days late, 60 days late, 90 days late, 120 days late or collections, severe derogatory,

and bankruptcy. In the analysis below, we define defaults as broadly as possible: default amounts

include any amounts 30 days late or more. The main reason for this choice is that many defaults

are recent. All of our specifications are run in first-differences, which mitigates concerns about

the average level of default for different default categories. Our results are materially unchanged

if we use an alternative definition of default such as 60 plus days late or more.




                                                  7
B. Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA) Data

       While the Equifax data provide us a comprehensive picture of the stock of consumer

credit at the zip code level, they do not provide information on the flow of new mortgage and

home equity loans being originated. We therefore collect this information from loan origination

data sets collected under the “Home Mortgage Disclosure Act” (HMDA).

       In order to supervise and enforce fair lending practices across that U.S., the U.S.

Congress mandates that all loans applications related to home purchase, refinancing, and home

improvement be reported to the federal government. The loan application information is publicly

available through HMDA from 1996 through 2006. For every loan application, the public data

record its status (denied / approved / originated), purpose (home purchase / refinancing / home

improvement), loan amount, and applicant characteristics including race, sex, income and home

ownership status. It also reports lender information, including the lender’s reasons for applicant

denial, type of lender, and whether the loan originator sold the loan to the secondary market

within a year. Since 2004, HMDA has also recorded the initial interest rate spread of loan

originations, and lien status. HMDA does not provide information on the maturity structure of a

loan, or whether the loan has a fixed rate mortgage or ARM. Nonetheless, with millions of loan

applications recorded every year, HMDA remains one of the best sources for understanding loan

origination patterns.

       Since our unit of analysis is a zip code, we aggregate the application-level HMDA data to

census tracts, which are the smallest available geographical identifiers in the data. The census

tract level HMDA data are then aggregated into zip codes using the census tract to zip code

match provided by Geolytics. Census tracts are smaller than zip codes on average, with about

60,000 census tracts for approximately 40,000 zip codes. Consequently the quality of the match




                                                 8
from census tract to zip code is excellent. For example, 85% of matched census tracts in our final

sample have over 90% of their population living in the zip code to which they are matched. The

intersection of HMDA and Equifax data contains 19,368 zip codes.

C. Fiserv Case Shiller Weiss Data

       Our primary data source for zip code level house price indices is Fiserv Case Shiller

Weiss. FCSW uses same house repeat sales data to construct house price indices at the zip code

level. The zip code level house price data we utilize in this study underlies the MSA level

S&P/Case Shiller indices, upon which futures are traded on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange.

The data set includes house price indices through the second quarter of 2007.

       One limitation of the data is that FCSW require a significant number of transactions in a

given zip code to obtain reliable estimates of changes in house prices over time. As a result,

FCSW has house prices for only 3,056 of the zip codes in Equifax-HMDA sample. While FCSW

covers only 15% of the number of zip codes in the Equifax-Census sample, their indices are

constructed for all major metropolitan and highly populated zip codes in the United States. As a

result, our final sample includes over 40% of the aggregate outstanding amounts of consumer

debt, and almost 45% of the aggregate home debt outstanding.

       The Appendix Table compares the sub-samples based on the house price index

restriction, and shows that the primary difference is the fraction of households in urban areas.

The average fraction of households in an urban area for our 3,056 zip codes is 92%, whereas the

average fraction of households in an urban for the other 16,312 zip codes for which we do not

have house price indices is only 46%. Our analysis is therefore concentrated on densely

populated urban zip codes in the United States. While there are other differences between the zip

codes included in our final sample and those excluded given the lack of house price data, they




                                                 9
are minor. In addition, all of our core results that do not require house price data are similar in

direction and magnitude if we use the full sample of 19,368 zip codes.

          As a robustness check of FCSW price indices, we also collect zip code level price indices

for 2,248 zip codes from Zillow.com, an online firm that provides house price data for potential

buyers and sellers. House price changes from FCSW and Zillow have a correlation coefficient of

0.91, and all of our core results are robust to the use of price indices from Zillow instead of

FCSW.

D. Census, Business Statisticss, IRS Data, and CapIndex crime statistics

          Zip code level demographic attributes such as population, race, poverty, mobility,

unemployment and education come from the Decennial 2000 Census. We also collect annual

measures of business opportunities available in a given zip code through the Business Statistics

published by the U.S. Census Bureau. These statistics provide data on wages, employment, and

number of establishments at the zip code level. Given a three year lag in the reporting of

information, the business opportunity data are available from 1996 through 2004. Finally, we

collect zip code level average “adjusted gross income” as reported by the IRS. The IRS currently

provides these data for 1998, 2001, 2002, 2004 and 2005. The income variable from the IRS is

important because it tracks the income of consumers living inside a given zip code, as opposed to

Business Statistics which provide wage and employment statistics for individuals working, but

not necessarily living, in a zip code.

          Since a potentially important neighborhood determinant of house prices and credit market

conditions is crime, we also collect zip level statistics on total crime from 2000 to 2007. These

data are from CAP Index, Inc., a firm specializing in providing crime data.3

E. Summary Statistics
3
    See Garmaise and Moskowitz (2006) for more information on CAP Index crime data.


                                                       10
        Table 1 presents summary statistics for the final sample of 2,920 zip codes, for which we

have data available at an annual frequency from 1996 to 2007. All variables are measured as of

the fourth quarter of each year, except for 2007 for which variables are measured as of the end of

the second quarter. Mortgage debt represents over 74% of consumer debt in our sample, and the

annualized growth in mortgage debt outstanding is 10.2% from 2001 to 2005. In contrast, the

annualized growth in non-home debt outstanding is only 4.6%. The average default rate on

mortgages in 1996 is 3%. While there is little change in the default rate from 1996 to 2005, there

is an increase of 1.7% in the mortgage default rate from 2005 to 2007, which represents almost a

three-quarter standard deviation and 50% of the mean. While the default rate on non-home debt

also increases from 2005 to 2007, the increase is smaller.

        House price growth is strong in our sample period, with house prices growing by an

annualized rate of 7.3% from 1996 to 2001 and 11.3% from 2001 to 2005. HMDA data on the

growth in amounts originated are consistent with the growth in outstanding mortgage debt from

Equifax: originations for home purchase grow at an annualized rate of 13.4% from 2001 to 2005.

The denial rate for mortgages in 1996 is 22%. There is a dramatic rise in the fraction of

mortgages sold to non-mortgage agency investors from 2001 to 2005: the fraction of these

mortgages increases by 26 percentage points.4



II. Evidence of an Aggregate Supply Shift in Mortgage Credit

        Figure 1B and Table 1 demonstrate an increase in outstanding mortgage debt from 2001

to 2005 that is almost 30% larger than the expansion in non-home debt over the same time

period. Figure 1C shows suggest that the increase in mortgage debt is not entirely driven by


4
 By “non-mortgage agency investors”, we mean investors other than Freddie Mac, Fannie Mae, Federal Farmers
Home Adminstration, and Ginnie Mae.


                                                     11
larger mortgages: it shows a larger increase in number of accepted mortgage applications for

home purchase from 2003 to 2005 than in any other period in our sample. Taken together, these

figures demonstrate a sharp rise in mortgage credit on both intensive and extensive margins from

2001 to 2005.

           The increase in the quantity of credit is also associated with an increase in the observable

riskiness of mortgage credit. Figure 2A maps the median, 75th percentile, and 90th percentile of

mortgage debt to income ratios of accepted mortgage applications.5 There is a slight upward

trend in the ratios from 1996 through 2000. However, the increase in mortgage debt to income

ratios from 2001 to 2005 is much larger. The mortgage debt to income ratio of borrowers in the

90th percentile increases by 1 unit over this time period. This change represents a remarkable two

standard deviation increase in the mortgage debt to income ratio at the 90th percentile.

           In Figure 2B, we examine the aggregate mortgage debt to income ratio of the entire zip

code, as opposed to the mortgage debt to income ratio of accepted mortgage applications

examined in Figure 2A. Aggregate mortgage debt originated for home purchase comes from the

HMDA data in a given year, and it is scaled by the aggregate zip code income reported to the

IRS. We utilize this measure as an alternative measure of the risk profile of zip codes given

potential fraud associated with income reporting on mortgage applications. The drawback of this

measure is that income data from the IRS is available only for 1998, 2001, 2002, 2004, and 2005.

Figure 2B shows a very similar pattern to Figure 2A. The total increase in mortgage debt to

income ratios from 2001 through 2005 is 0.12, which represents a two-thirds standard deviation

increase in the mortgage debt to income ratio.

           The sharp rise in debt to income ratios during the credit expansion highlights the

willingness of mortgage originators to take on increasing levels of risk. One concern is that the
5
    The percentiles are computed from accepted mortgage applications in a zip code using the HMDA data set.


                                                         12
increase in debt to income ratios is compensated by a concurrent decrease in debt to value ratios

as house prices increase. However, this is not the case. While we do not have mortgage level

home value data, Demyanyk and Van Hemert (2007) utilize such data and show that debt to

value ratios also increased from 2001 to 2005.

       A key remaining question is whether investors holding the new riskier mortgage

securities were compensated for the greater risk through higher interest rates. While we do not

have data on mortgage level interest rates, Chomsisengphet and Pennington-Cross (2006) show

that the subprime-prime mortgage spread for 30-year fixed mortgages dropped from 225 basis

points to historical lows of 175 basis points from 2001 to 2004. Their calculation uses 30-year

fixed mortgage rates, which mitigates concern that the decline in subprime-prime mortgage

spreads is due to low teaser rates on subprime loans at origination. Demyanyk and Van Hemert

(2007) reach a similar conclusion using a different data set (see their Figure 8).

       What precipitated such a dramatic increase in the riskiness and quantity of mortgages

during this time period? It is difficult to reconcile the evidence solely with changes in demand

for credit, particularly given that the subprime mortgage interest rates declined sharply despite

increases in quantity and risk. Figure 3 demonstrates one potential source of these trends. It

displays the dramatic rise in disintermediation, or the fraction of mortgages originated that are

sold to non-mortgage agency investors in the secondary market from 2001 to 2005. The fraction

of these mortgages is relatively constant up to 2001, and then increases by 25 percentage points

from 2001 to 2005.

       Two fundamental macroeconomic factors are likely to have played an important role in

pushing the securitization wave. First, 2001-2005 was a period of very low interest rates and

high liquidity in the United States. Despite the low interest rates, there was a flood of




                                                 13
international liquidity coming into the U.S. from the middle east, China, and India – a

phenomena referred to as “macro imbalances” in the international finance literature. Second,

innovations in the financial sector led to the creation of the collateralized debt obligation (CDO)

market that allowed risky mortgages to be pooled together and sold off in tranches of varying

seniority. Since the senior tranches were often given a very highly rated (e.g. AAA), these new

mortgage backed securities satisfied the rating criteria of institutional capital.



III. Empirical Methodology

       Section II demonstrates an outward shift in the supply of mortgage credit between 2001

and 2005 driven by disintermediation. In this section we develop an empirical methodology that

permits us to isolate the causal impact of the supply shift on mortgage originations, house prices,

and subsequent defaults.

A. Empirical Model

       Our empirical methodology for isolating the supply channel is based on the premise that

if one were to observe the latent (i.e. unfulfilled) loan demand, then ceteris paribus an expansion

in credit supply should lead to higher credit uptake in areas with greater initial latent demand.

The key identifying assumption, and one we test rigorously, is that areas with greater initial

unfulfilled credit demand do not experience larger positive income, credit quality, or economic

opportunity shocks in the future.

       We illustrate our empirical methodology in the following parsimonious model of

mortgage originations for home purchases. Consider customers living in zip code z in county c at

time t. In every period customers of measure one are interested in purchasing a new home that

requires one unit of capital. For simplicity, we assume that a qualified customer takes the




                                                  14
mortgage this period, and promises to completely pay off principal and interest next period. We

define customers as “Prime” if their income profile exceeds a certain threshold such that there is

no possibility of default next period. As a result, all lenders are willing to lend to Prime

customers at the risk free rate normalized to 1. We denote the fraction of prime customers in a

zip code by fzt (Izt), with the argument Izt reminding us that fzt depends on the overall income

distribution within a zip code.

        We define customers with income profiles below the Prime threshold as “Sub-Prime”.

What distinguishes Sub-Prime customers is that they have a positive probability, p, of default if

their realized income next period is sufficiently low. Sub-Prime customers have different

individual income profiles, and can therefore differ in their probability of default, p. We assume

the mortgage market is competitive at the national level, and that lenders recover nothing in case

of default. At each t, the interest rate offered to a Sub-Prime customer is given by:

                                                                                                        (1)

                                                   ∞

In (1), θ reflects the “risk premium” that the market charges for bearing the probability of

default, and is an interest rate ceiling above which no lender is willing to lend. We do not

model explicitly the underlying friction that leads to an interest rate ceiling above which

originators are unwilling to lend—borrower moral hazard (Diamond (1991), Holmstrom and

Tirole (1997)) or adverse selection (Stiglitz and Weiss (1981)) are potential reasons.6

        The net result of equation (1) is that only a fraction gzt of Sub-Prime customers in each

period t obtain mortgages. The fraction gzt depends on the market risk premium (θt) and

distribution of p among Sub-Prime customers, which in turn is a function of the overall income

6
 Gabriel and Rosenthal (2007) explicitly model how a supply expansion affects borrowers with a Stiglitz and Weiss
(1981) adverse selection problem. Their conclusions are similar to ours.


                                                       15
distribution Izt in the population.7 We can therefore write gzt as gzt (θt , Izt), with gθ < 0 and gI > 0.

The preceding discussion gives us the equilibrium determination of mortgage originations in zip

code z at time t (Lzt) as:

                                                                 1                                (2)

We have suppressed arguments of f and g for notational simplicity. Allowing for other possible

factors affecting Lzt, yields:

                                                       1                                          (3)

In (3), αz reflects time-invariant determinants of loan origination for a given zip code, αct reflects

time-varying county-level factors affecting loan originations in a given zip code, and εzt is an

unobserved error term.

           The fundamental economic drivers of equilibrium loan originations in equation (3) are

income factors, which are summarized by income distribution Izt, and credit supply factors,

which are summarized by the mortgage risk premium θt. The challenge of our empirical

methodology is to isolate the effect of changes in supply factors on loan originations while

controlling for income factors. Since equation (3) includes county interacted with time fixed

effects, any changes in income that are common across zip codes in the same county are non-

parametrically removed. For example, an economic boom in a given county is absorbed by αct.

           In order to clarify the identifying assumption we make to isolate the supply channel, we

first make the (strong) assumption that all variation in income factors occurs at the county level.

Given that there is no residual time variation left in fzt (which does not depend on the risk

premium), we can replace it by the initial fraction of Prime customers in a zip code, fz0. Since we

are interested in shocks to loan originations, we first-difference equation (3) and suppress time


7
    Solving explicitly, gzt is the subset of Sub-Prime customers with   .


                                                            16
subscripts for simplicity. Therefore, under the assumption that income factors only vary at the

level of the county, first-differencing equation (3) gives us:

                                ∆             1                  ∆                             (4)

where β =Δgz , which depends only on the credit supply shock θ. A negative θ reflects a

reduction in market risk premium and hence a positive credit supply shock. A positive credit

supply shock would lead to more Sub-Prime consumers obtaining mortgages and hence a

positive β. In other words,    identifies the impact of a credit supply shock on Lzt under the

identifying assumption that all income shocks occur at the county level.

         We are now in a position to relax our identifying assumption further. Income shocks may

be zip code specific, but as long as they are orthogonal to the initial latent demand conditions (1-

fz0),   retains its interpretation. A natural corollary is that if zip code specific income shocks are

negatively correlated with the initial fraction of Sub-Prime customers, then our interpretation of

   as a credit supply coefficient is still accurate, but the magnitude is an under-estimate of the

true supply effect. More specifically, if areas with a higher fraction of Sub-Prime customers have

negative future income shocks, then       will understate the effect of credit supply on originations.

As we show below, the fraction of Sub-Prime customers at the beginning of our sample is

negatively correlated with observable measures of future income shocks. This negative

correlation strengthens our identifying assumption that future income shocks are not positively

correlated with the initial fraction of Sub-Prime customers, and further suggests that our

estimates may understate the effect of credit expansion on outcomes.

         Equation (4) represents our primary regression specification. In order to estimate this

equation, our data provides us with many possible measures of initial latent demand conditions,

or equivalently “Sub-Prime” customers (1-fz0). For example, through the HMDA data we observe



                                                   17
the fraction of home loan applications in a given zip code that are denied in 1996. We also

observe the fraction of customers who have a credit score of under 660 or under 620 in 1996, the

fraction of home loans that are guaranteed by FHA under a “low income housing” initiative in

1996, and the fraction of households who are renters as of 2000. We use fraction of loan

applications denied in 1996 as our main measure of high latent demand zip codes, and show that

all of our core results are robust to alternative definitions as well.

B. Characteristics of High 1996 Latent Demand Zip Codes

        As equation (4) demonstrates, initial latent demand (1-fz0) is of primary importance in our

empirical analysis. Table 2 presents the correlation of our main measure of latent demand in a

zip code, the fraction of mortgage applications denied in 1996, with other variables. This

measure is strongly correlated with alternative measures of high latent demand/high credit risk,

such as the fraction of subprime borrowers, the fraction of loans backed by FHA, or the fraction

of housing units rented. It is also strongly correlated with poverty and unemployment, and

negatively correlated with household income measures.

        The bottom panel of Table 2 demonstrates that measures of future growth in economic

opportunities are negatively correlated with the fraction of 1996 mortgage applications denied.

As mentioned above, the critical identifying assumption of our empirical methodology is that

areas with high initial latent demand do not experience subsequent increases in income, credit

quality, or economic opportunity. The correlations in Table 2 strongly support the identifying

assumption, given that observable measures of future growth in economic opportunity are in fact

negatively correlated with our primary measure of high 1996 latent demand. This also suggests

that our estimated    is an under-estimate of the true coefficient on supply shock β.




                                                   18
IV. Credit Expansion, Mortgage Debt, Housing Prices, and Defaults

       In this section, we implement the empirical methodology discussed above. Our goal is to

estimate the causal effect of mortgage credit expansion (due to disintermediation) on growth in

mortgage debt, house prices, and mortgage defaults.

A. Credit Expansion to High 1996 Latent Demand Zip Codes

       We first demonstrate that high 1996 latent demand zip codes experience a relative

increase in credit supply to riskier borrowers from 2001 to 2005. In Figures 4 through 7, we plot

coefficient estimates from a year-by-year set of county fixed effects regressions of the following

general specification:

                          ,            β                             ,           ,           (5)

                                         1997, 1998, … , 2007

In other words, for each year t from 1997 to 2007, we estimate a first-difference county fixed

effects specification relating the change in outcome y for zip code z in county c from year 1996

to year t to our primary measure of high 1996 latent demand, which is the fraction of 1996

mortgage applications denied in the zip code. We plot the coefficient estimates of β for each

year t, along with the corresponding 95% confidence interval. The plotted coefficient estimates

represent the differential effect on the change in outcome y from 1996 to t for high latent demand

zip codes, after controlling for county fixed effects (αc). This methodology allows us to show the

differential effect of mortgage credit expansion on high latent demand zip codes throughout our

sample period, instead of taking a particular stand on exactly the time period over which

expansion occurs. The inclusion of county fixed effects in the first-differenced specification also

takes out all possible shocks affecting the outcome of interest at the county level.




                                                 19
         Figure 4 examines the differential pattern of denial rates, debt to income ratios, and

disintermediation for high 1996 latent demand zip codes. There is a dramatic differential

decrease in denial rates for high 1996 latent demand zip codes beginning in 2001 and lasting

through 2006. The coefficient estimate for 2004 implies that a one standard deviation increase in

1996 latent demand (0.08) leads to a reduction in the denial rate of 2 percentage points from

1996 to 2004, which is a one-third standard deviation of the left hand side variable. Figure 4B

shows a corresponding increase in the average debt to income ratio of high 1996 latent demand

zip codes. Beginning in 2002, there is a sharp relative increase in the mortgage debt to income

ratio of high 1996 latent demand zip codes. The coefficient estimate for 2005 implies that a one

standard deviation increase in 1996 latent demand leads to a one-third standard deviation

increase in mortgage debt to income ratios from 1998 to 2005.

         The reduction in denial rates and increases in mortgage debt to income ratios for high

1996 latent demand zip codes demonstrates a strong shift in the supply of mortgage credit to a

riskier consumer base from 2001 to 2005. Figure 4C shows the source of this credit expansion.

Beginning in 2001, there is a sharp relative rise in disintermediation for high 1996 latent demand

zip codes. The coefficient estimate for 2006 implies that a one standard deviation increase in

1996 latent demand leads to a 2.4 percentage point increase in the fraction of mortgages

disintermediated from 1996 to 2006, which is more than a one-third standard deviation of the left

hand side variable8.

B. The Effect of Credit Expansion on Mortgage Debt and Housing Prices

         Figure 4 demonstrates that zip codes for which there is a high fraction of mortgage

applications denied in 1996 experience a large relative increase originators’ willingness to supply


8
  There is a “bump” in Figure 4C prior to 2001. However, since the aggregate level of disintermediation does not
increase during the pre-2001 period (Figure 3), this bump is unlikely to have much of an effect in the aggregate.


                                                         20
credit from 2001 to 2005. This trend appears to be driven in large part due to an increase in the

disintermediation of mortgages and a consequent increase in the risk tolerance of originators. In

this section, we examine the differential effect of the increase in mortgage supply on mortgage

debt and housing prices in high 1996 latent demand zip codes.

        Figure 5A plots coefficient estimates of the differential growth in the number of accepted

mortgages for home purchase for high 1996 latent demand zip codes. From 2002 to 2005, the

coefficient estimate on high 1996 latent demand increases by 300%. The coefficient estimate for

2005 implies that a one standard deviation increase in 1996 latent demand (0.08) leads to a

relative increase in the growth rate of accepted mortgage applications from 1996 to 2005 of 24%,

which is a one-half standard deviation of the left hand side variable. There is a slight increase

from 1998 to 2000, but this increase is less than half the increase from 2002 to 2005. The

evidence suggests that high 1996 latent demand zip codes experience dramatic growth in the

number of new homeowners from 2002 to 2005 as a result of the expansion in mortgage supply.

        Figure 5B examines the relative growth in mortgage debt outstanding of high 1996 latent

demand zip codes. The figure demonstrates that the sensitivity of mortgage debt growth in a zip

code to high 1996 latent demand increases from 1999 through 2007. The coefficient estimate for

2007 implies that a one standard deviation increase in 1996 latent demand leads to a relative

increase in the growth rate of mortgage debt outstanding from 1996 through 2007 of 4

percentage points, which is one-eighth of a standard deviation of the left hand side variable.9



9
  The estimates in Figure 5B are relatively imprecise and small in magnitude compared to other estimates of
mortgage growth because the Equifax measure of mortgage debt used in the figure does not differentiate mortgage
debt for new home purchase versus mortgage debt obtained through refinancing. This is important because high
1996 latent demand zip codes do not refinance as aggressively in response to declining interest rates as low 1996
latent demand zip codes (something we confirm in the HMDA data that separates originations for refinancing versus
home purchase). Interest rates declined sharply from 2001 to 2003, and so there was a relative decrease in mortgage
debt due to refinancing for high 1996 latent demand zip codes from 2001 to 2003 even though there was a strong
relative increase in mortgage debt for new home purchase for high latent demand zip codes over this time period.


                                                        21
       Figure 5C shows a sharp relative increase from 2002 to 2006 in the volume of home

purchase loan originations for high 1996 latent demand zip codes. The coefficient estimate for

2006 implies that a one standard deviation change in 1996 latent demand leads to a relative

increase in the growth rate of originated mortgage amounts for home purchase of 28%, which is

one-half standard deviation of the left hand side variable. As in the number of mortgage

applications, there is a relative increase in the growth rate for high 1996 latent demand zip codes

from 1998 to 2000, but the increase from 2002 to 2006 is significantly larger.

       Figure 6 demonstrates the effect of increased supply on house price appreciation. Zip

codes with high 1996 latent demand do not experience any higher growth in house prices from

1996 to 1998. However, as credit supply starts to expand disproportionately more in high latent

demand zip codes in 1999 (Figure 5A), they start to experience a relative increase in house price

appreciation. The relative growth in house price appreciation accelerates from 2001 onward. The

coefficient estimate for 2000 implies that a one standard deviation increase in 1996 latent

demand leads to a relative increase in house price appreciation from 1996 to 2000 of 0.8%,

which is less than a one-fifteenth standard deviation in house price appreciation. The coefficient

estimate for 2006 implies that a one standard deviation increase in 1996 latent demand leads to a

relative increase in house price appreciation from 1996 to 2006 of almost 6%, which is one-third

of a standard deviation. It is important to emphasize that the relative increase in housing prices

for high latent demand zip codes occurs despite relative negative income and employment

growth during this time period. The evidence suggests that a significant fraction of relative house

price appreciation from 2001 to 2006 in high 1996 latent demand zip codes is a direct result of

the expansion of mortgage credit supply.




                                                 22
       As discussed in Section III, the key identifying assumption of our empirical methodology

is that high 1996 latent demand zip codes do not experience future increases in economic

opportunities or income shocks. Table 2 strongly supports this identifying assumption, as it

documents that observable measures of future growth in economic opportunities are negatively

correlated with our measure of high 1996 latent demand. Nonetheless, in Table 3, we control

directly for changes in economic opportunity. More specifically, Table 3 presents coefficient

estimates from the following first difference county fixed effects specification:

                                                       ,                                        (6)

In (6), X represents a matrix of control variables for economic opportunities including income

growth, wage growth, establishment growth, and employment growth. We also include zip code

level growth in crime rate as measured by the CAP Index crime index to account for variation in

neighborhood safety. We choose the period 2001 to 2005 for the regressions given the evidence

from Figures 4 through 6 that this is the main period over which supply expansion occurs. Minor

variations of this time frame do not affect the results.

       Panel A of Table 3 presents the estimates. The coefficient estimate in column 1 implies

that a one standard deviation change in 1996 latent demand leads to a 17% higher growth rate in

originated mortgage amounts for home purchase from 2001 to 2005, which is a one-third

standard deviation of the left hand side variable. The coefficient estimate in column 2 implies

that a one standard deviation change in 1996 latent demand leads to a 3% higher growth rate in

mortgage debt outstanding, which is a one-eighth standard deviation of the left hand side

variable. Finally, the coefficient estimate in column 3 implies that a one standard deviation

change in 1996 latent demand leads to a 3% higher growth rate in house prices, which is a one-

eighth standard deviation of the left hand side variable. The results in Table 3 suggest that

magnitudes are similar after controlling for changes in economic opportunities.


                                                  23
        In Panel B of Table 3, we examine the differential effect of credit expansion on mortgage

debt and house prices using a more direct measure of relative supply shifts. More specifically,

Panel B presents coefficient estimates from the following specification:

                                                                                             (7)

In other words, we estimate a first difference county fixed effects specification relating the

change in outcome y for zip code z in county c from 2001 to 2005 to the change in denial rates

from 2001 to 2005. We utilize the change in denial rates over this time period to measure the

change in the willingness of lenders to supply mortgage credit to a given zip code. The estimates

in Panel B are largely consistent with the estimates in Panel A. Zip codes that experience a

reduction in denial rates from 2001 to 2005 experience an increase in mortgage amounts

originated for home purchase, mortgage debt outstanding, and house price appreciation.

        The evidence in this sub-section demonstrates that increased risk tolerance on behalf of

originators led to a sharp increase in the supply of mortgage credit high 1996 latent demand zip

codes. As a result, these zip codes experienced large increases in originated mortgage amounts

and house prices from 2001 to 2005. Our results suggest that a substantial fraction of relative

house price appreciation and originated mortgage amounts in high 1996 latent demand zip codes

would not have occurred in the absence of the expansion in mortgage credit availability.

C. The Effect of Credit Expansion on Default Rates

        The results above suggest that a shift in the supply of mortgage credit caused a significant

increase in mortgage debt outstanding and house prices for zip codes with high 1996 latent

demand for mortgages. In this section, we explore the effect of credit expansion on mortgage

default rates.

        Figure 7A replicates the methodology of Figures 4 through 6 with the change in default

rates as the left hand side variable. Figure 7A shows that there is a relative increase in mortgage


                                                 24
defaults in 2001 for high 1996 latent demand zip codes. This relative increase during a recession

year is consistent with the results in Table 2 that show that high 1996 latent demand zip codes

are lower income, higher unemployment areas. However, it is important to emphasize that the

2001 increase in defaults is not preceded by a relative decrease in denial rates (Figure 4A) or an

increase in aggregate mortgage debt to income ratios (Figure 4B). In other words, there is less

evidence that the relative increase in default rates for high 1996 latent demand zip codes in 2001

is due to an expansion of credit supply. Instead, it appears to be driven primarily by the

economic slowdown.

       Figure 7A also shows a sharp increase in default rates for high 1996 latent demand zip

codes from 2005 to the second quarter of 2007. In contrast to the relative increase in defaults in

2001, this increase is not preceded by or concurrent with a recession. Instead, the increase in

defaults for high 1996 latent demand zip codes is preceded by a decline in denial rates (Figure

4A) and an increase in aggregate mortgage debt to income ratios (Figure 4B). These facts

suggest that the relative increase in default rates from 2005 to 2007 is due to the rapid expansion

in the supply of credit from 2001 to 2005. In terms of magnitudes, a one standard deviation

increase in 1996 latent demand for a zip code leads to a 1 percentage point increase in default

rates from 1996 to 2007, which is one-third standard deviation of the left hand side variable.

       In Figure 7B, we examine the differential effect of credit expansion on mortgage default

rates by using a time-varying measure of relative supply shifts. More specifically, Figure 7B

plots coefficient estimates from a year-by-year set of county fixed effects regressions of the

following general specification:

                                   ,         β                 ,                 ,               (8)

                                        2001, 2002, … , 2007




                                                 25
In other words, for each year t from 2001 to 2007, we estimate a first difference county fixed

effects specification relating the change in default rates for zip code z in county c from year t-2 to

year t to the change in denial rates from t-5 to t-3. For example, for t = 2007, the specification

estimates whether default rates from 2005 to 2007 are correlated with changes in denial rates

from 2002 to 2004. We utilize the change in denial rates as a measure of the change in the

willingness of lenders to supply mortgage credit to a given zip code.

       Figure 7B shows the year-by-year estimates. It demonstrates that the only year in our

sample for which changes in default rates are negatively correlated with lagged changes in denial

rates is 2007. In other words, zip codes that experienced a reduction in denial rates from 2002 to

2004 experience an increase in default rates from 2005 to 2007.

       In columns 1 and 2 of Table 4, we examine a reduced form specification relating the

change in default rates from 2005 to 2007 to 1996 latent demand and the change in denial rates

from 2001 to 2005, respectively. The two right hand side variables measure zip codes that

experience a relative increase in the supply of credit from 2001 to 2005; therefore, the coefficient

estimates represent the reduced form effect of credit expansion on default rates. The estimate in

column 1 implies that a one standard deviation increase in 1996 latent demand leads to a 0.52%

increase in default rates from 2005 to 2007, which is a one-fifth standard deviation increase in

the left hand side variable.

       In columns 3 through 6 of Table 4, we examine the effect of supply-driven mortgage

growth and house price growth from 2001 to 2005 on the change in default rates from 2005 to

2007. We define supply driven mortgage growth and house price growth as the predicted values

from first stage regressions relating mortgage growth and house price growth from 2001 to 2005

to either the fraction of 1996 mortgage applications denied or the change in denial rates from




                                                 26
2001 to 2005. The first stage estimates used to predict supply driven mortgage growth and house

price growth are in columns 1 and 3 of Table 3.

       The estimates in columns 3 through 6 of Table 4 demonstrate that supply driven

mortgage growth and house price growth from 2001 to 2005 have a strong effect on the increase

in default rates from 2005 to 2007. The estimate in column 3 implies that a one standard

deviation increase in supply driven mortgage growth from 2001 to 2005 leads to a 1.6 percentage

point increase in default rates, which is more than a one-half standard deviation increase of the

left hand side variable. A one standard deviation increase in supply driven house price

appreciation leads to a 5 percentage point increase in default rates, which is almost a two

standard deviation change in the left hand side variable.

D. Disintermediation and Moral Hazard

       The evidence in the section above demonstrates that house price appreciation and debt

growth driven by an increase in the supply of mortgage credit from 2001 to 2005 caused

substantial increases in default rates. The evidence also suggests that investors that entered this

market experienced large losses as a result of the expansion in credit. For example, our estimates

imply that a 10% expansion in mortgage credit from 2001 to 2005 to high 1996 latent demand

zip codes caused a 3 percentage point increase in default rates, which is a doubling of the sample

average. Given that foreclosure recovery rates are typically between 40 and 70% (Pence (2006)),

the increase in default rates represented significant losses for mortgage investors. In addition, the

subprime-prime mortgage spread fell to historical lows during this period, which suggests that

investors were not compensated for the additional ex post risk. These losses beg the question:

Why did investors agree to fund these mortgages?




                                                 27
       Figure 3 above shows that the sharp rise in mortgage growth coincides with the increase

in disintermediation of mortgages. Moreover, the disintermediation is significantly stronger in

zip codes with high 1996 latent demand for loans (Figure 4C). Models of financial

disintermediation and moral hazard argue that financial intermediaries exerting unobservable

monitoring effort must hold a significant fraction of credit risk to ensure proper incentives

(Holmtrom and Tirole (1997), He and Krishnamurthy (2006)). The findings above suggest that

moral hazard on behalf of loan originators that no longer hold a stake in risky loans is a potential

cause of the increase in default rates.

       In Table 5, we present further evidence of originator moral hazard. Column 1 in Panel A

reaffirms the result shown earlier in Figure 4C: High initial latent demand zip codes experience a

larger increase in fraction of loans sold off to investors within a year. Columns 2 through 6 of

Panel A break down the fraction sold by the identity of the party buying the mortgage from the

originating institution. The correlation between high latent demand and disintermediation is

being driven by mortgages sold in private securitizations to unaffiliated investors, and to non-

bank financial firms. In other words, high latent demand zip codes did not experience an increase

in the fraction of mortgages sold to affiliated institutions or banks.

       Column 1 of Panel B demonstrates that zip codes experiencing a relative increase in

disintermediation also experience increases in mortgage debt to income ratios, which is

consistent with originators shedding credit risk during the 2001 to 2005 expansion. Columns 2

through 6 show the correlation of the fraction of loans sold in a zip code from 2001 to 2005 by

the type of investor buying the mortgage with subsequent default rates from 2005 to 2007. The

estimates demonstrate that zip codes in which a larger fraction of mortgages are sold in private




                                                  28
securitizations and to non-commercial bank financial firms experience relatively larger increases

in default rates from 2005 to 2007.

        In contrast, column 2 of Panel B shows that zip codes in which originators sell more

mortgages to affiliated investors do not experience an increase in default rates. Under the

assumption that originators’ incentives are more closely aligned with affiliated versus non-

affiliated investors, these results suggest that undetected moral hazard is a primary cause for the

higher default rates on mortgages sold to non-affiliated investors. In addition, column 5 of Table

5 demonstrates that zip codes in which originators sell more mortgages to other commercial

banks do not experience an increase in default rates. Given that commercial banks have

specialized skill in screening loans, these results suggest that originators only sold bad loans to

unaffiliated investors lacking the skills to judge loan quality. Together with the findings in Panel

A, these findings support the hypothesis that moral hazard on behalf of originators is a main

culprit for the rise in default rates.

        A caveat is in order. Unlike the results above that demonstrate a causal effect of mortgage

credit expansion on house price appreciation and subsequent defaults, we view our evidence on

moral hazard as suggestive. In other words, it is more difficult to assert that undetected moral

hazard on behalf of originators caused the spike in mortgage defaults for two reasons. First, there

is the lack of exogenous within-county variation across zip codes in the ability of originators to

sell mortgages. Without such variation, it is difficult to rule out alternative explanations. Second,

we do not have loan-level interest rate data, which makes it difficult to examine whether moral

hazard is priced. Nonetheless, our suggestive findings are supported by both academic and

anecdotal evidence. Keys, Mukherjee, Seru and Vig (2008) exploit cutoffs in FICO scores

required for securitization of mortgages to show that securitization causes an increase in default




                                                 29
rates, which they interpret as evidence of bank moral hazard. They show that interest rate

differentials between mortgages above and below the cutoffs are similar. In addition, as

mentioned above, interest rates on subprime mortgage declined to historical lows during this

time period, which suggests that investors did not price increased moral hazard concerns. Finally,

anecdotal evidence on moral hazard of originators is plentiful (see Zuckerman, WSJ, January

15th, 2008; Ng and Mollenkamp, WSJ, January 14th, 2008; and Pleven and Craig, WSJ, January

17th, 2008).

E. Robustness

       In this section, we present two sets of robustness tests to ensure that the estimates

presented above reflect our credit expansion interpretation. The specifications reported in Table

6 examine non-home consumer debt, which includes credit card, auto, student, and consumer

loans. Given that our supply interpretation is unique to the expansion in mortgage debt

availability in high latent demand zip codes, we do not expect to find the same pattern in debt

growth and defaults for non-home consumer debt. As Table 6 demonstrates, high 1996 latent

demand zip codes experience a relative reduction in non-home debt from 2001 to 2005. This

result also mitigates the concern that high 1996 latent demand zip codes are experiencing

increases in economic opportunity over this time period, and it suggests that households may

respond to mortgage credit expansion by reducing other consumer debt. Columns 3 and 4

demonstrate that high 1996 latent demand zip codes do not experience any differential increase

in default rates on non-home debt, which helps rule out alternative stories for our results.

       In Table 7, we examine alternative measures of high 1996 latent demand. As we

discussed in Section III, our empirical methodology relies on variation across zip codes in the

initial fraction of borrowers that cannot obtain mortgages due to excessive credit risk. In Table 7,




                                                 30
we examine the fraction of loans backed by the Federal Housing Authority in a zip code in 1996,

the fraction of subprime borrowers in the zip code in 1996, and the fraction of housing units

occupied by renters in a zip code in 2000 as alternative measures of initial high latent demand.

As the estimates in Table 7 demonstrate, our core results are robust to these alternative measures

of high latent demand. The magnitudes of the second stage coefficients are larger for the FHA

and subprime shares, and slightly smaller for the fraction of units rented.



V. Concluding Remarks: What are the Macro-Economic Magnitudes of the Supply Shift?

       The process of disintermediation in the mortgage industry led to a sharp shift in the

supply of mortgage credit from 2001 to 2005. The expansion in supply was targeted at subprime

customers who were traditionally marginal borrowers unable to access the mortgage market. The

shift in mortgage supply consequently led to a rapid rise in the risk profile of borrowers, and a

surge in supply-induced house price and mortgage credit growth. These changes caused a

subsequent spike in default rates, which have in turn depressed the housing market and caused

financial market turmoil.

       The main contribution of our work is to empirically isolate the mechanism, magnitude,

and consequences of the historic shift in mortgage supply. Given that we have identified the

expansion in credit and increase in house price due to the shift in the supply of credit, we can use

our microeconomic estimates to answer an important macroeconomic counter-factual: How

would mortgage lending and house prices have evolved if the shift in supply in the mortgage

industry had not occurred?

       To answer this question, we sort zip codes by 1996 denial rates and categorize them into

20 equal bins with 5% of zip codes in each bin. Let i index each bin, and denote by di the median




                                                 31
denial rate inside a 5% bin. Given a coefficient of 2.11 (Table 3, column 1) for the marginal

effect of initial denial rate on mortgage growth from 2001 to 2005, the incremental supply-

induced loan origination in bin i is equal to 2.11*Li,2001*(di – d1), where Li,2001 is aggregate loan

origination in bin i in 2001. The total supply-induced loan origination in 2005 is thus equal to:


                                             2.11 L ,            d –d


The calculation above assumes that our estimated effect of 2.12 is linear over the entire data

distribution. We estimate a non-parametric plot of this coefficient and find that linearity is a

reasonable approximation.

         A similar calculation for calculating the average increase in house prices due to supply-

shift between 2001 and 2005 can be written as:


                                             0.34 w ,             d –d


where 0.34 is the house price growth coefficient from column 3 of Table 3, and w ,                       is the

weight of bin i according to the share of loan originations belonging to that zip code.10 Solving

the above expressions in our data gives us $83 billion of additional home purchase loan

originations in 2005 due to supply shift, or 15% of total home purchase originations in 200511.

Similarly we get a 4.3% increase in house prices between 2001 and 2005 due to supply shift, or

almost 10% of aggregate house price appreciation in the US between 2001 and 2005.

         It is important to emphasize that the calculations described above are an underestimate of

the true impact of supply shift for two reasons. First, changes in borrower credit quality are

10
   Alternatively we could have given each bin an equal weight of 1/20, which essentially gives the same result. Also
our exact calculation is slightly different in that we convert log changes to percentage changes by taking their
exponent and subtracting 1.
11
   To remain consistent with the calculation, we only include the zip codes that are part of our study in computing
the total home purchase originations.


                                                         32
negatively correlated with initial latent demand for mortgages which biases downward our

regression estimates (as described in Section III). Second, since our empirical methodology is

based on a difference-in-differences estimator, we can only estimate the relative impact of the

shift in supply. In other words, we estimate the differential effect of the supply shift on high

1996 latent demand zip codes relative to low 1996 latent demand zip codes. Consequently, our

calculation above disregards any level impact of the supply shift which impact all zip codes.

There is evidence to suggest that this may be a significant omission. For example, even zip codes

with low denial rates in 1996 took advantage of the lower lending rates by taking out home

equity loans and refinancing in large amounts. The effect of the supply shift on the intensive

margin of higher credit quality home-owners is material for future research.




                                                 33
                                              References

Brunnermeier, Markus and Christian Julliard, 2007. “Money Illusion and Housing Frenzies,”
Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming.

Case, Karl, and Robert Shiller, 1989. “The Efficiency of the Market for Single-Family Homes,”
American Economic Review 79: 125-137.

Chomsisengphet, Souphala and Anthony Pennington-Cross, 2006. “The Evolution of the
Subprime Mortgage Market,” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review 88: 31-56.

Demyanyk and Van Hemert, 2007, “Understanding the Subprime Mortgage Crisis”, Working
Paper, New York University.

Diamond, D., 1991, “Monitoring and reputation: The choice between bank loans and privately
placed debt,” Journal of Political Economy, 99, 689-721.

Doms, Mark, Fred Furlong, and John Krainer, 2007. “Subprime Mortgage Delinquency Rates,”
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper.

Gabriel, Stuart and Stuart Rosenthal, 2007, “Secondary Markets, Risk, and Access to Credit:
Evidence from the Mortgage Market,” Working Paper, Syracuse University.

Garmaise, Mark and Tobias Moskowitz, “Bank Mergers and Crime: The Real and Social Effects
of Credit Market Competition,” Journal of Finance 61: 495-538.

Genesove, David, and Christopher Mayer, 1997. “Equity and Time to Sale in the Real Estate
Market,” American Economic Review, 87: 255-269.

--, 2001, “Loss Aversion and Seller Behavior: Evidence from the Housing Market,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 1233-1260.

Glaeser, Edward and Joseph Gyourko, 2005, “Urban Decline and Durable Housing,” Journal of
Political Economy 113: 345-375.

He, Zhiguo, and Arvind Krishnamurthy, 2006. “Intermediation, Capital Mobility, and Asset
Prices,” Working Paper, Northwestern University.

Himmelberg, Charles, Christopher Mayer, and Todd Sinai, 2005, “Assessing High House Prices:
Bubbles, Fundamentals, and Misperceptions,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 19: 67-92.

Holmstrom, B. and J. Tirole, 1997, “Financial intermediation, loanable funds, and the real
sector,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112, 663-691.

Hurst, Erik and Frank Stafford, 2004, “Home is Where the Equity Is: Mortgage Refinancing and
Household Consumption,” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 36: 985-1014.



                                               34
Keys, Benjamin, Tanmoy Mukherjee, Amit Seru and Vikrant Vig 2008, “Securitization and
Screening: Evidence From Subprime Mortgage Backed Securities”, working paper.

Pence, Karen, 2006, “Foreclosing on Opportunity: State Laws and Mortgage Credit,” Review of
Economics and Statistics, vol. 88 (February 2006), pp. 177-182

Poterba, James, 1984. “Tax Subsidies to Owner-Occupied Housing: An Asset-Market
Approach,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 99: 729-752.

Reinhart, Carmen and Kenneth Rogoff, 2008, “Is the 2007 U.S. Sub-Prime Financial Crisis So
Different? An International Historical Comparison”, Mimeo, Harvard University.

Stein, Jeremy, 1995. “Prices and Trading Volume in the Housing Market: A Model with Down-
Payment Effects,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 110: 379-406.

Stiglitz, Joseph and Andrew Weiss, 1981. “Credit Rationing in Markets with Imperfect
Information,” American Economic Review 71: 393-410.




                                             35
                                                                         Figure 1A                                                                                                                                               Figure 1B
                                                               Housing Prices, Indexed to 1996                                                                                                           Mortgage and non-Mortgage Debt Outstanding, Indexed to 1996
      This figure presents the house price index for the U.S. from 1992 to 2007, indexed to 1996. The house price index is constructed from the equal-                This figure presents total mortgage and non-mortgage consumer debt outstanding for the U.S. from 1992 to 2007, indexed to 1996. Total non-mortgage
      weighted average of the 2,920 zip codes in our final sample. Data are from Fiserv Case Shiller Weiss                                                            consumer debt includes student loans, auto loans, consumer loans, and outstanding credit card balances. Data are from Equifax Predictive Services.
 3                                                                                                                                                              3.5




                                                                                                                                                                 3
2.5


                                                                                                                                                                2.5


 2

                                                                                                                                                                 2




1.5                                                                                                                                                             1.5




                                                                                                                                                                 1
 1



                                                                                                                                                                0.5


0.5
        1992     1993      1994     1995      1996      1997     1998      1999      2000     2001     2002        2003   2004      2005      2006       2007
                                                                                                                                                                 0
                                                                                                                                                                        1992     1993      1994      1995      1996      1997      1998        1999    2000      2001      2002      2003      2004       2005      2006      2007

                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Mortgage debt outstanding               non Mortgage debt outstanding
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           non-Mortgage



                                                                 Figure 1C                                                                                                                                                         Figure 1D
                                     Accepted Mortgage Applications for Home Purchase, Indexed to 1996                                                                                                Default Rates for Mortgage and non-Mortgage Debt , Indexed to 1996
                                                                                                                                                                       This figure presents the default rate for consumer debt outstanding for the U.S. from 1992 to 2007, indexed to 1996. The total non-mortgage default rate is
       This figure presents the number of accepted mortgage applications for home purchase from 1996 to 2006, indexed to 1996. Data are from HMDA.                     calculated using non-mortgage debt which includes student loans, auto loans, consumer loans, and outstanding credit card balances. Data are from Equifax
                                                                                                                                                                       Predictive Services.
2.2
                                                                                                                                                                1.6



                                                                                                                                                                1.5
 2


                                                                                                                                                                1.4

1.8
                                                                                                                                                                1.3


1.6
                                                                                                                                                                1.2



                                                                                                                                                                1.1
1.4


                                                                                                                                                                 1

1.2
                                                                                                                                                                0.9


 1                                                                                                                                                              0.8



                                                                                                                                                                0.7
0.8
          1996          1997          1998           1999         2000            2001        2002          2003          2004         2005          2006
                                                                                                                                                                0.6
                                                                                                                                                                        1992     1993      1994      1995      1996      1997      1998        1999    2000      2001      2002      2003      2004       2005      2006      2007

                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Mortgage debt default rates              non-Mortgage debt default rates
                                                                    Figure 2A
                                    Debt to Income Ratios for Accepted Mortgage Applications, Relative to 1996
          This figure presents the mortgage debt to income ratios of accepted mortgage applications at the median, 75th, and 90th percentiles from 1996 to 2006. The
          1996 level is substracted from each series. Data are from HMDA.
1.4




1.2




 1




0.8




0.6




0.4




0.2




 0
             1996          1997          1998           1999          2000           2001          2002          2003           2004          2005          2006

                    Debt to Income of Accepted
                                          p    Applications--Median
                                                pp                                                  Debt to Income of Accepted
                                                                                                                          p    Applications--75th
                                                                                                                                pp                Percentile
                    Debt to Income of Accepted Applications--90th Percentile



                                                                   Figure 2B
                                  Originated Mortgage Debt for Home Purchase to Income Ratios, Relative to 1996
           This figure presents the average originated mortgage debt to aggregate income ratio across zip codes from 1998 to 2005. The 1998 level is substracted
           from the series. Originated mortgage debt is from HMDA and aggregate income is from the IRS. * indicates data missing for the year in question.
0.16




0.14




0.12




 0.1




0.08




0.06




0.04




0.02




      0
                1998                1999*              2000*                 2001              2002               2003*                2004               2005
                                                                    Figure 3
                                        Fraction of Mortgages Sold to Non-Mortgage Agency Institutions
       This figure presents the fraction of originated mortgages that are sold to non-mortgage agency institutions within one year of origination. Non-mortgage
       agency institutions include all third parties except for Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, Ginnie Mae, and Farmer Mac. Data are from HMDA.
 0.6




0.55




 0.5




0.45




 0.4




0.35




 0.3




0.25




 0.2
         1996           1997           1998          1999           2000          2001           2002           2003          2004           2005          2006
                                                                      Figure 4A
                                                 Mortgage Denial Rates For High 1996 Denial Zip Codes
        This figure plots the estimated coefficients of β and 95% confidence intervals for each year for the following first difference county fixed effects specifications:

               Denied zct − Denied zc ,1996 = α c + β t * HighLatentDemand zc ,1996 + ε zct for t = 1997,1998,...,2007
 0.1



0.05



   0
           1996           1997            1998          1999           2000           2001           2002            2003           2004           2005           2006


-0.05



 -0.1



-0.15



 -0.2



-0.25



 -0.3



-0.35


                                                                      Figure 4B
                                       Originated Mortgage Debt to Income Ratio For High 1996 Denial Zip Codes
        This figure plots the estimated coefficients of β and 95% confidence intervals for each year for the following first difference county fixed effects specifications:

                     D 2 I zct − D 2 I zc ,1996 = α c + β t * HighLatentDemand zc,1996 + ε zct for t = 1997,1998,..., 2007
        * indicates data missing for the year in question.

 0.8




 0.7




 0.6




 0.5




 0.4




 0.3




 0.2




 0.1




   0
             1998                 1999*                2000*                2001                 2002                2003*                 2004                2005
                                                                       Figure 4C
                                                    Disintermediation For High 1996 Denial Zip Codes
        This figure plots the estimated coefficients of β and 95% confidence intervals for each year for the following first difference county fixed effects specifications:

                       Sold zct − Sold zc ,1996 = α c + βt * HighLatentDemand zc ,1996 + ε zct for t = 1997,1998,..., 2007
        Disintermediated loans are loans sold to any third party except for Fannie Mae
                                                                                   Mae, Freddie Mac
                                                                                                Mac, Ginnie Mae
                                                                                                            Mae, and Farmer Mac within 1 year of origination
                                                                                                                                                 origination.

0.35




 03
 0.3




0.25




 0.2




0.15




 0.1




0.05




   0
           1996           1997           1998           1999           2000           2001           2002           2003           2004            2005           2006


-0.05
                                                               Figure 5A
                           Number of Originated Mortgages for Home Purchase For High 1996 Denial Zip Codes
       This figure plots the estimated coefficients of β and 95% confidence intervals for each year for the following first difference county fixed effects specifications:

             Ln(Orig ) zct − Ln(Orig ) zc ,1996 = α c + βt * HighLatentDemand zc ,1996 + ε zct for t = 1997,1998,..., 2007

3.5




  3




2.5




  2




1.5




  1




0.5




  0
          1996           1997           1998           1999            2000          2001           2002           2003           2004           2005            2006


-0.5



                                                                  Figure 5B
                                            Outstanding Mortgage Debt For High 1996 Denial Zip Codes
       This figure plots the estimated coefficients of β and 95% confidence intervals for each year for the following first difference county fixed effects specifications:

        Ln( MortgageDebt ) zct − Ln( MortgageDebt ) zc ,1996 = α c + βt * HighLatentDemand zc ,1996 + ε zct for t = 1997,1998,...,2007
0.8



0.7



0.6



0.5



0.4



0.3



0.2



0.1



  0
         1996          1997          1998          1999         2000          2001          2002           2003         2004         2005          2006          2007

-0.1



-0.2
                                                               Figure 5C
                           Amount of Originated Mortgages for Home Purchase For High 1996 Denial Zip Codes
       This figure plots the estimated coefficients of β and 95% confidence intervals for each year for the following first difference county fixed effects specifications:

                 Ln( Amt ) zct − Ln( Amt ) zc ,1996 = α c + β t * HighLatentDemand zc ,1996 + ε zct for t = 1997,1998,...,2007
  4



3.5



  3



2.5



  2



1.5



  1



0.5



  0
          1996           1997           1998           1999           2000           2001           2002           2003           2004           2005            2006


-0.5
                                                                    Figure 6
                                        Relative House Price Appreciation For High 1996 Denial Zip Codes
       This figure plots the estimated coefficients of β and 95% confidence intervals for each year for the following first difference county fixed effects specifications:

                Ln( HP) zct − Ln( HP ) zc ,1996 = α c + βt * HighLatentDemand zc ,1996 + ε zct for t = 1997,1998,..., 2007
0.8



0.7



0.6



0.5



0.4



0.3



0.2



0.1



  0
         1996          1997          1998         1999          2000          2001          2002          2003          2004         2005          2006          2007


-0.1
                                                                      Figure 7A
                                                 Mortgage Default Rates for High 1996 Denial Zip Codes
         This figure plots the estimated coefficients of β and 95% confidence intervals for each year for the following first difference county fixed effects specifications:

               DefRatezct − DefRatezc ,1996 = α c + β t * HighLatentDemand zc ,1996 + ε zct for t = 1997,1998,...,2007
  0.14




  0.12




   0.1




  0.08




  0.06




  0.04




  0.02




    0
           1996          1997          1998         1999          2000          2001          2002          2003          2004          2005         2006          2007


 -0.02



                                                                      Figure 7B
                                               Mortgage Default Rates by Lagged Change in Denial Rates
         This figure plots the estimated coefficients of β and 95% confidence intervals for each year for the following first difference county fixed effects specifications:

                       DefRatezct − DefRatezc ,t −2 = α c + β t *( Denied zc ,t −3 − Denied zc ,t −5 ) + ε zct for t = 2001,..., 2007
         For example, for t = 2007, the coefficient estimate shows how default rates change from 2005 to 2007 for zip codes experiencing a change in denial rates
         from 2002 to 2004.


   0.1




  0.05




-1E-16
                2001                    2002                   2003                    2004                    2005                   2006                    2007




 -0.05




  -0.1




 -0.15
                                                  Table 1
                                              Summary Statistics
This table presents summary statistics for the 2,920 zip codes in our sample.

                                                                     Mean        SD      10th     50th    90th
Equifax Data
Mortgage debt as fraction of total debt, 1996                        0.741      0.106   0.600    0.761    0.854
Home equity debt as fraction of total debt, 1996                     0.044      0.028   0.018    0.037    0.075
Non-home debt as fraction of total debt, 1996                        0.215      0.085   0.121    0.201    0.330

Mortgage debt annualized growth, 1996 to 2001                        0.069      0.042   0.023    0.068    0.115
Non-home debt annualized growth, 1996 to 2001                        0.061      0.042   0.019    0.061    0.103
Mortgage debt annualized growth, 2001 to 2005                        0.102      0.046   0.054    0.103    0.149
Non-home debt annualized growth, 2001 to 2005                        0.046      0.046   -0.007   0.047    0.098

Mortgage default rate, 1996                                          0.030      0.024   0.005    0.024    0.060
Non-home default rate, 1996                                          0.069      0.035   0.029    0.063    0.114

Mortgage default rate change, 1996 to 2005                          -0.003      0.028   -0.032   -0.004   0.025
Non-home default rate change, 1996 to 2005                          -0.008      0.030   -0.041   -0.007   0.024
Mortgage default rate change, 2005 to 2007                          0.017       0.027   -0.009   0.014    0.051
Non-home default rate change, 2005 to 2007                          0.009       0.024   -0.016   0.009    0.034

Sub-prime consumer fraction (under 659)                              0.288      0.112   0.156    0.270    0.447

Fiserve Case Shiller Weiss Data
Home price annualized growth, 1996 to 2001                           0.073      0.023   0.041    0.075    0.102
Home price annualized growth, 2001 to 2005                           0.113      0.044   0.039    0.117    0.166

HMDA Data
Mortgages for home purchase annualized growth, 1996 to 2001          0.095      0.046   0.039    0.097    0.152
Mortgages for home purchase annualized growth, 2001 to 2005          0.134      0.078   0.048    0.136    0.220

Fraction of applications denied, 1996                                0.219      0.079   0.122    0.211    0.329

Fraction of mortgages sold to non-agency investors, 2001             0.277      0.074   0.184    0.275    0.374
Change in fraction sold to non-agency investors, 2001 to 2005        0.263      0.057   0.191    0.262    0.334

Fraction of mortgages backed by FHA, 1996                            0.129      0.111   0.014    0.097    0.283

Decennial Census, IRS, and Census Statistics of U.S. Business
Median household income, thousands, 2000                              55.7       20.0    33.4     52.5     81.8
Fraction non-white, 2000                                             0.202      0.197   0.028    0.132    0.496
Fraction with education less than high school, 2000                  0.166      0.117   0.051    0.135    0.320
Fraction unemployed, 2000                                            0.051      0.032   0.023    0.042    0.091
Fraction of housing units rented, 2000                               0.300      0.160   0.105    0.277    0.529

Income growth (from IRS), 2001 to 2005                               0.127      0.094    0.033   0.114    0.241
Wage growth (from Business Conditions), 2001 to 2004                 0.072      0.121   -0.050   0.072    0.196
Employment growth, 2001 to 2004                                      0.025      0.192   -0.172   0.017    0.217
Establishment growth, 2001 to 2004                                   0.057      0.100   -0.039   0.046    0.170
Crime index growth, 2001 to 2005                                     0.024      0.050   -0.027   0.016    0.087
                                         Table 2
    Correlation of Fraction of 1996 Mortgage Applications Denied with Other Variables
This table presents correlations of our main measure of latent demand for mortgages in a zip code, the fraction of
1996 mortgage applications denied, with other variables, after controlling for county fixed effects. The sample
includes 2,920 zip codes.

                                                                Correlation with fraction of 1996 applications denied

Alternative measures of latent demand
  Fraction of subprime borrowers in 1996 (under 619)                                   0.795**
  Fraction of subprime borrowers in 1996 (under 659)                                   0.789**
  Fraction of loans backed by FHA in 1996                                              0.516**
  Fraction of housing units rented in 2000                                             0.399**

Demographic variables from Census 2000
 Fraction non-white                                                                     0.680**
 Median household income                                                               -0.585**
 Per capital income                                                                    -0.568**
 Poverty rate                                                                           0.643**
 Fraction with less than high school education                                          0.662**
 Fraction unemployed                                                                    0.567**

Measures of future growth in economic opportunity
 Income growth, 2001 to 2005                                                           -0.209**
 Wage growth, 2001 to 2004                                                              -0.028
 Employment growth, 2001 to 2004                                                       -0.078**
 Establishment growth, 2001 to 2004                                                    -0.122**

**,* Correlation statistically distinct from 0 at the 1% and 5% levels, respectively
                                        Table 3
     The Effect of Mortgage Credit Expansion on Mortgage Amounts and House Prices
Columns 1 and 2 of Panel A present estimates of the effect of high 1996 latent demand in a zip code on growth in
originated mortgage amount for home purchase and growth in mortgage debt outstanding from 2001 to 2005,
respectively. Column 3 presents estimates of the effect of high 1996 latent demand in a zip code on growth in house
prices from 2001 to 2005. Panel B examines how outcomes vary with an alternative measure of zip codes receiving
a relative increase in supply: the change in denial rates from 2001 to 2005. All specifications include county fixed
effects.
                                                         Panel A: Fraction of 1996 applications denied
                                                     (1)                      (2)                       (3)
                                            Originated mortgage         Mortgage debt          House price growth
                                             amount for home          outstanding growth           2001 to 2005
                                              purchase growth            2001 to 2005
                                               2001 to 2005

Fraction of 1996 applications denied             2.109**                   0.444**                0.339**
                                                 (0.115)                   (0.064)                (0.016)

Income growth, 2001 to 2005                        0.103                   0.500**                -0.031**
                                                 (0.083)                   (0.046)                 (0.011)
Wage growth, 2001 to 2004                         -0.036                    0.044                   -0.004
                                                 (0.057)                   (0.031)                 (0.008)
Establishment growth, 2001 to 2004                0.008                     -0.015                  0.009
                                                 (0.042)                   (0.023)                 (0.006)
Employment growth, 2001 to 2004                    0.011                   0.669**                -0.032**
                                                 (0.090)                   (0.050)                 (0.012)
Crime growth, 2001 to 2005                        -0.050                   0.408**                -0.079**
                                                 (0.162)                   (0.090)                 (0.022)
N                                                  2897                      2897                    2897
R2                                                 0.41                      0.30                    0.96

                                                     Panel B: Change in denial rates from 2001 to 2005
                                                    (1)                   (2)                     (3)
                                           Originated mortgage      Mortgage debt         House price growth
                                            amount for home       outstanding growth         2001 to 2005
                                            purchase growth          2001 to 2005
                                              2001 to 2005

Change in denial rates, 2001 to 2005             -3.868**                  -0.477**               -0.557**
                                                  (0.198)                   (0.111)                (0.027)

Income growth, 2001 to 2005                          -0.068                0.448**                -0.062**
                                                    (0.081)                 (0.045)                (0.011)
Wage growth, 2001 to 2004                            -0.065                  0.038                  -0.009
                                                    (0.056)                 (0.031)                (0.008)
Establishment growth, 2001 to 2004                   0.015                   -0.016                0.010**
                                                    (0.041)                 (0.023)                (0.006)
Employment growth, 2001 to 2004                      -0.079                0.650**                -0.046**
                                                    (0.089)                 (0.050)                (0.012)
Crime growth, 2001 to 2005                           -0.183                0.335**                -0.109**
                                                    (0.159)                 (0.089)                 0.022
N                                                     2897                    2897                   2897
R2                                                    0.42                    0.29                   0.96
**,* Coefficient estimate statistically distinct from 0 at the 1% and 5% levels, respectively
                                                                     Table 4
                                       The Effect of Mortgage Credit Expansion on Mortgage Default Rates
This table presents estimates of how the shift in mortgage supply from 2001 to 2005 affects default rates from 2005 to 2007. Columns 1 and 2 report estimates
from the reduced form relating the increase in defaults from 2005 to 2007 to measures of zip codes experiencing relative supply increases from 2001 to 2005.
Columns 3 through 6 relate the increase in default rates from 2005 to 2007 to measures of supply driven house price growth and mortgage origination growth,
which are obtained from a first stage that relates these variables to two different supply shifters: the fraction of denied applications in 1996 and the change in
denial rates from 2001 to 2005. The first stage estimates are in Table 3. All specifications include county fixed effects.
                                                                       (1)              (2)                (3)               (4)              (5)             (6)
                                                                                         Change in mortgage default rates from 2005 to 2007

Fraction of 1996 applications denied                              0.066**
                                                                  (0.008)
Change in denial rates, 2001 to 2005                                               -0.092**
                                                                                    (0.014)
Supply driven originated mortgage amount for home                                                    0.031**                            0.024**
purchase growth, 2001 to 2005                                                                        (0.004)                            (0.004)
Supply driven house price growth, 2001 to 2005                                                                         0.194**                            0.165**
                                                                                                                       (0.024)                            (0.025)

Income growth, 2001 to 2005                                       -0.033**         -0.040**          -0.036**         -0.027**          -0.038**         -0.030**
                                                                   (0.006)          (0.006)           (0.006)          (0.006)           (0.006)          (0.006)
Wage growth, 2001 to 2004                                           0.003            0.003             0.005            0.004             0.004             0.004
                                                                   (0.004)          (0.004)           (0.004)          (0.004)           (0.004)          (0.004)
Establishment growth, 2001 to 2004                                 -0.001            -0.001            -0.001           -0.003            -0.002           -0.003
                                                                   (0.003)          (0.003)           (0.003)          (0.003)           (0.003)          (0.003)
Employment growth, 2001 to 2004                                     0.011            0.008             0.010           0.017**            0.010           0.015*
                                                                   (0.006)          (0.006)           (0.006)          (0.006)           (0.006)          (0.006)
Crime growth, 2001 to 2005                                          0.004            -0.004            0.005            0.019             0.000             0.014
                                                                   (0.011)          (0.011)           (0.012)          (0.012)           (0.011)          (0.012)

Supply shifter?                                                Reduced form      Reduced form      1996 Denied      1996 Denied       Change in         Change in
                                                                                                   applications     applications     denial rates,     denial rates,
                                                                                                                                     2001 to 2005      2001 to 2005
N                                                                    2897             2897             2897             2897            2897              2897
R2                                                                   0.20             0.19             0.11             0.16             0.16              0.18
**,* Coefficient estimate statistically distinct from 0 at the 1% and 5% levels, respectively
                                                                          Table 5
                                                         Evidence of a Disintermediation Channel
Panel A presents coefficient estimates relating the change in the fraction of originated mortgages sold in a zip code to latent demand as of 1996. Column 1 of
Panel B relates the change in median debt to income ratios of accepted applications from 2001 to 2005 to the change in the fraction of loans sold to investors.
Columns 2 through 5 of Panel B presents estimates relating default rates from 2005 to 2007 to the fraction of loans sold by originators to investors from 2001 to
2005. All specifications include county fixed effects and control variables for income, wage, employment, establishment, and crime growth.

                                                  Panel A: High latent demand zip codes and mortgage sales
                                                       (1)                  (2)                 (3)                  (4)                            (5)
                                                Change in fraction  Change in fraction   Change in fraction Change in fraction             Change in fraction
                                                    sold to all      sold to affiliates,  sold in private   sold to banks, 2001             sold to non-bank
                                                investors, 2001 to     2001 to 2005       securitizations,        to 2005                 financial firms, 2001
                                                      2005                                 2001 to 2005                                          to 2005

Fraction of 1996 applications denied                  0.161**              -0.072**                0.177**                0.004                   0.125**
                                                      (0.014)               (0.008)                (0.006)               (0.004)                  (0.006)
N                                                      2897                  2897                   2897                  2897                     2897
R2                                                      0.47                 0.54                    0.63                 0.45                      0.58

                                                      Panel B: Mortgage sales and changes in default rates
                                                                        (1)            (2)            (3)          (4)              (5)                     (6)
                                                                  Change in Debt              Change in mortgage default rates from 2005 to 2007
                                                                 to Income Ratio
                                                                   2001 to 2005

Change in fraction sold to all investors, 2001 to 2005                 0.314**           0.042**
                                                                       (0.056)           (0.011)
Change in fraction sold to affiliates, 2001 to 2005                                                    -0.105**
                                                                                                        (0.019)
Change in fraction sold in private securitizations, 2001 to 2005                                                       0.147**
                                                                                                                       (0.023)
Change in fraction sold to banks , 2001 to 2005                                                                                          -0.023
                                                                                                                                        (0.036)
Change in fraction sold to non-bank financial firms , 2001 to                                                                                           0.136**
2005                                                                                                                                                    (0.023)
N                                                                         2919              2897         2897           2897             2897             2897
R2                                                                        0.77              0.18         0.18           0.19             0.17             0.19
**,* Coefficient estimate statistically distinct from 0 at the 1% and 5% levels, respectively
                                               Table 6
                                   Non-home Debt Growth and Defaults
This table presents estimates of specifications that replicate specifications reported in Table 3 but with non-home
debt and non-home default rates as the dependent variables. All specifications include county fixed effects.

                                                                     Non-home debt growth and defaults

                                                            (1)             (2)             (3)               (4)
                                                           Non-home debt growth,         Change in non-home default
                                                                2001 to 2005                 rates, 2005 to 2007

Fraction of 1996 applications denied                       -0.117*                           0.007
                                                           (0.059)                          (0.008)

Change in denial rates, same years as dep. var.                             0.012                            -0.002
                                                                           (0.102)                           (0.014)

Income growth, 2001 to 2005                               0.400**          0.419**            0.000           -0.001
                                                          (0.043)          (0.042)          (0.006)          (0.006)
Wage growth, 2001 to 2004                                   0.013           0.014             0.000           0.000
                                                          (0.029)          (0.029)          (0.004)          (0.004)
Establishment growth, 2001 to 2004                         -0.012           -0.011           -0.001           -0.001
                                                          (0.021)          (0.021)          (0.003)          (0.003)
Employment growth, 2001 to 2004                           0.585**          0.590**           -0.001           -0.001
                                                          (0.046)          (0.046)          (0.006)          (0.006)
Crime growth, 2001 to 2005                                0.386**          0.420**           -0.002           -0.004
                                                          (0.083)          (0.082)          (0.011)          (0.011)


N                                                              2897          2897             2897            2897
R2                                                             0.24          0.24             0.02            0.02
**,* Coefficient estimate statistically distinct from 0 at the 1% and 5% levels, respectively
                                             Table 7
                    Alternative Measures of High Latent Demand for Mortgages
This table presents estimates using alternative measures of latent demand. Panel A examines the fraction of 1996
loans originated that are backed by the Federal Housing Administration. Panel B examines the fraction of 1996
population with subprime credit scores (below 659). Panel C examines the fraction of housing units in the zip code
occupied by renters measured as of 2000. All specifications include county fixed effects and control variables for
income, wage, employment, and establishment growth.

                                                                   (1)                 (2)            (3)
                                                              Reduced form         First stage    Second stage
                                                                Change in        Amount growth     Change in
                                                               default rates      for purchase    default rates
                                                              2005 to 2007        2001 to 2005    2005 to 2007

                                                                                   Panel A
                                                                    Fraction of 1996 loans backed by FHA

Fraction of 1996 loans backed by FHA                             0.072**             1.281**
                                                                 (0.006)             (0.092)

Amount growth for home purchase, 2001 to 2005                                                        0.056**
                                                                                                     (0.006)

                                                                                   Panel B
                                                                Fraction of 1996 loans to subprime borrowers

Fraction of 1996 loans to subprime borrowers (<659)              0.059**             1.330**
                                                                 (0.005)             (0.077)

Amount growth for home purchase, 2001 to 2005                                                        0.044**
                                                                                                     (0.004)

                                                                                  Panel C
                                                             Fraction of 2000 housing units occupied by renters

Fraction of 2000 housing units occupied by renters               0.019**             0.654**
                                                                 (0.003)             (0.054)

Amount growth for home purchase, 2001 to 2005                                                        0.029**
                                                                                                     (0.005)


**,* Coefficient estimate statistically distinct from 0 at the 1% and 5% levels, respectively
                                        Appendix Table
                Characteristics of Zip Codes With and Without House Price Data
This table compares the 3,056 zip codes for which FCSW collects house price data to the 16,312 zip codes for which
house price data are unavailable.

                                                                  House price data     House price data
                                                                     available          not available

Fraction urban, 2000                                                   0.919                0.464
Population, 2000                                                       6,630                4,763
Median household income (thousands), 2000                              55.7                 39.8
Poverty rate, 2000                                                     0.092                0.129
Fraction of housing units built in last 5 years, 2000                  0.084                0.116
Fraction of households that have moved in last 5 years, 2000           0.352                0.337
Mortgage default rate, 1996                                            0.030                0.028
