                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    CAPITAL STRUCTURE PUZZLE



                        Stewart C. rers




                     Working Paper No. 1393




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF EXONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                            July 1984




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Financial Markets and Monetary Economics and Taxation. Any
opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                          NBER Working Paper it11393
                                          July 1984




                     Capital   Structure Puzzle




                               ABSTRACT




    This paper contrasts the "static tradeoff" and "pecking order"

theories of capital structure choice by corporations. In the static

tradeoff theory, optimal capital structure is reached when the tax

advantage to borrowing is balanced, at the margin, by costs of

financial distress. In the pecking order theory, firms prefer

internal to external funds, and debt to equity if external funds are

needed. Thus the debt ratio reflects the cumulative requirement for

external financing. Pecking order behavior follows from simple

asyninetric information models. The paper closes with a review of

empirical evidence relevant to the two theories.




                                                   Stewart C. Myers
                                                   Finance Section
                                                   Sloan School of Management
                                                   Massachusetts Institute of
                                                      Technol ogy
                                                   50 Memorial Drive
                                                   Cambridge, MA   02139

                                                   (617) 253-6696
                        THE CAPITAL STRUCTURE PUZZLE

                              Stewart C. Myers*




    This paper's title is intended to remind you of Fischer Black's well—known

note on "The Dividend Puzzle," which he closed by saying, "What should the

corporation do about dividend policy? We don't know." [6, p.8] I will start

by asking, "How do firms choose their capital structures?" Again, the answer

is, "We don't know."

    The capital structure puzzle is tougher than the dividend one. We know

quite a bit about dividend policy. John Llntner's model of how firms set

dividends [19] dates back to 1956, and it still seems to work. We know stock

prices respond to unanticipated dividend changes, so It is clear that

dividends have information content——this observation dates back at least to

Miller and Modigliani (MM) in 1961 [27]. We do not know whether high dividend

yield increases the expected rate of return demanded by Investors, as adding

taxes to the MM proof of dividend irrelevance suggests, but financial

economists are at least hammering away at this issue.

    By contrast, we know very little about capital structure. We do not know

how firms choose the debt, equity or hybrid securities they Issue. We have

only recently discovered that capital structure changes convey Information to

investors. There has been little if any research testing whether the

relationship between financial leverage and Investors' required return is as
                                      —2—



the pure     theory predicts. In general, we have inadequate understanding of

corporate financing behavior, and of how that behavior affects security

returns.

    I do not want to sound too pessimistic or discouraged. We have

accumulated many helpful insights into capital structure choice, starting with

the most important one, MWs No Magic in Leverage Theorem (Proposition I)

[31]. We have thought long and hard about what these insights imply for

optimal capital structure. Many of us have translated these theries, or

stories, of optimal capital structure into more or less definite advice to

managers. But our theories don't seem to explain actual financing behavior,

and it seems presumptuous to advise firms on optimal capital structure when we

are so far from explaining actinl decisions. I have done more than my share

of writing on optimal capital structure, so I take this opportunity to make

amends, and to try o push research in some new directions.

    I will contrast two ways of thinking about capital structure:

           1. A static tradeoff framework, in which the firm is viewed as

    setting a target debt—to—value ratio and gradually moving towards it, in

    much the same way that a firm adjusts dividends to move towards a target

    payout ratio.

           2. An old—fashioned pecking order framework, in which the firm

    prefers internal to external financing, and debt to equity if it issues

    securities. In the pure pecking order theory, the firm has no

    well—defined target debt—to—value ratio.

    Recent thretical work has breathed new life into the pecking order

framework. I will argue that this theory performs at least as well as the

 static tradeoff thery in explaining what we know about actnl financing
                                         —3—



choices and their average Impacts on stock prices.




Managerial and Neutral Mutation Hypotheses

    I have arbitrarily, and probably unfairly, excluded "managerial" theories

which might explain firms' capital structure choices.' I have chosen not to

consider models which cut the umbilical cord that ties managers' acts to

stockholders' Interests.

    I am also sidestepping Miller's idea of "neutral mutation."2 He

suggests that firms fall into some financing patterns or habits which have no

material effect on firm    value.   The habits may make managers feel better, and

since they do no harm, no one cares to stop or change them. Thus someone who

identifies these habits and uses them to predict financing behavior would not

be explaining anything important.

    The neutral mutations idea is important as a warning. Given time and

imagination, economists can usually invent some model that assigns apparent

economic rationality to any random event. But taking neutral mutation as a

strict null hypothesis makes the game of research too tough to play. If an

economist identifies costs of various financing strategies, obtains

independent evidence that the costs are really there, and then builds a model

based on these costs which explains firms' financing behavior, then some

progress has been made, even if it proves difficult to demonstrate that, say,

a type A financing strategy gives higher firm value than a type B. (In fact,

we would never see type B if all firms follow value—maximizing strategies.)

    There is another reason for not immediately embracing neutral mutations:

we know investors are interested in the firm's financing choices, because
                                     —4—




stock prices change when the choices are announced. The change might be

explained as an "information effect" having nothing to do with financing per

se——but again, it is a bit too easy to wait until the results of an event

study are in, and then to think of an information story to explain them. On

the other hand, if one starts by assuming that managers have special

information, builds a model of how that information changes financing choices,

and predicts which choices will be interpreted by investors as good or bad

news, then some progress has been made.

    So this paper is designed as a one—on—one competition of the static

tradeoff and pecking—order stories. If neither story explains actual

behavior, the neutral mutations story will be there faithfully waiting.




The Static Tradeoff Hypothesis

    A firm's optimal debt ratio is usually viewed as determined by a tradeff

of the costs and benefits of borrowing, holding the firm's assets and

investment plans constant. The firm is portrayed as balancing the value of

interest tax shields against various costs of bankruptcy or financial

embarassment. Of course, there is controversy about how valuable the tax

shields are, and which, if any, of the costs of financial embarassment are

material, but these disagreements give only variations on a theme. The firm

is supposed to substitute debt for equity, or equity for debt, until the value

of the firm is maximized. Thus the debt—equity tradeoff is as illustrated in

Fig. 1.

    Costs of adjustment. If there were no costs of adjiustment, and the static

tradeoff theory is correct, then each firm's observed debt—to—value ratio
                                     —5--




should be its optimal ratio. However, there must be costs, and therefore

lags, in adjusting to the optimum. Firms can not immediately offset the

random events that bump them away from the optimum, so there should be some

cross—sectional dispersion of actual debt ratios across a sample of firms

having the same target ratio.

    Large adjustment costs could possibly explain the observed wide variation

in actual debt ratios, since firms would be forced Into long excursions away

from their optimal ratios. But there is nothing in the usnl static tradeoff

stories suggesting that adjustment costs are a first—order concern——in fact,

they are rarely mentioned. Invoking them withoit modelling them is a cop—out.

   Any cross—sectional test of financing behavior should specify whether

firms' debt ratios differ because they have different optimal ratios or

because their actual ratios diverge from optimal ones. It is easy to get the

two cases mixed up. For example, think of the early cross—sectional studies

which attempted to test MM's Proposition I. These studies tried to find out

whether differences in leverage affected the market value of the firm (or the

market capitalization rate for its operating income).   With hindsight, we can

quickly see the problem: if adjustment costs are small, and each firm in the

sample is at, or close to its optimum, then the in—sample dispersion of debt

ratios must reflect differences in risk or in other variables affecting

optimal capital structure. But then MM's Proposition I cannot be tested

unless the effects of risk and other variables on firm value can be adjusted

for. By now we have learned from experience how hard it is to hold "other

things constant" in cross—sectional regressions.

    Of course, one way to make sense of these tests is to assume that

adjiustment costs are smalL, but managers don't know, or don't care, what the
                                     —6—



optimal debt ratio is, and thus do not stay close to it. The researcher then

assumes some (usually unspecified) "managerial" theory of capital structure

choice. This may be a convenient assumption for a cross—sectional test of

MM's Proposition I, but not very helpful if the object is to understand

financing behavior   .
    But suppose we don't take this "managerial" fork. Then if adjustment

costs are small, and firms stay near their target debt ratios, I find it hard

to understand the observed diversity of capital structures across firms that

seem similar in a static tradeoff framework. If adjustment costs are large,

so that some firms take extended excursions away from their targets, then we

ought to give less attention to refining our static tradeoff stories and

relatively more to understanding what the adjiustment costs are, why they are

so Important, and how rational managers would respond to them.

    But I am getting ahead of my story. On to debt and taxes.

    Debt and taxes. Miller's famous "Debt and Taxes" paper [26] cut us loose

from the extreme implications of the original MM theory, which made interest

tax shields so valuable that we could not explain why all firms were not awash

in debt. Miller described an equilibrium of aggregate supply and demand for

coporate debt, in which personal income taxes paid by the marginal investor in

corporate debt just offset the corporate tax saving. However, since the

equilibrium only determines aggregates, debt policy should not matter for any

single tax—paying firm. Thus Miller's model allows us to explain the

dispersion of actual debt policies without having to introduce

non—value--maximIzing managers

    Trouble is, this explanation works only if we assume that all firms face

approximately the same marginal tax rate, and that is an assumption we can
                                     —7—




immediately reject. The extensive trading of depreciation tax shields and

Investment tax credits, thrcxigh financial leases and other devices, proves

that plenty of firms face low marginal rates.5

    Given significant differences in effective marginal tax rates, and given

that the static tradeoff theory works, we would expect to find a strong tax

effect In any cross—sectional test, regardless of whose thery of debt and

taxes you believe.

    Figure 2 plots the net tax gain from corporate borrowing against the

expected realizable tax shield from a future deduction of one dollar of

interest paid. For some firms this number is 46 cents, or close to it. At

the other extreme, there are firms with large unused loss carryforwards which

pay no immediate taxes. An extra dollar of interest paid by these firms waild

create only a potential future deduction, usable when and if the firm earns

enough to work off prior carryforwards. The expected realizable tax shield is

positive but small. Also, there are firms paying taxes today which cannot be

sure they will do so in the future. Such a firm values expected future

Interest tax shields at somewhere between zero and the full statutory rate.

    In the "corrected" MN thsry [28] any tax—paying corporation gains by

borrowing; the greater the marginal tax rate, the greater the gain. This

gives the top line in the figure. In Miller's thry, the personal income

taxes on interest payments would exactly offset the corporate interest tax

shield, provided that the firm pays the full statutory :ax rate. However, any

firm paying a lower rate would see a net loss to corporate borrowing and a net

gain to lending. This gives the bottom line.

    There are also compromise theories, advanced by D'Angelo and Masulis [12],

Modigliani [30] and others, indicated by :he middle dashed line in the
                                        —8—



figure. The compromise thries are appealing because they seem less extreme

than either the MM or Miller theories.        But regardless of which theory

holds, the slope of the line is always positive. The difference between (1)

the tax advantage of borrowing to firms facing the full statutory rate, and

(2) the tax advantage of lending (or at least not borrowing) to firms with

large tax loss carryforwards, is exactly the same as in the "extreme"

theories. Thus, although the theories tell different stories aboit aggregate

supply and demand of corporate debt, they make essentially the same

predictions abo.it which firms borrow more or less than average.

    So the tax side of the static tradeoff theory predicts that IBM should

borrow more than Bethlehem Steel, other things equal, and that General Motors'

debt—to—value ratio should be more than Chrysler's.

    Costs of financial distress. Costs of financial distress include the

legal and administrative costs of bankruptcy, as well as the subtler agency,

moral hazard, monitoring and contracting costs which can erode firm value even

if formal default is avoided. We know these costs exist, although we may

debate their magnitude. For example, there is no satisfactory explanation of

debt covenants unless agency costs and moral hazard problems are recognized.

    The literature on costs of financial distress supports two qualitative

statements about financing behavior,6

         1. Risky firms aight to borrow less, other things equal. Here

    "risk" would be defined as the variance rate of the market value of the

    firm's assets. The higher the variance rate, the greater the probability

    of default on any given package of debt claims. Since costs of financial

    distress are caused by threatened or actual default, safe firms aight to
                                         —9—



   be able to borrow more before expected costs of financial distress offset

   the tax advantages of borrowing.

           2. Firms holding tangible assets—in—place having active second—hand

   markets will borrow less than firms holding specialized, intangible assets

    or valuable growth opportunities. The expected cost of financial distress

   depends not just on the probability of trouble, but the value lost if

    troible comes. Specialized, intangible assets or growth opportunities are

   more likely to lose value in financial distress.




The Pecking Order Theory

    Contrast the static tradeff thery with a competing popular story based

on a financing pecking order:

           1. Firms prefer internal finance.

           2. They adapt their target dividend payout ratios to their

    investment opportunities, althcugh dividends are sticky and target payout

    ratios are only gradually adjusted to shifts in the extent of valuable

    investment opportunities.

           3. Sticky dividend policies, plus unpredictable fluctations in

    profitability and investment opportunities, mean that internally—generated

    cash flow may be more or less than investment otlays. If it is less, the

    firm   first   draws down its cash balance or marketable securities portfolio.

           4. If external finance is required, firms issue the safest security

    first. That is, they start with debt, then possibly hybrid securities

    such as convertible bonds, then perhaps equity as a last resort.

    In this story, there is no well—defined target debt—equity mix, because
                                           —10—



there are two kinds of equity, internal and external, one at the top of the

pecking order and one at the bottom. Each firm's observed debt ratio reflects

its cumulative requirements for external finance.

    The pecking order literature. The pecking order hypothesis is hardly

new.8 For example, it comes through loud and clear in Donaldson's 1961

study of the financing practices of a sample of large corporations. He

observed [13, p. 67] that "Management strongly favored internal generation as

a source of new funds even to the exclusion of external funds except for

occasional unavoidable 'bulges' in the need for funds." These bulges were not

generally met by cutting dividends: Reducing "the customary cash dividend

payment ... was unthinkable to most managements except as a defensive measure

in a period of extreme financial distress." (p. 70) Given that external

finance was needed, managers rarely thoight of issuing stock:

          Though few companies would go so far as to rule out a sale
          of common under any circumstances, the large majority had
          not had such a sale in the past 20 years and did not
          anticipate one in the foreseeable future. This was
          particularly remarkable in view of the very high
          Price—Earnings ratios of recent years. Several financial
          officers showed that they were well aware that this had
          been a good time to sell common, but the reluctance still
          persisted. (p. 57—58)

     Of coirse, the pecking order hypothesis can be quickly rejected if we

require it to explain everything. There are plenty of examples of firms

issuing stock when they could issue investment—grade debt. But when one looks

at aggregates, the heavy reliance on internal finance and debt is clear. For

all non—financial corporations over the decade 1973—1982, internally generated

cash covered, on average, 62 percent of capital expenditures, including

investment in inventory and other current assets. The bulk of required

external financing came from borrowing. Net new stock issues were never more
                                     —11—



than 6 percent of external financing.9 Anyone innocent of modern finance

who looked at these statistics wculd find the pecking order idea entirely

plausible, at least as a description of typical behavior.

    Writers on "managerial capitalism" have interpreted firm's reliance on

internal finance as a byproduct of the separation of ownership and control:

professional managers avoid relying on external finance because it would

subject them to the discipline of the capital market)0 Donaldson's books

was not primarily about managerial capitalism, but he nevertheless observed

that the financing decisions of the firms he studied were not directed towards

maximizing shareholder wealth, and that scholars attempting to explain those

decis-ions would have to start by recognizing the •managerial view of

corporate finance. [14, Ch. 2]

    This conclusion is natural given the state of finance thery in the

l960s. Today, it is not so obvious that financing by a pecking order goes

against shareholders' interests.

    External financing with asymmetric information. I used to ignore the

pecking order story because I could think of no theoretical foundation for it

that would fit in with the theory of modern finance. An argument cciild be

made for internal financing to avoid issue costs, and if external finance is

needed, for debt to avoid the still higher issue costs of equity. But issue

costs in themselves do not seem large enough to override the costs and

benefits of leverage emphasized in the static tradeoff story. However, recent

work based on asymmetric information gives predictions roughly In line with

the pecking order theory. The following brief exposition is based on a

forthcoming joint paper by me and Nicholas Majiuf [34], although I will here

boil down that paper's argument to absolute essentials.
                                    —12—



   Suppose the firm has to raise N dollars in order to undertake some

potentiall.y valuable investment opportunity. Let y be this opportunity's

net present value (NPV) and x be what the firm will be worth if the

opportunity is passed by. The firm's manager knows what x and y are, but

investors in capital markets do not: they see only a joint distribution of

                 ('V   "V
possible values (x, y). The information asymmetry is taken as given. Aside
from the information asymmetry, capital markets are perfect and semi—strong

form efficient. MM's Proposition I holds in the sense that the stock of debt

relative to real assets is irrelevant if information available to investors is

held constant.

    The benefit to raising N dollars by a security issue is y, the NPV of

the firm's investment opportunity. There is also a possible cost: the firm

may have to sell the securities for less than they are really worth. Suppose

the firm issues stock with an aggregate market value value, when issued, of

N. (I will consider debt issues in a moment.) However, the manager knows the

shares are really worth N1 .   That is, N1 is what the new shares will

be worth, other things equal, when investors acquire the manager's special

knowledge.

    Majiuf and I discuss several possible objectives managers might pursue in

this situation. The one we think makes the most sense is maximizing the

"true," or "intrinsic" value of the firm's existing shares. That is, the

manager worries about the value of the "old" shareholders' stake in the firm.

Morever, investors know the manager will do this. In particular, the "new"

investors who purchase any stock issue will assume that the manager is not on

their side, and will rationally adjust the price they are willing to pay.

    Define N as the amount by which the shares are over— or undervalued:
                                              —13—




    N1 —   N   .   Then the manager will issue and invest when

                                     y>N              .                            (1)
If the manager's inside information is unfavorable, N is negative and the

firm will always issue, even the only good use for the funds raised is to put

them in the bank——a zero—NPV investment.                  If the inside information is

favorable, however, the firm may pass up a positive—NPV Investment opportunity

rather than Issue undervalued shares.

    But if management acts this way, its decision to issue will signal bad

news to both old and new shareholders. Let V be the market value of firm

(price per share times number of shares) it does not Issue, and V' be market

value if it does issue; V' includes the value of the newly—issued shares.

Thus, if everyone knows that managers will act according to Ineqnlity (1),

the conditions for a rational expectations equilibrium are:12
                           (\J

                    V =   E(xlno   issue) =   E(xly   < tIN)                         (2a)


                          r\
           V' = E(x + y + Nissue) = E(x + y ÷ NIy >               N)      .          (2b)


    The total dollar amount raised is fixed by assumption, but the number of new

shares needed to raise that amciint is not. Thus N is endogenous: it depends

on V' .    For example, If the firm issues, the fraction of all shares held by 'new

stockholders is N/V' .           The manager sees the true value of their claim as:

                                                                                   (3)
                                   N1 -(x+y+N)

Thus, given N, x and y, and given that stock Is issued, the greater the

price per share, the less value is given up to new stockholders, and the less

iN is.
                                        —14—




   Majluf and I have discussed the assumptions and implications of this model

in considerable detail. But here are the two key points:

    1. The cost of relying on external financing. We usually think of the

cost of external finance as administrative and underwriting costs, and in some

cases underpricing of the new securities. Asymmetric Information creates the

possibility of a different sort of cost: the possibility that the firm will

choose not to Issue, and will therefore pass up a posItive—NPV investment.

This cost Is avoided if the firm can retain enough iriternafly—generated cash

to cover its positIve—NPV opportunities.

    2. The advantages of debt over equity issues. If the firm does seek

external funds, It is better off Issuing debt than equity securities. The

general rule is, "Issue safe securities before risky ones."

    This second point is worth explaining further. Remember that the firm

issues and invests if y, the NPV of Its investment opportunity, is greater

than or equal to AN, the amount by which the new shares are undervalued

(If AN > 0)   or overvalued (if AN <     0).   For example, suppose the

investment requires N =   lO million,   but in order to raise that amount the

firm must issue shares that are realty worth l2 million. It will go ahead

only if project NPV is at least 2 million. If it is worth only l.5 million,

the firm refuses to raise the money for it; the intrinsic overall value of the

firm is reduced by l.5 million, but the old shareholders are 0.5 million

better off.

    The manager could have avoided this problem by building up the firm's cash

reserves——but that is hindsight. The only thing he can do now is to redesign

the security issue to reduce AN. For example, if AN could be cut to

$0.5 million, the investment project could be financed without diluting the
                                     —15—



true value of existing shares. The way to reduce AN is to issue the

safest possible securities——strictly speaking, securities whose future val.ue

changes least when the manager's inside information is revealed to the market.

    Of course, AN is endogencus, so it is loose talk to speak of the

manager controlling it. However, there are reasonable cases in which the

absolute value of AN is always less for debt than for equity. For

example, if the firm can issue default—risk free debt, AN is zero, and the

firm never passes up a valuable investment opportunity. Thus, the ability to

issue default—risk free debt is as good as cash in the bank. Even if default

risk is introduced, the absolute value of AN will be less for debt than

for equity if we the customary assumptions of option pricing models.13

Thus, if the manager has favorable information (AN >    0),   it is better to

issue debt than equity.

    This example assumes that new shares or risky debt woild be underpriced.

What if the managers' inside information is unfavorable, so that any risky

security issue would be overpriced? In this case, wculdn't the firm want to

make AN as large as possible, to take maximum advantage of new investors?

If so, stock would seem better than debt (and warrants better still). The

decision rule seems to be, "Issue debt when investors undervalue the firm, and

equity, or some other risky security, when they overvaLue it.

    The trouble with this strategy is obvious once you put yourself in

investors' shoes. If yai know the firm   will   issue equity only when it is

overpriced, and debt otherwise, you will refuse to buy equity unless the firm

has already exhausted its "debt capacity"——that is, unless the firm     has issued
so much debt already that it would face substantial additional costs in
                                     —16--




issuing more. Thus investors would effectively force the firm to follow a

pecking order.

    Now this is clearly too extreme. The model just presented woild need lots

of fleshing out before it could fully capture actual behavior. I have

presented it just to show how models based on asymmetric information can

predict the two central ideas of the pecking order story: first, the

preference for internal finance, and, second, the preference for debt over

equity if external financing is sought.




What We Know About Corporate Financing Behavior

    I will now list what we know about financing behavior and try : o make

sense of this knowledge in terms of the two hypotheses sketched above. I

begin with five facts about financing behavior, and then offer a few

generalizations from weaker statistical evidence or personal observation. Of

coirse even "facts" based on apparently good statistics have been known to

melt away under further examination, so read with caution.

    Internal. vs. external equity. Aggregate investment oitlays are

predominantly financed by debt issues and internally—generated funds. New

stock issues play a relatively small, part. Morsver, as Donaldson has

observed, this is what many managers say they are trying to do.

    This fact is what suggested the pecking order hypothesis in the first

place. However, it might also be explained in a static tradeoff theory by

adding significant transaction costs of equity issues and noting the favorable

tax treatment of capital gains relative to dividends. This would make

external, equity relatively expensive. It would explain why companies keep
                                         —17—



target dividend payouts low enough to avoid having to make regular stock

issues.4 It woild also explain why a firm whose debt ratio soars above

target does not immediately issue stock, buy back debt, and re—establish a

more moderate debt—to—value ratio. Thus firms might take extended excursions

above their debt targets. (Note, however, that the static tradeoff hypothesis

as usually presented rarely mentions this kind of adjustment cost.)

    But the out—of—pocket costs of repurchasing shares seem fairly small. It

is thus hard to explain extended excursions below a firm's debt target by an

augmented static tradeoff theory——the firm could quickly issue debt and buy

back shares. Moreover, if personal income taxes are important in explaining

firms' apparent preferences for internal equity, then it's difficult to

explain why external equity is not strongly negative——that is, why most firms

haven't gradually moved to materially lower target payout ratios and used the

released cash to repurchase shares.

    Timing of security issues. Firms apparently ry to "time" stock issues

when security prices are "high." Given that they seek external finance, they

are more likely o issue stock (rather than debt) after stock prices have

risen than after they have fallen. For example, past stock price movements

were one of the best—performing variables in Marsh's study [21] of British

firms' choices between new debt and new equity issues. Taggart [39] and
         15
others        have found similar behavior in the United States.

    This fact is embarassing to static tradeoff advocates. If firm value

rises, the debt—to—value ratio falls, and firms ought to issue debt, not

equity, to rebalance their capital structures.

    The fact is equaLly embarrassing to the pecking order hypothesis. There

is no reason to believe that the manager's inside information is
                                         —18—



systematically more favorable when stock prices are "high." Even if there

were such a tendencj ,   investors   would have learned it by now, and would

interpret the firm's issue decision accordingly. There is no way firms can

systematically take advantage of purchasers of new equity in a rationaL

expectations equilibrium.

    Borrowing against intangibles and growth opportunities. Firms holding

valuable intangible assets or growth opportunities tend to borrow less than

firms holding mostly :angible assets. For example, Long and MaLitz [20] faind

a significant negative relationship between rates of investment in advertising

and research and development (R&D) and the level of borrowing. They also

found a significant positive relationship between the rate of capital

expenditure (in fixed plant and equipment) and the level of borrowing.

    Williamson [14] reached the same conclusion by a different route. His

proxy for a firm's intangibles and growth opportunities was the difference

between the market value of its debt and equity securities and the replacement

cost of its tangible assets. The higher this proxy, he found, the less the

firm's debt—to—value ratio.

    There is plenty of indirect evidence indicating that the level of

borrowing is determined not just by the value and risk of the firm's assets,

but aLso by he type of assets it holds. For example, without this

distinction, the static tradeoff theory would specify all target debt ratios

in terms of market, not book vaLues. Since many firms have market vaLues far

in excess of book values (even if those book values are restated in current

dollars), we ought to see at least a few such firms operating comfortably at

very high book debt ratios——and of course we do not. This fact begins to make

sense, however, as soon as we realize that book values reflect assets—in—place
                                     —19—



(tangible assets and working capital). Market values reflect intangibles and

growth opportunities as well as assets—in—place. Thus, firms do not set

target book debt ratios because accountants certify the books. Book asset

values are proxies for the values of assets in place)6

    Exchange offers. Masulis [22,23] has shown that stock prices rise, on

average, when a firm offers to exchange debt for equity, and fall when they

offer to exchange equity for debt. This fact coild be explained In varlois

ways. For example, it might be a tax effect. If most firms' debt ratios are

below their optimal ratios (i.e., to the left of the Dptimum in Figure 1), and

if corporate interest tax shields have significant positive value, then

debt—for—equity exchanges would tend to move firms closer to optimum capital

structure. Equity—for—debt swaps would tend to move them farther away.

    The evidence on exchanges hardly builds confidence in the static tradeoff

theory as a description of financing behavior. If the theory were right,

firms woild be sometimes above, and sometimes below, their optimum ratios.

Those above would offer to exchange equity for debt. Those below would offer

debt for equity. In both cases, the firm would move closer to the optimum.

Why should an exchange offer be good news if in one direction and bad news if

in the ) ther?

    As Nasulis points oit, the firm's willingness to exchange debt for equity

might signal that the firm's debt capacity had, in management's opinion,

increased. That is, it woild signal an Increase in firm value or a reduction

in firm risk. Thus, a debt—for—equi:y exchange would be good news, and the

opposite exchange bad news.

    This "information effect" explanation for exchange offers is surely right

in one sense. Any time an announcement affects stock price, we can infer that
                                     —20—



the announcement conveyed information. That is not much help except to prove

that managers have some information investors do not have.

   The idea that an exchange offer reveals a change in the firm's target debt

ratio, and thereby signals changes in firm vaLue or risk, soinds plausible.

But an equally plausible storf can be told without saying anything about a

target debt ratio. If the manager with superior information acts to maximize

the intrinsic value of existing shares, then the announcement of a stock issue

shoild be bad news, other things equaL , because stock issues will be more

likely when the manager receives bad news)7 On the other hand, stock

retirements should be good news. The news in both cases has no evident

necessary connection with shifts in target debt ratios.

    It may be possible to build a model combining asymmetric information with

the costs and benefits of borrowing emphasized in static tradeoff stories. My

guess, however, is that it will prove difficult to do this withait aLso

introducing some elements of the pecking order story.

    Issue or repurchase of shares. The fifth fact is no surprise given the

fourth. On average, stock price falls when firms announce a stock issue.

Stock prices rise, on average, when a stock repurchase is announced. This

fact has been confirmed in several studies, including those by Korwar [181,

Asquith and Mullins [2j, Dann and Mikkleson [10], Vermaelen [40], and

DeAngelo, DeAngelo and Rice [11].

    This fact is again hard to explain by a static tradeoff model, except as

an information effect in which stock issues or retirements signal changes in

the firm's target debt ratio. I've aLready commented on that.

    The simple asymmetric information model I used to motivate the pecking

order hypothesis does predict that the announcement of a stock issue will
                                       —21—



cause stock price to fall. It also predicts that stock price shoi id not faLl.,

other things equal, if default—risk debt is issued. Of course, no private

company can issue debt that is absolutely protected from default, but it seems

reasonable to predict that the average stock price impact of high—grade debt

issues will be small relative to the average impact of stock issues. This is

what Dann and Mikkleson [10] find.

    These results may make one a bit more comfortable with asymmetric

information models of the kind sketched above, and thus a bit more comfortable

with the pecking order story.

    That's the five facts. Here now are three items that do not qualify for

that list——just call then "observations."

    Existence of target ratios. Marsh [21] and Taggart [39] have faind some

evidence that firms adjust towards a target debt—to—value ratio. However, a

model based solely on this partial adjustment process would have a very low

R2. Apparently :he static tradeoff model captures only a small part of

actual behavior.18

    Risk. Risky firms tend to borrow less, other things equil. For example,

both Long and Malitz [20] and Williamson [41] found significant negative

relationships between unlevered betas and the level of borrowing. However,

the evidence on risk and debt policy is not extensive enough to be totally

convincing.

    Taxes. I know of no study clearly demonstrating that a firm's tax status

has predictable, material effects on its debt policy.'9 I think the wait

for such a study will be protracted.

    Admittedly it's hard to classify firms by ax status without implicitly

classifying them on other dimensions as well. For example, firms with large
                                      —22—



tax loss carryforwards may also be firms in financial distress, which have

high debt ratios almost by definition. Firms with high operating

profitabiliy, and therefore plenty of unshielded income, may also have

valu3ble intangible assets and growth opportunities. Do they end up with a

higher or lower than average debt—to--value ratio? Hard to say.




Conclusion

    Paple feel comfortable with the static tradeoff story because it soinds

plausible and yields an interior optimum debt ratio. It rationalizes

"moderate" borrowing.

    Well, the story may be moderate and plausible, but that does not make it

right. We have to ask whether it explains firms' financing behavior. If it

does, fine. If it does not, then we need a better theory before offering

advice to managers.

    The static tradeoff story works to some extent, but it seems to have an

unacceptably low R2. Actual debt ratios vary widely across apparently

similar firms. Either firms take extended excursions from their targets, or

the targets themselves depend on factors not yet recognized or understood.

    At this point we face a tactical choice between two research strategies.

First, we coild try :o expand the static tradeff story by introducing

adjustment costs, possibly including those stemming from asymmetric

information and agenc' problems. Second, we caild start with a story based on

asymmetric information, and expand it by adding only those elements of the

static tradeDff which have clear empirica' support. I think we will progress

farther faster by the latter route.
                                     —23—



    Here is what I really think is going on. I warn you that the following

"modified pecking order" story is grossly oversimplified and underqinlified.

But I think it is general].j consistent with the empirical evidence.

         1. Firms have good reasons to avoid having to finance real

    investment by issuing common stock or other risky securities. They do not

    want to run the risk of falling into the dilemma of either passing by

    positive—NPV projects or issuing stock at a price they think is too low.

         2. They set target dividend payout ratios so that norma'. rates of

    equicy investment can be met by internally generated funds.

         3. The firm may also plan to cover part of normal investment oatlays

    with new borrowing, but it tries to restrain itself enough to keep the

    debt safe——that is, reasonably close to default—risk free. It restrains

    itself for two reasons: first, to avoid any material costs of financial

    distress; and second, to maintain financial slack in the form of reserve

    borrowing power. "Reserve borrowing power" means that it can issue safe

    debt if it needs to.

         4. Since target dividend payout ratios are sticky, and investment

    opportunities fluctuate relative to internal cash flow, the firm will from

    time to time exhaust its ability : o issue safe debt. When this happens,

    the firm turns to less risky securities first——for example, risky debt or

    convertibles before common stock.

    The crucial difference between this and the static tradeoff story is that,

in the modified pecking order story, observed debt ratios will reflect the

cumulative requirement for external financing——a requirement cumulated over an

extended period.20 For example, think of an unusual'y profitable firm in an

industry generating relatively slow growth. That firm will end up with
                                     —24—



an unusually low debt ratio compared to its industry's average, and it won't

do much of any: hing about it. It won't go out of its way to issue debt and

retire equity to achieve a more normal debt ratio.

   An unprofitable firm In the same industry will end up with a relatively

high debt ratio. If it is high enough to create significant costs of

financial distress, the firm may rebalance its capital structure by issuing

equiy. On the other hand, it may not. The same asymmetric information

problems which sometimes prevent a firm from issuing stock to finance real

investment will sometimes also block issuing stock to retire debt.21

    If this story is right, average debt ratios will vary from industry to

industry, because asset risk, asse :ype, and requirements for external funds

also vary by industry. But a long—run industry average will not be a

meaningful target for individual firms in that industry.



    Let me wrap this up by noting the two clear gaps in my description of

"what is really going on." First, the modified pecking order story depends on

sticky dividends, but does not explain why he are sticky. Second, it leaves

us with at best a fuzzy understanding of when and why firms issue common

equity. Unfortunately I have nothing to say on the first weakness, and only

the following brief comments on the second.

    The modified pecking order story recognizes both asymmetric information

and costs of financial distress. Thus the firm faces two increasing costs as

it climbs up the pecking order: it faces higher odds of incurring costs of

financial distress, and also higher odds that future posltive—NPV projects

will be passed by because the firm will be unwilling to finance them by

issuing common stock or other risky securities. The firm ma, choose to reduce
                                    —25—



these costs by issuing stock now even if new equi:y is not needed immediately

to finance real investment, just to move the firm down the pecking order. In

other words, financial slack (liquid assets or reserve borrowing power) is

valuable, and the firm may rationalLy issue stock to acquire it.        (I say "may'

because the firm which issues equt.y to buy financial slack faces the same

asymmetric information problems as a firm   issuing   equity to finance real

investment.) The optimal dynamic issue strategy for the firm under asymmetric
                                                                   22
information is, as far as I know, totally unexplored territory.
                                      —26—



                                   FOOTNOTES

*Sloan School of Management, MIT, and National Bureau of Economic Research.



1.    The finance and economics literature has at least three "managerial"

     strands: (1) descriptions of managerial capitalism, in which the

     separation of ownership and control is taken as a central fact of life,

     for example Berle and Means [5]; (2) agencp theory, pioneered for finance

     by Jensen and Meckling [17], and (3) the detailed analysis of the

     personal risks and rewards facing managers and how their responses affect

     firms' financing or investment choices. For examples of Strand (3), see

     Ross's articles on financiaL signalling [36,37].

2.     Put forward in "Debt and Taxes," [26], esp. pp. 272—273. Note that

     Miller did not claim that all of firms' financing habits are neutraL

     mutations, only that some of them may be. I doubt that Miller intended

     this idea as a strict null hypothesis (see below).

3.     The only early cross—sectional study I know of which sidesteps these

     issues is MM's 1966 paper on the cost of capital for the electric utility

     industry [28]. Their "corrected" theory says that firm value is

     independent of capital. structure except for the value added by Ihe present

     value of interest tax shields. Thus tax—paying firms would be expected to

     substitute debt for equity, at least up to the point where the probability

     of financial distress starts to be important. However, the regulated

     firms MM examined had little tax incentive to use debt, because their

     interest tax shields were passed through to consumers. If a regulated

     firm pays an extra one dollar of interest, and thus saves T     in

     corporate income taxes, regulators are supposed to reduce the firm's
                                      —27—




     pre—tax operating income by T/(l —   T),   the grossed—up value of the

     tax saving. This roughlj cancels out any tax advantage of borrowing.

     Thus regulated firms shculd have little Incentive to borrow enoigh to

     flirt with financial distress, and their debt ratios could be dispersed

     across a conservative range.

      Moreover, M1's test could pick up the present value )f interest tax

     shields provided they adjusted for differences in operating Income.

     Remember, interest tax shields are not eliminated by regulation, just

     offset by reductions in allowed operating income.

       Thus regulated firms are relatively good subjects for cross—sectionaL

     tests of static tradeoff theories. MM's theory seemed to work fairly welL

     for three years in the mid—1950s. Unfortunately, MN's equitions didn't

     give sensible coefficients when fitted on later data (see for example,

     Robichek, McDonald and Higgins [35]). There has been little further work

     attempting to extend or adapt MN's 1966 model. In the meantime, theory

     has moved on.

4.     Although Miller's "Debt and Taxes" model [26] was a major conceptuil

     step forward, I do not consider it an adequate description of how taxes

     affect optimum capital structure or expected rates of return on debt and

     equity securities. See Gordon and Malkiel [16] for a recent review of the

     evidence.

5.     Cordes and Scheffrin [8] present evidence on the cross—sectional

     dispersion of effective corporate tax rates.

6.     I have discussed these two points in more detail in [32 and 33].
                                        —28—



7.      If it is more, the firm first pays off debt or invests in cash or

      marketable securities. If the surplus persists, it may gradually increase

      its target payout ratio.

8.      Although I have not seen the term "pecking order" used before.

9.      These figures were computed from Brealey and Myers [7], Table 14—3, p. 291.

10.     For example, see Berle [4 ],   or   Berle and Means [5].

11.     If the firm always has a zero—NPV opportunity available to it, the

                                                                        f'.J
      distrbution
                                             r'J

                    of y is truncated at y = 0.       I also assume that x is

      non—negative.

12.     The simple model embodied in (1) and (2) is a direct descendant of

      Akerlof's work [1]. He investigated how markets can fail when buyers can

      not verify the quility of what they are offered. Faced with the risk of

      buying a lemon, the buyer will demand a discount, which in turn

      discoi rages the potential sellers who do not have lemons. However, in

      Majiuf's and my model, the seller is offering not a single good, but a

      partial claim on two, the investment project (worth y) and the firm

      without the project (worth x). The information asymmetry applies to both

      goods——for example, the manager may receive inside information that

      amounts to good news about x and bad news about y, or vice versa, or

      good or bad news aboit both.

       Moreover, the firm may suffer by not selling stock, because the

      investment opportunity is lost. Management will sometimes issue even when

      the stock is undervalued by investors. Consequently, investors on the

      other side of the transaction do not automatically interpret every stock

      issue as an attempted ripoff——if they, did stock woild never be issued in

      a rational expectations equilibrium.
                                        —29—



13.    This amounts to assuming that changes in firm value are lognormally

      distributed, that managers and investors agree on the variance rate, and

                                                4•\J   \J
      that managers know the current value of x + y but investors do not. If

      there is asymmetric information about the variance rate, but not about

      firm value at the time of issue, the pecking order co.ild be reversed. See

      Giammarino and Neave [15].

14.     Regulated firms, particularly electric utilities, typically pay

      dividends generous enough to force regular trips to the equity market.

      They have a special reason for this polic,r :    it improves their bargaining

      position vs. consumers and regulators. It turns the opportunity cost of

      capital into cash requirements.

15.     Jalilvand and Harris [16], for example.

16.     The problem is not that intangibles and growth opportunities are risky.

      The securities of growth firms may be excellent collateral. But the firm

      which borrows against intangibles or growth opportunities may end up

      reducing their value.

17.     This follows from the simple model presented above. See Myers and

      Majluf [34] for a formal proof.

18.     Of course, we could give each firm its own target, and leave that target

      free to wander over time. But then we would explain everything and know

      nothing. We want a thery which predicts how debt ratios vary across

      firms and time.

19. For example, both Williamson [41] and Long and Malitz [20] introduced

      proxies for firms' tax status, but failed to find any significant,

      independent effect on debt ratios.
                                           —30—



20.    The length of that period reflects the time required to make a

      significant shift in a target dividend payait ratio.

21.    The factors that make financial distress costly also make it difficult

      to escape. The gain in firm value from rebalancing Is highest when the

      firm   has   gotten into deep trouble and lenders have absorbed a significant

      capital toss. In that case, rebalancing gives lenders a windfall gain.

      This is why firms In financial distress often do not rebatance their

      capital structures.

22.     If the information assymetry disappears from time to time, then the firm

      clearly      should stock up with equity before it reappears. This observation

      is probably not much practical help, however, because we lack an objective

      proxy for changes In the degree of asymmetry.
                                      —31—




                                  REFERENCES



Akerlof, G.A., "The Market for 'Lemons:' Qtality and the Market Mechanism,"
    Quarterly Journal of Economics, 84 (August 1970), 488—500.

Asquith, P. and D.W. Mullins, "Equity Issues and Stock Price Dilution,
    Working Paper, Harvard Business School, May 1983.

Barges, A., The Effect of Capital Structure on the Cost of Capital,
    Prentice—Hall, Inc., Englewood Cliffs, N.J., 1963.

Berle, A., The 20th Century Capitalist Revolution, 1-larcourt, Brace and World,
    Inc. 1954

Berle, A. and C. Means, The Modern Corporation and Private Property,
    MacMillan, New York, 1932.

Black, F., "The Dividend Puzzle," Jairnal of Portfolio Management, 2 (Winter
    1976), 5—8.

Brealey, R.A. and S.C. Myers, Principles of Corporate Finance, 2nd Ed.,
    McGraw—Hill Book Co., New York, 1984.

Cordes, J.J. and S.M. Sheffrin, "Estimating the Tax Advantage of Corporate
    Debt," Journal of Finance, 38 (March 1983), 95—105.

Dann, L.Y., "Common Stock Repurchases: An Analysis of Returns to Bondholders
    and Stockholders," Journal of Financial Economics, 9 (June 1981), 113—138.

Dann, L.Y. and W.H. Mikkleson, "Convertible Debt Issuance, Capital Structure
    Change and Financing—Related Information: Some New Evidence," Working
    Paper, Amos Tuck School of Business Administration, 1983.

DeAngelo, H., L. DeAngelo, and E.M. Rice, "Minority Freezeouts and Stockholder
    Wealth," Working Paper, Graduate School of Business Administration,
    Universiy of Washington, 1982.

DeAngelo, H., and R. Masulis, "Optimal Capital Structure Under Corporate and
    Personal Taxation," Journal of Financial Economics, 8 (March 1980), 3—29.

Donaldson, G., Corporate Debt Capacity: A Study of Corporate Debt Polic' and
    the Determination of Corporate Debt Capacity, Boston, Division of
    Research, Harvard Graduate School of Business Administration, 1961.

Donaldson, C., Strategy for Financial Mobility, Boston, Division of Research,
    Harvard Graduate School of Business Administration, 1969.
                                     —32—



Gianimarino, R.M. and E.H. Neave, "The Failure of Financial Contracts and the
    Relevance of Financial Po1ic ," Working Paper, Queens University, 1982.

Gordon, R.H. and G.B. Malkiel, "Corporation Finance," in H.J. Aaron and J.A.
    Pechman, How Taxes Affect Economic Behavior, Brookings Institution,
    Washington, DC, 1981.

Jalilvand, A. and R.S. Harris, "Corporate Behavior in Adjusting to Capital.
    Structure and Dividend Policy: An Econometric Study," Journal of Finance,
    39 (March 1984), 127—145.

Jensen, M.C. and W. Meckling, "Thery of the Firm: Managerial Behavior,
    Agency Costs and Capital Structure," Journal of Financial Economics,    3

    (October 1976), 11—25.

Korwar, A.N., "The Effect of New Issues of Equity: An Empirical Examination,
    Working Paper, University of California, Los Angeles, 1981.

Lintner, J. "Distribution of Incomes of Corporations Among Dividends, Retained
    Earnings and Taxes," American Economic Review, 46 (May 1956), 97—113.

Long, M.S., and E.B. Malitz, "Investment Patterns and Financial Leverage,
    Working Paper, National Bureau of Economic Research, 1983.

Marsh, P.R., "The Choice Between Equity and Debt: An Empirical Study,"
    Journal of Finance, 37 (March 1982), 121—144.

Masulis, R.W., "The Effects of Capital Structure Change on Security Prices: A
    Study of Exchange Offers," Journal of Financial Economics, 8 (June 1980),
    139—177,

Masulis, R.W., "The Impact of Capital Structure Change on Firm Value," Journal
    of Finance, 38 (March 1983), 107—126.

Mikkelson, W.H., "Capital Structure Change and Decreases in Stockholders'
    Wealth: A Cross—Sectional Study of Convertible Security Calls,"
    Forthcoming in B. Friedman, Ed., Corporate Capital Structures in the
    United States, (National Bureau of Economic Research Conference Volume).

Mikkelson, W.H., "Convertible Calls and Security Returns," Journal of
    Financial Economics, 9 (June 1981), 113—138.

Miller, M., "Debt and Taxes," Journal of Finance, 32 (May 1977), 261—275.

Miller, M. , and F. Modigliani, "Dividend Po1ic' ,   Growth and the Valuation of
    Shares," Journal of Business, 34 (October 1961), 411—433.

Miller, M.H. and F. Modigliani, "Some Estimates of the Cost of Capital to the
    Electric Utility Industry, 1954—1957," American Economic Review, 56 (June
    1966), 333—391.
                                     —33—



Miller, M.H. and K. Rock, "Dividend Policy Under Information Asymmetry,"
    Working Paper, Gradnte School of Business, University of Chicago,
    November 1982.

Modigliani, F., "Debt, Dividend Polici, Taxes, Inflation and Market
    Valuation," Journal of Finance, 37 (May 1982), 255—273.

Modigliani, F. and M. Miller, "The Cost of Capital, Corporation Finance and
    the Theory of Investment," American Economic Review, 53 (June 1958),
    2 61—2 97.

Myers, S., "Determinants of Corporate Borrowing," JournaL of Financial.
    Economics, 5 (November 1977), 147—176.

Myers, S., "The Search for Optimal Capital. Structure," Midland Corporate
    Finance Journal, 1 (Spring 1984), 6—16.

Myers, S., and N. Majiuf, "Corporate Financing and Investment Decisions When
    Firms Have Information Investors Do Not Have," Journal of Financial
    Economics, forthcoming.

Robicheck, A.A., J. MacDonald and R. Higgins, "Some Estimates of the Cost of
    Capital to the Electric Utility Industry, 1954—1954: Comment," American
    Economic Review, 57 (December 1967), 1278—1288.

Ross, S.A., "Some Notes on Financial—Incentive Signalling Models, Activity
    Choice and Risk Preferences," Journal of Finance, 33 (June 1978), 777—792.

Ross, S.A., "The Determination of Financial Structure: The
    Incentive—SignaLLing Approach," Bell Joirnal. of Economics, 8 (Spring
    1977), 23—40.

Smith, C. and Warner, J., 'On Financial Contracting: An Analysis of Bond
    Covenants," Journal of Financial Economics, 7 (June 1979), 117—161.

Taggart, R., "A Model of Corporate Financing Decisions," Joirnal. of Finance,
    32 (December 1977), 1467—1484.

Verinaelen, T., "Common Stock Repurchases and Market SignalLing: An EmpiricaL
    Study," Journal of Financial Economics, 9 (June 1981), 139—183.

Williamson, S., "The Moral Hazard Thery of Corporate Financial. Structure: An
    Empirical Test," Unpublished Ph.D. Dissertation, MIT, 1981.
