                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 BRAND NAMES BEFORE THE INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION

                                           Gary Richardson

                                         Working Paper 13930
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w13930


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2008




I thank my advisors, dissertation committee, dissertation study group, Maile Jedlinsky, Carl Ryanen-Grant,
participants in seminars at Berkeley, Stanford, Nuffield College, and UNC Chapel Hill, and numerous
friends and colleagues for comments, advice, and encouragement. I thank the University of California
and the Social Science Research Council for financial support. I thank Matthew O'Keefe and Gloria
Richardson for accommodations near archives. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Gary Richardson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Brand Names Before the Industrial Revolution
Gary Richardson
NBER Working Paper No. 13930
April 2008
JEL No. L15,L2,N13,N4,N6,O14,O34,O5

                                                 ABSTRACT

In medieval Europe, manufacturers sold durable goods to anonymous consumers in distant markets,
this essay argues, by making products with conspicuous characteristics. Examples of these unique,
observable traits included cloth of distinctive colors, fabric with unmistakable weaves, and pewter
that resonated at a particular pitch. These attributes identified merchandise because consumers could
observe them readily, but counterfeiters could copy them only at great cost, if at all. Conspicuous characteristics
fulfilled many of the functions that patents, trademarks, and brand names do today. The words that
referred to products with conspicuous characteristics served as brand names in the Middle Ages. Data
drawn from an array of industries corroborates this conjecture. The abundance of evidence suggests
that conspicuous characteristics played a key role in the expansion of manufacturing before the Industrial
Revolution.


Gary Richardson
Department of Economics
University of California, Irvine
Irvine, CA 92697-5100
and NBER
garyr@uci.edu
Introduction

         In medieval Europe, manufacturers seeking to sell merchandise to anonymous consumers in distant

markets had to overcome the obstacles of adverse selection and counterfeit goods. These obstacles arose because

purchasers of defective products lacked legal recourse and because intellectual property, such as patents and

trademarks, lacked legal protection. Adverse selection particularly afflicted markets for durable merchandise –

such as textiles and metalware – with attributes that consumers could not observe before purchase. In these

markets, sellers knew more than buyers about the quality of their wares. Manufacturers could cheat consumers

and had an incentive to do so. Fear of being cheated deterred consumers from purchasing durable products.

Exchanges that should have occurred because they were mutually beneficial did not occur because buyers

worried that sellers would deceive them.1

         Counterfeiting impeded efforts to overcome the problem of adverse selection. Today, counterfeit

products account for a significant share of world trade.2 During the Middle Ages, counterfeit products probably

accounted for at least as large a share of the market and perhaps much more. The staples of medieval

manufacturing – textiles, tools, housewares, and military equipment – were commonly counterfeited. Recent

research reveals striking examples. Much of the pottery produced in Europe before the Industrial Revolution

was sold under false pretenses. The forgeries were so sophisticated that they fooled consummate consumers like


1
    This note defines terms used in this essay whose definitions vary across disciplines. Throughout this essay, a
    reputation is a belief held by consumers about the characteristics of products that cannot be detected before purchase.
    Economists often label these characteristics as experience, hidden, or unobservable attributes. Quality is the true state
    of attributes that cannot be detected before purchase. A high-quality product has unobservable attributes that
    consumers prefer and is said to have few hidden defects. A low-quality product has unobservable attributes that
    consumers dislike and is said to have many hidden defects. Synonyms for quality such as superior merchandise and
    shoddy products also refer exclusively to unobservable attributes. A manufacturer with a good reputation is known to
    sell high-quality products. A manufacturer with a bad reputation is suspected of selling shoddy merchandise.
    Synonyms for good reputations, such as well regarded, widely know, reputable, and good names, refer exclusively to
    consumers’ beliefs about the unobservable attributes of manufacturers’ merchandise.
2
    Recent estimates indicate the value of illicit goods exceeds $300 billion each year or 5% of the value of international
    shipments of manufactured merchandise (Business Europe 1999, Freedman 1999, Porter 1996). The share is highest in
    developing nations. In China, approximately 20% of all consumer durables are fake (Simone 1999). In the rest of Asia,
    Africa, and Latin America, the figure ranges from 5% to 25%. Floods of inferior merchandise drive genuine goods from
    many venues including the markets for recorded music in Brazil, videotaped motion pictures in Eastern Europe,
    computer software in China, and designer clothing in former Soviet republics. The hardest hit industries include
    software, clothing, cosmetics, footwear, movies, music, pharmaceuticals, publishing, and sporting goods. The Internet
    exacerbates the problem. Between one-in-ten and one-in-five web sites, accounting for a substantial share of e-
    commerce, sell counterfeit goods or misuse manufacturers’ trademarks (Freedman 1999 and Nicholson 1998).



                                                              2
medieval aristocrats and modern collectors. Chemical analyses of swords that scholars believed to be

archetypical Damascus steel blades show that 1 in 4 were convincing counterfeits.3

         One reason for counterfeiting’s prevalence was the lack of legal protection for intellectual property.

Patents and trademarks arose initially in Italy during the fourteenth century, spread to industrial centers in the

Low Countries during the fifteenth century, and reached England during the sixteenth century.4 These inchoate

legal forms fell far short of modern standards, which evolved in the centuries following the Industrial

Revolution. Enforcing modern standards across international boundaries became possible only in recent decades

and remains far from perfect today.

         While fourteenth-century manufacturers lacked twentieth-first-century techniques for overcoming

counterfeiting, insufficient protection for intellectual property did not preclude the expansion of long-distance

trade. Commerce in consumer durables expanded steadily from the eleventh through sixteenth centuries, a

period known as the Commercial Revolution of the Middle Ages.5 Initially, durables were scarce, expensive, and

seldom sold over long distances. People purchased textiles, tools, and tableware from local artisans, if they

purchased them at all. At the end of the Middle Ages, durables were abundant and affordable. People purchased

quantities of cloth, equipment, and furniture that would have amazed their ancestors four-hundred years earlier.

The exchange of merchandise spanned enormous distances. Textiles manufactured in England made their way to

the Middle East. Weapons manufactured in Italy appeared in markets in Moscow. Distribution channels became

increasingly complex. Artisans sold most of their merchandise to merchants who resold it to retailers hundreds

of miles away. Chains of middlemen transferred products from point of production to point of sale.

Manufacturers ceased to have direct contact with ultimate consumers.

         Manufacturers formed cooperatives now known as manufacturing guilds.6 Members of these

associations lived in the same town, worked in the same industry, and sold standardized products. These

artisanal alliances operated in most towns and industries. Guilds specialized in the production of particular

3
    Verhoeven, Pendray, and Dauksch 1998.
4
    Copyrights developed later, spread less rapidly, and did not arrive in the United Kingdoms for another two hundred
    years.
5
    Lopez 1994




                                                             3
products. Successful guilds produced quantities far beyond local or regional needs and exported ever-increasing

quantities from their hometowns to rural villages, distant towns, and foreign nations. Guilds from distant towns

competed against each other in those markets, where the preponderance of the population lived and where guilds

sold most of their merchandise.7

         Medieval manufacturing guilds, this essay argues, employed a two-step technique to cure the twin

afflictions of adverse selection and counterfeit goods. Step one involved intensive efforts to control quality.

Guilds of manufacturers inspected members' merchandise, prohibited sales of shoddy products, and punished

members caught selling defective output. These efforts enabled the organizations to consistently sell defect-free

merchandise and establish reputations for doing so. Good reputations assuaged consumers’ fears about

purchasing products with hidden defects and encouraged consumption of manufactured merchandise. 8

         Step two involved selling merchandise with conspicuous characteristics. Examples of these unique,

observable traits included cloth of a distinctive color, fabric with an unmistakable weave, and pewter which

when tapped with a spoon resonated at a particular pitch. These attributes identified merchandise made by

particular guilds because consumers could observe them readily, legitimate manufacturers could produce them

inexpensively, and counterfeiters could copy them only at great cost if at all. Guilds maintained a cost advantage

by keeping manufacturing methods secret, using techniques that required local resources, and selling

merchandise whose manufacture required significant investment in specialized equipment. The uniqueness of

conspicuous characteristics communicated reputations from producers to consumers. Communication occurred

even when products passed through the hands of numerous middlemen between point of production and point of




6
    Medieval men and women referred to these organizations by a variety of names including brotherhoods, companies,
    confraternities, fraternities, and mysteries.
7
    The previous paragraphs compiled from Bridbury 1962 and 1982, Britnell 1986 and 1993, Cameron 1993, Cantor 1993,
    Cipolla 1980, Cunningham 1890, Dyer 1994, Hatcher and Miller 1995, Hilton 1995, Jardine 1996, Keen 1990, Lopez
    1994, McKisack 1991, Mokyr 1990, Munro 1994, Myers 1991, Pirenne 1937 and 1952, Postan 1972 and 1987, Pounds
    1994, Rorig 1967, Rowley 1986, Salzman 1923, Swanson 1989, Thrupp 1962 and 1963, Unwin 1908, Waugh 1994, and
    Zacour 1976.
8
    Medieval efforts to overcome adverse selection focused on the same issues as modern efforts. In both eras,
    manufacturers try to communicate accurate information about their products’ unobservable attributes and to enable
    consumers to distinguish legitimate goods from inferior imitations. Modern mechanisms for signaling quality include
    trademarks, brand names, warranties, advertising, Consumer Reports, and the Food and Drug Administration.



                                                           4
sale. The phrases with which medieval men referred to products with conspicuous characteristics were the brand

names before the Industrial Revolution.

          The foundation for this paper’s hypothesis can be found in the work of George Akerlof, who introduced

the issue of adverse selection to academic economists; Bo Gustafson, who first linked the issue and medieval

markets; and historians, such as Richard Britnell and Robert Lopez, who seconded Gustafson’s suppositions.9

These historians documented an important point. Guilds standardized the observable attributes of consumer

durables. Why guilds did that is unknown. Some scholars have suggested that standardization was a mechanism

for monopolizing markets, but recent research questions that conjecture.10 Other scholars have speculated that

standardization was a method of encouraging commerce, but their speculations remain unsubstantiated.11 No

work documents the information asymmetries that engendered adverse selection or the way in which

standardization alleviated that affliction. Whole industries have been ignored. The incentives of craftsmen and

consumers have not been explored. Little effort has been made to collate the data or assess the scope and scale

of the evidence. No work reveals how manufacturers established reputations, prevented counterfeiting, and

disseminated information about unobservable attributes.

          This essay fills those gaps in the historical record. It examines the principal industries of the British

Isles, continental Europe, and Levant during the thirteenth through sixteenth centuries. A list of these industries

and occupations appears in Table 1. Evidence comes from many sources. Court records reveal defects in

manufactured merchandise. So do artifacts studied by archeologists, antique collectors, and museum curators.

Legal codes reveal the structure of property rights and the effectiveness of enforcement. Other government

documents – including tariff lists, tax accounts, inventories of property, and tax lists of municipal governments

and the royal household – provide information about the nature of guilds, durable goods, and good names.

Commercial documents illustrate the value of reputations and the mechanisms that transmitted information from

craftsmen to consumers. Linguistic and literary studies confirm these conclusions. Guilds’ internal documents

illuminate their goals, structure, and activities. So do returns surviving from England’s guild census of 1388.

9
     Britnell 1993, Gustafsson 1987 p. 13, Lopez 1994 p. 129
10
     Richardson 2001a and 2001b.




                                                               5
The number and variety of sources reflects the nature of the argument. Many types of evidence are required to

substantiate the analogy between medieval markets for manufactured merchandise and modern models of

adverse selection. No single source contains enough information to corroborate the hypothesis of this paper.

          The following four sections present the essential evidence. Section 1 shows conditions conducive to

adverse selection pervaded markets for manufactures. Section 2 describes the methods that craftsmen used to

control quality, create conspicuous characteristics, communicate with consumers, and protect reputations from

counterfeiters. Section 3 presents examples of guilds that successfully established reputations and evidence that

those reputations influenced the decisions of consumers, price of products, and profits of manufacturers. Section

4 discusses the implications of these findings. By alleviating the afflictions of adverse selection and

counterfeiting that plagued medieval markets for manufactures, the conspicuous characteristics created by

manufacturing guilds facilitated the expansion of anonymous exchange at the heart of the commercial revolution

of the Middle Ages.


Section 1: Information Problems Besetting Medieval Markets for Manufactured Merchandise

          Medieval markets for manufactured merchandised possessed the six precursors of adverse selection.

First, manufactured merchandise had attributes that consumers could not observe before purchase such as

durability, safety, and effectiveness. Examples abound. Leather’s life span depended on its water content.12

Steel’s strength depended on its carbon content.13 Gold’s value depended on the ratio of precious to base metal

in its alloy. Furniture’s durability depended on the materials used in its construction. Chairs and chests made

with unseasoned wood warped, split, and cracked. Cloth’s longevity varied with the length of its fibers, the

thickness of its thread, the density of its weave, and the chemical composition of its coloring. Inexpensive dyes

ran in the rain and faded in the sun. Fabric impregnated with wool-processing chemicals gave its wearer an itchy

rash.




11
     Gustafsson 1987
12
     Swanson 1989 p. 54
13
     Blair and Ramsay 1991 p. 168



                                                         6
          Second, ordinary men and women could not afford to replace defective purchases. Table 2 emphasizes

that fact by comparing prices of products and incomes of consumers. The table reveals the large percentage of

typical incomes spent on durable goods. Cheap tunics cost 15% of a craftsman’s and 20% of a laborer’s annual

disposable income. Coats that an artisan could wear with pride cost approximately 25% of a craftsman’s and

35% of a laborer's annual disposable income. For perspective, consider these analogies. During the Middle

Ages, buying a cart with fittings, tackle, and iron bound wheels was like purchasing an automobile today. The

cost of replacing defective merchandise must have been on men’s minds. Everyone must have wanted clothing,

shoes, tools, and tableware to last as long as possible. Durability must have been a pressing concern.14

          Durability was not the only issue. Anxieties included safety, effectiveness, comfort, and resale value.

Product failures could have catastrophic consequences. Craftsmen could be injured when their tools shattered or

cauldrons cracked. Knights and men-at-arms could die if their arms and armor failed during a battlefield test.

Yeoman could be poisoned if their tableware contained mercury or lead. Cultivators could starve when faulty

bindings allowed cattle to wander into fields and consume crops. One-in-six accidental deaths recorded in the

coroners’ roles studied by Barbara Hanawalt occurred on the job in agricultural fields, construction sites, and

craft workshops.15 Medical treatment, when available, was at best ineffective and often counterproductive. The

effectiveness and safety of tools and equipment must have been a cause of concern.

          Table 3 illuminates these facts by indicating the unobservable attributes of the principal products

produced during the Middle Ages. A row refers to a group of products with similar characteristics. Column 1

indicates the industry. Column 2 specifies the type of product. Columns 6 through 8 provide explicit examples

of products and potential hidden defects. Columns 3 through 5 describe the intensity of apprehension concerning

three attributes that consumers had difficulty observing before purchase. Effectiveness answers the question:

“will this product fulfill the functions that I intend for it?” For textiles, leather, and wooden goods, effectiveness

was a secondary concern, because casual observation revealed much about the uses of a particular piece of cloth,

although some aspects, such as heat retention, depended on unobservable factors, such as the tightness of the


14
     Dyer 1994 pp. 174-177, 205, 208
15
     Hanawalt 1988 pp. 269-274



                                                          7
weave and the composition of the fibers. For metals and military equipment, effectiveness was the primary

concern. Hidden flaws spawned sudden failures. The possibility existed whenever metal was stressed. Alloys

that minimized the probability of failure were more effective than alloys than did not. Durability answers the

questions: “for how long will a product be effective? Will its effectiveness diminish over time? How quickly

will its effectiveness decline?” For textiles, leather, and wooden goods, durability was the key concern, because

they were made from perishable materials. The manufacturing process delayed inevitable decomposition. The

length of the delay was difficult to determine without the test of time. For metals, durability was less of an issue,

because alloys corroded slowly when protected them from the elements. In a few cases, however, durability did

take center stage. Repeated use weakened iron with a low carbon content. Leaching altered the color and

accelerated the corrosion of pewter and precious alloys that contained lead and other contaminants.

          Purchasers alone bore the consequences of defective purchases, because of the third characteristic of

medieval markets. People who purchased defective merchandise had few remedies. Unhappy purchasers had

little recourse in courts of law.16 Lawsuits were long and costly affairs. Claims regarding quality were hard to

prove. Sellers usually had to be sued in their hometown. Judges insisted caveat emptor, buyer beware. That legal

doctrine placed liability for poor product performance on consumers, the burden of proof on the plaintiff, and

the presumption of innocence on the defendant, which impeded unsatisfied consumers from successfully suing

manufacturers. In medieval England and many other places, warranties were uncommon, uneconomic, and

unenforceable. Courts refused to enforce warranties because the common law considered them deceptive.17

Sellers did not offer warranties because indemnification against product failure discouraged the maintenance of

durable products. Sellers could not monitor the behavior of buyers. So warranties generated moral hazard.

Warranties were also expensive to write and record. The expense probably exceeded the stake in many

situations. Thus, sellers had little incentive to offer warranties, and consumers had little reason to trust promises

about future performance.




16
     Baker and Milson 1986 p. 614, Hastings 1947 p. 157, Milson 1985 p. 129
17
     Baker and Milsom 1986 p. 614, Milson 1985 p. 129.



                                                           8
          Consumers also lacked the ability to retaliate against sellers of defective wares. Men and women rarely

knew who made the products they purchased. People usually bought manufactured merchandise from itinerant

merchants, whom they seldom saw again, or at fairs that operated for a few days each year. Merchandise seldom

leapt directly from manufacturers’ workshops to consumers’ hands.18 Even if buyers knew who manufactured

defective merchandise, they could not punish them by refusing to buy their wares in the future. Consumers

purchased durable products infrequently. People purchased shoes, clothing, and similar articles when old

possessions could no longer be patched or repaired. Families purchased pots, pans, tools, tableware, and similar

items once in a lifetime and often passed them from one generation to the next.

          Consumers’ lack of recourse left them in a precarious position. They bore the costs of defective

purchases. Craftsmen reaped the benefits. That imbalance encouraged craftsmen to take advantage of inside

information. Informational asymmetry was the fourth characteristic of medieval markets. Craftsmen knew much

about the quality of their merchandise. Consumers knew little. The quality of finished goods depended on the

raw materials and workmanship that went into them. Better inputs yielded better outputs. Craftsmen controlled

those inputs. They knew when they cut corners and when they did not. Moreover, by manipulating the

manufacturing process, craftsmen could conceal severe defects from consumers’ eyes. Examples abound. Cloth

makers could substitute coarse wool for fine fiber and conceal this substitution by soaking the wool in solutions

containing water-soluble powders. The wool absorbed the water, the water evaporated, and the powder

crystallized, smoothing the surface of the fibers until the cloth was rinsed repeatedly and the crystals washed

away. Cloth makers could replace superior dyes with inferior inks of the same color that faded in the sun, bled

when wet, putrefied, or attract insects. For example, the dye logwood produced a glorious blue, but could not be

fixed to cloth. Similarly, oak galls, sumac, and other tannin-bearing dyes produced dark blues, but did not last.

Orchil, a dye derived from lichens, produced a reddish purple, but faded unless mixed with a longer lasting

dye.19 Tanners, who converted animal hides to leather by submerging the hides in a chemical wooze that

replaced the moisture in them with a stable solvent, could accelerate this transformation by making their

18
     Bagley and Rowley 1966 pp. 74-75, Blair and Ramsay 1991 p. xxx, Hilton 1995 pp. 32-34, 55, 85-87, Lopez and
     Raymond 1990 pp. 78-89, Pooley 1947 p. 20, Swanson 1989 pp. 44, 46, 130, 141.




                                                           9
“woozes too strong or by applying heat, whereby the entire process could be advanced from nine months to a

startling six weeks.”20 Such shortcuts resulted in leather that looked normal initially, but whose useful life was

limited, especially when exposed to the elements, because the leather hardened and cracked as evaporation

extracted the remaining moisture. Pewterers, who sold pewter cups, bowls, and plates, could add lead to the tin

and copper in their alloy. Leaded and unleaded pewter looked identical initially. But over time, lead leached

from adulterated alloy, changing its color from silver to gray, spoiling the taste of food and drink, and poisoning

those who consumed it.21

          Evidence of these deceptions and craftsmen’s superior knowledge appears in innumerable sources.

Guild records describe defects that could not be detected before purchase.22 Government documents refer to the

problems posed by shoddy products.23 Court rolls detail customers’ complaints about defective merchandise and

deceptive business practices.24 Historians who have studied medieval industry have rediscovered methods that

produced superior and inferior merchandise.25 Antique collectors and archeologists have documented subtle

quality differences in arms, armor, tableware, and other manufactured merchandise.26 Manuals of business

practice cautioned merchants to mistrust “everybody else.”27 A thirteenth century text entitled Advice to a

Norwegian Merchant, written by a father for his son, warned:

          You must also be careful to examine the wares that you buy before the purchase is finally made
          to make sure that they are sound and flawless.28

Giovanni Morelli, in his Cronica, admonished:

          In the wool or French-cloth business ... [trade] with trustworthy persons who enjoy good
          reputations and credit who have something to show by their name.... Do not exercise any trade
          or business in which you have no experience. Do what you are able to do and beware of
          everything else, for otherwise you will be cheated.29

19
     Blair and Ramsay 1991 pp. 334-336, Fisher and Jurica 1977 pp. 177-178
20
     Swanson 1989 p. 54
21
     Blair and Ramsay 1991 pp. 57-80, Cotterell 1929, Gale    1909, Hedges 1964, Michaelis 1955, Swanson 1989 pp. 76-
     81, Verster 1958
22
     Ffoulkes 1988 pp. 169-172, Michaelis 1955 pp. 2-5, L. Smith 1902 p. 209, Swanson 1989 p. 55
23
     Fisher and Jurica 1976 pp. 188-189, Thrupp 1976 pp. 20-21
24
     Bridbury 1989 p. 82, Farley 1946 pp. 145, 151
25
     Cherry 1992 pp. 55-60, Manier 2001, Swanson 1989 p. 54
26
     Brownsword and Pitt 1984 pp. 237-244
27
     Lopez and Raymond 1990 p. 408
28
     Ross and McGloughlin 1977 p. 145
29
     Lopez and Raymond 1990 p. 422



                                                          10
          While craftsmen’s inside information gave them the ability cheat consumers, what gave craftsmen the

incentive to do so was the high cost of manufacturing high-quality merchandise. Those costs were the fifth

transcendent characteristic of medieval markets. A rough estimate indicates cloth makers could cut costs 15% by

replacing fine wool with coarse wool, since wool amounted to one-third of cloth’s cost, and expensive wool’s

price was double that of its cheaper substitute. Another approximation suggests cloth makers could cut costs

between 5% and 35% by replacing expensive dyes with cheaper substitutes. Dyes amounted to one-twentieth of

the cost of common-colored cloth and one-half of the cost of fashionably colored cloth, while inferior inks that

mimicked those colors could be purchased for pennies.30 A rough estimate suggests pewterers could cut costs up

to 20% by putting lead in their alloy, since lead was half the price of more expensive metals, and pewter could

hold up to 40% lead.

          Additional estimates appear in last column of Table 4, which presents evidence concerning craftsmen’s

incentive and ability to conceal hidden defects. Each row of the table describes a potential defect. The fourth

column indicates the length of time that the flaw took to manifest itself after purchase. Textiles, leather, wood,

and pewter products deteriorated gradually. Deterioration accelerated when the product was used. The

acceleration was greatest for textiles, which degraded rapidly when worn and washed, and for pewter, which

leached lead into acidic liquids such as tomato juice. Iron alloys often failed without warning. A bell might show

no symptoms of internal weaknesses until it cracked. A knife might snap suddenly along the line of an internal

fracture. Column 5 indicates the difficulty of detecting such flaws before purchase. Detecting internal flaws in

metallic merchandise was not possible during the Middle Ages and remains difficult even today. Detecting the

adulteration of precious metals was possible for experts with the appropriate tools and training. Experts could

often detect flaws in textiles and leather goods if they took the time to examine them thoroughly. On occasion,

consumers could detect these flaws if they possessed appropriate knowledge and experience. Column 6 indicates

the methods that craftsmen used to conceal hidden defects from consumers’ eyes. I have discovered six

examples in historical documents, despite craftsmen’s obvious reluctance to leave written records of deceptive


30
     Munro 1994 V pp. 14-15, 39-45, Tables 3.4 to 3.11



                                                         11
activity. Column 7 indicates potential profits from selling low-quality merchandise at high-quality prices. The

appendix details the calculation of these estimates.

        Together, Tables 2, 3, and 4 demonstrate that conditions conducive to adverse selection existed in all

industries that expanded rapidly during the Middle Ages. The severity of that affliction cannot be measured in

statistical terms. Insufficient evidence exists about the volume of trade and the counterfactual volume that would

have existed in the absence of adverse selection. Since the data does not exist, theory must suffice. In theory,

adverse selection’s severity increases when the damage done by hidden defects and consumers’ aversion to risk

increase. Both must have been high during the Middle Ages. Hidden defects could have catastrophic

consequences including poverty, injury, and death. Medieval men lived on the edge of subsistence and had few

financial reserves. Brief spells of bad luck could push them into the abyss. Such circumstances must have made

men wary of spending significant sums and impeded the expansion of commerce.

        The existence of adverse selection provided manufacturers with a moneymaking opportunity.

Consumers would pay more for merchandise they knew would perform as promised than for products they

worried would not. Manufacturers that developed good reputations could sell their wares at higher prices, in

larger quantities, and farther from home than manufacturers without good names. As a manufacturer’s good

name spread, it would be able to sell its merchandise even farther afield to consumers who would not purchase

their products otherwise. Demand for its wares would rise, prices would increase, and profits would follow.

        Consumers’ confidence may have been most important benefit of reputations for product quality, but

manufacturers had many other reasons for establishing brand names. Reputations freed craftsmen from local

merchants’ monopolistic clutches. Reputable manufacturers attracted merchants from many places. Wholesale

merchants came since they could sell well-known wares at international fairs. Itinerant merchants came since

they could sell well-regarded merchandise to rural customers. Reputations altered the balance of power in the

traditional chain from manufacturer to wholesaler to retailer. Highly regarded manufacturers could reject

unacceptable offers by local merchants secure in the knowledge that merchants from other towns would

distribute their merchandise. Well-known manufacturers could punish dishonest distributors by refusing to sell

wares to them in the future. Craftsmen valued this control because manufacturing and mercantile interests



                                                        12
seldom coincided. Merchants wanted to pay craftsmen as little as possible and dreamed of expropriating the

surplus generated by industrial activity. Merchants were not loyal to particular manufacturers. They sold goods

made in many places, and they would not push products that competed with the merchandise on which they

made the greatest profit.

          In sum, medieval markets for manufactures possessed characteristics conducive to counterfeiting and

adverse selection. These problems presented moneymaking prospects. Desire to capitalize on that lucrative

opportunity motivated manufacturers to establish respected reputations and communicate them to consumers.

How did they do so?


Section 2: Mechanisms for Establishing and Communicating Reputations

                                 From the ordinances of London’s guild of pewterers
                                      Rules regarding quality adopted in 1348

          So many persons make vessels not in due manner to the damage of the people and the scandal
          of the trade, that three or four of the most true and cunning in the guild [should] be chosen to
          oversee the alloys and the workmanship of all ... be it understood, that all manner of vessels
          shall be made of fine pewter with the [proper] proportion of copper to tin, and no one of the
          guild shall in secret places [make] vessels of lead or of false alloy to sell out of the city at fairs
          or markets to the scandal of the City and the damage of the good folk of the guild ... and if
          anyone is found carrying such wares to fairs or markets or anywhere else in England ... for the
          first default let them lose the material so wrought; upon the second default let them lose the
          material and suffer punishment at the discretion of mayor and the alderman; and if a third time
          they shall be found offending, let them forswear the guild for evermore.31


          Medieval manufacturers established reputations for selling high-quality merchandise with a two-step

technique. The first involved intensive efforts to control quality usually under the aegis of an association of

artisans who lived in the same town, worked in the same industry, sold standardized products, and regulated the

quality of members’ merchandise. These guilds of manufacturers established good reputations by adopting rules

regarding quality and enforcing these rules vigorously. The quote above is an example of the rules enacted by

typical English guilds. It defines quality, vessels made with the proper proportion of copper to tin; establishes a

mechanism for monitoring quality, three or four master craftsmen will monitor the quality of all; prohibits


31
     Michaelis 1955 pp. 2-5. I have modernized the vocabulary, spelling, and punctuation of this quote and removed some
     superfluous words without marking these removals by ellipses.



                                                            13
members from selling substandard products, vessels made from impure alloy; prohibits members from using

inferior inputs, lead in particular; and specifies punishments for members caught violating these rules, for the

first default let them lose the material so wrought; upon the second default let them lose the material and suffer

punishment at the discretion of mayor and the alderman; and if a third time they shall be found offending, let

them forswear the guild for evermore.

         To enforce such rules, guilds inspected members’ merchandise, and in some cases, their shops and

homes. Guild officers called searchers carried out these inspections.32 Searchers ensured members’ merchandise

met guild standards by testing the quality of finished goods and by surreptitious stores of inferior inputs and

similar signs that members used inappropriate manufacturing methods.33 For example, searchers for goldsmiths’

guilds looked for piles of base metals lying about members’ shops and tested the purity of members’ alloy with

a touchstone, a fine-grained, abrasive, black rock that allowed a scraping taken from a suspicious alloy to be

compared with the color and consistency of samples taken from alloys of known composition.34 Similarly,

searchers for tanners’ guilds looked for signs that members heated their vats, made their woozes too strong, or

used the hides of unsuitable animals.

         To facilitate searchers’ efforts, most guilds prohibited work after dark, when – as many ordinances

asserted – mistakes could be more easily made and deceitful practices more easily concealed.35 Many guilds also

required members to set up shop in the same neighborhood and keep an eye on each other’s work. Personal

relationships among members probably facilitated enforcement. Members attended the same church and

gathered frequently for feasts and festivities. They were friends, colleagues, and relatives. Such close contacts

must have made it difficult for one guild member to deceive another.

         Members caught selling shoddy products were subjected to an escalating series of punishments. First-

time offenders were punished lightly and repeat offenders harshly. Punishments varied from guild to guild, of

course. Typical guilds confiscated first-time offenders’ shoddy products, forced second-time offenders to pay


32
     L. Smith 1902 p. 209
33
     Blair and Ramsay 1991 pp. xxiv, 337, Keen 1990 p. 103
34
     Cherry 1992 pp. 55-60
35
     Blair and Ramsay 1991 pp. 184-185, Cantor 1994 pp. 278-279



                                                         14
monetary penalties, and expelled third-time offenders from the organization.36 Expelled members lost the

business benefits of guild membership and much more. They lost friends, colleagues, and access to their guild’s

social services. All guilds held frequent feasts, festivals, and gatherings. Most hired priests, financed parishes,

supported the poor, buried the dead, prayed for the salvation of members’ souls, opened schools, staged plays,

extended credit, established liveries, participated in public processions, insured members against the risks of

everyday life, and provided social standing in class-conscious medieval society. Fear of loosing these fringe

benefits was the glue that held guilds together.

          Monitoring members’ behavior was only half of the battle. Guilds also had to prevent outsiders from

counterfeiting their wares. In England, keeping outsiders from copying guilds’ wares was difficult to do because

the common law protected neither trademarks nor techniques. Patents were not granted until Elizabeth’s reign.

Trademarks were not protected until the 1700s. Goodwill did not become legal property until the nineteenth

century. Before then, courts consistently ruled that manufacturers’ marks were no more their property than their

last names, and courts granted guilds only limited rights to reputations. A guild had a claim to its good name,

and therefore, could sue outsiders who passed inferior wares off as guild merchandise, if they could catch the

culprit, because this deception besmirched the guild’s reputation. But, a guild did not have a claim to its good

names’ pecuniary benefits, and thus, a guild could not sue those who sold merchandise identical to its own,

because perfect copies gave consumers no reason to think less of guild products. Perfect copies did not defame a

guild’s good name.37

          Similarly, almost everywhere outside of England, laws did little to protect the reputations of

manufacturers. No nations protected intellectual property at the beginning of the Middle Ages. Few states

protected it at the end. The exceptions were the industrial centers in Italy, which began protecting trademarks

and techniques in the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries, and the industrial centers in the Low Countries, which

began protecting intellectual property one hundred years later. In those locales, trademarks conveyed

information about product’s unobservable attributes and consequently had value. The legal protection

36
     Blair and Ramsay 1991 p. 73, Cherry 1992 p. 54, and Thomas 1926 p. 264




                                                          15
underlying that value, however, did not extend far from a town. Trademarks from one municipality had no legal

protection in other towns or the hinterland where most of the population lived. Thus, the problem that bedeviled

industry in regions lacking protections for intellectual property also bedeviled manufactures in regions

possessing such protections. Everyone lacked legal protection for intellectual property when they sold

merchandise in the wider market.

          Since the law did little to protect guilds’ reputations, guilds had to defend their own good names. The

principal defense was making merchandise that was difficult to duplicate. Guilds accomplished this task in

various ways. Most kept manufacturing methods secret. Many used techniques that required local resources. The

latter method worked well for smiths and clothmakers, since small differences in raw materials greatly affected

the characteristics of metals and textiles. Ore’s carbon content determined iron’s strength. Contaminants in

furnace fuels affected metal’s malleability. Heat and humidity affected wool’s weave. Chemicals in soil and

water affected the dyeing, fulling, and spinning of cloth. All of these factors varied from place to place,

preventing the transplantation of metallurgical and clothmaking methods from one town to another.38

          An apt example is Damascus steel, which was harder but less brittle than other iron alloys. Blades made

from Damascus steel were stronger, sharper, and sturdier than others made at the time. Manufacturing Damascus

steel required iron ore infused with traces of vanadium and other impurities. Repeated heating and beating

formed bands of vanadium as the metal cooled and hardened and filled “those bands with hard, carbon-rich

steel, surrounded by softer, springier metal.”39 That combination made the metal strong and flexible. It also

yielded metal with a dull blue color laced meandering lines. The pattern, now known as damask or damascene,

was the conspicuous characteristic that revealed the identity of the steel. Smiths outside of Damascus could not

copy it because they lacked (a) iron ore with the appropriate impurities and (b) techniques for transforming that

ore into Damascus steel. The metalworkers’ guild of Damascus devised those techniques and imported pre-

smelted ingots of vanadium-infused ore from mines near Hyderabad in southern India. Scholars only recently


37
     Baker 1995 pp. 511-512, 522-523, Baker and Milsom 1986 p. 614, Blair and Ramsay 1991 p. xxv, Phillips 1982 pp. 71-
     79, Strasser 1989 pp. 43-44
38
     Cipolla 1980 pp. 185-192, Ffoulkes 1988 pp. 13-14
39
     Manier 2001



                                                           16
rediscovered these techniques after years of chemical analysis, metallurgical research, and practical

experimentation.40

         Another method of impeding duplication was selling merchandise whose manufacture required

significant investment in specialized equipment. The largest medieval industry, textiles, provides apt examples.

Cloth’s dimensions depended on the machines used in its manufacture. Looms, tents, and tubs of a particular

size produced rolls of fabric with a particular length, width, and weight. This dependence made duplicating the

dimensions of another guild’s cloth a costly task. Duplication required the appropriate, expensive machinery.

The cost of duplication allowed cloth’s dimensions to communicate its origin to consumers. Each cloth-making

town in England and the Low Countries “adopted its own measure or 'muison' [which was] jealously controlled

by the guild and considered a form of trade mark and guarantee to the buyer.” 41 “A merchant who wanted to

purchase cloth manufactured in distant places had to know its exact quality and length. Guilds in each city

required all members to standardize their products, so … that they would have characteristics different from

[cloth] woven in other towns."42

         Evidence appears in numerous sources. One is a letter from the merchants of Douai to the king of

England.

         They requested [the king] to permit them to import into the realm cloth of the same measure as
         that sold in the fairs of Champagne, Franche-Comte, and Burgundy, arguing that these
         measurements, that is ’24 a laune de Engletene en lice et en corde de long’ were duly controlled
         by the eswardeurs of the town, so that no cloths that did not fulfill the requirements could be
         exported, they also maintained that these measurements were recognized as a characteristic of
         Douai cloth and were therefore a form of trade mark. Finally, they added if permission were not
         given to them, they would be unable to import any cloth at all because the necessary changes to
         be made to the tenters and other manufacturing processes could only be done at great expense
         and loss.43

Another source is Peglotti’s manual for merchants, The Practice of Commerce, which describes cloth from

towns such as Ypres, France where

         all covertures of any sort are [in length] 21 ells apiece. All rays of any color are 42 ells apiece.
         White tiree of any sort, 36 ells apiece. Dyed cloth and imitation Malines medleys, 36 ells

40
     Verhoeven, Pendray, and Dauksch 1998
41
     Buyse 1965 p. 235
42
     Lopez and Raymond 1990 p. 123
43
     Buyse 1965 p. 228



                                                          17
          apiece. Quality white cloth of Ypres is weighed and not measured by the ell ... and all [cloth of
          Ypres] is sold there are so many gold royaux apiece [according] to the quality.44

Fabric’s dimensions conveyed such valuable information that many municipalities required imported cloth to be

measured publicly (or by public officials) before it was cut for the first time. Buyers often paid premia for the

first piece removed from an uncut roll of cloth.

          Cloth’s dimensions, like other conspicuous characteristics, could be called technological trademarks.

Guilds’ one-two punch of technological trademarks and quality control gave them the ability to establish

reputations, while consumers’ concerns about hidden defects gave them an incentive to do so.

          Why did guilds do this rather than individuals or families? Guilds succeeded where individuals failed

for good reasons. Guilds possessed advantages that individuals lacked. First, establishing reputations was

expensive. Quality had to be consistent. Hidden defects had to be eliminated. Conspicuous characteristics had to

be created. Consumers had to be convinced of the connection between observable and unobservable attributes.

Convincing consumers of this connection was an expensive and time-consuming task. Manufacturers had to sell

superior merchandise at moderate prices until satisfied customers spread the word that the product’s value

exceeded its cost. Guilds pooled members’ talents and resources. Pooling reduced the costs born by individuals

and increased the returns that they received from investments in human and physical capital. Pooling permitted

groups to afford investments that individuals could not.

          Second, guilds survived for centuries. Individuals lived for decades. Typical careers lasted less than

twenty years. Typical families survived for a few generations.45 Artisans wanted their children to climb the

social ladder. Whenever possible, craftsmen in common trades apprenticed sons into higher-paying, more-

prestigious professions.46 High mortality and upward mobility meant that individuals and families had time

horizons of twenty years at most and often considerably shorter. The longevity of guilds meant that their time


44
     Lopez and Raymond 1990 pp. 123-124
45
      These generalizations are based on the following figures. Roughly, one-in-ten twenty-year olds died before age thirty.
      One-in-three died before age forty. Only one-in-two celebrated their fouty-fifth birthday. One-in-three families left no
      descendants, and half lacked surviving sons. For these figures, see Cipolla 1980 pp. 145, 164, Hatcher 1973 p. 27,
      Hilton 1995 p. 17, Russell 1948 pp. 176-180, 240-242, and Waugh 1994 pp. 48-49.
46
      From 1387 to 1534 in York, for example, only half of the artisan’s sons who took out the freedom did so in their
      father’s occipation. Most of those had fathers practicing lucrative crafts such as goldsmithing and metal working
      (Swanson 1989 p. 165).



                                                               18
horizons extended across generations. Since the returns from investments accumulated over time, guilds’

longevity encouraged the creation of reputations.

           Third, the longevity of guilds had another effect. It reduced the cost of establishing reputations.

Reputations arose in repeated games when buyers believed that sellers earned more from consistently selling

superior products than from cheating consumers. The former paid large returns in the long run since reputable

manufacturers earned quality premia. The latter paid large returns in the short run when unscrupulous

manufacturers sold low-quality products at high-quality prices. Longevity increased the attractiveness of long-

run returns and cooperative behavior relative to short-run returns and uncooperative behavior. Consumers knew

this. Therefore, they demanded less proof of guilds’ good intentions before believing guilds’ claims concerning

quality.

           Guilds also possessed advantages that governments and merchants lacked. Bureaucrats lacked the

knowledge, skills, and resources needed to detect hidden defects. So did merchants, who bought and sold

commodities of all types, and lacked in depth insights into the unobserved characteristics of the wide array of

goods in which they dealt. The typical tools of regulatory authorities had little influence over wider markets.

Limited geographic jurisdictions handicapped public employees. Towns could only inspect merchandise that

passed within their walls. Kings could only inspect merchandise sold within their realms. No monarch could

control the quality of products in international commerce. Most could not even regulate the quality of products

within their own borders. That is why governments and merchants initially addressed the affliction of adverse

selection by assimilating, allying, or cooperating with craft guilds. Government officials did inspect some

manufactured merchandise. Agents examined observable attributes such as length, width, color, and weight of

certain types of manufactures. These inspections facilitated the collection of customs duties and other taxes,

whose value often depended on the aforementioned attributes. But, government agents neither sought hidden

defects, nor punished those who sold defective merchandise, nor protected consumers from unscrupulous

craftsmen.




                                                           19
Section 3: Evidence of Effort, Success, and Influence

        Evidence of guilds’ ability and intent forms the foundation of a strong circumstantial case that guilds

established reputations for product quality, but circumstantial evidence cannot prove the point beyond a

reasonable doubt. An ironclad conclusion requires indisputable evidence that guilds tried to establish

reputations. Guilds succeeded (at least occasionally). And, guilds’ good names influenced the decisions of

consumers, prices of products, and profits of craftsmen.

        Several types of evidence indicate guilds tried to establish reputations. One was discussed earlier in the

essay. Innumerable guilds possessed rules regarding quality. These guilds operated in towns throughout Europe

and in most manufacturing sectors. Local and legal historians have documented another salient fact. Guilds

enforced their rules vigorously. Evidence of enforcement can be found in extant guild documents and the

archives of towns such as Winchester, London, and Salisbury. In those municipalities, guilds could not punish

members for violating rules-regarding quality without holding public hearings. Winchester’s court records

reported weavers penalized for selling shoddy cloth and candle-makers punished for selling underweight

candles.47 London’s Plea and Memorandum Rolls described pewterers fined for selling vessels made from lead

and tanners punished for selling improperly processed hide. Salisbury’s court rolls recorded similar prosecutions

and penalties.48 Comparable evidence exists for towns on the continent, where municipal governments helped

guilds enforce rules regarding quality.49

        Well-known examples demonstrate that some guilds successfully established reputations for

consistently selling high-quality merchandise. For example, in the second half of the fourteenth century,

London’s guild of pewterers, developed a European-wide reputation for selling pewterware with a low lead

content. Evidence comes from several sources. The pewterers’ records describe their efforts to control quality.

London’s legal records reveal their efforts to prevent others from passing-off leaded wares as London pewter.

Tariff records show that London pewter sold at a high price. Tax records indicate that London pewterers earned


47
    Farley 1946 pp. 145, 151
48
    Bridbury 1989 p. 82
49
   Lopez 1994, Munro 1994



                                                        20
high incomes which suggests London pewter earned a quality premium. Scientific studies confirming the lead

content of London pewter was lower than the lead content of its competitors.50

          Additional examples abound. In medieval England, everyone knew clothmakers in Beverly, Coventry,

Colchester, Kersey, Lincoln, Norwich, Oxford, Salisbury, Stamford, Winchester, and York sold superior cloth.

Weavers in York made moderately priced, durable woolens. Weavers from Norwich sold durable worsteds.

Clothmakers from Salisbury sold well-made woolen rays. Artisans from Shrewesbury sold fine flannel. York’s

armorers’ sold sturdy chain mail. London’s armorers’ assembled rugged plate armor from imported Italian steel

plates. The most durable canvas came from Newcastle. Wire drawn in Coventry was the most malleable in the

realm. Other well-regarded products included Bristol’s leather goods, Gloucester’s iron, Hanley’s pottery,

Shrewesbury’s furs, Haverford’s gloves, Lincoln’s scarlet, Stamford’s hauberge, Beverly’s burnet, Aylesham’s

linen, Colchester’s russet, Corfe’s marble, Lincoln’s scarlet, Pontefract’s bows, and Thaxted’s knives.51 Similar

examples come from the continent. Good white wine came from Champagne. A tasty cheese came from Parma.

          The last example – Parmesan cheese – illustrates a linguistic convention that concisely conveyed

information about products’ attributes: the type-town product name. A type-town name was an appellation like

London pewter. When medieval men said, “London pewter,” they associated a product (pewter) with a producer

(London’s guild of pewterers). Variations existed in the type-town scheme. Well-known regional terms

occasionally replaced obscure place names. For example, wine made in the vineyards of Cote' d'Or, Yonne, and

Saone-et-Loire was known as Burgundy wine (hence the modern word burgundy meaning in American English

a dry red wine or a dark purple color). Swords made in Haute Savoy were called Burgundy swords.52 Paper

made in the town of “Fabriano, in the Marche region,” was known as paper from Marche.53 Well-known place

names also replaced terms for product types. These replacements occurred in cases where a town’s fame for

producing a particular product spread so widely that it became a byword for that product. This situation could

generate type-town names composed of two town’s names. One indicated the product type. The other indicated

50
     Blair and Ramsay 1991 pp. 57-80, Cotterell 1929, Encyclopedia Americana 1994 v. 21 p. 842, Gale 1909, Hedges 1964,
     Michaelis 1955, Swanson 1989 pp. 76-81, Verster 1958
51
     Blair and Ramsay 1991 p. 73, Holmes 1962 p. 151, Rothwell 1975 pp. 881-884, Swanson 1989 pp. 71, 80
52
     Ffoulkes 1988 p. 12
53
     Lopez and Raymond 1990 pp. 109-114



                                                           21
the town of production. Examples include ‘worsted from Ipswich’ and ‘cordovan from Bristol.’ Such

composities often appeared in merchant’s records. In 1320, for example, the Florentine company of Francesco

del Bene recorded in its account books the purchase of white Malines-style cloth made in Malines to distinguish

it from Malines-style cloth made in other towns.54

         Mercantile records demonstrate that merchants used type-town product names regularly. Type-town

names appeared in commercial correspondence. For example, on November 29, 1265 Andrea de’ Tolomei wrote

from the fair of Troyes to Tolomeo de’ Tolomei, his second cousin and business partner, that “wax of Venice

[cost] d.23 per pound [and] wax of Tunis, d. 21 ½.” Type-town names also appeared in financial ledgers. For

example, between 8 May and 25 May 1331, Maitre Ugo Teralh, a drapier from Forcalquier, recorded purchases

and sales of canet [cloth] from Carcassonne, blue [cloth] from Saint-Pons, checkered cloth from Toulouse,

saffron cloth from Carcassonne, medley cloth from Saint-Toulouse, and camlet cloth from Montolieu. In 1320,

among other transactions, the Florentine company of Francesco del Bene recorded purchases of white Malines-

style cloth made in Malines, white cloth made in Saint-Omer, wool cloth from Moulin, white cloth from Ghent,

felt from Ypres, as well as cloth of various colors and styles produced in Brussels and Aalst.55 Type-town names

also appeared in Genoese notarial documents; accounts of the Alberti, Covoni, Datini, and Peruzzi firms;

Peglotti’s handbook for merchants, La Practica della Mercatura; Parliamentary edicts; purchase records from

Henry VI’s royal wardrobe; and English, Italian, Polish, and Spanish customs accounts.56 Type-town names

were even translated from one language to another. Table 5 illustrates that fact by listing English, Persian, and

Cumanic terms for twelve types of linen fabric taken from a trilingual medieval dictionary.

         Lexicographic evidence indicates ordinary individuals uttered type-town names in everyday speech at

least as often as merchants wrote type-town names in mercantile records. Linguistic research reveals a

persuasive pattern. Many type-town names evolved into modern words. An example is worsted. Worsted

originally meant fabric woven in the parish of Worsted, England. Later, it meant fabric woven anywhere in the

Worsted style. Today, it means a woven wool cloth with a smooth, hard surface. Worsted’s metamorphosis from

54
     Lopez and Raymond 1990 pp. 123, 364
55
     Lopez and Raymond 1990 pp. 362-363, 364-370, 393, 400.




                                                         22
town name to product type to modern word occurred for the same reason Kleenex means facial tissue and

Xeroxing means copying. Names of popular products become associated with similar products made by other

manufacturers, acquire broad connotations, and enter the vernacular. Other modern words descended from

medieval product names include cordovan (from Cordoba, Spain), drab (from Drab-de-Berry), pistol (from

Pistoia, a town in Tuscany), muslin (from Mosul, Persia), and the names of innumerable fabrics, wines, cheeses,

and preserved meats.57 The definitive English-language source on this topic is the Oxford English Dictionary. It

indicates that before the end of the sixteenth-century, the names of 14 English towns became bywords for types

of cloth. The names of 3 English towns became bywords for types of cheese. The names of other English towns

became bywords for a kind of cord and a diamond-like gem.58

          The type-town linguistic convention also appears in medieval literature. Authors used type-town names

in their prose and poetry. An example is Chaucer, who used the terms cloth of Tars in the “Knight’s Tale” and

cloth of Reynes in the “Book of the Duchess.” (circa 1369). 59 The former also appeared in Peirs Plowman (year

1377) and Morte d’Arthur (circa 1400).60 The latter appeared in the Play Sacram (circa 1460) and the Paston

Letters (year 1489).61 Cloth of Tars was a fine silk made in Tarsia in Turkestan. Cloth of Reynes was a fine linen

fabric made in Rennes in Brittany.

          The use of type-town names should not be surprising. The type-town convention conformed to the

medieval custom of identifying objects and individuals with descriptive suffixes. Commodities were classified

by place of production such as “wax of Montenegro, wax of Ragusa, wax of Byzantium, Bulgarian wax, wax of

Spain, wax of Poland, and wax of Riga,” and individuals were distinguished by surnames indicating occupation,

residence, or birthplace such as Thomas the clerk, Thomas of London, and Thomas Becket.62 Surnames

supplemented forenames, which were usually the names of apostles or saints. Guilds also had Christian names.



56
     Munro 1994 VII
57
     Mokyr 1990 pp. 41-42, Oxford English Dictionary
58
     In the Oxford English Dictionary, see Worsted, Kendal, kersey, Stafford, Taunton, Lincoln, Stockbridge, Tavistock,
     Molton, Penistone, Bridgewater, Kentish, Chessyre, Dunster, Bristol, Shropshire, and Worcester.
59
     Davis et al 1979 p. 27
60
     “tars, tarse” Oxford English Dictionary
61
     “Raines” Oxford English Dictionary
62
     Becket probably means born in the village of Beck. Barlow 1986 p. 12



                                                             23
They used them in legal documents and on ceremonial occasions.63 Guilds usually named themselves after the

patron saint of their craft or a popular Christian persona. The former practice gave similar Christian names to all

guilds in an occupation, since everyone in an occupation had the same patron saint. The latter practice gave

similar Christian names to several guilds in one town, since guilds outnumbered popular Christian namesakes.64

Because devotional designations did not distinguish one guild from another, medieval consumers and modern

scholars employed another convention: the profession-town guild names. These appellations appeared in the

form “the guild in industry X from town Y.” Table 6 illustrates this convention by presenting the religious and

professional labels of occupational organizations appearing in the guild census 1388.

          In most cases, the juxtaposition of profession-town guild names and type-town product names

unambiguously associated producers and products. Guild X from town Y made product Z from town Y. The

monopsonistic tendencies of medieval craftsmen facilitated this convention. In many towns, all artisans who

wove wool joined one guild and all those who cobbled shoes joined another. Type-town names could cause

confusion, however, in towns where multiple guilds, unaffiliated artisans, and itinerant merchants sold similar

products. That created quandaries such as: was cloth from York woven by members of York’s wool-weavers’

guild, by members of some other guild in the city, by independent Yorkshire craftsmen, or by craftsmen

somewhere else in the world whose cloth happened to be sold by a merchant from York? Evidence of this

confusion and the institutions the English created to clarify it proves the point. Artisans argued incessantly about

overlapping type-town designations. Disputes often spilled into town councils, mercantile courts, and the halls

of Westminster. The royal government typically settled these disputes by selling charters that allowed the

purchaser to impose quality standards on all merchandise of a particular type sold in a particular place or by

requiring local governments to enforce such standards. The ubiquity of type-town names and the reputations

that they conveyed indicates many guilds established widely known reputations.

          Five classes of evidence demonstrate that reputations for quality influenced the decisions of consumers,

prices of products, or profits of manufacturers. The first is the judicial record. Court transcripts demonstrate that

63
     Pooley 1947 p. 9




                                                         24
hundreds of guilds engaged in costly legal battles to defend their reputations, which suggests hundreds of guilds

thought their reputations were worth defending. Court records also show outsiders tried to pass-off shoddy

wares as guild merchandise, which suggests many guilds had reputations worth exploiting.

          The second is evidence indicating that guilds profited from goods reputations. Economists call these

profits quality premia. Price variation unrelated to products’ tangible attributes is prima facia evidence of quality

premia. Such variation appears in commercial records, tariff schedules, and aristocratic account books. For

example, in the tenth year of Henry IV’s reign (30 September 1408 to 30 September 1409), the royal wardrobe

purchased dyed long broadcloths measuring thirty by one and three-quarter yards from various towns.

Meticulous records report no differences among these broadcloths except the town of manufacture, yet the

cloths’ prices varied substantially. The most expensive cost ten-and-a-half pound sterling, the cheapest only six.

In other years, prices varied by even wider margins.65

          The third class is evidence that trademarks were bought and sold once they became legal property.

Genoese notarial documents report many such sales. Here is an example. On Wednesday, 10 June 1383, Ser

Pietro Preda sold to Ser Petrolo Tanzio

          [a] trademark ... suitable for marking fustians on top and over the fold of every piece [and
          recorded in] a copybook [kept] by the provosts of the society and community of the Art of
          Fustian in Milan ... the right of using the said mark ... [and] all rights, suits, and advantages in
          and from these marks and on account of or by reason of them.66

Such transactions suggest trademarks and the reputations that they represented possessed monetary

value.

          The fourth class is scholarly studies concluding guilds’ reputations influenced the demand for

particular products. Ffoulkes, for example, found armor’s price depended on its producer’s reputation

because “personal safety in the field was of the utmost importance.”67 Epstein argued “the international

market for wool cloth valued products according to the town of origin,” and craftsmen “producing

goods for a wider market ... understood that the reputation of their wares was the most important factor

64
     For example, all goldsmiths’ guilds in England were named for St. Dunstan, and all goldsmiths’ guilds on the Continent
     were named for St. Eligius. Cherry 1992 p. 52
65
     Munro 1990 V p. 67




                                                             25
in determining the price and prestige of their cloth.” Bridbury stated that “the reputation of products

made or finished ... in some [English] towns carried well beyond the neighborhood, or even the region,

in which the town lay ... Sometimes the reputation of these products carried beyond the shores of

England.”68 Their demand depended on “the quality of the craftsmanship and material which had gone

into its making.”69

         The fifth class is medieval documents that attribute shifts in economic fortunes to changes in

reputations for product quality. An example is the fifteenth-century Act for the Improvement of Worsted

Making, which lamented that:

         in the city of Norwich, as elsewhere within the county of Norfolk, diverse persons which do
         make untrue wares of all manner of worsteds, not being of the assize length nor in breadth, nor
         of good stuff and right making as they ought to be, and of old time were accustomed, and the
         sleyes and yarn pertaining to the same not well made and wrought, in great deceit as well of
         denizens as of strangers inhabiting or reparing to this realm, which have used and so use to buy
         such merchandise, trusting that they were within as they seemed without, where indeed it is
         contrary: and for that the worsteds in times past were lawfully wrought, and merchandise well
         liked, and greatly desired and esteemed in parts beyond the sea; now because they be of no right
         making, nor good stuff, they be reported and esteemed deceitful and unlawful merchandise, and
         of little regard, to the great damage of our lord the king, and great prejudice of his loyal
         subjects.70

The Act for the Improvement of Worsted Making is as close as one can come to an eyewitness account of the

relevant issues. It stresses reputations’ importance in international markets, recalling that when worsteds were of

good stuff and right making they were greatly desired and esteemed in parts beyond the sea, but when worsteds

were not within as they seemed without, they were deemed deceitful and unlawful merchandise of little regard,

and consumers would not buy them to the great damage of our lord the king, and great prejudice of his loyal

subjects.

         This account illustrates the argument advanced by this essay. Medieval manufactures tried to establish

reputations for selling defect-free merchandise by controlling quality. Conspicuous characteristics

communicated these reputations to consumers. These reputations influenced consumers’ decisions, products’

66
     Lopez and Raymond 1990 p. 124 from Notaio Marcolo Golasecca.
67
     Ffoulkes 1988 p. 13.
68
     Epstein 1991.
69
     Bridbury 1982 p. 6.




                                                        26
prices, and manufacturers’ profits. Men and women referred to these reputations with type-town product names.

These appellations served as the brand names before the Industrial Revolution.


Section 4: Discussion

          This argument’s implications become clear when one considers Adam Smith and Henry Pirenne’s

dictum that the expansion of long-distance trade propelled economic progress before the Industrial Revolution.

According to the Adam Smith, the division of labor increased output per worker, because specialization allowed

manufacturers to do what they did best, enabled workers to engage in particular tasks, created economies of

scale, encouraged investment in product-specific skills and machinery, and focused inventors on particular

problems, rather than dissipating creative energies on an array of ill-defined and unrelated tasks. Combining

Smith’s paradigm and this paper’s hypothesis – that manufacturing guilds served as branding mechanisms –

yields a clear conclusion. By mitigating adverse selection and fostering commerce, guilds encouraged economic

progress.

          Before accepting this conclusion wholeheartedly, a potential drawback of improving quality should be

considered. In theory, increasing durability might have inhibited commerce. If goods lasted longer, people may

have purchased fewer products. But, medieval society’s structure suggests that increasing durability did not

reduce the volume of trade. During the Middle Ages, durability was correlated with other desirable attributes

such as safety and effectiveness. Demand for durables was large, elastic, and growing. Product innovation

outpaced process innovation. Manufacturers lacked economies of scale. Consumers wanted to be on the cutting

edge of fashion and technology. Products were expensive. Consumers bore the costs of hidden defects on their

own. The costs were high and could be catastrophic. Under these conditions, economic theory indicates

increasing durability would encourage, rather than discourage, innovation and trade.

          The manufacturing-guilds-as-branding-mechanisms hypothesis also resolves several riddles of industrial

organization in late-medieval Europe. One concerns the spatial distribution of industrial activity. Guilds of

manufacturers were organized town by town. Norwich had a guild of weavers. York had a guild of weavers.

70
     Act for the Improvement of Worsted Making, 1467 (9 Edward IV, c. 1, Statutes at Large, II (1763), pp. 20-21) from




                                                            27
Salisbury, London, and hundreds of other towns had guilds of weavers. Those guilds seldom, if ever, included

weavers from other towns and often, but not always, included all local weavers. Guilds were also organized

industry by industry. For example, a town might have a guild of weavers, a guild of shoemakers, and a guild of

armorers. But, towns contained few (if any) active manufacturing guilds whose members worked in multiple

industries. The guilds-as-brands hypothesis suggests this pattern of industrial organization reflected the costs of

creating and maintaining reputations. The large up-front costs of creating conspicuous characteristics generated

economies of scale in the formation of reputation. Guilds spread the fixed costs amongst members of a craft.

However, diseconomies of distance existed. Communications were costly and few men knew how to read and

write. Monitoring the behavior of colleagues living far away was difficult if not impossible. So, guilds

segmented themselves along geographic lines. Diseconomies of scope also existed. Some involved the

production process. For example, techniques varied so much across industries that learning how to manufacture

one product provided few insights into how to manufacture another product. Other diseconomies involved social

and religious activities. For example, guilds worshipped patron saints and patron saints differed across

occupations. So, manufacturing guilds naturally segmented themselves along occupational and geographic lines.

        Another mystery of medieval manufacturing was the relentless shifting of industrial leadership among

guilds, towns, regions, and nations in late-medieval Europe. In one decade, certain manufacturers in particular

towns flourished. During the next decade, the leaders failed and followers took their place. Years later, hitherto

obscure manufacturers reached the forefront, and a few former leaders regained the van. Sometimes these

changes occurred cyclically. At other times, they occurred haphazardly. The manufacturing-guilds-as-branding-

mechanisms hypothesis suggests two phenomena that may have produced these patterns. One is an inverse

relationship between reputations and innovations, which has the potential to generate cycles of industrial

leadership. Medieval Europe’s largest industry, textiles, provides an example. During the fifteenth century,

Italian and French clothmaking guilds encouraged product development but discouraged the adoption of labor-

saving machinery. At the same time, English clothmakers enthusiastically adopted labor-saving devices but

seldom developed new products. These dissimilar strategies could have been the best responses to each region’s


   Fisher and Jurica 1976 pp. 188-189.



                                                         28
reputation. Italian and Flemish clothmakers were known for selling expensive, luxurious, and defect-free

textiles. Since early versions of labor-saving machines, such as water powered fulling mills, could not make

cloth of consistent quality, Italian and Flemish clothmakers may have benefited from resisting mechanization

and retaining their reputations. English clothmakers may have been benefited from the opposite strategy,

because mechanization cut costs but did little to lower their second-rate reputations.

         A second potential explanation for cycles of industrial leadership lies in the discovery and depletion of

unique resources. The creation of counterfeit-proof conspicuous characteristics often required access to raw

materials with one-of-a-kind chemical properties. Industrial centers flourished when access to unique resources

expanded. Industrial centers waned when access ended, either after overuse exhausted supplies or because

political events disrupted trade routes linking point of extraction and point of production.

         The decline during the seventeenth and eighteenth century of Damascus’s metalworking industry

provides an apt example.71 The production of Damascus steel had three requirements. One, iron ore had to come

from a deposit with significant traces of the elements Chromium, Molybdenum, Niobium, Manganese, or

Vanadium. Ingots of this ore came from the area around Hyderabad in southern India. Two, craftsmen had to

know heat-treating techniques that decarburized the exterior “in order to produce a ductile surface rim adequate

to contain the hot-sort interior regions.” Three, craftsmen needed knowledge of a finishing process that

produced surface patterns characteristic of Damascus steel. Master craftsmen could teach apprentices the second

and third requirements, but the first was mysterious and irreplaceable. Ingots with the necessary trace elements

appeared identical to ingots without them.

         … during several generations all of the ingots from India were coming from an ore body with
         the proper amount of minor elements present, and blades with good patterns were being
         produced. Then, after a few centuries, the ore source may have been exhausted or become
         inaccessible to the smithing community; therefore, the technique no longer worked. With time,
         the smiths who knew about the technique died out without passing it on to their apprentices
         (since it no longer worked), so even if a similar source was later found, the knowledge was no
         longer around to exploit it.72




71
     Verhoeven, Pendray, and Dauksch 1998
72
     Verhoeven, Pendray, and Dauksch 1998 pp. 64



                                                         29
This quote suggests a link between European colonial expansion and the decline of Islamic industry. European

invasions of Arabia and India disrupted trade routes throughout the region, preventing manufacturers from

important the resources that they needed, decreasing the value of their skills, and eventually driving them from

business.

        The manufacturing-guilds-as-branding-mechanisms hypothesis also has implications for the history of

patents. Scholars often portray England’s adoption of a patent system in a favorable light. Patenting encouraged

inventive activity to such an extent that it was an important impetus for industrialization. Patents alleviated a

debilitating ailment, the counterfeiting of consumer goods, whose only cure was government intervention.

Scholars also believed that medieval English guilds monopolized markets for manufactured merchandise.

Recent research, however, reveals that medieval English guilds lacked legal and natural monopolies.73 English

guilds acquired limited monopolies in local venues only in Tudor times. That acquisition coincided with the

evolution of legal protections for intellectual property, a concept that England imported the continental concept

during Elizabeth I’s reign. The concept originally linked a quid, disseminating information about new

inventions, and a quo, receiving monopoly rights over markets for the invention for a limited period of time.

Monopolies over markets for manufactures, which were previously prohibited by common and statutory law,

arose as clever lawyers and greedy courtiers expanded the connotations of the quid, enabling clever courtiers

and powerful politicians to claim many things long in existence as a new and useful invention. The initial

interpretation returned only after repeated reforms of the system during the seventeenth and eighteenth

centuries.

        These facts and the manufacturing-guilds-as-branding-mechanisms hypothesis suggest modifying the

conventional academic wisdom. Rather than a panacea to a pervasive problem, the introduction of patents may

have instigated centuries of political intrigue and monopolistic machinations that impeded the evolution of

alternative methods of protecting intellectual property. In other words, patents may not have been a prerequisite

for industrialization. Before patents existed, conspicuous characteristics allowed manufacturers to keep

technologies to themselves and to defend their reputations. Physical and economic forces complicated the




                                                         30
process of counterfeiting merchandise made by reputable manufacturers and the process of transplanting

technology from place to place. In many ways, of course, patents and conspicuous characteristics were

complements. Manufacturers could use both to safeguard intellectual assets. Evidence indicates that many early-

modern manufacturers did so, just as manufacturers do today. Thus, the adoption of patents probably increased

incentives for innovation, although the influence of patents may have been smaller than conventionally claimed.

         This deduction suggests that patents may have influenced economic progress through other channels.

One was by shifting the costs of enforcing intellectual property rights from the private to the public sector. In the

world before patents, manufactures invested time and money to create goods with unique, observable attributes.

In modern economies, governments bear the costs of protecting reputations and innovations. The judiciary

prosecutes counterfeiters. Criminal courts compensate victims of counterfeiting. Entrepreneurs need not invest

large sums in conspicuous characteristics.

         A second channel was the time-profiles of profits from innovation. In the world before patents, returns

from inventive activity accrued over long periods. Profits from successful innovations, conspicuous

characteristics, and respected reputations accrued over generations. The ability to capture intergeneration returns

may have been a principal reason that guilds formed the nexus of innovation and commerce before modern

times. Since the creation of patents, returns from innovation accrue for limited periods, usually 14 years or less.

Front-loading revenues makes innovation more attractive to individuals, families, and firms with limited life

spans, which have been the nexus of commerce and innovation in the modern era. Thus, the emphasis on the

short-run returns seems to influence the optimal method of organizing industry.

         A third channel was by changing the types of intellectual property that could be protected. In the world

before patents, protection existed only in industries with natural or technical barriers to entry. After the

establishment of patents, intellectual property could be protected in industries without innate barriers. This

protection may have been particularly important due to the Scientific Revolution. The spread of scientific

knowledge facilitated entry into many industries. Science revealed relationships between conspicuous

characteristics and local resources and lowered the costs of duplicating technological trademarks. Science also

73
     Richardson 2001a and 2001b



                                                          31
accelerated the diffusion of industrial technology. Chemistry, biology, physics, and engineering explained how

to adjust manufacturing methods to local conditions. A fourth channel was by transforming private information

into common knowledge. In the world before patents, innovators strove to keep ideas to themselves. Success at

keeping secrets enabled entrepreneurs to earn large returns from exclusive markets. Technology often

disappeared when bad luck beset those who held key pieces of information in their minds. Today, to receive a

patent, an inventor has to describe an idea, what it does, and how it works. The description becomes part of the

public record and available to all interested parties. Public revelation has several benefits. Ideas were less likely

to be lost when those in the know fail to pass them along. Other entrepreneurs can build upon bright ideas.

Parallel applications may exist in unexpected places of which original innovators are ignorant. After a patent

expires, the technology becomes public property, and everyone can employ it freely.

         In addition to illuminating the history of patents, the manufacturing-guilds-as-branding-mechanisms

hypothesis contributes to at least three fields of academic literature that use the past as a laboratory for

pondering the present. The first investigates the foundations of impersonal markets and the origins of

anonymous exchange. Greif, Milgrom, North, and Weingast explore these issues in a series of articles that

examine the infrastructure underlying the late-medieval Commercial Revolution. Their work illuminates

institutions that supported long-distance commerce. Muslim and Italian trading associations linked local

wholesalers with overseas agents.74 Merchant guilds protected members who traveled abroad from the

exploitative impulses of foreign authorities.75 The community responsibility system enforced commercial

obligations and facilitated inter-community exchange.76 The Champagne Fairs disseminated information about

merchants’ reputations, ensured contract enforcement, and encouraged impersonal exchange.77 Together, these

institutions enabled chains of merchants to ship goods from point of production to point of sale. This essay

complements that conclusion by revealing the methods manufacturers used to transmit information about

product quality through distribution chains.


74
     Grief 1989, 1993, 1994
75
     Grief, Milgrom, Weingast 1994
76
     Grief 1999
77
     Milgrom, North, Weingast 1990



                                                          32
          The second school of scholarship examines the role of cooperative institutions in the early stages of

industrial development and sectors plagued by information and incentive programs. Typical studies focus on

credit, debt, and insurance markets. Examples include the work of Banerjee, Besley, Coate, Guinnane, and

Kimball.78 This essay alludes to those applications and demonstrates that, in the past, cooperatives operated in a

wider array of industries than they do today. Manufacturing cooperatives dominated most medieval industries.

Associations of artisans invented many of the products and foodstuffs consumed in modern times. A short list –

textiles, dyes, perfumes, eyeglasses, books, watches, clocks, wines, beers, liquors, and cheeses – tells but a

fraction of the tale. The success of cooperative manufacturing during Europe’s economic development suggests

ways in which cooperatives can aid the developing world today.

          The third field of literature studies methods of marketing merchandise when protections for intellectual

property are lax or nonexistent. The theoretical foundation of this literature rests on the work of Grossman and

Shapiro who describe the positive and normative effects of the counterfeit-product trade.79 The empirical

literature appears in business journals, trade publications, news articles, government reports, and history texts. A

common theme is that only deterrence can stop crimes against intellectual property.80 Judicial authorities deter

counterfeiting by prosecuting in criminal courts. Private parties discourage counterfeiting by suing in civil

courts. Political pressure enhances these actions by closing offshore havens where illicit manufacturers can

avoid the long arm of the law. All three approaches are enhanced by the use of new tagging technologies such as

color-coded micro-fibers hidden within manufactured merchandise, which allow legal authorities and legitimate

manufacturers to identify illicit articles. The success of medieval manufacturers suggests a similar strategy that

enlists consumers to combat crime. Use technology to create characteristics that customers can observe but

counterfeiters cannot duplicate. These conspicuous characteristics will, like hidden tagging technologies,

facilitate law enforcement, and have an additional benefit. They will involve individuals in the anti-




78
      Banerjee, Besley, and Guinnane 1994, Besley, Coate, and Loury 1993 and 1994, Coate and Ravallion 1993, Fafchamps
      1992, Kimball 1988
79
      Grossman and Shapiro 1988a and 1988b
80
     Borrus, Bradford, Elliot, O’Donnell, and Weiner 1985, Business Marketing Digest 1993, Checkett 1998, Economist
     1996, Globeman 1988, Granzin and Olsen 1992, Harvey 1987, Long 1995, Mohl 1995, Newland 1998, Strasser 1989.



                                                          33
counterfeiting crusade by providing the public with the ability and an incentive to distinguish legitimate goods

from low-quality look-alikes.

        This method is already used for the world’s most important commodity: money. Governments go to

great lengths to prevent counterfeiting of currency. The United States Treasury recently redesigned the five, ten,

twenty, fifty, and one-hundred dollar bills. New security features complicate duplication of these denominations,

making it easier for cashiers and consumers to distinguish real bills from fake funds. The security efforts of

countries around the world often dwarf those of the United States. Latin and Asian nations revise currencies

frequently. European nations and former British colonies use multiple colors, metal security threads, and

miniature holograms. Whether these methods may be applied to other industries depends on cost conditions.

Conspicuous characteristics impede counterfeiting only if consumers can observe them readily, legitimate

manufacturers can produce them inexpensively, and counterfeiters can copy them only at great cost if at all. This

cost structure may exist in many industries, but probably far fewer than during the Middle Ages. Scientific

progress has swept away the ignorance and inability that once reinforced conspicuous characteristics. Modern

knowledge enables manufacturers to reverse engineer competitors’ merchandise and learn the secrets of its

success. Conspicuous characteristics are likely to have sizeable impacts only in regions lacking first-world

levels of education and industry. Conspicuous characteristics may have a significant role to play in those

regions, since those places often also lack first-world protections for intellectual property.




                                                         34
Table 1
Manufacturing Guilds by Industry, Specialty, and Occupation

 Industry                Specialty        Occupation

 Textiles                Wool Cloth       Weavers, Fullers, Dyers, Tenters, Shearers
                         Other Fabric     Burrelers, Cappers, Felters, Knitters, Linen-weavers

 Leather Goods           Processing       Tanners, Tawwers
                         Finishing        Curriers, Painters, Stainers
                         Apparel          Corversers, Girdlers, Glovers
                         Shoes            Cobblers, Cordwainers
                         Equipment        Pouchmakers, Saddlers

 Metallic Goods          Luxuries      Goldsmiths, Silversmiths
                         Housewares    Bronzesmiths, Coppersmiths, Cutlers, Founders, Pewterers
                         Miscellaneous Bellmakers, Blacksmiths, Lorimers, Lockyers, Ironmongers,
                                       Nailmakers, Pinmakers, Spurriers, Wiredrawers

 Wooden Goods            Furniture        Cabinetmakers, Coffermakers, Carpenters
                         Equipment        Coopers, Joiners, Wheelwrights

 Military Equipment Arms                  Bladesmiths
                    Armor                 Armorers, Malemakers, Helmetmakers, Shieldmakers
                    Archery               Bowyers, Fletchers, Stringers
                    Accessories           Scabbardmakers


 Note:      This table lists the occupations of guilds with rules regarding quality found in the sources
            listed in the bibliography. Most of these guilds were founded in the fourteenth century. A
            few were founded in the twelfth, thirteenth, and fifteenth.

 Sources: Data compiled from books and articles listed in the bibliography.




                                                   35
Table 2
Prices of Products versus Incomes of Consumers

                                                   Price       Price as Percent of Monthly Income
Industry Product
                                                  (pence)     Laborer      Craftsmen      Merchant
Textiles Wool, first quality - 4 sq. yards          78        124.8%       78.0%          15.6%
         Wool, second quality - 4 sq. yards         42         67.2         42.0           8.4
         Blanket - 4 sq. yards                      35         55.2         34.8           7.2
         Linen, shirting - 4 sq. yards              25         39.6         24.0           4.8
         Canvas, coarse - 4 sq. yards               15         24.0         15.6           3.6
         Tunic, plain                                3         52.8         33.6           7.2
         Sack, large                                12         19.2         12.0           2.4
         Cap, Knitted                               7          10.8         7.2            1.2
Leather   Saddle                                   175         279.6        175.2          34.8
          Boots                                    49          79.2         49.2           9.6
          Saddle Bags                              19          30.0         18.0           0.0
Metal     Copper cauldron, 20 gallon               400         639.6        339.6          80.4
          Brass pot, 5 gallon                      71          112.8        70.8           14.4
          Scythe                                   26           42.0        26.4            4.8
          Iron skillet                             20           32.4        20.4            3.6
          Lock and chain                           10           15.6         9.6            2.4
          100 large nails                           6           9.6          6.0           1.2
Wood      Boat, small rowboat                      216         345.6        216.0          43.2
          Cart, body without fittings or wheels    40          63.6         39.6           8.4
          Table, long                              32          51.6          32.4           6.0
          Vat for malt                             25          39.6         25.2            4.8
          Chest                                    24          38.4         24.0           4.8
          Wheelbarrow                              15          24.0         15.6            3.6
          Ladder                                   12          19.2          12.0           2.4
Military Armor, breast plates and gorget           240         384          240.0          48.0
         Helmet, iron                               48         76.8          48.0           9.6
         Gloves, plated with iron                   45         72.0          45.6           9.6
         Crossbow                                  25          39.6         25.2           4.8
         Sword                                     25          39.6         25.2           4.8
         Longbow                                   12          19.2         12.0           2.4
         Shield                                     9          14.4          9.6           2.4

Misc.     Wheel for wagon, iron bound              352         562.8        351.6          70.8
          Bed with mattress and quilt              340         543.6        339.6          68.4
          Pestle and mortar, stone                  80         128.4         80.4          15.6
          Wheel for wagon, wooden                   74         118.8        74.4           14.4
          Hand-mill, stone                          27          43.2        27.6            6.0
          Bushel measure, iron bound                24          37.2         24.0           4.8
          Axe                                      10          15.6          9.6           2.4


Sources: See Appendix.
Note: Prices rounded to the nearest pence. Percentages rounded to tenths of a percent.


                                                         36
Table 3
Unobservable Attributes of Manufactured Merchandise
 Industry      Product            Unobservable                                Examples
                                  Attributes
                                                                              Product                   Defect                                 Consequences




                                  Effectiveness



                                                               Resale Value
                                                  Durability
 (1)           (2)                (3)             (4)          (5)            (6)                       (7)                                    (8)

 Textiles      Wool Cloth         ○               ●            ○              Worsted                   Coarse substituted for fine wool       Fabric irritates skin. Irritation gradually increases
               Wool Cloth         ○               ●            ○              Broadcloth                Cloth insufficiently fulled            Cloth shrinks when wet and tears easily
               Wool Cloth         ○               ●            ○              Scarlet                   Dyes unfixed or unstable               Coloring fades, runs, or putrefies
               Other Fabric       ○               ●            ○              Sailcloth, Burlap         Poorly woven from fragile fiber        Sales tear, sacks split, garments rip

 Leather       Footwear           ○               ●                           Shoes and boots           Improperly tanned leather              Leather hardens, cracks, putrefies, and/or smells
               Garments           ○               ●            ○              Gloves and belts          Colored with inferior stains           Coloring fades or runs.

 Wood          Furniture                          ●            ○              Tables, chests, chairs    Made with unseasoned wood              Wood warps, joints loosen, furniture breaks
               Tools              ●               ●            ○              Wagons, Plow frames       Inferior adhesives and joints          Equipment fails often

 Earthenware   Housewares         ●                                           Dishes, containers        Glaze permeable or poisonous           Dishes deteriorate or contaminate food

 Metal         Precious Metals    ○                            ●              Silver dishes             Base substituted for precious metals   Gold and silver less valuable than anticipated
               Jewelry            ○                            ●              Silver brooch with gems   Glass substituted for gems             Jewelry worth less than anticipated
               Pewter             ●               ○            ○              Dishes and housewares     Lead in alloy                          Lead contaminates food and discolors dishes
               Alloys of Iron     ●                            ○              Hammer, horseshoes        Excessive carbon content               Brittle metal shatters when struck
               Alloys of Iron     ●                            ○              Knives, tools             Insufficient carbon content            Soft metal. Blades dull quickly
               Alloys of Iron     ●               ○            ○              Ploughshares, nails       Internal fractures                     Metal snaps when stressed
               Cast Metal         ●                            ○              Bells, hammer heads       Internal cavities                      Metal deforms under pressure

 Military      Metallic Weapons   ●                            ○              Swords, daggers, axes     Imperfections in metal (see above)     Sword breaks during combat. Owner endangered
               Metallic Armor     ●                            ○              Plate and chain mail      Imperfections in metal (see above)     Armor penetrated by opponent. Owner dies
               Leather Armor      ●               ●            ○              Corset or jerkin          Substandard leather (see above)        Leather hardens and cracks. Armor weakens
               Accessory Armor    ●                            ○              Helmets                   Inferior materials and assembly        Weak joint along crest. Helm cracks when struck


Sources: See appendix.
Key: “●” indicates principal concern of purchasers. “○” indicates secondary concern of purchasers.

                                                                                                          37
Table 4
Craftsmen’s’ Ability and Incentives to Conceal Defects

 Industry   Product                    Defect                                       Gestation       Detect Method of Concealment                Profits
 (1)        (2)                        (3)                                          (4)              (5) (6)                                    (7)

 Textiles   Wool Cloth                 Coarse wool substituted for fine wool        Gradual           ○   Soak wool in water soluble powder     15%
            Wool Cloth                 Cloth insufficiently fulled                  Gradual           ○                                         5%
            Wool Cloth                 Dyes unfixed or unstable                     Gradual           ○                                         5% to 35%
            Other Fabric               Poorly woven from fragile fiber              Gradual           ○   Reinforce easily examined edges       15%

 Leather    Footwear                   Improperly tanned leather                    Gradual           ♦   Paint or stain exterior               10%

 Metal      Gold jewelry.              Base substituted for precious metals         When detected     ♦   Cover with veneer of precious metal     80%
            Silver jewelry with gems   Glass substituted for gems                   When detected     ○   Place colored foil behind glass baubles 80%
            Pewter housewares          Lead in alloy                                Gradual           ■                                           30% to 45%
            Iron alloys                Excessive carbon content                     Sudden            ■                                           30% to 45%
            Iron alloys                Insufficient carbon content                  Sudden            ♦   Cover edge with thin sheet of steel     30% to 45%
            Forged metals              Internal fractures from improper forging     Sudden            ■                                           30% to 45%
            Cast metals                Internal cavities due to improper casting    Sudden            ■                                           30% to 45%


Sources: See appendix.
Key: “■” indicates detection before purchase impossible in most circumstances. “♦” indicates experts with appropriate tools and
   techniques may detect hidden defects but probably not all of them. “○” indicates with effort, experts can detect many defects.
   Laymen may spot flaws, but doing so requires knowledge, experience, and effort.




                                                                               38
Table 5
Equivalent Labels in Three Languages

 Latin                Persian           Cumanic
 linen of Champagne   ketan y jonban    yionban chetan
 linen of Reims       ketan y rusi      russi chetan
 linen of Germany     ketan alamani     ketan chetanj
 linen of Orleans     chetan soltanj    orlens chetan
 linen of Novara      sansda chesi      sasda chesi
 linen of Cremona     dras chesi        dras ches
 linen of Lombardy    chetan lombardi   lonbardi chetanj
 linen of Asti        chetan astexa     astexan chetanj
 linen of Ostuni      chetan ostume     ostume chetanj
 linen de Novo        keta begonia      bergonia katanj
 linen of Bergamo     keta bgamasce     bgamasce ketanj
 linen of Fabriano    aracli            aracli

Source: Lopez and Raymond 1990 pp. 347-348.




                                               39
Table 6
Guilds’ Christian and Profession-Town Names

 Town                       Fraternity of …                              Guild of ...

 Boston                     St. John the Baptist                         cordwainers
 Cambridge                  St. Katharine                                skinners
 Holbeach                   Assumption                                   tilers
                            Nativity of the Blessed Virgin Mary          shepherds
 Great Yarmouth             Holy Trinity                                 cobblers and tanners
 Lincoln                    St. Nicholas                                 clerks
                            Holy Cross                                   archers
                            St. John the Evangelist                      barbers
                            Blessed Virgin Mary                          cordwainers
                            Holy Cross                                   fullers
                            All Saints                                   masons
                            Blessed Virgin Mary                          mercers
                            Corpus Christi                               tilers
                            Corpus Christi                               sailors
                            Corpus Christi                               tailors
                            Exaltation of the Holy Cross                 weavers
 London                     St. John the Baptist                         tailors
                            St. Lawrence                                 ironmongers
                            Our Lady of St. John                         carpenters
                            Annunciation and Assumption                  pouchmakers
                            Blessed Virgin Mary and Saint Luke           painters
                            All Hallows, London Wall                     whittawyers
                            All Hallows, London Wall                     brewers
 Lynn                       Ascension                                    coifmakers
                            Exaltation of Holy Cross                     shipmans
                            Nativity of St. John the Baptist             young merchants
                            St. William                                  young scholars
                            Great Gild of Holy Trinity                   gilda mercatoria
 Norwich                    St. Mary’s in the Carmelites Church          candlemakers
                            St. Mary’s and All Saints                    saddlers and spurriers
                            St. John the Baptist                         barbers
                            Holy Trinity                                 carpenters
                            St. Michael                                  artificers
                            St. William                                  peltyers
                            Ascension                                    tailors

Sources: Guild Census 12 Richard II (1388), Public Record Office, Miscellany of Chancery
         Collection: C 47.38 to C 47.36. Pooley 1947 p. 9, and Westlake 1915 pp. 138-238.




                                                     40
Appendix: Construction of Tables 2, 3, and 4

         Table 3 proves products’ were large fractions of consumers’ incomes. Data for the table has been taken
from the last decades of the fourteenth century and the first decades of the fifteenth century. Those decades
witnessed the peak of post plague popularity when real incomes rose to the highest levels and real prices fell to
the lowest levels ever before the Industrial Revolution. Thus, the choice of those decades minimizes biases that
might undermine the message of the table and ensures the moral arises from historical reality and not spurious
manipulations of the evidence. The data underlying the table is described below.
         Craftsmen’s yearly income ranged from 900 to 1250 pence, and laborers’ ranged from 540 to 750 pence.
Those approximations are based on the following figures. During the second half of the fourteenth century,
skilled craftsmen earned five pence a day and laborers three. The Sabbath and numerous religious holidays
limited artisans with steady employment to about two hundred fifty working days per year. Typical laborers
worked approximately one hundred eighty days per year. The table assumes laborers worked 250 days each year,
for the reason stated above, to bias the results as far as possible against the conclusions drawn by the author.
Typical individuals spent at least three-quarters of total income on necessities such as food, clothing, rent, and
taxes, leaving just one-quarter as spendable surplus. Relative to this disposable income, durables were expensive.
         The incomes for this table have been calculated using data from England from the late-fourteenth and
early-fifteenth centuries. Evidence on daily wage rates comes from Phelps-Brown and Hopkins and Dyer (See
Phelps Brown and Hopkins 1957 and 1962, Dyer 1994 pp. 215-217, 226-229). Estimates of the number of days
worked comes from Hoskins and Dyer (see Hoskins 1988 pp. 111-113 and Dyer 1994 pp. 222-223, 226).
Comparisons with similar calculations undertaken by other scholars have confirmed the conclusions here (Epstein
1991 p. 113, and Swanson 1989 pp. 152-155).
         Most price data in the table comes from Thorold Rogers’ History of Agriculture and Prices in England
volumes 1 through 4, John Munro’s Textiles, Towns, and Trade, and Christopher Dyer’s The Standard of Living
in the Middle Ages. In some instances, the average prices calculated by Thorold Rogers have been used. The
averages have flaws. They are not based on random samples. They are not weighted by the quantities recorded in
the transactions (so that 1 nail purchased for 1 pence receives the same weight in the average as 1000 nails
purchased for 50 pence). They do not account for geographic and quality variation. But, the averages do serve the
purposes of the table. They allow quick comparisons of average incomes and average prices that roughly reveal
the costs of purchasing defective products. In other cases, raw data collected by Rogers has been used to calculate
average prices of particular products. Details appear below.
         The comparisons assume individuals earned as much as the most affluent urban laborers, craftsmen, and
merchants without deducting for food, shelter, and other necessities. That assumption biases the estimates
downwards. Evidence on incomes and prices comes from late-fourteenth and early-fifteenth century England.
During those centuries, real incomes were higher and real prices were lower than at any other point in the Middle
Ages. In the Anglo-Saxon homeland, the people were among the poorest in Europe. Thus the data used in the
table also biases the estimates downwards (detailed descriptions of the data and calculations appears in the
appendix). The downward bias is appropriate. It makes corroborating the claims of this author more difficult. The
difficulty, however, does not stand in the way of demonstrating.

Textiles

•   Blanket material. Price of 34.7 pence is average of 3 transactions: (1) 1387, Southampton, 1s. per yard.
    Rogers vol. 2 p. 342. (2) 1392, Heyford Warren, 6d. per yard. Rogers vol. 2 p. 342. (3) 1394, Oxford, 8d. per
    yard. Rogers vol. 2 p. 342.
•   Caps. Price of 7 pence is based on one transaction. 1388, Oxford, 2 caps at 7d. each. Rogers vol. 2 p. 342.
•   Tunic. Price of 12.1 pence is average of 3 transactions. (1) 1385, Southampton, 1 tunic for carter 2s. 6d.
    Rogers vol. 2 p. 342. (2) 1392, Oxford, 4 winter tunics for wardens at 2s. 9d. each. Rogers vol. 2 p. 342. (3)
    1398, Oxford, 4 winter tunics for wardens at 3s. each. Rogers vol. 2 p. 342.
•   Textiles: prices for coarse canvas, linen, first-quality wool, and second-quality wool from 1391-1400
    averages in Rogers vol. 1 p. 595. Averages converted to prices for four square yards by dividing price for
    dozen ells (~12 yards long by 1 yard wide) by 3 and pannus of cloth (~24 yards long by 2 yards wide) by 12.


                                                        41
    Price of 1 s. per yard for blankets the average of ten transactions from 1325 to 1394 from Rogers vol. 1 p.
    576.
•   Sacks. Price of 33 pence is based on 7 transactions: (1) 1401, Heghtredebury, one sack of four bushels and
    one sack of five bushels, total 1s. 1d., Rogers vol. 3 p. 544 (2) 1401, Hornchurch, four sacks of seven bushels
    each, 1s. 2d. each. Rogers vol. 3 p. 544 (3) 1403, Horchurch, 6 new sacks, 1s. 4d. each. Rogers vol. 3 p. 545
    (4) 1403, Hornchurch, 2 five bushel sacks at 11d. each. Rogers vol. 3 p. 545 (5) 1407, Lullington, 3 sacks at
    1s. 4d. each. Rogers vol. 3 p. 545 (6) 1407, Takely, 2 sacks for total 2 s. Rogers vol. 3 p. 545 (7) 1408, Stert,
    2 five bushel sacks at 11d. each. (8) 1409, Alton Bates, 2 five bushel sacks at 10.5d. each.. Rogers vol. 3 p.
    545.

Leather Goods

•   Boots. Price of 49.3 is average of 4 transactions. (1) 1356, superior dyed leather boot, 4s. a pair, Rogers vol. 2
    p. 575, (2) 1358, superior dyed leather boot, 4s. a pair, Rogers vol. 2 p. 575, (3) 1379, standard boot, 2s. 4d.
    per pair, Rogers vol. 2 p. 575 (4) 1383, fancy boot with spurs bought, 6s. 8d. per pair, Rogers vol. 2 p. 575.
•   Saddle. Price of 174.7 pence is average of four transactions. (1) In 1394, a ‘warden’ in Oxford purchased a
    saddle for 20 s. 4 d. (2) In 1410 in Jarrow, an individual bought a saddle and bridle for 10 s.. (3) In 1411 in
    Finchalk, an individual bought a saddle, girths, bit and bridle for 13 s. 4 d.. (4) In 1412 in Oxford, and
    individual bought a saddle for 11s.. Rogers vol. 2 p. 575 and vol. 3 p. 546.
•   Saddle bags. Price of 19 pence based on 1 transactions. Rogers vol. 1 p. 648.

Metallic Goods

•   Base metals. Lead’s average price per 112 pounds = 5s. 4.5d. (a wey is 2 cwts is 224 pounds). Pewter’s
    average price per 112 pounds = 30s 4d.. Brass’s average price per 112 pounds is 26s 3d. Pewter, brass, and
    copper had similar prices throughout the Middle Ages. Averages over period 1351-1400. Rogers vol. 1 p.
    605.
•   Brass pot. Price of 70.5 pence comes from Rogers vol. 1 p. 552 which notes that the average price of 5-gallon
    brass pots (9 of which were purchased from 1301-1400) was 5s 10.5 d (i.e. 70.5 pence). Supporting evidence
    comes from Rogers vol. 2 p. 574 which notes that in 1388 in Radcliff, an individual spent 6 s. 8 d. on two
    brass pots (dimensions unrecorded) and Rogers vol. 1 p. 605 which notes the average price of a one gallon
    brass pot from 1381-1390 was 1s. 8d..
•   Copper Cauldron, 20 gallons. Price derived from cost of copper (noted above as equal to that of brass) and the
    average price per gallon of metal container (noted above as 20 pence per gallon).
•   Iron skillet. The price of 20 pence is based on one transaction. In 1409 in Heyford, an individual purchased an
    iron skillet for 1 s. 8 d. Supporting evidence comes from Rogers vol. 1 p. 553 which states that the the
    average price paid for pans in six transactions from 1301 to 1400 was 1s 10d and Rogers vol. 3 p. 546 which
    reports the purchase of a frying pan for 1 s. 2 d..
•   Lock and chain. The price of 10 pence is based on 6 transactions. (1) 1401, Alton Barnes, granary lock, 1s.
    Rogers vol. 3 p. 544 (2) In 1392 in Drayton, and individual paid 2 s. 6 d. for 2 padlocks and chains. Rogers
    vol. 2, p. 575. (3) In 1399, a farmer in Alton Barnes paid 10½ d. for a chain and padlock to use it to lock his
    horse in the pasture. Rogers vol. 2, p. 575. (4) 1401, Takeley, 3 fetterlocks for horses in pasture, 1s. 7.5d.,
    Rogers, vol. 3, p. 546, (5) 1402, Takely, 2 fetterlocks for houses, 1s. 3d. Rogers, vol. 3, p. 546, (6) 1406,
    Takely, fetterlock, 6d., Rogers, vol. 3, p. 546.
•   Scythe: The price of 26 pence is based on the average of six transactions between 1348 and 1400, as stated by
    Rogers v 1 p. 541 … Rogers v4 p. 413 in 15th century, scythes generally cost about 2 shillings, “The scythe
    was a more expensive tool.”

Wooden Goods

•   Boat, small rowboat. 1408, Jarrow, 18s. Rogers vol. 3 p. 545.



                                                         42
•   Cart body without wheels or fittings. The price of 40 pence is the average of 2 transactions: (1) 1401,
    Heghtredebury, Cooper’s cart, 3s. 4d., Rogers vol. 3 p. 544 (2) 1401, Hornchurch, cart body, 3s. 4d., Rogers
    vol. 3 p. 544.
•   Chest, wooden: The price of 24 pence is based on one transaction. In 1409 in Heyford, an individual
    purchased a chest for 2s. Rogers vol. 3 p. 546.
•   Ladder: The price of 12 pence is based on 2 transactions. (1) In 1411 in Cambridge, an individual bought a
    ladder for 1s. 1d.. (2) In 1410 in Oxford, an individual bought 3 new ladders for 1s. each. Rogers vol. 3 p.
    546.
•   Table, long: The price of 32 is based on one transaction. 1410, Wye, long table, 2s. 8d.. Rogers vol. 3 p. 546.
•   Vat for malt. Price of 25 pence is based on one transaction. In 1388 in Alton Barnes, an individual spent 4s.
    2d. on 2 malt vats. Rogers vol. 3 p. 546.
•   Wheelbarrow. Price of 15 pence average of two transactions. (1) 1411 Cambridge 1s. ½d.. (2) 1391 1s.
    Rogers vol. 1 p. 551. In the 15th century, “There are fourteen entries for wheelbarrows, at prices ranging from
    2s. to 7d.. The general price is about 1s. 3d.” Rogers vol. 4 p. 414.

Military Equipment

•   Armor, plate. Price of 240 pence for upper body armor based on two transactions. (1) 1312, Tikhill, 1 pair
    plates and gorget for 20s. Rogers, vol. 2, p. 559, (2) Corset, iron. 1312, Tikhill for 13s. 4. Rogers vol. 2 p.
    559. Note: 1 pair plates refers to a breastplate and a backplate. A gorget is a piece of armor that protects the
    neck, shoulders, and upper torso. A corset is a close fitting, sleeveless, metal shirt that protects the middle and
    lower torso.
•   Crossbow. Price of 25 pence based on one transaction. 1312, Tikhill, 12 for 2s. 1d. each. Rogers vol. 2 p. 559.
•   Gloves, plated with iron. Price of 45 pence based on two transactions. (1) 1369, Oxford, 1 pair plate gloves
    5s. Rogers vol. 2 p. 559. (2) 1385, Southampton, 1 pair plated gloves 2s. 6d. Rogers vol. 2 p. 559.
•   Helmet, iron. Price of 48 pence based on two transactions. (1) 1308, Framlingham Castle, 9 capellae feratae
    for 4s. each. Rogers vol. 2 p. 559. (2) 1312, Tikhill, 1 bacinet for 4s. 6d. Rogers vol. 2 p. 559.
•   Longbow. Price of 12 pence based on two transactions. (1) 1382, Southampton, 1 bow for 1s., Rogers, vol. 2,
    p. 559, (2) 1385, Southampton, 2 bows with arrows for 4s. 2d. Rogers vol. 2, p. 559.
•   Shields. 1308, Framlingham Castle, 8 shields for 6s. total. Rogers vol. 2 p. 559.
•   Sword: 1296, 1 sword for 2s. 2d.. Rogers vol. 1 p. 649. (2) 1368, Dengmarsh, 6 swords at 2s. each. Rogers
    vol. 2 p. 559.

Miscellaneous

•   Axe: The price of 10 pence is derived from four transactions. In 1382 in Donyngton, and individual spent 9 d.
    on an axe. In 1390 in Oxford, an individual spent 2 s. on an axe. In 1398 in Hornchurch, and individual spent
    5 d. on an axe. In 1413 in Daventry, an individual bought an axe for 8 d.. Rogers vol. 2 pp. 574-5 and vol. 3 p.
    546. Five axes purchased post plague averaged 11.5 pence each. Rogers vol. 1 p. 551
•   Bed (including mattress and quilt): Average price of 340 pence from two purchases made by a college warden
    in Oxford 1345, 25s.; 1374 33s. 4d. Rogers vol. 1 p. 581.
•   Bushel measure, iron bound: The price of 23.5 pence is based on two transactions. In 1384 in Oxford, an
    individual spent 1 s. 10 d. on a bushel measure bound with iron. In 1396 in Drayton and individual spent 2 s.
    1 d. on a bushel measure bound with iron.. Rogers vol. 2 pp. 574-5.
•   Hand-mill stones: The price of 27 pence is derived from a single transaction. In 1395 in Drayton, an
    individual paid 4 s. 6 d. for 2 hand-mill stones. Rogers vol. 2 p. 575. Also millstone for mustard purchased in
    Oxford in 1388 at 7s. Two hand-mill stones bought at Hornchurch in 1395 at 2s 3d each.
•   Pestle and mortar, stone (for kitchen): Average price 80 pence. Transactions: 1399, 6s 8d for the monastic
    kitchen at Bicester. Rogers vol. 1 p. 552.
•   Wheel for wagon, wooden. 74 pence. Average for 1391-1400 from Rogers v. 1 p. 567.
•   Wheel for wagon, iron bound. 351.5 pence. Average for 1391-1400 from Rogers v. 1 p. 567. Sum of wheels
    (ad ferr) and ligatures, i.e. sum of wheel with attachment points and iron to be attached to them.


                                                          43
•   The category of various implements includes dung pots, ox-yokes, spades, sickles, pea hackers, sieves,
    harrows, hoes, shovels, saws, sickles, spoons, picks, pincers, utensils, and cheap tablewear. Their prices range
    from 4 to 12 pence. See Rogers vol. 4 pp. 411 to 430. Prices for lanterns range from 6 to 18 pence Rogers vol.
    4 pp. 411 to 430. Pestle and mortar, for kitchen (wooden). Average price 5 pence. Rogers vol. 1 p. 552.

    Table 3 relies heavily on Thorold Rogers’ collection of prices, while Table 2 and 4 draws data from a wider
array of sources. All appear in the bibliography. Several should be mentioned here. Invaluable descriptions of
merchandise and manufacturing methods appear in Blair and Ramsay’s English medieval industries, Swanson’s
Medieval Artisans, and Salzman’s English Industries. Almost anything there is to know about medieval
clothmaking appears in Munro’s Textiles, Towns, and Trade. Detailed descriptions of medieval metalworking
appear in Cherry’s Medieval Craftsmen, Goldsmiths, Cotterell’s Old Pewter, Gale’s Pewter and the Amateur
Collector, Hatcher’s English Tin Production and Trade before 1550, Michaelis’s Antique Pewter, Verster’s Old
European Pewter, and Ffoulkes’s The Armourer and his Craft. Those texts supply most of the facts found in
Table 2, columns 6 to 8, and Table 4, columns 3 to 6. Those texts also supply the technical information
underlying the estimates in column 8 Table 4, column 7. Information about the prices of raw materials comes
from three other sources: Thorold Rogers’ History of Agriculture and Prices in England volumes 1 through 4,
John Munro’s Textiles, Towns, and Trade, and Christopher Dyer’s The Standard of Living in the Middle Ages.
The estimates in Table 4, column 7 are calculated as follows.

Textiles

    a) By replacing fine wool with coarse wool, cloth makers could cut costs 15%, since wool amounted to one
       third of cloth’s cost, and expensive wool’s price was double that of its cheaper substitute. (Munro 1994 V
       pp. 14-15, 39-45, Tables 3.4 to 3.11 and Rogers vol. 3 p. 704).
    b) By using unwashed wool, which contained chemicals used to treat sheep scab and other skin ailments and
       the oils used to comb and card the wool, Clothmakers could cut costs by an amount less than 3%. That
       percentage is an upper bound. Studies show the cost of preparing wool for weaving by washing, carding,
       and combining it amounted to just under 3% of total costs. What proportion of that amount was
       composed of the costs of washing is uncertain. A safe guess might divide the costs equally among the
       three steps, suggesting that using unwashed wool saved about 1% of total costs. (Munro 1994 V p. 52
       Table 3.12).
    c) By insufficiently fulling fabric, cloth makers could cut costs by up to 5%, since fulling charges amounted
       to about 5% to total costs. (Munro 1994 V p. 52 Table 3.12).
    d) Cloth makers could cut costs between five and thirty-five percent by replacing expensive dyes with
       cheaper substitutes. Dyes amounted to one-twentieth of common-colored cloth’s cost and one-half of the
       most fashionably colored cloth’s cost, while inferior inks that mimicked those colors could be purchased
       for pennies.(Munro 1994 V pp. 14-15, 39-45, Tables 3.4 to 3.11).

    Leather Goods

    e) Calculating the savings from speeding the tanning process is a tricky task. The savings arose because
       speeding the process permitted tanners to make better use of fixed capital. They could process more hides
       with fewer vats and chemicals. Tanners could speed the process by a factor of six, reducing the time it
       took to convert hides to leather to six from 36 weeks. Since fixed costs amounted to something like 60%
       of total tanning costs, speeding the tanning process reduced costs by approximately 50%. If those savings
       were passed on to craftsmen father down the production chain, such as saddlers or cobblers, whose efforts
       amounted to about 80% of the value of finished products (the other 20% being the cost of the leather), the
       savings from total costs of finished goods amounted to approximately 10%. (See Swanson 1989 p. 54 for
       details).

    Metalware



                                                        44
f) Cherry suggests most, perhaps 80%, of the value of gold and silver articles was the value of the precious
   metal within them. If consumers could be fooled by base metals, most if not all of that cost could be
   saved. Rogers vol. 4 p. 488 shows that silver’s value exceeded that of base metals by 200 times and
   gold’s value exceeded silver’s by factor of almost 20.
g) Pewterers could cut costs up to one third by putting lead in their alloy, since lead was one sixth the price
   of pewter, and pewter could hold up to forty-percent lead. (Prices from Rogers vol. 1 p. 605).
h) Rogers vol. 1 p. 473 shows the price ratio of steel to iron as 4 to 1. Rogers vol. 4 p. 410 shows the price
   ration of wrought iron to raw iron as 2.3 to 1 (specifically, 112 pounds of wrought iron in 1401-1410 had
   an average price 18s. 2¾d. and 112 pounds of raw iron had an average price of 7s. 9¾d). Thus, assuming
   the price of metal amounted to half the cost of an article forged by a smith (the other half consisting of
   their fixed, fuel, and labor costs), then a smith who substituted raw for wrought iron could cut their costs
   by 30% and a smith who substituted raw iron for steel could cut their costs by 45%.




                                                    45
Bibliography

Adelson, Andrea. “Retail Fact, Retail Fiction; In Luxury Goods, a War on Fakes Has Many Pitfalls.” New York
       Times. 16 September 1995. Section 1, Page 31, Column 2

Akerlof, George. “The Market for ‘Lemons’: Quality Uncertainty and the Market Mechanism,” Quarterly Journal
        of Economics (August 1970).

Ashdown, Charles Henry. European Arms and Armor. Brussel and Brussel, New York, 1967.

Bagley, J. and P. Rowley. A Documentary History of England: Vol.1 (1066-1540). Pelican 1966.

Baker, J.H. An Introduction to English Legal History. Butterworths 1990.

-----   and S.F.C. Milsom. Sources of English Legal History: Private Law to 1750. Butterworths 1986.

Barbour, Matthew. “Counterfeits Cost 8bn Pounds a Year.” The Times (London). 14 June 1999.

Barlow, Frank. Thomas Becket. University of California Press 1986.

Black, Antony. Guilds and Civil Society in European Political Thought from the Twelfth Century to the Present.
        Cornell 1984.

Blair, John and Nigel Ramsay. English medieval industries: craftsmen, techniques, products. Hambledon Press
         1991.

Bloomberg Business News. “Many Phony Products Look Like the Real Thing. Desktop Publishing Has Made It
      Easier for Counterfeiters to Reproduce High-Quality Packaging for Fake Goods.” Los Angeles Times. 23
      August 1995. Business, Part D, Page 8.

Borrus, Amy, Hazel Bradford, Dorinda Elliot, Thomas O’Donnell, and Elizabeth Weiner. “The Counterfeit
        Trade.” Business Week. December 16, 1985 (2925) 64-72.

Brentano, Lujo. On the History and Development of Guilds and the Origins of Trade Unions. London, Trübner &
       Co.. 1870.

Bridbury, A. R. Medieval English Clothmaking: An Economic Survey. Heinemann 1982.

-----   Economic Growth: England in the Later Middle Ages. Allen and Unwin 1962.

Britnell, R.H. The Commercialization of English Society, 1000-1500. Cambridge University Press 1993.

-----   Growth and Decline in Colchester, 1300-1525. Cambridge University Press 1986.

Brownsword, R. and E.E.H. Pitt. “X-ray Fluorescence Analysis of English 13th-16th Century Pewter Flatware.”
      Archaeometry 1984, pp. 237-244.

Business Europe. “Countering Counterfeiting.” July 28, 1999. 39 (15) pp. 5-6.

Business Marketing Digest. “Coding advances help guard against dangerous rip-offs.” Third Quarter 1993. 18 (3)
       75-78.



                                                       46
Buyse, Lorna. The Market for Flemish and Brabantine Cloth in England from the 12th to the 14th Century.
       London, MA Thesis 1956.

Cameron, Rondo. A Concise Economic History of the World From Paleolithic Times to the Present. Oxford
      University Press 1993.

Cantor, Norman F. The Civilization of the Middle Ages. Harper Collins 1993.

-----   The Medieval Reader. Harper Collins 1994.

Carus-Wilson, Eleanora. The Expansion of Exeter at the Close of the Middle Ages. University of Exeter 1963.

Carus-Wilson, E. M. and O. Coleman. England’s Export Trade 1275-1547. Oxford University Press 1963.

Chandler, Alfred. The Visible Hand : the Managerial Revolution in America. Belknap Press 1977.

Chaucer, Geoffery. The Cantebury Tails, Nine Tails and the General Prolouge. V. A. Kolve and Glending Olson
       (editors). Norton and Company 1989.

Checkett, Alfred. “Can We Do More To Fight Counterfeiting.” Security Management. February 1999. 43 (2) 129-
       130.

Cherry, John. Medieval Craftsmen, Goldsmiths. University of Toronto Press 1992.

Cheyney, Edward. English Towns and Guilds. University of Pennsylvania 1900.

Cipolla, Carlo. Before the Industrial Revolution: European Society and Economy, 1000-1700. Norton and
        Company 1980.

Clark, Elaine. “Medieval Labor Law and the English Local Courts.” American Journal of Legal History 27
        (1983): 330-353.

Coleman, D.C. “Textile Growth.” Textile History and Economic History: Essays in Honour of Miss Julia de Lacy
      Mann, ed. N.B. Harte and K.G. Ponting, Manchester University Press, 1973, 1-21.

Cooper, R.C.H. The Archives of the City of London Livery Companies and Related Organizations. Guildhall
       Library 1985.

Cotterell, Howard. Old Pewter, Its Makers and Marks in England, Scotland, and Ireland: An Account of the Old
        Pewterer and His Craft. Charles Scribner’s Sons 1929.

Cottman, Lawrence. “It’s Not the Real Thing.” Security Management. December 1992, 36(12):68-70.

Cunningham, William. The Growth of English Industry and Commerce. Cambridge 1890.

Day, John. The Medieval Market Economy. Oxford, 1987.

Davis, N., D. Gray, P. Ingham, A. Wallace-Hadrill. A Chaucer Glossary. Oxford University Press 1979.

Davis, R. Trevor. Documents Illustrating the History of Civilization in Medieval England (1066-1500). Methuen
        and Company 1926.

Ditchfield, P.H. The Story of the City Companies. Foulis 1926.
                                                       47
Douglas, David. English Historical Documents, 1042-1089. Oxford University Press 1953.

Dyer, Christopher. Standards of Living in the later Middle Ages: Social change in England c. 1200-1520.
       Cambridge University Press 1994.

Dymond, David and Alec Betterton. Lavenham, 700 Years of Textile Making. Boydell Press 1982.

Economist. “Retribution for Reproduction.” May 18, 1996. 339 (7966) pp. 73-74, 93-94.

Encyclopedia Americana, International Edition. “Pewter.” Groliers v. 21 pp. 842-843 1994.

Epstein, Steven A. “Labor in Thirteenth-Century Genoa.” Mediterranean Historical Review 3 (1988): 114-140

-----   Wage and Labor Guilds in Medieval Europe. University of North Carolina Press 1991.

Farley, John S. Town Life in the XIVth Century as seen in the Court Rolls of Winchester City. Warren and Son
         1946.

Ffoulkes, Charles. The Armourer and his Craft from the XIth to the XVth Century. Dover 1988.

Fisher, H.E.S. and A.R.J. Jurica. Documents in English Economic History: Engand from 1000 to 1760. G. Bell
        and Sons 1977.

Fox, Harriot Lane. “F for fake.” Marketing. 12 October 1995, pp. 20-23.

Freedman, David. “Farkers’ Paradise.” Forbes. April 5, 1999. Pp. 48-54.

Gale, Edwards. Pewter and the Amateur Collector. Charles Scribner’s Sons 1909.

Gimple, Jean. The Medieval Machine: The Industrial Revolution of the Middle Ages. Penguin Books 1976.

Globerman, Steven. “Addressing International Product Piracy.” Journal of International Business Studies. Fall
       1988. 19(3):497-504.

Gray, H.L. “The Production and Exportation of English Woolens in the Fourteenth Centuery.” English Historical
       Review 1924, pp. 13-35.

Grazin, Kent and Janeen Olsen. “Gaining Retailers’ Assistance in Fighting Counterfeiting: Conceptualization and
        Empirical Test of a Helping Model.” Journal of Retailing. Spring 1992. 68(1): 90-109.

Greek, Dinah. “False Economies.” Professional Engineering. 13 January 1999. 12(1): 27-28.

Green, J.R. Town Life in the 15th Century. Macmillan and Company, New York 1894.

Grierson, Philip. “Commerce in the Dark Ages: A Critique of the Evidence.” Transactions of the Royal Historical
        Society, 5th ser. 9 (1959): 123-140.

Gross, Charles. The Guild Merchant. Clarendon Press 1890.

Grossman, Gene and Carl Shapiro. “Foreign Counterfeiting of Status Goods.” The Quarterly Journal of
      Economics. February 1988. Pp. 79-100.


                                                       48
-----   “The Counterfeit-Product Trade.” The American Economic Review. March 1988. pp. 59-75.

Gustafsson, Bo. 1987. “The Rise and Economic Behavior of Medieval Craft Guilds: An Economic-Theoretical
        Interpretation.” Scandinavian Journal of Economics. 35 (1): 1-40.

Hanawalt, Barbara. The Ties that Bound: Peasant Families in Medieval England. Oxford University Press 1988.

Harding, Alan. England in the Thirteenth Century. Cambridge University Press 1993.

Harvey, Michael. “Industrial Product Counterfeiting: Problems and Proposed Solutions.” Journal of Business and
       Industrial Marketing. Fall 1987. 2(4):5-13.

Hastings, Margaret. The Court of Common Pleas in fifteenth century England; a study of legal administration and
       procedure. Cornell University Press 1947.

Hatcher, John. English Tin Production and Trade before 1550. Oxford University Press 1973.

-----   and Edward Miller. Medieval England: Towns, Commerce and Crafts, 1086 - 1348. Longman 1995.

Hedges, Ernest. Tin in Social and Economic History. St. Martin’s Press 1964.

Henderson, Ernest. Select Historical Documents of the Middle Ages. Bell and Sons 1892.

Hetherington, Peter. “Black Economy Booms as Crooks Eye Nice Littler Earner. Organised Crime is Moving in
        on the Moonlighters’s Market, and Costing Business.” The Guardian (London). 5 July 1999.

Hickson, Charles R. and Earl A. Thompson. “A New Theory of Guilds and Economic European Economic
       Development.” Explorations in Economic History, 28: 127-168.

Hilton, R.H. English and French Towns in Feudal Society: A Comparative Study. Cambridge University Press
        1995.

Hines, W.D. English Legal History: a bibliography and guide to the literature. Garland Publishing 1990.

Hofenk-De Graff, Judith H. “The Chemistry of Red Dyestuffs in Medieval and Early Modern Europe.” Cloth and
       Clothing in Medieval Europe: Essays in Memory of E. M. Carus-Wilson, ed N. B. Harte and K. G.
       Ponting, Pasold Studies in Textile History, London: Heinemann Educational Books, 1983, 71-9.

Holdsworth, W.S. A History of English Law. Methuen and Co. 1938

Holmes, George. The Later Middle Ages: 1272-1485. Norton 1962.

-----   The Oxford History of Medieval Europe. Oxford University Press 1992.

Hopkins, A. Selected Rolls of the Chester City Court: Late Thirteenth And Early Fourteenth Centuries. Chetham
       Society 1950.

Hoskins, W. G. The Age of Plunder: The England of Henry VIII 1500-1547. Longman 1988.

Hulme, E. W. “The Early History of the English Patent System.” Select Essays in Anglo-American Legal History.
       Association of American Law Schools, 1907.

Jardine, Lisa. Wordly Goods: A New History of the Renaissance. Norton 1996.
                                                      49
Jones, Ann Rosalind and Peter Stallybrass. Renaissance Clothing and the Materials of Memory. Cambridge
        University Press, 2000.

Keen, Maurice. English Society in the Later Middle Ages 1348-1500. Penguin 1990.

Kerridge, Eric. Textile Manufacturers in Early Modern England. Manchester University Press, 1985.

Kovel, Ralph and Terry Kovel. “Copies of Washington Bust Abundant.” Star Tribune (Minneapolis). 20 February
       1993, p. 2E.

Le Force, Jr. James. The Development of the Spanish Textile Industry, University of California Press, 1965.

Leach, Arthur A. Beverley Town Documents. Selden Society 1900.

Liam, Lavery. “Internet Fraud: Steer Clear of Trademark Troubles.” E-Business Advisor. 17 (7) July 1999 pp. 26.

London, Corporation of. The Historical Charters and Constitutional Documents of the City of London. Whiting
       Press 1884.

Long, Frank. “Product Counterfeit Defenses Vary, Market to Market.” Arizona Business Gazette. December 14,
       1995. P. 11.

Lopez, Robert. The Commercial Revolution of the Middle Ages, 950-1350. Cambridge University Press 1994.

-----   “Silk Industry in the Byzantine Empire.” Speculum 20 (1945): 1-42.

-----   and Harry Miskimin. “Economic Depression of the Renaissance.” Economic History Review, 15 1962.

-----   and Irving Raymond. Medieval Trade in the Mediterranean World: Illustrative Documents Translated
        with Introductions and Notes. Columbia University Press 1990

Manier, Jeremy. Damasus Steel’s Lost Secret Found. Chicago Tribune. 13 August 2001.

Mazzaoui, Maureen F. The Italian Cotton Industry in the Later Middle Ages, 1100-1600. Cambridge University
      Press, 1981.

McKisack, May. The Fourteenth Century 1307-1399. Oxford University Press 1991.

Metrick, Andrew and Richard Zeckhauser. “Price Versus Quantity: Market Clearing Mechanisms When Sellers
       Differ in Quality.” NBER working paper No. W6728. August 1996.

Michaelis, R. F. Antique Pewter of the British Isles. G. Bell and Sons 1955.

Miller, E. “The Fortunes of the English Textile Industry during the Thirteenth Century.” English Historical
        Review 1965, pp. 64-82.

Milsom, S.F.C. Historical Foundations of the Common Law. Butterwords 1969.

-----   Studies in the History of the Common Law. Hambledon Press 1985.

-----   Sources of English Legal History: Private Law to 1750. Butterworths 1986.

Mohl, Bruce. “Flow of Counterfeit Goods is on the Rise.” The Boston Globe. October 24, 1995. Economy p. 63.
                                                        50
Mokyr, Joel. Lever of Riches: Technological Creativity and Economic Progress. Oxford University Press 1990.

Monier-Williams, M.F. Records of the Worshipful Company of Tallow Chandlers, London. Cheswick Press
       1897.

Munro, John. “Urban Regulation and Monopolistic Competition in the Textile Industries of the Late-Medieval
       Low Countries.” In Textiles of the Low Countries in European Economic History. Ed Erik Aerts and John
       H. Munro, Proceedings of the Tenth International Economic History Congress: Session B-15, Studies in
       Social and economic History 19. Leuven: Leuven History Press, 1990.

-----   “Industrial Transformations in the North-West European Textiles Trade, c. 1290 – c. 1340: Economic
        Progress or Economic Crisis?” In Before the Black Death: Studies in the ‘Crisis’ of the early Fourteenth
        Century, ed. Bruce M.S. Campell. Manchester and New York: Manchester University Press. 1991. Pp.
        110-148.

-----   Textiles, Towns, and Trade. Essays in the economic history of late-medieval England and the Low
        Countries. Variorum 1994.

Murphy, David. “Fake Goods Sales at Critical Levels in China.” Business Times (Singapore). 21 June 1999.

Myers, A. R. England in the Late Middle Ages. Penguin 1991.

Newland, Francesca. “Phoney Wars.” Marketing Week. 21 May 1998, 21(12):43-46.

Nicholson, Tom. Horror in Cyberspace.” Managing Intellectual Property. December 1998. Ppp. 18-22.

North, Douglass C. and Robert Paul Thomas. The Rise of the Western World. Cambridge University Press 1973.

Olson, Mancur. The Rise and Decline of Nations: Economic Growth, Stagflation, and Social Rigidities. Yale
       University Press 1982.

Owens, Mitchell. “Antiques: Stylish Fakes that Attract Connoisseurs.” New York Times. March 19, 1999.

Oxford English Dictionary. 2nd ed. 1989 (ed. J. A. Simpson and E. S. C. Weiner), Additions 1993-7 (ed. John
       Simpson and Edmund Weiner; Michael Proffitt) , and 3rd ed. (in progress) Mar. 2000- (ed. John
       Simpson). OED Online. Oxford University Press. <http://oed.com>

Palmer, W. M.. Cambridge Borough Documents Vol. I. Bowes and Bowes 1931.

Peglotti, Francesco Balduci. La pratica della mercatura. Allen Evans (editor). Medieval Academy of America
         1936.

Pfaffenbichler, Matthias. Medieval Craftsmen, Armourers. University of Toronto Press 1992.

Phelps Brown, E. H. and S. V. Hopkins. “Wage-rates and Prices.” Economica 1957.

Phelps Brown, E. H. and S. V. Hopkins. “Seven Centuries of the Price of Consumables Compared with Builder's
        Wage-rates.” in E. M. Carus-Wilson (ed.) Essays in Economic History, vol 2, London 1962.

Phillip, J. H. “The English Patent as a Reward for Invention: the importation of an idea.” Journal of Legal History
         1982 v. 3 pp. 71-79.


                                                        51
Pirenne, Henri. Economic and Social History of Medieval Europe. Harvest Books 1937.

-----   Medieval Cities: Their Origins and the Revival of Trade. Frank Halsey (translator). Princeton University
        Press 1952.

Pooley, Ernest. Guilds of the City of London. Collins 1947.

Porter, Janet. “Countertech Launched in Britain: Fake Goods Estimated at 5 Percent of World Trade.” Journal of
         Commerce. August 5, 1996. P. 3a.

Postan, Michael. The Medieval Economy and Society: An Economic History of Britain in the Middle Ages.
        Willmer Brothers Limited 1972.

-----   “The Trade of Medieval Europe: The North.” Cambridge Economic History of Europe Vol II Trade and
        Industry in the Middle Ages. Cambridge University Press 1987 pp. 168-305.

Pounds, N. J. G. An Economic History of Medieval Europe. Longmann Press 1994.

Prescott, Andrew. English Historical Documents. British Library 1988.

Reddaway, Thomas Fiddian. The Early History of the Goldsmith’s Company, 1327-1509. Arnold Press 1975.

Richardson, Gary. “A Tale of Two Theories: Monopolies and Craft Guilds in Medieval England and Modern
       Imagination.” Journal of the History of Economic Thought. Volume 23. Number 2. June 2001.

Richardson, Gary. “Guilds, Laws, and Markets for Manufactured Merchandise in Late Medieval England.” UC
       Irvine Department of Economics Working Paper. 2001

Roche, Daniel. A History of Everyday Things: The Birth of Consumption in France, 1600-1800. Cambridge
       University Press, 2000.

Rorig, Fritz. The Medieval Town. University of California Press 1967.

Rothwell, Harry. English Historical Documents, 1189-1327. Vol. 3. Eyre and Spottiswoode 1975.

Rowley, Trevor. The High Middle Ages: 1200-1550. Routledge & Kegan Paul 1986.

Russell, J.C. British Medieval Population. Albuquerque 1948.

Salzman, Louis. English Industries in the Middle Ages. Oxford 1923.

Samuelson, Paul. “The Monopolistic Competition Revolution.” in Monopolistic Competition Theory: Studies in
       Impact. Essays in Honor of Edward H. Chamberlin. editor Robert Kuenne. pp. 105-138. 1967.

Schecter, F. I. The Historical Foundations of the Law Relating to Trademarks. 1925.

Schumpeter, Joseph. History of Economic Analysis. Oxford University Press 1986.

Scott, David. Metallography and Microstructure of Ancient and Historic Metals. The J. Paul Getty Trust. 1991

Scrutton, T. E. The Laws of Copyrights. 1883.



                                                       52
Shainwald, Richard and Clarence Condon. “International Product Counterfeiting.” Business and Economic
       Review. Oct/Nov/Dec 1987, 34(1): 19-25.

Simone, Joseph. “Countering Counterfeiters.” China Business Review. January 1999.

Smith, Adam. An Inquiry Into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations. London 1776.

Smith, Lucy. “Town Life.” Companion to English History (Middle Ages). F. P. Barnard (ed). Clarendon 1902.

Smith, Toulmin. English Gilds: The Original Ordinances of More than One Hundred Early English Gilds. Early
        English Text Society 1870.

Strasser, Susan. Satisfaction Guaranteed: The Making of the American Mass Market. Pantheon Books 1989

Stuard, Susan. “Medieval Workshop: Toward a Theory of Consumption and Economic Change.” Journal of
        Economic History (June 1985) 447-451.

Swanson, Heather. Medieval artisans: an urban class in late medieval England. Blackwell 1989.

Thirsk, Joan. Economic Policy and Projects: The Development of Consumer Society in Early Modern England.
        Clarendon Press, 1978.

Thomas, Arthur Herman. Calendar of early Mayor’s Court rolls preserved among the archives of the
      Corporation of the city of London at Guildhall A. D. 1298-1307. Cambridge University Press, 1924.

-----   Calendar of Plea and Memorandum Rolls of the City of London preserved among the archives of the
        Corporation of the city of London at Guildhall. Cambridge University Press 1926.

Thrupp, Sylvia. The Merchant Class of Medieval London 1300-1500.

-----   “The Gilds.” Cambridge Economic History of Medieval Europe, vol. 3, pp. 230-280, 624-635. Cambridge
        University Press, 1963.

Turnau, Irena. “The Organization of the European Textile Industry from the Thirteenth to the Eighteenth
        Century.” Journal of European Economic History 17 (Winter 1988): 586-96.

Unwin, George. The Guilds and Companies of London. Methuen & Company 1908.

Verhoeven, J.D., A.H. Pendray, and W.E. Dauksch. “The Key Role of Impurities in Ancient Damascus Steel
       Blades.” JOM, 50 (9) (1998), pp. 58-64.

Verster, A. Old European Pewter. Viking Press 1958.

Walford, Cornelius. Guilds: their origin, constitution, objects, and later history. George Redway 1888.

Walker, James. The armorial bearings of the several incorporated companies of Newcastle Upon Tyne: with a
       brief historical account of each company, together with notices of the Corpus Christi, or Miracle plays.
       Goldsmith’s Kress 1824.

Waugh, Scott. England in the Reign of Edward III. Cambridge University Press 1994.

Westlake, H.F. The Parish Guilds of Medieval England. Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge 1919.


                                                        53
Whitelock, Dorothy. English Historical Documents, c.500-1042. Oxford University Press 1955

Willoughby, Tony. “Combating Counterfeiters: A Practical Guide.” Mondaq Business Briefing, Business and
       Management Practices. 26 January 1999.

Zacour, John. An Introduction to Medieval Institutions. St. Martins Press 1976.




                                                        54
