                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               TRAINING DISADVANTAGED YOUTH IN LATIN AMERICA:
                      EVIDENCE FROM A RANDOMIZED TRIAL

                                          Orazio Attanasio
                                          Adriana Kugler
                                           Costas Meghir

                                        Working Paper 13931
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13931


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2008




We are extremely grateful to the teams at SEI and Econometria, which participated in the coordination
and collection of the data, and in particular to Rafael Arenas, Luis Carlos Gomez, John Tirado and
especially to the director of the project, Bernardo Kugler, and to the deputy director, Martha Isabel
Gutierrez, for making sure the process was carried out in a careful manner every step of the way. We
are also very grateful to Luis Carlos Corral at the Department of Planning for hearing our plea and
supporting us in carrying out the randomization. We thank Josh Angrist, Jere Behrman, Bill Evans,
David Francis, Jim Heckman, and Jesse Rothstein for very helpful comments, as well as to seminar
participants at the World Bank, the University of Notre Dame, the IZA/World Bank Employment and
Development Conference and at the TIMES seminar at the University of Houston. Adriana Kugler
gratefully acknowledges financial support from a University of Houston GEAR grant. Orazio Attanasio
and Costas Meghir's research have been financed by an ESRC professorial fellowship and the ESRC
centre at the IFS. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Orazio Attanasio, Adriana Kugler, and Costas Meghir. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Training Disadvantaged Youth in Latin America: Evidence from a Randomized Trial
Orazio Attanasio, Adriana Kugler, and Costas Meghir
NBER Working Paper No. 13931
April 2008
JEL No. C21,I38,J24

                                               ABSTRACT

Youth unemployment in Latin America is exceptionally high, as much as 50% among the poor. Vocational
training may be the best chance to help unemployed young people at the bottom of the income distribution.
This paper evaluates the impact of a randomized training program for disadvantaged youth introduced
in Colombia in 2005 on the employment and earnings of trainees. This is one of a couple of randomized
training trials conducted in developing countries and, thus, offers a unique opportunity to examine
the causal impact of training in a developing country context. We use originally collected data on individuals
randomly offered and not offered training. We find that the program raises earnings and employment
for both men and women, with larger effects on women. Women offered training earn about 18% more
than those not offered training, while men offered training earn about 8% more than men not offered
training. Much of the earnings increases for both men and women are related to increased employment
in formal sector jobs following training. The benefits of training are greater when individuals spend
more time doing on-the-job training, while hours of training in the classroom have no impact on the
returns to training. Cost-benefit analysis of these results suggests that the program generates a large
net gain, especially for women.


Orazio Attanasio                                      Costas Meghir
Department of Economics                               Department of Economics
University College London                             University College London
Gower Street                                          Gower Street
London WC1E 6BT UNITED KINGDOM                        London WC1E 6BT ENGLAND
and NBER                                              c.meghir@ucl.ac.uk
o.attanasio@ucl.ac.uk

Adriana Kugler
University of Houston
Department of Economics
204 McElhinney Hall
Houston, TX 77204-5019
and NBER
adkugler@uh.edu
    1. Introduction

            Youth unemployment is exceptionally high in Latin America, to the point that it

    triples the unemployment rate of adults in the region. Youth unemployment is even more

    of a problem among those at the lower end of the income distribution. In the late 1990s,

    the youth unemployment rate in the first income quartile was 13 times higher than the

    youth unemployment rate in the fourth quartile in Honduras, 9 times higher in Argentina,

    8 times higher in Bolivia, 5 times higher in Chile and 2 times higher in Colombia and

    Panama. 1 This is a sad start to the beginning of anyone’s labor market experience and

    likely affects adult employment prospects. At the same time, these high youth

    unemployment rates, especially among the poor, raise concerns about young people

    engaging in criminal activities given the lack of better prospects. In fact, violent activity

    among young people has contributed to the steep rise in urban violence during the 1990s

    in Latin America, with Colombia, Brazil, Mexico and Venezuela heading the list. In

    addition to the usual concerns about youth unemployment in terms of poor future labor

    market prospects and increased crime, there is the concern that living standards may be

    affected substantially by youth unemployment in Latin America, where young people,

    and even children, are substantial contributors to household income.


            Lack of skills is thought to be one of the key determinants of major social problems

such as youth unemployment, poverty and crime as well as a key limitation to growth in

developing countries. Education programs have, thus, been at the heart of developing policies

and have been backed up by Conditional Cash Transfers such as the Progresa/Oportunidades

program in Mexico and the Familias en Acción program in Colombia among many others.


1
    See Hopenhayn (2002).


                                                 3
However, by their nature these interventions take a long time to translate into poverty

reduction and require further investments in quality improvements. Given the urgency of this

matter the question is whether it is possible to intervene and improve the outcomes for young

adults. If so what form should such an intervention take?


          While early interventions and improvements in the quality of education at all levels

may be key for long-term poverty alleviation (see Carneiro and Heckman, 2003), these

interventions may reach young people too late – either close to the end of their schooling or

in their early post-schooling years. Vocational training may thus be the best chance to

improve the labor market prospects of youth at the bottom of the income distribution and

may also help avoid the rise of social problems such as crime and extreme poverty that result

from youth unemployment. However, while there may be good reasons to advocate the use

of training programs in developing countries, there is little reliable evidence on the impact of

training on improving the labor market standing of the poor. Indeed, mixed results on the

impact of government training programs in the US, the UK and other industrialized countries

justifies some a priori skepticism as to whether such interventions can deliver positive and

cost-effective results, helping poverty alleviation. 2


          The picture, however, could be different in developing countries, as one may

  expect the returns to training to be higher where the levels of skills of the population are

  very low to begin with. A number of training programs for disadvantaged workers have

  been introduced in recent years in many countries, including Argentina, Brazil, Chile,


  2
    See LaLonde (1995) and Heckman, LaLonde and Smith (1999) for surveys of the literature and Carneiro
  and Heckman (2003) and Heckman and Krueger (2003) for a general discussion of human capital policies.
  Also, see LaLonde (1986), Card and Sullivan (1988) and Burghardt and Schochet (2001) for some selected
  studies of randomized training programs in the U.S.


                                                    4
Colombia, the Dominican Republic, Panama, Peru and Uruguay, and indeed suggest

positive returns in Latin America especially for women. 3 However, these programs have

largely been evaluated using non-experimental technique making it difficult to

disentangle the causal effect of training from selection of program participants. 4

        An intervention in Colombia, combined with a randomized experiment, gives us

an almost unique opportunity to offer reliable evidence on the value of training in

developing countries. The program “Jóvenes en Acción” (which translates as Youth in

Action) was introduced between 2001 and 2005 and provided 3 months of in-classroom

training and 3 months of on-the-job training to young people between the ages of 18 and

25 in the two lowest socio-economic strata of the population. Training institutions in the

seven largest cities of the country chose the courses to be taught as part of the program

and received applications. Each institution was then asked to select more individuals than

they had capacity for. Subsequently, the program randomly offered training to as many

people as there were slots, among the individuals initially chosen by the training

institutions. The remaining youths were then used as a control group not selected into

training. 5 The advantage of this design is that it attempts to capture the process of trainee

selection as it would take place in practice, rather than force the training institutions to

train individuals they would otherwise not choose to train.

        Results on the impacts of the program show large effects. Comparisons between

those offered and not offered training show that both women and men offered training do


3
  See Betcherman, Olivas and Amit Dar (2004), Elias et al. (2004) and Card et al. (2007).
4
  The study by Card et al. (2007) on the Dominican Republic is the only other randomized evaluation of a
training program in a developing country. Their estimates are positive but not significant, at conventional
significance levels. We discuss this study below.
5
  In practice, some training centers did not receive enough qualified applicants to select the extra 50%
initially requested. For this reason, the probability of being offered training actually varies by training
institution.


                                                    5
better in the labor market. The comparisons between individuals offered and not offered

training are known as intention-to-treat (ITT) effects. In the case of “Jóvenes en Acción,”

the intention-to-treat effects are likely to be very close to the average effects of training

because there is close to full compliance. In particular, the probability of receiving

training is about 0.96 higher for those who were initially offered training relative to those

who were not. Few individuals who are not initially offered a slot in a course are

eventually trained, and even fewer of those individuals who were offered a slot turn down

the opportunity to train.


       Intention-to-treat effects show that women offered training are more likely to be

employed and work more days and longer hours. In particular, being offered training

increases paid employment by about 14% and increases days and hours worked by about

11%. The monthly wage and salary earnings of women offered training are about 30,000

Colombian pesos (US$15) or 18% higher than those of women not offered training.

Moreover, the likelihood of being employed in jobs that offer non-wage benefits and of

having a written contract is 0.05 higher for women offered training. In fact, the gains

from training seem largely linked to employment in the formal sector, as wage and salary

earnings gains after training are only linked to those in the formal sector but not for

informal sector workers. Men also benefit from being offered training, but the effects for

men are more limited. The monthly wage and salary earnings of men offered training are

22,600 Colombian pesos or 8% higher than the salaries of those not offered training.

Training offers also double the likelihood of getting a formal sector job and a job with a

written contract for men. Also, as for women, wage and salary earnings gains after

training are due to earnings increases for those employed in the formal sector. On the



                                             6
other hand, women and men offered training had shorter tenures by about 1 and a half

and 3 months, respectively, compared to those who were not trained, possibly because of

the automatic withdrawal from the labor force during the three months of classroom

training. Nonetheless, this decreased tenure should be considered as a cost of the

program.

       An interesting finding is that training has stronger effects on earnings and

employment, the greater the intensity of on-the-job training. By contrast, the returns to

training are not related to hours of classroom training, nor were they related to whether

training was provided by a for-profit or non-profit training institution. The strong effects

of the on-the-job component of training, together with the importance in terms of placing

workers in formal sector jobs, suggests that the program may have played the role of a

placement-like service or job-search assistance by providing information to both workers

and employers. Of course, we should be cautious in interpreting these results because this

duration was not randomly assigned and the effect could reflect the quality of the

applicant, with better applicants getting longer internships or even permanent jobs after

the program.

       These results stand in strong contrast to most of the results obtained in developed

countries and, in particular, in the U.S. (see, e.g., Heckman and Krueger, 2003; Burghardt

and Schochet, 2001; Heckman, LaLonde and Smith, 1999). In these countries the effects

are often small, if at all positive, and it is often unclear whether from they are worth

implementing from a cost-benefit perspective. The picture, however, could be different in

developing countries as one may expect the returns to be higher where the levels of skills

of the population are very low to begin with. A number of training programs for



                                             7
disadvantaged and low skilled individuals have been introduced in recent years in many

countries, including Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Dominican Republic, Panama,

Peru and Uruguay, and indeed suggest high returns. However, unlike in the Colombian

program we study, in the majority of these programs individuals were not randomized

into training. As a consequence, these studies have mostly been evaluated using non-

experimental techniques. Consistent with the results in this paper, for the most part, the

results from these non-experimental analyses show positive effects on the earnings of

women. An exception to these non-experimental evaluations in developing countries is

the work by Card et al. (2007) for the Dominican Republic which finds positive, though

insignificant, effects on earnings and on the probability of getting a job with health

insurance of similar magnitudes we find here. The authors attribute the insignificant

effects to their small sample sizes.

       The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides some background on

the basic design and implementation of the program Jóvenes en Acción. Section 3

describes the experimental design, as well as the collection of the data. Section 4 provides

descriptive statistics and comparisons between the treatment and control groups at

baseline. Section 5 presents first-stage results on the impact of a training offer on actual

training, and then presents estimates of the intention-to-treat effects of the program on

labor market outcomes, controlling for training institution fixed effects and pre-treatment

characteristics. Section 6 shows cost-benefit analyses for women and men and Section 7

concludes.




                                             8
2. Background and Description of the Program

        In 1998 Colombia was hit by the strongest recession in almost 60 years. While the

economy had an average GDP growth of 3% for the entire decade of the 1990s, in 1999

Colombia’s GDP growth fell to -6.0%. The economy only recovered to 3% GDP growth

again in 2003.

        Given the absence of safety nets in the Colombian economy and the devastating

effect that the recession was having on the poorest segments of the population, in 2001

the Colombian government introduced three new social programs to help those hardest

hit by the recession, 6 which were financed with a loan from the World Bank and the

Inter-American Development Bank. The three programs were “Familias en Acción,”

“Empleo en Acción,” and “Jóvenes en Acción.” The first was a conditional cash transfer

program, similar to the Progresa program in Mexico, which provides stipends for rural

families conditional on sending their children to school and providing health checks to

the children. The second was a workfare-type program, similar to “Trabajar” in

Argentina, which provided temporary government employment to low-income adults.

The third, “Jóvenes en Acción,” which is the program evaluated in this study, provided

training to young people living in urban areas.

        The program “Jóvenes en Acción” reached 80,000 young people (or

approximately 50% of the target population) and was given to various cohorts over a

period of four years. The first cohort received training in 2002 and the last one in 2005.

This analysis evaluates this last cohort.




6
  It is worth noting that unemployment insurance did not exist in Colombia until 2003 when it was
introduced by legislation.


                                               9
        The program was targeted to young people between the ages of 18 and 25, who

were unemployed and who were placed in the two lowest deciles of the income

distribution. The program spent US$70 million or US$875 per person and was offered in

the seven largest cities of the country: Barranquilla, Bogotá, Bucaramanga, Cali,

Cartagena, Manizales and Medellin.

        Training consisted of 3 months of classroom training and 3 months of on-the-job

training. Classroom training was provided by private and public training institutions,

which had to participate in a bidding process to be able to participate in the program. The

training institutions were selected based on the following criteria: legal registration,

economic solvency, quality of teaching, and ability to place trainees after the classroom

phase into internships with registered employers. In 2005, there were a total of 118

training institutions offering 441 different types of courses to 989 classes with a total of

26,615 slots for trainees, which means that the average class had 27 students. Training

courses provided vocational skills in a diverse number of occupations. 7 It is important to

stress that the private training institutions played a fundamental role in determining what

courses were offered, how they were marketed and how they were designed. The

maximum number of hours of lectures was set at 350 hours for three months (or about 6

hours of lectures during weekdays). Of the participating training institutions 43.2% were

for profit and 56.8% were non-profit. Training institutions were paid according to market

prices and were paid conditional on completion of training by the participants of the

program.

7
  Courses included training for: taxi and bus drivers; office assistants; call center operators; nurses’ and
physicians’ assistants; pharmacy assistants; hairdressing and cosmetology assistants; inventory assistants;
archival assistants; preschool teacher assistants; cashiers; payroll assistants; assistants for computer
installation and maintenance; textile operators; woodcutting machine operators; carpentry assistants,
plumber assistants, and electricians’ assistants.


                                                    10
        On-the-job training was provided by legally registered companies, which

provided unpaid internships to the participants. There were a total of 1,009 companies

that participated in the program. These companies operated in manufacturing (textiles,

food and beverages, pharmaceuticals, and electricity), retail and trade, and services

(including security, transportation, restaurants, health, childcare, and recreation).

        The program provided a stipend of about US$2.20 per day to male and female

trainees without young children throughout the 6 months in the program to cover for

transportation and lunch. The amount was increased to about US$3.00 per day for women

with children under 7 years of age to help cover for childcare expenses.



3. Experimental Design and Data Collection

3.1. Experimental Design

        As a rule the earnings of trainees and non-trainees are unlikely to be directly

comparable for reasons that have been extensively discussed (see Heckman, LaLonde and

Smith, 1999). Random assignment allows us to overcome selection bias in the evaluation

of Youth in Action. The randomization worked as follows: each training institution

provided a list of up to 50% more applicants than they had capacity for; then, these

individuals were randomly offered or not offered a position in a course at each training

institution using the special information system set up to register applicants into the

program. Since the total number of slots per course was fixed but the number of people

pre-selected in the training list varied by training institution, the probability of being

offered a spot in a course also differed by training institution. 8


8
  The median probability of being offered training was 0.815 and the average probability of being offered
training was 0.85 with a standard deviation of 0.12.


                                                   11
       If the individuals who were initially assigned to the program did not accept the

training opportunity, then the training institutions were allowed to fill these slots with the

next individual in the lists randomly generated by the information system. In addition,

individuals who were not initially offered a slot could request to be released from the

waiting list in a particular training institution and to apply to other institutions. In

practice, there were only 56 individuals in our sample who did this. This means that

although the trainees were randomly assigned for the most part, these 56 individuals (i.e.,

1.29% of our sample) who initially did not get assigned to treatment but got trained and

the 8 (i.e., 0.18% of our sample) who turned down training may be self-selected and

introduce a bias. For this reason, our analysis is based on the initial random assignment.

However, the number of non-compliers was so small that, in practice, it does not matter

for the results we obtain.




       An important advantage of this study is that the availability of training was

randomly assigned among those who chose to apply for training and were selected as

suitable by the training institutions. Because of the limited non-compliance we reported

above, the direct comparison of outcomes between the group that was offered training

and the group that was not will yield unbiased estimates of the average effect of offering

training on those who apply for it and are accepted by one of the training institutions.

Given the design of the program, we estimate the effect of an offer to train on the

population of interest, namely those who would be accepted into the program by those

delivering it. Moreover, by asking the training institutions to select more candidates than

they had places, the experiment comes closer to identifying the effect following an



                                             12
overall expansion of the program to a population, which currently does not have full

access. 9

3.2. Data Collection

            Given the design of the randomization described above, the data set used for this

evaluation, includes a treatment and a control group, in each of the seven cities covered

by the program. There were two stages to the data collection: the first stage conducted a

baseline survey which collected information on the individuals in the sample before their

participation into the program, and a second stage which conducted a follow-up survey

and collected information on individuals after the end of the two components of training

(i.e., the classroom and on-the-job training).

         Table 1 provides information on the size of the samples and reports the planned

and actual number of interviews conducted at baseline and in the follow-up surveys by

city. We chose the number of interviews to be able to detect effects similar to those found

in other programs based on a 10% level of significance. This yielded a sample of 3,300

with 1,650 in each group. Taking an ex-ante pessimistic view on attrition, 10 we increased

the sample to 2,040 and 2,310 for the treatment and control groups, respectively.

         The baseline sample includes 2,066 individuals in the treatment group and 2,287

controls. The sample was stratified by city and sex, with equal numbers of women and

men in each city. This allows us to carry out separate analyses of the program for women

and men, which as we will show in the next sections show different effects for the two

genders.



9
   In Manizales and Cali, however, several training institutions did not get enough applicants to be able to
select more individuals than they had capacity for.
10
    The expected attrition was 24% for the program participants and 40% for the non-program participants.


                                                    13
       The baseline data (before the provision of training) was collected in January 2005

either before the beginning of the training program or during the first week of classes to

minimize any influence of participation in the program on the interviewees’ responses.

The follow-up interviews were carried out between August and October of 2006 or

between 19 and 21 months after the beginning of the program (since the program started

at the end of January 2005) with the idea of allowing at least one year since the

completion of the program to evaluate its effectiveness in terms of labor market

outcomes.

       Since there were concerns with attrition, especially for a highly mobile group of

young people in the lowest socio-economic strata of the population, telephone updates

were conducted on November 2005 or 4 months after the completion of the program.

These telephone follow-ups verified the basic personal information of the baseline

interviewees and got up-to-date contact information, including addresses and telephone

numbers, for those who had moved or were about to move. Telephone numbers were

available for 4,298 of the 4,353 individuals initially interviewed at baseline, so that there

were missing phone numbers only for 55 individuals or 2% of those initially interviewed.

Of the ones with a phone number, 3,736 or 85.8% were reached. Of these 163 or 4.36%

had moved and it was not possible to get new contact information. Out of the 617 who

were not reached, 71% had their phone lines cut off or not working. However, personal

visits were then conducted to update the information of these 617 individuals.

       The complete follow-up in-person interviews were carried out between 9 and 11

months after the telephone update. The follow-up was conducted using the initial list of

individuals in the baseline with the contact information updated by telephone in



                                             14
November. The last two columns in Table 1 present the number of actual interviews

carried out during the follow-up. There were 1,749 and 1,814 treatment and control

individuals interviewed in the follow-up approximately one year after the training

program finished. This is 85% and 79% of the treatment and control groups relative to the

samples in the baseline or 81.8% of the total initial sample. 11 This low attrition rate is

remarkable, especially considering that the data collection took place in a less developed

country and for a sub-population which is highly mobile. More importantly, attrition is

unrelated to random training offers for both women and men. 12



4. Data Description and Baseline Comparisons

4.1. Descriptive Statistics

        The baseline and follow-up surveys collected information for all individuals

drawn both from the treatment and control populations and included three parts. The first

part of the survey collected information on the demographic characteristics of all

treatment and control individuals and those living in the same households. The second

part included questions on education, training, health and general labor market

information for all individuals older than 12 years of age living in the households of the

treatment and control individuals. The third and most pertinent part of the survey

included detailed questions to the treatment and control individuals on their labor market

experience during the year prior to the survey. In addition, during the follow-up,




11
   This attrition rate compares very favorably to the attrition rates found in labor market surveys for
developed countries (e.g., the attrition rate for the CPS is around 20%).
12
   The coefficients on a random offer dummy in linear probability models of the probability of continuing
in the sample are -0.0012 with a se of 0.0034 for women and -0.0009 with a se of 0.0028 for men.


                                                   15
questions were asked to those who participated in the program (treatment group) about

their training experience.

         Table 2 reports basic descriptive statistics on the pre-treatment and post-treatment

demographic characteristics and labor market outcomes of women and men in the

treatment and control groups. 13 The labor market variables include employment status,

hours, days, earnings and the quality of jobs. We distinguish between employment and

paid employment. We also distinguish between earnings from wage and salary

employment and earnings from self-employment. Our earnings, tenure, days, and hours

measures all include zeros for those not working. 14 Two interesting outcomes that we

consider in our analysis are whether the worker is employed in a formal sector job or not

and whether she has a contract. These two measures are indicator variables which take

the value of one if an individual is employed in the formal sector and has a written

contract and zero if she is not working at all or works in the informal sector or without a

written contract. This distinction between the formal and informal sector is important in

developing countries where being in the formal sector implies access to pensions, health

and other benefits as well as better working conditions. The Appendix includes a detailed

description of how the various variables were constructed.

         The average age of women and men in the sample before training was 21 years of

age. About a quarter of the women and 10% of the men in the sample were married

before the program. Educational attainment was low with both women and men having

about 10 years of education and, thus, being high school dropouts. Employment during

13
   The smaller number of observations reported for the follow up sample reflects attrition. However, as
pointed out, attrition is not related to the probability of receiving a random offer, so that it is unlikely to
introduce biases.
14
   Below we discuss the implications of including zeros in our earnings and other measures for the
interpretation of our results.


                                                     16
the year before training is low for both groups in terms of participation (i.e., 0.34 for

women and 0.4 for men), in terms of days worked per month (i.e., 11 for women and 14

for men), and in terms of hours worked per week (23 for women and 30 for men). The

probability of having had a formal sector job during the past year, which includes

coverage for pensions, health insurance and/or injury compensation is only 0.07 for

women and 0.12 for men. The probability of having had a job with a written contract is

equally low. Moreover, wage and salary earnings and self-employment earnings are also

low for both women and men. Women’s monthly wage and salary earnings are 86,716

Colombian pesos or US$42.14 per month or US$1.4 per day, and men’s monthly wage

and salary earnings are 124,647 Colombian pesos or US$60.57 per month or US$2.02 per

day. If these individual earnings were the only source of income in their households, then

these individuals would be living in poverty or close to extreme poverty. 15                Self-

employment earnings are even lower.

4.2. Baseline Comparisons

        If the randomization was successful, the baseline characteristics of those not

offered training (i.e., the control group) and those offered (i.e., the treatment group)

should not be significantly different at least within training institutions. They could,

however, differ between training institutions because these may differ in their quality and

applicants may sort by training institution on the basis of tastes, ability and other

variables that could affect the final outcomes. Moreover, the probability of assignment to

treatment differs by training institution because in some cases there were not enough

qualified applicants to assign 2/3 to the treatment group and 1/3 to the control group as in


15
  Moderate poverty is roughly defined as $2.00 per day and extreme poverty as $1.00 per day (World
Development Report, 2001).


                                               17
the original design. For this reason, in addition to the simple comparison between

treatment and control variable at baseline, we also make the same comparison allowing

for training institution fixed effects. This second set of comparisons are thus based on

within training institution contrasts. 16

        Table 3 reports differences in demographic characteristics and labor market

outcomes between women in the treatment and control groups. The first column reports

simple comparisons and the second allows for training institution fixed effects. The first

column shows that treatment and control group characteristics are, for the most part, very

similar for women at baseline, i.e., before the program. The only exceptions are education

and age, which show significant but small differences between the two groups. The

treatment group has a third of a year more education and is a fifth of a year younger than

the treatment group. In addition, those in the treatment group appear to have one more

month of tenure in their pre-treatment jobs. Controlling for institution fixed effects and

thus comparing within training institution does not change the picture much, except for

the fact that the difference in the pre-program tenure is no longer significant. The

differences in education and age remain, although they only represent about 15% of a

standard deviation for education and 10% for age.

        Table 4 reports similar differences between those in the treatment and control

groups to those reported in Table 3 but for men. These comparisons show that baseline

characteristics are also fairly well balanced for men. As for women, there are small

differences in education and age between men in the treatment and control groups.

However, self-employment earnings are also significantly lower for men in the treatment

16
   Because training institutions are only identified in the follow-up sample, these comparisons within
training institutions are based on the smaller follow-up sample. Comparisons for the restricted follow-up
sample (not reported here) are very similar.


                                                   18
group, although the discrepancy is only 13% of a standard deviation. 17 In addition,

treated individuals are more likely to have paid employment. 18 When we control for

institution fixed effects, only the differences in age, education and self-employment

income remain significant at the 5% level, but these only represent 15% of a standard

deviation for age and 13% of a standard deviation for education and self-employment. 19



5. Estimating Program Effects

        Define by Y1i and Y0i the outcomes for individual i in the training state and the

non-training state; Di = {0,1} the indicator of whether an individual chooses to participate

in the program and is pre-selected by the training institution to which he applied. Ri =

{0,1} is the indicator of whether the individual was (randomly) offered a place in the

program, following pre-selection by a training institution. Finally, E{•} represents

expectations.

        Given the design of the program, we have that the average outcome for those

offered a place in training institution Т is E{Y1i|Di=1,Т} = E{Y1i|Di=1,T,Ri=1}.

Similarly, the counterfactual for this population may be estimated using the average

outcome for those randomized out of training, i.e., E{Y0i|Di=1,T} = E{Y0i|Di=1,T,Ri=0}.

The difference between these two expectations is the program effect in training centre T,

     δT = E{Y1i – Y0i |Di =1, T} = E{Y1i |Di =1, T, Ri = 1} - E{Y0i |Di =1, T, Ri = 0}.




17
   As explained in the Data Appendix, self-employment earnings are earnings of the self-employed net of
business-related expenditures.
18
   As for women, comparisons restricted to the follow-up sample are very similar.
19
   Note that significant difference could emerge in any randomization. We examine differences for a large
number of characteristics and outcomes and yet the vast majority of these differences are insignificant.
Moreover, the fact that the few variables that are significant move in different direction for women and
men, except for education, is also encouraging.


                                                   19
Our estimator of the intention to treat is thus obtained as a weighted average of the within

training centre effects, i.e.


                              ^
                             δ=
                                  ∑ P (1− P )(Y − Y
                                      s   s           s   1s    0s   )
                                                                                             (1)
                                     ∑ P (1− P )
                                              s   s        s




where Ps is the probability of selection into the program among qualified applicants in

training institution s, Y1s is the average outcome (wages, employment, etc.) for those

qualified applicants randomly offered training in institution s and Y0 s is the average

outcome for those qualified applicants randomly denied training in institution s. The sum

is taken over training institutions and the parameter is the weighted average of the

program effects across training institutions. 20 This simple comparison of weighted means

is an unbiased estimate of δ, the intention-to-treat (ITT) effect.

         Recognizing that this is the standard within-groups estimator, it is straightforward

to control for observable characteristics (see Arellano (2003)). Indeed, we control for age,

education, a head status dummy, marital status, and city effects, all measured before

training (pre-treatment) and henceforth denoted Xi. Including these pre-treatment

characteristics increases the precision of the estimates and helps control for any

remaining baseline imbalances, although these are insignificant for the most part and very

small otherwise. In the tables below we report both the estimates that only control for




20
   Note that comparing within training institutions would not be necessary if the probability of assignment
of the treatment group did not vary by training institution or if the effectiveness of training did not differ by
training institution. As discussed above, the probability of treatment varies by training institution with a
mean of 0.85. Moreover, given the diversity of courses offered, the effectiveness of training is likely to
vary across training institutions.


                                                           20
training institution fixed effects and those that, in addition, control for the additional

variables.

Given full compliance with the random assignment, the ITT parameter just described is

the average effect of training on those who were deemed eligible and selected into the

program. As shown in the next section, there was indeed close to full-compliance with

this program.

5.1. Effects of Random Offers on the take-up of Training

       The description of the data above suggested that few individuals who were

randomly offered training turned down training opportunities and few individuals not

initially offered a spot in a training institution eventually got trained. To examine how

close random training offers relate to actual training, we estimate a linear probability

model of training on a random offer indicator, controlling for training institution fixed

effects and pre-treatment characteristics, as follows:

                                     Tij = αRi + ρXi + τj + υij ,
                                                                                          (3)

where Tij is an indicator of whether person i obtained training in institution j, Xi are pre-

treatment characteristics, τj are training institution fixed effects and υij is a random error

term. Table 5 reports the results of this regression for women and men separately.

Random assignment to training increases women’s probability of being trained by 0.96

and men’s probability of training by 0.97. Thus, there is close to full compliance in the

sense that most of those initially assigned to training get trained and most of those not

initially assigned to the program remain untrained.




                                             21
5.2. Employment and Earnings Effects for Women


        Panel A of Table 6 presents ITT effects for women, which condition on training

institution fixed effects and city effects. These results show positive effects of being

offered training on employment, paid employment, days worked per month, hours

worked per week, and wage and salary earnings. On the other hand, tenure declines and

profits of the self-employed are not affected by training.


        Panel B presents results which, in addition, control for pre-training characteristics.

The results conditioning on pre-treatment characteristics are somewhat smaller but

remain large and significant. The results show that being offered training increases the

probability of employment and paid employment by 0.047 and 0.052, respectively, as

opposed to the 0.057 and 0.065 found without pre-treatment characteristics. Women’s

days and hours worked also increase after being offered training by close to a day and

two and a half hours. The results for salaries also show smaller but still sizeable effects of

being offered training of about 18% compared to the control group.


        At this point, however, it is useful to see how we can interpret the comparisons of

earnings (including the zeros) between treatment and control. The treatment effect we

estimate is E ( S i | Ri = 1) − E ( S i | Ri = 0) , where Si stands for earnings (salary) and is set

to zero if a person is out of work. Ignoring the pre-treatment characteristics for notational

simplicity, this effect can be decomposed as


E ( S i | Ri = 1) − E ( S i | Ri = 0) = [E ( S i | Pi = 1, Ri = 1) − E ( S i | Pi = 1, Ri = 0)]Pr( Pi = 1 | Ri = 0) +

                      [Pr( Pi   = 1 | Ri = 1) − Pr( Pi = 1 | Ri = 0)]E ( S i | Pi = 1, Ri = 1)




                                                      22
This expression shows that earnings increases will occur because of increased

employment (the last term) and/or because of the increased earnings of those employed.

Earnings of those employed could increase either because worker productivity increased

as a result of the program or because the intervention changes the composition of those

working. Indeed this last effect could lead to a change in earnings even if the overall

employment rate does not change. 21 Our results suggest that about a third of the increase

in salaries can be accounted for by increases in employment and the rest is due to higher

earnings among those employed who received the treatment relative to the controls.

Although the positive effect does mean that the program caused average earnings to rise,

the mechanism by which this happens is not revealed by this sort of approach and could

be due to increased productivity; due to the better quality of jobs obtained after training

or due to employment composition effects. To get around the effects of censoring and to

understand more about the mechanisms further assumptions and modeling is required. 22

        Returning to the results, the negative effects of being offered training on tenure

are slightly larger and suggest a reduction in tenure of about one month and a half, or half

of the time of the classroom training. The results controlling for pre-treatment

characteristics, thus, confirm that the differences are not simply driven by the small pre-

existing differences between the two groups, which we described earlier.



21
   The composition of those working among those who received the intervention may be different than
among those who did not.
22
   For understanding more about the mechanisms an alternative would be to bound the impact on the
quantiles of earnings for those in employment, using the approach developed by Manski (1994) and
Blundell, Gosling, Ichimura and Meghir (2007). Here it would just about be possible to bound the effect at
the median for women, whose participation in paid employment among the controls is 54%, and the
percentiles between the 30th and the 70th percentile for men. However, given the large number of
individuals without employment, the bounds are likely to be very wide. Means cannot be bounded without
assumption on the support of wages. This is, of course , a feature of any randomized experiment attempting
to measure the effects on earnings, when there exists the possibility of non-employment.


                                                   23
The picture is one of increased labor market activity with substantially higher wage and

salary earnings and increased employment for women. On the basis of these results, this

seems like a highly successful program for young women seeking training in the first

place.

5.3. Employment and Earnings Effects for Men

         Table 7 reports ITT effects for men. The results in Panel A, which condition on

training institution fixed effects, show that training offers only increase wage and salary

earnings in the case of men. On the other hand, these results show a reduction in tenure of

about 3 months and a reduction in the earnings of the self-employed that are offered

training. In Panel B we also control for pre-training age, household headship, marital

status, and profits, the variables that displayed some small baseline differences. These

results continue to show positive and significant effects of training on wage and salary

earnings and negative effects on tenure and self-employment earnings, though the latter is

only marginally significant. Those offered training earn 22,603 Colombian pesos or 8%

more in salaried employment than those in the control group. Since there is no

employment effect for men, the entire increase is coming from an increase in earnings of

those working following the intervention relative to those working in the control group. 23

On the other hand, men offered training earn about 9,326 Colombian pesos or 24% less in

self-employment than those in the control group. This may simply reflect the movement

of trainees from self-employment to salary employment and, as discussed below, into the

formal sector. Also, even after controlling for pre-treatment characteristics, the results




23
   As already discussed, this in itself does not exclude the possibility that the observed increase is due to
differences in composition of the two groups.


                                                     24
continue to show a reduction in tenure of about two and half months or close to the time

spent by trainees in the classroom.

       To summarize: the results imply that training has had positive labor market

impacts for both men and women but possibly through different mechanisms. For women

there is a clear effect on employment, days, and hours as well as wage and salary

earnings. For men the picture is different; the estimates imply an increase in the average

wage and salary earnings among treated employed workers and a marginally significant

decline in self-employment earnings, but no effect on employment rates. For women, a

third of the increase can be attributed to increased employment. The rest is due to

increased earnings among treated employed workers. For both women and men wage and

salary earnings gains could also be related to access to better paid formal sector jobs.

       The only other similar intervention with a randomized trial is that reported in

Card et al. (2007) for the Dominican Republic and it is interesting to provide a brief

comparison. The programs are similar with the only difference that in Colombia the

internship lasted 3 months instead of 2 months as in the Dominican Republic. Card et al.

(2007) find no employment effect, but they do find an earnings effect of 10% to 17%

(depending on the method used). However, the effect they find is not precisely estimated.

There are some differences in the design of the experiment and the data collection. First,

the Card et al. (2007) sample has 786 treatment and 563 controls as opposed to the 1,749

treatment and 1,814 control individuals in our sample. This can explain a reduction of

standard errors by a factor of 1.62 in our study. Second, our results are based on the

original random assignment of treatment, while the Card et al. (2007) study had to use

data on the realized training outcome. Given that in the Dominican Republic there was



                                             25
substantial reassignment after the dropping out of the originally assigned trainees, this

could introduce bias. Nevertheless, the comparison between the two evaluations is

valuable because of the similarity in program design and similarity in the magnitude of

the results.

5.4. Effects on Formal Sector Employment

           In Latin America, like in other developing countries, there is a large share of

workers employed in the shadow or informal economy, with no coverage of mandatory

benefits. About 45% of all workers in Colombia are employed in jobs in the informal

sector, in which they do not receive non-wage benefits such as health insurance,

pensions, or injury compensation. Moreover, earnings are lower on average in the

informal sector, although this could be due to skills and/or self-selection by ability. 24 It

is, thus, important to ask whether the intervention improved access to the formal sector.

           Table 8 shows intention-to-treat effects on the probability of formal employment,

defined as employment covered by health, pension and injury compensation benefits, as

well as on the probability of having a written contract. Not being employed in the formal

sector includes the unemployed and those in the informal sector.

           Panel A shows results controlling for training institution fixed effects and Panel B

adds controls for pre-treatment characteristics, which includes a pre-treatment contract

indicator in the case of men. The results show positive and significant effects on the

probability of having a formal sector job and of having a written contract for both women

and men. Training increases the probability of having a formal sector job by 0.053 and

0.052 for women and men, respectively. Training also increases the probability of having

a written contract by 0.054 and 0.07 for women and men.
24
     See, e.g., Kugler (1999, 2005).


                                               26
       In addition to estimating the effect of the program on the probability of formal

employment, we also try to get at whether the impact of training on wage and salary

earnings that we documented earlier is due to higher earnings in these formal sector jobs.

For this purpose, we estimate separate regressions of formal and informal wage and

salary earnings, where formal earnings are assigned a zero when individuals are

employed in the informal sector and where informal earnings are assigned a zero when

individuals are employed in the formal sector. Training increases wage and salary

earnings in the formal sector but not in the informal sector for both women and men,

indicating that the wage and salary earnings gains observed above are related to increased

access to formal sector jobs

5.5. Gender Differences

       The results above show larger and more widespread effects of training on women

than on men. Women not only experience larger gains than men in terms of earnings

following training, but they also experience gains in the quantity of employment in terms

of participation, days and hours worked not experienced by men. There are three possible

reasons for the differential returns to training for women relative to men. First, the higher

return could result from the fact that women have lower levels of formal education to

begin with. However, contrasting formal schooling at baseline in Table 2 shows small

differences in education between women and men. Moreover, interaction models which

allow for a differential effect of training for those with different education levels show no

differences in the returns to training for more and less educated individuals. Second,

women with children received an additional stipend for child care, which may have freed

up additional time for women to devote to training. In fact, women tend to enroll in



                                             27
courses requiring longer hours, though as we will show below this does not seem to be an

important part of the story. Third, qualitative interviews with the training institutions and

trainees suggest that women were more motivated and were more responsible during the

classroom and internship phases of the program. In fact, self-reported information on

completion of the program show that 3.3% of men dropped out during the first three

months of the program while only 2.4% of women did. Also, only 0.4% of women were

expelled from the classroom or internship phases, while 1.3% of men were expelled. This

may just reflect a different quality of original applicants to the program (in terms of

unobservables) among men and women.

5.6. Classroom vs. On-the-Job Training

        By most standards, including by cost-benefit criteria (which follow this section)

this Colombian program is a resounding success. This does contrast with results obtained

in industrialized countries, such as the US, the UK and others, as discussed earlier. A

priori, there is little reason to expect that in such different contexts the results should be

similar. However, it is still interesting and important to document, to the extent possible,

what aspects of this program have made it successful.

        We can isolate two important characteristics of the program. First, it included a

substantive element of on-the-job training, which consisted of a 3-month internship.

Second, private sector institutions – some for-profit and some nonprofit, offered the

training and chose, designed and marketed the courses. There is already some evidence

that both these aspects are important for the success of training programs. 25 Here, we

exploit variation in some aspects of this program to provide some indications of which of

25
  Sianesi (2003) for example shows that among the Swedish programs the ones relating to wage subsidies
and internships are the most successful. Blundell, Dearden and Meghir (1996) show that private employer
provided training is the one with positive returns.


                                                  28
the aspects have been most important for its success. Of course the allocation of trainees

to the various types of courses and training institutions is not random, so these results

should be viewed as suggestive.

       Table 9 shows the results of specifications that interact the treatment effect with

classroom training characteristics. Panel A presents the results of models which include

the interaction of the training offer dummy with the number of hours of training in the

classroom. Panel B shows the results of models which include an interaction of the

training offer dummy with a for profit training institution dummy. Neither the intensity of

classroom training nor the for profit status of training institutions appear to affect the

benefits to training in terms of overall and formal sector employment or earnings.

       By contrast, the results in Panel A of Table 10, which include an interaction

between the training offer dummy and hours of on-the-job training, show that

employment and earnings gains are greater the longer the duration of on-the-job training.

Moreover, Panel B in Table 10 shows models with an interaction of the training offer

dummy with a dummy that takes the value of 1, if the skills taught in the classroom and

on-the-job training were the same, and zero otherwise. These results show bigger

employment and earnings gains when the content of the classroom and on-the-job

training coincided.

       These results suggest that the intensity of on-the-job training was related to the

success of the program, while the intensity of classroom training (within the range

observed in our program) was irrelevant. Moreover, while the type of the training

institution did not affect the returns to training, the similarity in content between the

classroom and on-the-job training did matter.




                                            29
         These findings suggest that it was the on-the-job component of the program that

mattered in terms of the success of the program. In what follows, we show that these

higher returns to training we find here also imply that these programs are cost-effective in

a developing country context.



6. Cost-Benefit Analysis

         The simplest way of calculating a lower bound to the benefits of the program is to

use the gains in wage and salary earnings. 26 The results imply a gain of about 30,000 for

women and of about 22,000 for men, so there are yearly gains of 360,000 and 264,000 for

women and men, respectively. The key question of course is whether these gains are

permanent or not. We will consider two scenarios: one in which the gains are permanent

but do not grow over time, and a second one in which we assume a 10% depreciation rate

of these gains. We assume that the working life of these individuals is another 40 years,

given that their average age is about 22 in the data. For women, the 30,000 Colombian

pesos increase reflects employment and monthly earnings gains as well as the salary

gains from moving to the formal sector for those who do so due to the program. In the

case of men, the increase of 22,000 Colombian pesos reflects both monthly earnings

gains as well as any salary gains from moving to the formal sector. Discounting at 5% a

year, and assuming the growth rate of earnings is not affected, we obtain a gain for

women of 6,486,048 Colombian pesos or about US$3,212 and a gain for men of

26
   We do not actually need to know the mechanism by which salary increases for the treatment group so
long as no one is negatively affected by the program. However, there is a possibility that some of the gain
could have resulted in displacing individuals not trained due to a preference of employers for trained
individuals. In this case, there is a cost to the program in terms of the lost earnings of those individuals.
Such displacement effects and more generally the general equilibrium aspect of the intervention are
important for understanding the longer term effects of such a program. From an experimental point of view
one way to understand the importance of displacement is to randomize both between and within regions.
Issues related to displacement are discussed in Blundell et al. (2004).


                                                    30
4,756,435 Colombian pesos or US$2,355 under the first scenario in which the gains are

permanent. Under the more conservative scenario in which we allow the gains to

depreciate at a rate of 10%, the gains are of 2,514,694 Colombian pesos or $1,245 for

women and of 1,844,109 Colombian pesos or $913 for men.

       The direct cost of operation of the training program was US$875 per person. In

addition there is the cost of lost employment for those who would work at the time of

training. We have seen that the loss of time in employment as measured by tenure due to

time participating in the program is about 1 and a half months for women and 3 months

for men. This is an overestimate of the employment loss because individuals could get

many small jobs in one state and one long job in the other. Loss in tenure may not fully

reflect unemployment. Table 2 reports an average monthly salary for women before

training of 86,716 Colombian pesos or US$42 per month and of 124,647 Colombian

pesos or US$60.57 for men. However, women get a transfer of $2.20 daily if they do not

have children under 7 and of $3.00 if they have young children. Under either case, the

stipend provided by the program more than compensates the monthly salary they would

have gotten without the training, so the opportunity cost for women is zero. For men, the

daily stipend of $2.20 implies a monthly transfer of $44, so the opportunity cost for men

due to the three months of lost employment is $16.57 per month or $49.71 for the entire

period. This implies a total cost of training of US$875 for women and of US$924.7 for

men.

       Under the first scenario of permanent gains, the net gains for women are of about

$2,337 and of about $1,430 for men. Under the more conservative scenario which allows

for depreciation of these gains, there is a net benefit of $370 for women and a loss of $12



                                            31
for men. Thus, net benefits from the program are larger for women, but they are clearly

positive for both genders when the gains are assumed to persist over time. However,

when we allow for workers to lose some of the skills learned during training, the program

is no longer cost-effective for men. On the other hand, this is clearly a conservative

estimate given that we have not considered the non-wage benefits received due to the

increased employment in the formal sector for both women and men.



        Another way of calculating the effectiveness of the program is to calculate the

internal rate of return. The internal rate of return is the rate of return that equates the costs

with the gains. Under the first scenario the internal rate of return is 25% for women and

16% for men, while under the second scenario, which allows for depreciation, the rate of

return is 13.5% for women and 4.5% for men. These high rates of return, especially for

women, suggest that the training program is a great success, at least when interest rates

are lower than 4.5%.



        The high returns to training beg the question as to why more people are not

getting trained on their own. In the case of “Jóvenes en Acción”, there was a shortage of

volunteers for some courses once the program was announced, which suggests that lack

of information may be preventing people from obtaining training. In addition, a credible

hypothesis is that they cannot finance it. Indeed, for men it would take about 15 months

pay to cover the entire cost, based on the average pay at the time of the program. Given

the lower salaries for women, the cost of training for women corresponds to about 21

months of work. Moreover, the costs would be even higher for women with children who

would need to cover for childcare costs during their participation in the program. It is



                                               32
unlikely that anyone would be able to borrow such an amount without collateral at a

reasonable interest rate.




7. Conclusion

       The program “Jóvenes en Acción” introduced in Colombia in 2005 offers a

unique opportunity to evaluate the causal effect of training on young people with little

education in the context of a less-developed country. The program offered vocational

training for a total period of 6 months (3 months in classroom and 3 months on-the-job)

to young unemployed women and men, who belonged to the lowest two strata in the

population and who were for the most part high-school dropouts. Most importantly for

the purpose of this evaluation, the program randomly offered training to these young

women and men.

       The results show that the program had substantial effects on both women and

men, but in different ways. In particular, training increased wage and salaried earnings,

the probability of employment, days and hours worked, the probability of having a formal

job, and the probability of having a job with a written contract for women. The effects on

men were smaller and also more limited. In the case of men, training only increased wage

and salaried earnings, the probability of having a formal job, and the probability of

having a job with a written contract, but not employment. Salaried earnings increased for

both genders: 18% for women and 8% for men. In addition, we find an increase in the

probabilities of having a formal sector job and a written contract for both women and

men of about 0.05 and 0.07, respectively. As is standard in these interventions, there is

some loss in work experience for both women and men due to the time in the classroom,



                                           33
which is reflected in loss of tenure for the treatment group. In particular, we find a

decrease of about one and a half and three months for women and men, respectively. The

results are robust to controlling for training institution fixed effects and pre-treatment

characteristics. This is reassuring, but not surprising, given the randomized design of the

evaluation and the fact that treatment and control samples are reasonably balanced at

baseline.

       These results constitute the basis for a cost-benefit analysis. Even the most

conservative of the cost-benefit calculations, which ignore the benefits associated to the

higher probability of being employed in the formal sector and which allow the benefits to

depreciate over time, suggest that the net benefits of the program more than justify its

existence and possibly its expansion for women. Under this scenario, the internal rate of

return is of 13.5% for women and 4.5% for men. Given the higher returns to training, the

question remains as to why similar type of programs are not more widespread and why

people do not take advantage of existing training opportunities. Lack of information and

credit constrains are two likely causes, but this remains an open question.

       An especially interesting and strong finding is the much bigger return to training

for both women and men as the intensity of on-the-job training increases. By contrast, the

returns to training do not respond to changes in intensity of classroom training,

suggesting that it was the on-the-job component of the program that made the program a

success. This findings echo some of the finding in the U.S. literature on training

programs, which finds bigger effects of on-the-job than classroom training. The

importance of on-the-job training combined with the strong effects on training on formal

sector employment and earnings suggest that the program may have played a role in



                                            34
matching and placing workers by providing information to both sides of the market. In

fact, one of the important roles played by the training program was to identify the

demand for skills and place workers for the on-the-job component of the program. This is

in line with the recent recommendation by Economic Commission for Latin America and

the Caribbean (ECLAC) “[to establish] a national training and skills development system

which provides internships in business and links to employers” as a solution to the youth

unemployment problem in the region (Hopenhayn (2002)).




                                           35
References

Ado, Christian and Sergio Nuñez. 2004. “The Impact of Training Policies in Latin
America and the Caribbean: The Case of Program Jove,” IDB Working Paper No. R-483.

Arellano Manuel. 2003. Panel Data Econometrics. Oxford University Press

Ashenfelter, Oley. 1978. “Estimating the Effects of Training Programs on Earnings,”
Review of Economics and Statistics, 60: 648-660.

Blundell, Richard, Lorraine Dearden and Costas Meghir. 1996. “The Determinants and
Effects of Work Related Training in Britain,” Mimeo, Institute for Fiscal Studies.

Blundell, Richard, Monica Costa Dias, Costas Meghir and John Van Reenen. 2004.
Evaluating the Employment Impact of a Mandatory Job Search Assistance Program.
Journal of the European Economic Association. 2(4): 569-606.

Blundell, Richard , Amanda Gosling, Hidechiko Ichimura and Costas Meghir. 2007.
“Changes in the Distribution of Male and Female Wages Accounting for Employment
Composition Using Bounds,” Econometrica, 75(2): 323–363.

Burghardt, John and Peter Schochet. 2001. “National Job Corps Study: Impact by Center
Characteristics,” Princeton: Mathematica Policy Research.

Card, David, Pablo Ibarrarán, Ferdinando Regalia, David Rosas, and Yuri Soares. 2007.
“The Labor Market Impact of Youth Training in the Dominican Republic: Evidence from
a Randomized Evaluation,” NBER Working Paper No. 12883.

Card, David and Daniel Sullivan. 1988. “Measuring the Effect of Subsidized Training
Programs on Movements In and Out of Employment,” Econometrica, 56: 497-530.

Calderon-Madrid, Angel. 2006. “Revisiting the Employability Effects of Training
Programs for the Unemployed in Developing Countries,” IDB Working Paper No. R-522.

Chong, Alberto and José Galdo. 2006. “Training Quality and Earnings: The Effects of
Competition on the Provision of Public-Sponsored Training Programs,” Mimeo.

Elias, Victor, Fernando Ruiz, Ricardo Cossa, and David Bravo. 2004. “An Econometric
Cost-Benefit Analysis of Argentina’s Youth Training Program,” IDB Working Paper No.
R-482.

Gill, Indermit, Claudio Montenegro and Dörte Dömeland. 2002. Crafting Labor Policy:
Techniques and Lessons from Latin America. Washington, D.C.: The World Bank.

Heckman, James and Alan Krueger. 2003. Inequality in America: What Role for Human
Capital Policies? Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.



                                         36
Heckman, James, Robert LaLonde and Jeffrey Smith. 1999. “The Economics and
Econometrics of Active Labor Market Programs,” in Oley Ashenfelter and David Card,
eds. Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. 3A, pp. 1865-2097.

Heckman, James, Hidehiko Ichimura, Jeffrey Smith, Petra Todd. 1998. “Characterizing
Selection Bias Using Experimental Data,” Econometrica, 66(5): 1017-1098.

Hopenhayn, Martin. 2002. “Youth and Employment in Latin America and the Caribbean:
Problems, Prospects and Options,” ECLAC Working Paper.

Ibarrarán, Pablo and David Rosas. 2007. “Impact Evaluation of Labor Training Program
in Panama,” Mimeo.

Kugler, Adriana. 2005. “Wage-Shifting Effects of Severance Payments Savings Accounts
in Colombia,” Journal of Public Economics, 89(2-3): 487-500.

Kugler, Adriana. 1999. “The Impact of Firing Costs on Turnover and Unemployment:
Evidence from the Colombian Labor Market Reform,” International Tax and Public
Finance Journal, 6(3): 389-410.

LaLonde, Robert. 1986. “Evaluating the Econometric Evaluations of Training Programs
with Experimental Data,” American Economic Review, 76(4): 604-620.

Manski, C. (1994): “The Selection Problem,” in Advances in Econometrics, Sixth World
Congress, Vol 1, ed. by C. Sims. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press, 143–
170. [327,329,331]

Orr, Larry, Howard Bloom, Stephen Bell, Winston Lin, George Cave and Fred Doolittle.
1994. The National JTPA Study: Impacts, Benefits, and Costs of Title II-A. Bethesda,
Md.: Abt Associates.

Smith, Jeffrey and Petra Todd. 2001. “Reconciling Conflicting Evidence on the
Performance of Propensity Score Matching Methods,” American Economic Review,
91(2): 112-118.

Sianesi, Barbara. 2003. “Swedish Active Labour Market Programmes in the 1990s:
Overall Effectiveness and Differential Performance,” Swedish Economic Policy Review,
8(2): 133-169.

World Bank. 2007. World Development Report. Washington D.C.: The World Bank.




                                         37
                                      Data Appendix

All information used in this analysis was originally collected for the purpose of
evaluating the program “Jóvenes en Acción.” The data was collected by enumerators
which visited the household of individuals in the treatment and control groups on average
3 times. The survey consisted of three parts. The first part collected information on the
characteristics of the household, including demographic characteristics of all members of
the household as well as household expenditures. The second part of the survey collected
information on education, general labor market experience and health outcomes of all
household members over the age of 12. Finally, the last part of the survey collected
detailed labor market information exclusively on young individuals assigned either to the
treatment or control groups. The information in the filled surveys was scanned; read by
computers, and subsequently checked for reading errors.

Employment and Paid Employment: the employment variable is an indicator variable
which takes the value of 1 if the person reports to have had a job during the year after
finishing training or 0 if the person reports being unemployed or out of the labor force.
Paid employment is slightly different as it also assigns a value of zero to those who report
being employed but who report having zero earnings. There are 176 women and 179 men
who report having being employed but having earnings of zero.

Weeks and Hours Worked: the survey asks the weeks worked per month and the hours
worked per week on the main job held during the year after finishing training. We impute
zero weeks and hours worked for all of those who reported being either unemployed or
out of the labor force during the year following the completion of the training program.

Formal Employment: formal employment is an indicator variable which takes the value
of 1 if the worker was covered by health insurance, injury compensation, pensions or
family subsidies, and zero if the worker did not receive any of these benefits in the main
job held during the year after having finished training. We impute zeros for all
individuals who report being either unemployed or out of the labor force during the entire
year after the completion of the program.

Written Contract: written contract is an indicator variable which takes the value of 1 if
the person reports having signed a written contract in the most important job during the
year following the completion of the program and zero if the person did not sign a
contract in the most important job or was unemployed or out of the labor force during the
year following the completion of the program. Note that this is different from having a
permanent or a temporary contract, but rather refers to having any type of written
contract whatsoever.

Tenure: the tenure on the most important job during the year following the completion of
the program is constructed by using the exact dates (month and year) when the person
reported ending and starting the most important job held during the year after the
completion of the program. For those who reported to still be in the same jobs, the end
date used was the month and year of the interview so that tenure spells were incomplete.


                                            38
We also imputed zero tenure spells for all individuals who reported being unemployed or
out of the labor force during the year following the completion of the training program.

Wage and Salary Earnings and Self-Employment Earnings: wage and salary earnings are
the monthly salaries and wages earned in the main job held during the year after having
finished training for salaried workers. Self-employment earnings are the monthly
earnings net of costs for the self-employed. We impute zero earnings for all of those who
reported being either unemployed or out of the labor force. Earnings are deflated by a
city-specific CPI, which comes from the National Department of Statistics (DANE).

Formal and Informal Wage and Salary Earnings: formal wage and salary earnings are
the monthly salaries and wages earned in the main formal job held during the year after
having finished training for salaried workers. Similarly, informal wage and salary
earnings are the monthly salaries and wages earned in the main informal job held during
the year after having finished training for salaried workers. We impute zero earnings for
those who reported being either unemployed or out of the labor force. For formal
earnings, we impute zero earnings for all of those who were identified as employed in the
informal sector. By contrast, for informal earnings, we impute zero earnings for all of
those who were identified as employed in the formal sector. As before, earnings are
deflated by a city-specific CPI.




                                           39
            Table 1: Proposed and Actual Sample Sizes for Pre and Post-Treatment Periods by City
                             Proposed Sample                          Baseline Sample                          Follow-up Sample

                        Treatment             Control           Treatment             Control           Treatment              Control

Bogotá                     625                  741                 642                 712                 528                  530
Medellín                   378                  441                 386                 442                 333                  378
Cali                       340                  393                 344                 388                 292                  312
Barranquilla               211                  246                 211                 256                 190                  207
Bucaramanga                207                  212                 204                 212                 161                  146
Manizales                   99                  93                  99                   93                  81                   77
Cartagena                  180                  184                 180                 184                 164                  164

Total                     2,040                2,310               2,066               2,287               1,749                 1,814

Notes: The table reports the proposed sample sizes for the treatment and control groups based on power tests of a significance difference in
earnings and employment between the two groups at the 10 percent level. The baseline sample reports the actual sample sizes before training
was provided and the follow-up sample reports the actual size of the sample collected after the training program.




                                                                                                                            40
        Table 2: Basic Descriptive Statistics of Pre- and Post-Treatment Variables for Women and Men
                                                       Women                                                 Men

                                       Pre-Treatment            Post-Treatment             Pre-Treatment             Post-Treatment
                                            2004                     2006                       2004                      2006
Employment                                  0.465                    0.670                      0.587                     0.830
                                           (0.499)                  (0.470)                    (0.493)                   (0.376)
Paid Employment                             0.340                    0.578                      0.404                     0.720
                                           (0.474)                  (0.494)                    (0.491)                   (0.449)
Contract (zero if out of work)              0.072                    0.229                      0.106                     0.341
                                           (0.258)                  (0.420)                    (0.307)                   (0.474)
Formal (zero if out of work)                0.070                    0.231                      0.120                     0.382
                                           (0.256)                  (0.421)                    (0.325)                   (0.486)
Wage and Salary Earnings                   86,716                  195,090                    124,647                   285,444
(zero if out of work)                    (141,180)                (199,680)                  (173,206)                 (218,708)
Self-employment Earnings                   15,089                   14,835                     32,228                    27,710
(zero if missing)                         (60,127)                 (67,792)                   (97,744)                  (99,662)
Tenure (zero if out of work)                3.229                    6.583                      4.151                     9.380
                                           (9.226)                 (12.235)                    (8.668)                  (14.967)
Days Worked per Month (zero                11.033                   15.606                     14.133                    20.083
if out of work)                           (12.597)                 (12.214)                   (12.624)                  (10.469)
Hours Worked per Week (zero                22.776                   33.460                     29.864                    44.183
if out of work)                           (28.084)                 (27.979)                   (28.954)                  (24.940)
Education                                   9.978                   10.247                     10.131                    10.316
                                           (1.872)                  (1.677)                    (1.773)                   (1.721)
Age                                        21.326                   22.869                     20.940                    22.542
                                           (2.050)                  (2.060)                    (2.023)                   (2.117)
Married                                     0.269                    0.324                      0.109                     0.181
                                           (0.444)                  (0.468)                    (0.311)                   (0.385)

Max N                                      2,321                      1,926                     2,028                     1,632

Notes: The table reports means and standard deviations of the labor market outcomes and demographic characteristics for the pre-training
period and the post-training period, combining treatment and control groups.




                                                                                                                          41
Table 3: Baseline Differences between Women in Treatment and Control Groups
                                         Pre-Training 2004              Pre-Training 2004
                                      (Pre-Training Sample)          (Post-Training Sample)
                                       No Institution Fixed           With Institution Fixed
                                              Effects                        Effects
  Employment                                   0.011                          0.009
                                              (0.022)                        (0.023)
  Paid Employment                              0.025                          0.028
                                              (0.021)                        (0.022)
  Contract (zero if out of work)               0.005                          0.004
                                              (0.011)                        (0.012)
  Formal (zero if out of work)                  0.014                         0.009
                                              (0.012)                        (0.012)
  Wage and Salary Earnings                     4,719                          3,186
  (zero if out of work)                       (6,253)                        (6,452)
  Self-employment Earnings                     3,105                          1,666
  (zero if missing)                           (2,826)                        (2,906)
  Tenure (zero if out of work)                1.174**                        0.942*
                                              (0.499)                        (0.541)
   Days Worked per Month                       0.585                           0.344
   (zero if out of work)                      (0.555)                        (0.581)
   Hours Worked per Week                       1.008                           0.467
   (zero if out of work)                      (1.241)                        (1.291)
   Education                                 0.286***                       0.329***
                                              (0.088)                        (0.044)
   Age                                       -0.202**                        0.221**
                                              (0.085)                        (0.090)
   Married                                     -0.016                         -0.029
                                              (0.021)                        (0.022)

   Max N                                       2,321                           1,920


 Notes: The table reports differences in mean characteristics between the treatment and control
 groups with and without controls for training institution fixed effects. The pre-training sample
 refers to the full sample at baseline. The post-training sample includes only those observations
 which were observed in the follow-up sample and which were not lost due to attrition. * indicates
 significance at the 10% level, ** indicates significance at the 5% level, and *** indicates
 significance at the 1% level.




                                                                                                     42
Table 4: Baseline Differences between Men in Treatment and Control Groups
                                      Pre-Training 2004                Pre-Training 2004
                                   (Pre-Training Sample)            (Post-Training Sample)
                                    No Institution Fixed             With Institution Fixed
                                           Effects                          Effects
  Employment                                 0.012                           -0.002
                                           (0.024)                          (0.025)
  Paid Employment                          0.046*                             0.038
                                           (0.025)                          (0.026)
  Contract (zero if out of                  -0.023                          -0.029*
  work)                                    (0.016)                          (0.017)
  Formal (zero if out of                    -0.007                           -0.028
  work)                                    (0.016)                          (0.018)
  Wage and Salary Earnings                  -1,817                           -7,059
  (zero if out of work)                    (8,759)                          (8,978)
  Self-employment Earnings               -14,051**                        -13,206**
  (zero if missing)                        (5,718)                          (5,991)
  Tenure (zero if out of                     0.807                            0.831
  work)                                    (0.545)                          (0.544)
  Days Worked per Month                     -0.188                           -0.303
  (zero if out of work)                    (0.624)                          (0.648)
  Hours Worked per Week                     -0.433                           -1.031
  (zero if out of work)                    (1.421)                          (1.457)
  Education                               0.340***                         0.236**
                                           (0.102)                          (0.100)
  Age                                    -0.293***                        -0.310***
                                           (0.100)                          (0.107)
  Married                                  -0.033*                           -0.032
                                           (0.019)                          (0.020)

  Max N                                      2,028                            1,626


 Notes: The table reports differences in mean characteristics between the treatment and control
 groups with and without controls for training institution fixed effects. The pre-training sample
 refers to the full sample at baseline. The post-training sample includes only those observations
 which were observed in the follow-up sample and which were not lost due to attrition. *
 indicates significance at the 10% level, ** indicates significance at the 5% level, and ***
 indicates significance at the 1% level.




                                                                                                    43
Table 5: Effect of Training Offer on Probability of Being Trained
                                                Women                       Men

 Training Offer                                0.961***                  0.965***
                                                (0.012)                   (0.007)
 City Effects                                     Yes                       Yes
 Pre-treatment Characteristics                    Yes                        Yes
 Training Institution Effects                     Yes                        Yes
 R²                                               0.92                      0.94
 N                                               1,917                      1,621


Notes: The table reports the effect of being randomly offered training on the
probability of having being trained. Robust standard errors are in parenthesis. *** indicates
significance at the 1% level or below.




                                                                                                44
                                     Table 6: Intention-to-Treat Estimates of Effects of Training
                                                 on Employment and Earnings of Women
                                                     Labor Supply                                                           Earnings

                                    Paid                                                                      Wage & Salary Self-employment
              Employment                             Days/Month         Hours/Week             Tenure
                                 Employment                                                                     Earnings        Earnings
 Control
                  0.636              0.535              14.572              31.203              7.483             171,371             14,667
 Means

                                                           A. Training Institution Fixed Effects


                0.057***           0.065***            1.510***           3.332***           -1.540***           37,022***             3,487
                 (0.021)            (0.023)             (0.561)            (1.284)            (0.561)             (9,184)             (3,080)

    N             1,917              1,917               1,917              1,917               1,906               1,917               1,917

                                        B. Training Institution Fixed Effects and Pre-treatment Characteristics


                0.047**             0.052**            1.149**             2.540**           -1.604***           30,401***             3,465
                (0.021)             (0.022)            (0.557)             (1.282)            (0.559)             (9,111)             (2,941)

     N            1,917              1,917               1,917              1,917               1,906              1,917                1,917


Notes: The table reports the coefficient of the training offer dummy for separate regressions of labor market outcomes. Robust standard errors
are reported in parenthesis. All regressions control for training institution fixed effects. The regressions in Panel B control for pre-training age,
headship status dummy, marital dummy, education, pregnancy, and city effects, and for pre-training tenure in tenure regression. * indicates
significance at the 10% level, ** indicates significance at the 5% level, and *** indicates significance at the 1% level.




                                                                                                                                   45
                                     Table 7: Intention-to-Treat Estimates of Effects of Training
                                                   on Employment and Earnings of Men
                                                     Labor Supply                                                           Earnings

                                    Paid                                                                      Wage & Salary Self-employment
              Employment                             Days/Month         Hours/Week             Tenure
                                 Employment                                                                     Earnings        Earnings
 Control
                  0.847              0.704              20.464              46,225             11.521             277,302             38,229
 Means

                                                           A. Training Institution Fixed Effects


                 -0.004              0.036               0.093              -1.524           -2.876***            21,757*            -12,086*
                 (0.020)            (0.023)             (0.546)             (1.308)           (0.748)             (11,463)            (5,231)

    N             1,621              1,621               1,621              1,621               1,615               1,621               1,621

                                        B. Training Institution Fixed Effects and Pre-treatment Characteristics


                  0.002              0.035               0.064              -1.064           -2.538***           22,603**             -9,326*
                 (0.020)            (0.023)             (0.546)            (1.308)            (0.753)            (11,309)             (5,184)

     N            1,621              1,621               1,621              1,621               1,615              1,621                1,621


Notes: The table reports the coefficient of the training offer dummy for separate regressions of labor market outcomes. Robust standard errors
are reported in parenthesis. All regressions control for training institution fixed effects. The regressions in Panel B control for pre-training age,
headship status dummy, marital dummy, education, pregnancy, and city effects, and for pre-training tenure in tenure regression. * indicates
significance at the 10% level, ** indicates significance at the 5% level, and *** indicates significance at the 1% level.




                                                                                                                                   46
                              Table 8: Intention-to-Treat Estimates of Effects of Training
                              on Formal Employment and Earnings of Women and Men
                                  Women                                                               Men

                        Formal           Formal         Informal                           Formal            Formal          Informal
         Contract                                                          Contract
                      Employment         Salary          Salary                          Employment          Salary           Salary

                                                    A. Training Institution Fixed Effects


         0.070***       0.068***       33,404***         3,802            0.071***          0.050**         30,932**          -9,961
          (0.020)        (0.020)        (8,565)         (7,594)            (0.024)          (0.025)         (12,137)          (9,546)

  N        1,917          1,917           1,917          1,917               1,621           1,621            1,621            1,621

                                  B. Training Institution Fixed Effects and Pre-training Characteristics


        0.054***        0.053***       26,831***         3,570            0.070***          0.052**         29,990**           -7.626
         (0.020)         (0.020)        (8,569)         (7,687)            (0.024)          (0.025)         (11,956)          (9,563)

  N        1,917          1,917           1,917          1,917               1,621           1,621            1,621            1,621

Notes: The table reports the coefficient of the training offer dummy for separate regressions of labor market outcomes for women and
men. Robust standard errors are reported in parenthesis. All regressions control for training institution fixed effects. The regressions in
Panel B control for pre-training age, headship status dummy, marital dummy, education, and city effects, and for pre-training contract
indicator in contract regression. * indicates significance at the 10% level, ** indicates significance at the 5% level, and *** indicates
significance at the 1% level.




                                                                                                                              47
                       Table 9: Effects of Quality of Classroom Training on Overall and Formal
                                        Employment and Earnings of Women and Men
                                              Women                                                           Men

                       Paid                        Formal         Formal            Paid                          Formal           Formal
                    Employment        Salary     Employment       Salary         Employment          Salary     Employment         Salary

                                                    A. Interactions with Hours of Classroom Instruction


 Training Offer       0.140**        38,471        0.090*        36,142*             0.067         47,917*           0.054          27,321
                      (0.060)       (24,929)       (0.051)       (21,545)           (0.061)        (29,564)         (0.062)        (29,872)

Training Offer ×       -0.001          -94         -0.000           -61             -0.000           -416           -0.000             -86
Classroom Hours        (0.001)        (306)        (0.001)         (272)            (0.001)          (377)          (0.001)           (385)

        N               1,915         1,915         1,915          1,915             1,402           1,402           1,402            1,402

                                                B. Interactions with For-Profit Status of Training Institution


 Training Offer       0.056**      33,186***       0.041*        22,036**            0.008          16,534          0.059**       38,780***
                      (0.027)       (11,223)       (0.024)       (10,487)           (0.028)        (13,613)         (0.030)        (14,508)

 Training Offer × -0.012             -8,556        -0.036         14,731            0.086*          18,887          -0.039          -28,470
For-Profit Dummy (0.047)            (18,889)       (0.042)       (17,906)           (0.050)        (24,648)         (0.054)        (25,640)

        N               1,917         1,917         1,915          1,917             1,618           1,618           1,618            1,618

Notes: The table reports the coefficient of the training offer dummy interacted with hours of instruction in the training institution and with
a dummy that takes the value of 1 if the training institution is for profit and zero if the training institution is a non-profit organization in
Panel A and Panel B for separate regressions of labor market outcomes for women and men. Robust standard errors are reported in
parenthesis. All regressions control for training institution fixed effects and for pre-training age, headship status dummy, marital dummy,
education, and city effects. * indicates significance at the 10% level, ** indicates significance at the 5% level, and *** indicates
significance at the 1% level.




                                                                                                                                 48
                      Table 10: Effects of Quality of Classroom Training on Overall and Formal
                                       Employment and Earnings of Women and Men
                                             Women                                                          Men

                       Paid                       Formal         Formal           Paid                         Formal           Formal
                    Employment       Salary     Employment       Salary        Employment         Salary     Employment         Salary

                                                    A. Interactions with Hours of On-the-job Training


 Training Offer       -0.048        -12,293       -0.066*      22,664*            -0.040        -10,481*          -0.059         14,055
                      (0.043)      (18,027)       (0.038)      (16,355)           (0.043)       (21,984)          (0.044)       (21,932)

Training Offer × 0.003***          1,189***      0.003***      1,379***          0.002**          923*          0.003***        1,238**
On-the-job Hours (0.001)             (441)        (0.001)        (402)           (0.001)          (533)          (0.001)         (522)

        N              1,917         1,917         1,917         1,917             1,618          1,618           1,618           1,402

                                      B. Interactions with Similarity between Classroom and On-the-job Training


 Training Offer       -0.023        -7,235        -0.028        -10,549           -0.045          -14,332         -0.059         -21,935
                      (0.037)      (14,667)       (0.032)      (13,339)           (0.038)        (18,204)         (0.038)       (18,187)

Training Offer ×      0.097**     48,695***      0.104***     48,365***          0.105***       48,077**        0.139***      68,029***
Same Class/OJT        (0.039)      (15,588)       (0.034)      (14,266)           (0.038)       (19,037)         (0.039)       (19,027)

        N              1,917         1,917         1,917         1,917             1,618          1,618           1,618           1,618

Notes: The table reports the coefficient of the training offer dummy and on the training offer dummy interacted with hours of on-the-job
training in Panel A and with a dummy that takes the value of 1 if the type of training provided in the classroom and on-the-job training was
in the same area in Panel B for separate regressions of labor market outcomes for women and men. Robust standard errors are reported in
parenthesis. All regressions control for training institution fixed effects and for pre-training age, headship status dummy, marital dummy,
education, and city effects. * indicates significance at the 10% level, ** indicates significance at the 5% level, and *** indicates
significance at the 1% level.




                                                                                                                             49
