                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             CENTRAL BANK COMMUNICATION AND MONETARY POLICY:
                      A SURVEY OF THEORY AND EVIDENCE

                                           Alan S. Blinder
                                          Michael Ehrmann
                                          Marcel Fratzscher
                                           Jakob De Haan
                                          David-Jan Jansen

                                        Working Paper 13932
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13932


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2008




Blinder: Princeton University. Ehrmann: European Central Bank. Fratzscher: European Central Bank.
De Haan: University of Groningen and CESifo. Jansen: De Nederlandsche Bank. The authors are grateful
to Sylvester Eijffinger, Gabriel Fagan, Andreas Fischer, Otmar Issing, Frederic Mishkin, Glenn Rudebusch,
Pierre Siklos, Eric Swanson, Charles Wyplosz, and the editor and two anonymous referees of this
Journal for valuable comments on earlier drafts. Views expressed in this article do not necessarily
coincide with those of the European Central Bank, de Nederlandsche Bank, the Eurosystem. or the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Alan S. Blinder, Michael Ehrmann, Marcel Fratzscher, Jakob De Haan, and David-Jan
Jansen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Central Bank Communication and Monetary Policy: A Survey of Theory and Evidence
Alan S. Blinder, Michael Ehrmann, Marcel Fratzscher, Jakob De Haan , and David-Jan Jansen
NBER Working Paper No. 13932
April 2008
JEL No. E52,E58

                                              ABSTRACT

Over the last two decades, communication has become an increasingly important aspect of monetary
policy. These real-world developments have spawned a huge new scholarly literature on central bank
communication -- mostly empirical, and almost all of it written in this decade. We survey this ever-growing
literature. The evidence suggests that communication can be an important and powerful part of the
central bank's toolkit since it has the ability to move financial markets, to enhance the predictability
of monetary policy decisions, and potentially to help achieve central banks' macroeconomic objectives.
However, the large variation in communication strategies across central banks suggests that a consensus
has yet to emerge on what constitutes an optimal communication strategy.


Alan S. Blinder                                      Jakob De Haan
Department of Economics                              Faculty of Economics and Business
Princeton University                                 University of Groningen
Princeton, NJ 08544-1021                             PO Box 800
and NBER                                             9700 AV Groningen, Netherlands
blinder@princeton.edu                                and CESifo
                                                     jakob.de.haan@rug.nl
Michael Ehrmann
European Central Bank                                David-Jan Jansen
Postfach 16 03 19                                    De Nederlandsche Bank
D-60066 Frankfurt am Main                            Westeinde 1
GERMANY                                              PO Box 98
michael.ehrmann@ecb.int                              1000 AB Amsterdam
                                                     The Netherlands
Marcel Fratzscher                                    d.jansen@dnb.nl
European Central Bank
Kaiserstrasse 29
D-60311 Frankfurt/Main GERMANY
marcel.fratzscher@ecb.int
        1. A Revolution in Thinking and Practice

        Prior to the 1990s, central banks were shrouded in mystery—and believed they

should be. Conventional wisdom in central banking circles held that monetary policymakers

should say as little as possible, and say it cryptically. In 1981, Karl Brunner (1981, p. 5)

wrote, with evident sarcasm:

        Central Banking… thrives on a pervasive impression that [it]… is an esoteric art.
        Access to this art and its proper execution is confined to the initiated elite. The
        esoteric nature of the art is moreover revealed by an inherent impossibility to
        articulate its insights in explicit and intelligible words and sentences.

        Fifteen years later, in his 1996 Robbins lectures at the London School of Economics,

one of the authors of this paper (Alan Blinder (1998), pp. 70-72) expressed a view of what

central bank communications should be—one that had been lurking around in the

underbrush but was far from mainstream at the time: 1

        Greater openness might actually improve the efficiency of monetary policy…
        [because] expectations about future central bank behavior provide the essential link
        between short rates and long rates. A more open central bank… naturally conditions
        expectations by providing the markets with more information about its own view of
        the fundamental factors guiding monetary policy…, thereby creating a virtuous
        circle. By making itself more predictable to the markets, the central bank makes
        market reactions to monetary policy more predictable to itself. And that makes it
        possible to do a better job of managing the economy.

        Five years later, Michael Woodford (2001, pp. 307 and 312) told an audience of

central bankers assembled at the Federal Reserve’s 2001 Jackson Hole conference that:

        successful monetary policy is not so much a matter of effective control of overnight
        interest rates… as of affecting… the evolution of market expectations... [Therefore,]
        transparency is valuable for the effective conduct of monetary policy… this view has
        become increasingly widespread among central bankers over the past decade.

        Notice the progression here: from Brunner’s 1981 lament about central bankers’

refusal to communicate, to Blinder’s 1996 argument that more communication would

1
  For example, the basic idea was stated in Marvin Goodfriend (1991). We thank Michael Woodford for this
reference.


                                                                                                           2
enhance the effectiveness of monetary policy, to Woodford’s 2001 claims that the essence

of monetary policy is the art of managing expectations and that this was already received

wisdom. Woodford probably exaggerated that last point. But the view that monetary policy

is, at least in part, about managing expectations is by now standard fare both in academia

and in central banking circles. It is no exaggeration to call this a revolution in thinking.

       These new ideas have made a mark on central bank practice as well. At the Federal

Reserve, for example, then-Chairman Alan Greenspan, who once prided himself on

“mumbling with great incoherence,” was by 2003 explicitly managing expectations by

telling everyone that the Fed would keep the federal funds rate low “for a considerable

period.” This guidance was only the latest step in what was, by then, a long march toward

greater transparency that began in February 1994 when the Federal Open Market

Committee (FOMC) first started announcing its decisions on the federal funds rate target. In

May 1999, the FOMC began publishing an assessment of its “bias” with respect to future

changes in monetary policy in its statements. It also began issuing fuller statements, even

when it was not changing rates. About three years later, it began announcing FOMC

votes—with names attached—immediately after each meeting. Starting in February 2005,

the FOMC expedited the release of its minutes to make them available before the

subsequent FOMC meeting. And most recently, starting in November 2007, the Fed has

increased the frequency and expanded the content and horizon of its publicly-released

forecasts.

       Other central banks have also become remarkably more transparent in the last 10-15

years and are placing much greater weight on their communications. In fact, the Fed is more

of a laggard than a leader in this regard. The Reserve Bank of New Zealand and the Bank of




                                                                                               3
England were early and enthusiastic converts to greater transparency, and Norges Bank (the

central bank of Norway) and Sveriges Riksbank (the central bank of Sweden) may now be

in the vanguard. Arguably, the European Central Bank (ECB) has been more transparent

than the Fed ever since it opened its doors in 1998. More extensive central bank

communication is truly a worldwide phenomenon.

       One important driver of increased transparency is the notion that more independent

central banks should be more accountable—that they have a duty to explain both their

actions and the thinking that underlies those actions. But the intellectual arguments just

mentioned also played a role. As it became increasingly clear that managing expectations is

a useful part of monetary policy, communication policy rose in stature from a nuisance to a

key instrument in the central banker’s toolkit. In this survey, we concentrate on how central

bank communication can be used to manage expectations both by what might be called

“creating news” and “reducing noise.”

       These real-world developments have spawned a huge new scholarly literature on

central bank communication—almost all of it written in this decade. While this new

literature includes some theoretical contributions, most of it is empirical; and this survey

reflects that weighting. Studies of how central bank communications create news focus on

how, e.g., the central bank’s pronouncements influence expectations and therefore move

asset prices. In extreme circumstances, communication, used to anchor and guide market

expectations, may even become the main tool of monetary policy. Studies of reducing

noise focus, e.g., on how central bank talk increases the predictability of central bank

actions, which should in turn reduce volatility in financial markets. As William Poole

(2001, p. 9) put it: “The presumption must be that market participants make more efficient




                                                                                                4
decisions… when markets can correctly predict central bank actions.” In both cases, the

central bank’s presumed objective is to raise the signal-to-noise ratio, and one major

concern of this essay is how successful that effort has been.

        That said, communication is no panacea. As with all human endeavors, there are

pitfalls and occasional errors. One famous example came in October 2000 when then-ECB

President Wim Duisenberg hinted to an interviewer that there would be no further central

bank intervention to support the euro. Those words led to an immediate depreciation of the

euro and to heavy criticism of Duisenberg. Similarly, when a supposedly off-the-record

remark made in April 2006 by Fed Chairman Ben Bernanke, stating that his recent

Congressional testimony had been misinterpreted, was reported, markets reacted strongly—

as investors concluded that Bernanke was “reversing himself” and saying that interest rates

could easily go up.

        What constitutes “optimal” communication strategy is by no means clear. And these

two examples illustrate that more talk is not always better. 2 The key empirical question is

whether communication contributes to the effectiveness of monetary policy by creating

genuine news (e.g., by moving short-term interest rates in a desired way) or by reducing

noise (e.g., by lowering market uncertainty). There are two main strands in the literature.

The first line of research focuses on the impacts of central bank communications on

financial markets. The basic idea is that, if communications steer expectations successfully,

asset prices should react and policy decisions should become more predictable. Both appear

to have happened. The second line of research seeks to relate differences in communication

strategies across central banks or across time to differences in economic performance. For


2
  However, in the Bernanke case, the Fed was going to raise rates further. So disabusing markets of the false notion
that the tightening cycle was finished probably did manage expectations in a constructive way.


                                                                                                                       5
example, does announcing a numerical inflation target help anchor the public’s long-run

inflation expectations? The answer seems to be a qualified yes.

       This article reviews the impressive number of mostly empirical studies of central

bank communication that have been written in the last several years, mostly focusing on the

experience of advanced economies. We take stock of what we now know about how central

bank communication can contribute to the effectiveness of monetary policy, and we identify

places where additional research is needed. Section 2 discusses in more detail why central

bank communication matters. Section 3 examines the practices of three major central banks:

the Federal Reserve, the ECB, and the Bank of England. Section 4 reviews the first strand of

empirical research mentioned above, and Section 5 discusses the second. Finally, Section 6

provides our answers to the question of how central bank communication can contribute to

the effectiveness of monetary policy and identifies avenues for future research.

       2. Why does central bank communication matter? Theory

       Central bank communication can be defined as the provision of information by the

central bank to the public regarding such matters as the objectives of monetary policy, the

monetary policy strategy, the economic outlook, and the outlook for future policy decisions.

       Nowadays, it is widely accepted that the ability of a central bank to affect the

economy depends critically on its ability to influence market expectations about the future

path of overnight interest rates, and not merely on their current level. The reason is simple.

Few, if any, economic decisions hinge on the overnight bank rate. According to standard

theories of the term structure, interest rates on longer-term instruments should reflect the

expected sequence of future overnight rates. So, for example, the n-day rate should be,

approximately:




                                                                                                 6
    (1) Rt = αn + (1/n) (rt + re t+1     +   re t+2   +…   re t+n-1 ) + ε1t   ,


where rt is the current overnight rate, ret+1 is today’s expectation of tomorrow’s overnight

rate (and so on for t+2, t+3,…), αn is a term premium, and the error term indicates that the

term premium might be stochastic. 3 Equation (1) makes it clear that intermediate and long-

term rates should depend mostly on the public’s expectations of future central bank policy.

Today’s overnight interest rate barely matters. A particularly extreme case arises when

interest rates get close to their zero lower bound. As long as the current overnight rate is

stuck at or near zero, central bank communication about expected future rates becomes the

essence of monetary policy (Ben S. Bernanke, Vincent Reinhart and Brian Sack 2004; Gauti

Eggertsson and Woodford 2003).

         Let us now embed this idea in a simple macroeconomic framework designed to

illustrate the role of central bank communications, henceforth denoted by the vector st (for

“signals”). 4 Imagine that r in (1) is the short rate and R is the long rate. Then aggregate

demand depends on r, R, expected inflation ( π te ), and a host of other factors which need not

be listed explicitly:

(2)    yt = D(rt - π te , Rt - π te , …) + ε2t,

        The aggregate supply relation could (but need not) be something like the New

Keynesian Phillips curve:

(3)     πt = βE(πt+1) + γ(yt – y*t) + ε3t ,


3
  The time subscript can be thought of as indexing days, months, quarters, etc. The same interpretation holds. The
weaknesses of the expectations theory of the term structure are well known. We use it here only for illustrative
purposes.
4
  We deliberately keep this model simple for expositional purposes. It could be expanded in several directions. For
example, in a New Keynesian setting, expected output would appear on the right-hand side of equation (2)—which
would open up another channel by which central bank communications could matter. One could also add a more
complex financial sector and/or more complex interactions between the real and financial sectors. None of this is
necessary for current purposes.


                                                                                                                  7
where πt is inflation and yt and y*t are, respectively, actual and potential real output. The

model could be closed by appending a central bank reaction function (e.g., a “Taylor rule”):

(4)     rt = G(yt - y*t, πt, π*t, … ) + ε4t .

where π* denotes the central bank’s inflation target.

           Now imagine that the economic environment is stationary (that is, equations (1)-(3)

do not change over time), that the central bank is credibly committed to an unchanging

policy rule (4), and that expectations are rational. In that unrealistic case, central bank

communication has no independent role to play. Any systematic pattern in the way

monetary policy is conducted would be correctly inferred from the central bank’s observed

behavior (Woodford, 2005). In particular, when it comes to predicting future short-term

rates, it would suffice to interpret incoming economic data in the light of the central bank’s

(known) policy rule. Any explicit central bank communication would be redundant. Under

Jon Faust and Lars Svensson’s (2001, p. 373) definition of central bank transparency—that

is, how easily the public can deduce central-bank goals and intentions from observable

data—the central bank would be fully transparent without uttering a word.

           This extreme case points to four features that have the potential to make central bank

communication matter: nonstationarity (whether of the economy or the policy rule), the

learning that is a natural concomitant of such an environment, and either non-rational

expectations or asymmetric information between the public and the central bank. If one or

more of these conditions hold, central bank communication can matter.

           Needless to say, these four conditions are the norm, not the exception. The real

world is constantly changing, as Alan Greenspan never tired of emphasizing. 5 So learning,

including learning both by and about the central bank, never ends. Furthermore, it is
5
    See Blinder and Ricardo Reis (2005), especially pages 15-24.


                                                                                                    8
virtually inevitable that the central bank will know more about its own thinking than the

public does. In addition, contrary to the impression given by simple Taylor rules, monetary

policy decisions depend on much more than current inflation and output gaps (Svensson,

2003). It is also extremely unlikely that the central bank would stick to an unchanged policy

rule for long. For example, Bernanke (2004) noted that “specifying a complete and explicit

policy rule, from which the central bank would never deviate under any circumstances, is

impractical. The problem is that the number of contingencies to which policy might respond

is effectively infinite (and, indeed, many are unforeseeable).” Likewise, President Jean-

Claude Trichet has repeatedly emphasized that the ECB takes its decisions one step at a

time, rather than following a rule.

        Under conditions like that, as Bank of England Governor Mervyn King (2005, p.13)

has observed, “Rational optimising behaviour is … too demanding, and actual decisions

may reflect the use of heuristics.” Since central bank communication undoubtedly plays a

role in shaping beliefs about those heuristics, it also plays a potentially important role in

anchoring expectations. 6 Similarly, Bernanke (2004) used the recent academic literature on

adaptive learning to explain why communication affects monetary policy effectiveness.

When the public does not know, but instead must estimate, the central bank’s reaction

function, there is no guarantee that the economy will converge to the rational expectations

equilibrium because the public’s learning process affects the economy’s behavior. The

feedback effect of learning on the economy can lead to unstable or indeterminate

outcomes—which effective communication by the central bank can help to avoid (see, for

example, Stefano Eusepi and Bruce Preston 2007).


6
  For example, King (2005, p. 12) suggests that, under inflation targeting, a good heuristic would be “expect
inflation to be equal to target.”


                                                                                                                9
       In addition, the central bank may have, or may be believed to have, superior

information on the economic outlook. Central banks usually devote many more resources

than private sector forecasters to forecasting and even to estimating the underlying

unobservable state of the economy. Various studies find that financial markets react to

information on the outlook that central banks provide (e.g., Malin Andersson, Hans Dillén

and Peter Sellin 2006). Apparently, investors update their own views in response to the

information conveyed by the central bank. Donald L. Kohn and Sack (2004) argue that

private agents may attach special credence to the economic pronouncements of their central

bank, especially if the bank has established its bona fides as an effective forecaster. They

point out that the Federal Reserve has been broadly correct on the direction of the economy

and prices over the past two decades, on occasion spotting trends and developments before

they were evident to market participants. In a well-known paper, Christina Romer and

David Romer (2000) provide statistical evidence that Federal Reserve staff forecasts of

inflation were far more accurate than private sector forecasts over a period of several

decades.

       Central bank communication and learning are inextricably tied, despite a dearth of

scholarly attention to that obvious point. There are exceptions, however. In Athanasios

Orphanides and John C. Williams (2004), the public is assumed to know the form of the

equation describing inflation dynamics but to employ standard statistical methods to learn

about its parameters—which depend on the unobserved objectives and preferences of the

central bank. The learning process leads to different behavior than in the rational

expectations equilibrium. For example, while people are learning, an increase in inflation

may lead the public to revise its estimate of long-run average inflation upward, which, in




                                                                                               10
turn, raises actual inflation. 7 As Bernanke (2004) pointed out, such a situation opens up a

clear opportunity for the central bank to improve economic performance by providing

information about its long-run inflation objective. As is true in many contexts, an

information problem can be cured by providing more information.

        We capture these ideas within our simple framework by replacing the assumption of

rational (really, “model-consistent”) expectations by an explicit equation for interest rate

expectations such as: 8

        (5) ret+j = Hj(yt, Rt, rt, …, st) + ε5t ,

where st is a vector of central bank signals, which might range from crystal clear (e.g.,

announcing a numerical inflation target) to cryptic (e.g., some of the Fed’s words.) Some of

these communications, such as the inflation target, might be long-term and durable while

others, such as the daily reactions to data releases, might be high-frequency and fleeting—a

distinction that will assume some importance in our review of the empirical evidence. There

is no need to specify the details of equation (5), which can stand for a variety of possibilities

for learning.

        In this schema, the total effect of any central bank action operates through at least

three distinct channels:

         •   the direct effect of the overnight rate on aggregate demand—Dr in equation

             (2)—which is probably quite small;

         •   the direct effects of central bank signals on expected future short rates: Hs in

             equation (5), including any learning that might take place;



7
 Some other examples are Glenn Rudebusch and Williams (2008) and Michele Berardi and John Duffy (2007).
8
 We focus on interest rate expectations for simplicity. Expectations of inflation or even of output may be equally
important.


                                                                                                                     11
       •   the effect of changes in the short rate on expectations of the entire sequence of

           future short rates, via equations (1) and (5), and their consequent feedback onto

           long rates, Rt, and therefore onto demand (DR). This channel will undoubtedly be

           influenced by the central bank’s signals, st.

It should be clear from this trichotomy that any account of monetary policy that ignores

central bank communication is seriously deficient. Indeed, if the first channel is as

unimportant as we suggest, then the communication channels constitute most of the story—

which is what Woodford meant and is why many economists these days characterize the job

of monetary policy as one of managing expectations.

       This modern view of monetary policy leads directly to several empirical questions

that form the central concerns of this survey. First, what does the vector st look like in

practice—and why might it vary across central banks? Second, what evidence is there that

central bank communications influence expectations directly, as posited by equation (5)?

Third, how do particular elements of the vector st affect measurable variables like interest

rates, stock prices, and exchange rates? Fourth, the framework suggests that skillful

communications can (a) raise the signal-to-noise ratio, (b) reduce financial market volatility,

and (c) lead to better monetary policy outcomes (e.g., lower variances of inflation and

output). Is there evidence that it does?

       Is there a downside to communication?

       All that said, poorly designed or poorly executed communications clearly can do

more harm than good; and it is not obvious that a central bank is always better off by saying

more. In practice, central banks do limit their communications. In most cases, internal

deliberations are kept secret. Only a few central banks project the future path of their policy




                                                                                                  12
rate. (More on this later). And most observe a blackout or “purdah” period before each

policy meeting, and in some instances also before important testimonies or reports. The

widespread existence of such practices illustrates the conviction of most central bankers that

communication can, under certain circumstances, be undesirable and detrimental. In fact,

communication during the purdah period has been shown to lead to excessive market

volatility (Ehrmann and Fratzscher 2008).

        The theoretical literature has not generated clear conclusions regarding the optimal

level of transparency (Petra Geraats 2002, Carin van der Cruijsen and Sylvester Eijffinger

2007). The models differ with respect to both which aspects of central bank transparency

they consider and their assumptions about how communications influence the monetary

transmission mechanism. Looking at real-world central bank behavior, the range of views

on what constitutes the “optimal” degree (and types) of communication has clearly evolved

over time—mainly in the direction of greater openness. Are there valid—and empirically

relevant—arguments for limiting communication on monetary policy? 9

        One possible argument dates back to the seminal paper by Alex Cukierman and

Allan Meltzer (1986). 10 Their case for obfuscation rested on two assumptions: that only

unanticipated money matters, and that the central bank’s preferences are not precisely

known by the public. Under these assumptions, some degree of opacity enhances the

effectiveness of monetary policy because a fully-transparent central bank cannot create

surprises. However, two decades later, Pierre Gosselin, Aileen Lotz, and Charles Wyplosz

(2007) pointed out that both the view that only unanticipated money matters and the idea

9
  We mention here, but do not discuss further, a few obvious ones: the need to preserve confidentiality, the fact that
financial stability sometimes limits central bank talk, and the obvious point that no central bank can divulge what it
does not know
10
   For related work see Michelle Garfinkel and Seonghwan Oh (1995), Faust and Svensson (2001), and Henrik
Jensen (2002).


                                                                                                                   13
that the central bank conceals its preferences in order to pursue its own agenda seem

increasingly anachronistic.

       Anne Sibert (2006) has recently raised doubts about the Cukierman and Meltzer

argument. Her two-period model of a non-transparent central bank focuses on the role of

private information. The central bank’s welfare is increasing in unexpected inflation

(because it increases output) and decreasing in actual inflation. As is typical in models with

such objective functions, an unobserved shock that is realized after the public’s expectations

are formed but before monetary policy is made offers the central bank an opportunity to

exploit a short-run Phillips curve tradeoff. Nonetheless, one of Sibert’s main conclusions is

that both the central bank and society are always better off with increased transparency –

mainly because it reduces the inflation bias.

       Surely there are limits to how much information can be digested effectively (Daniel

Kahneman, 2003). So a central bank should perhaps be wary of communicating about issues

on which it receives noisy signals itself—such as the evolution of the economy (as opposed

to, say, its upcoming interest rate decisions). This point has been emphasized in the

literature on coordination games initiated by Stephen Morris and Hyun Song Shin (2002).

Jeffery D. Amato, Morris, and Shin (2002) argue that central bank communication has a

dual function: On the one hand, it provides signals about the private information of central

banks, and on the other hand, it serves as a coordination device for the beliefs of financial

market agents. They argue that central bank communication might be welfare-reducing if

agents give too much weight to central bank communication as a focal point, and too little

to their own information. The central bank might even coordinate the actions of markets

away from fundamentals.




                                                                                                 14
        But is this likely? Svensson (2006a) shows that the validity of the argument requires

that central bank communication has a much lower signal-to-noise ratio than that of private

information. He argues that this assumption hardly ever holds in reality. Moreover,

Woodford (2005) notes that the Morris-Shin problem is even less likely to arise if the

coordination of private agents’ actions is a welfare objective per se. And Gosselin et al.

(2006) point out that it is unrealistic to think that a central bank can withhold information as

Amato et al. suggest. For example, policymakers tacitly reveal some of what they know

merely by setting the interest rate. Furthermore, if we focus on providing information about

future monetary policy—as opposed to, say, forecasting the stock market or the exchange

rate—there is an even simpler and more compelling objection to the Morris-Shin reasoning.

Who, after all, knows more about the central bank’s intentions than the central bank itself?

Thus honest central bank talk is almost certain to coordinate beliefs in the right direction.

        Finally, we should mention the “cacophony problem,” pointed out by Blinder (2004,

Chapter 2). When monetary policy decisions are taken and subsequently explained by a

committee rather than by a single individual, there is a danger that too many disparate

voices might confuse rather than enlighten the public—especially if the messages appear to

conflict. If done poorly, uncoordinated group communication might actually lower, rather

than raise, the signal-to-noise ratio. But the appropriate remedy for this problem, should it

exist, is clarity, not silence.

        Communication is not precommitment

        Over the years, many central bankers and economists have at times confused

communication with commitment—or worried out loud that the public might confuse the

two. For example, it has been agued that words uttered today might restrict the freedom to




                                                                                                   15
maneuver tomorrow. For example, then-Chairman Paul Volcker defended the Fed’s refusal

to announce its decisions immediately in 1984 as follows:

        One danger in immediate release of the directive is that certain assumptions might be
        made that we are committed to certain operations that are, in fact, dependent on
        future events, and these interpretations and expectations would tend to diminish our
        needed operational flexibility. 11

In a similar vein, Alan Greenspan opposed immediate disclosure of the FOMC’s decisions

in 1989 because “a public announcement requirement also could impede timely and

appropriate adjustments to policy.” 12 (Yet less than five years later, he voluntarily did

precisely that.)

        From today’s standpoint, the objections of Volcker and Greenspan to this minimalist

disclosure proposal sound quaint—almost scholastic. While there are cases in which saying

something does constrain future behavior—as in “giving a verbal commitment” —most

central bank communication is not, or need not be, of this nature. In particular, the mere

conveyance of information—such as about the policy decision, the inflation target, the

forecast, etc.—does not commit the bank to any future action or inaction (although it might

hint at such). Even the famous published “forward tracks” of the Reserve Bank of New

Zealand (discussed later), which are conditional forecasts of its own future behavior, are

conditioned on many future variables. That said, the conditional character of such forecasts

may be difficult to convey (Otmar Issing 2005).

        Of course, there may be cases in which a central bank wants to use words to commit

itself in some way. For example, Bernanke, Thomas Laubach, Frederic Mishkin, and Adam

Posen (1999) argued in favor of inflation targeting on precisely these grounds—as a way to


11
   Quoted in Goodfriend (1986), pp. 76-77. Goodfriend’s paper was an early, and at the time highly controversial,
critique of the Federal Reserve’s secrecy—written by a Fed employee.
12
   Quoted in Blinder (1998), pp. 74-75.


                                                                                                                    16
constrain central bank discretion. But that is the exception, not the rule. For the most part,

the sorts of communications that we deal with in this paper generally do not imply any form

of commitment. Since there is already a huge and well-known theoretical literature on the

role of commitment in monetary policy, we will not deal with that subject further.13

         In sum, there are many theoretical reasons why central bank communication should

be expected to matter, and many of them imply that skillful communication can improve

macroeconomic outcomes. As against this, the arguments against greater transparency seem

to be thin gruel: the profession no longer believes that only unanticipated money matters;

the Morris-Shin coordination “problem” seems more likely to be an advantage of central

bank communication than a disadvantage; and communication need not imply (unwanted)

commitment. We turn now from theory to practice.

         3. Central bank communication in practice

         Many central banks with similar monetary policy objectives nonetheless follow

fundamentally different communication policies; and these policies have evolved over time.

In our framework, this means that the vector of communication signals, st, takes different

forms in different times and places. In this section, we illustrate the diversity in current

communication practices by examining the different types of signals that central banks send,

concentrating mainly on three major central banks: the Federal Reserve System, the Bank of

England, and the European Central Bank. 14 We first split the vector of central bank signals,

st, by content (Section 3.1), and then by sender (Section 3.2).

3.1 What to communicate


13
   Among the many sources that could be cited, see Richard Clarida, Jordi Gali, and Mark Gertler (1999) or
Woodford (2003).
14
   The diversity in communication practices across central banks is also illustrated in Issing (2005), particularly
Table A2.


                                                                                                                      17
        Central banks communicate about at least four different aspects of monetary policy:

their overall objectives and strategy, the motives behind a particular policy decision, the

economic outlook, and future monetary policy decisions. Central banks’ objectives and

strategies tend to be more stable, so the corresponding signals show less variability over

time than signals about the other three items.

        Objectives and strategy

        An independent central bank should be given a clearly-defined mandate by its

government. Generally, this is done by enunciating central bank objectives, sometimes in

quantitative terms. Some central banks that are not given quantitative objectives by their

governments have nonetheless decided (or been directed) to provide their own

quantification, for at least two reasons. First, numerical targets facilitate accountability,

enabling the performance of the central bank to be assessed against its mandated yardstick

(Jakob De Haan and Sylvester Eijffinger, 2000). Second, a quantitative objective (or

objectives) helps to anchor the expectations of economic agents. In terms of our simple

modeling framework, agents’ expectation formation in (5) is facilitated by knowing the

targets yt* and πt* that enter the policy rule (4). In turn, well-anchored inflation expectations

help to stabilize actual inflation by removing an important source of shocks. However, few

if any central banks actually communicate a precise policy rule. 15 Instead, private agents

learn about the “rule” both by watching what the central bank does and listening to what it

says.

        These accountability and anchoring arguments figure prominently in the debate over

inflation targeting (IT) because better and more open communication is often taken to be a


15
  Even formulating an objective function may be a daunting task for a central bank. Some of the difficulties in
doing so are described by Mishkin (2004) and Cukierman (2008).


                                                                                                                  18
defining virtue of IT. While the Bank of England, for example, sets interest rates

independently, its inflation target comes from the Chancellor. The ECB, in contrast, was not

given a quantitative objective by the Maastricht Treaty, but provided one for itself as an

important part of its monetary policy strategy. Yet a third approach is followed by the

Federal Reserve, which has two legislated objectives, namely price stability and full

employment, neither of which is quantitative as yet. This diversity of practices among

otherwise similar central banks is striking, and we will later investigate the extent to which

these differences bear on economic outcomes.

       Policy decisions

       Most central banks nowadays inform the public about their monetary policy

decisions on the day they are taken. However, this was not always so. Prominently, the

Federal Reserve only began announcing changes in its target federal funds rate on the day of

FOMC meetings in February 1994. Before that, markets had to infer the intended funds rate

from the type and size of open-market operations--until the decision was published after the

subsequent FOMC meeting. Prompt and clear announcement of monetary policy decisions

clearly creates news, but it also reduces noise by eliminating any guessing on the part of the

public. So this type of central bank communication evidently raises the signal-to-noise ratio.

As we will see in the next section, it also leads to improvements in the efficiency of

monetary policy.

       Practices differ enormously regarding what central banks should or should not say in

the statement that accompanies the decision and, presumably, explains it. In particular,

central banks apparently disagree over how much should be disclosed about the decision-

making process itself, e.g., through the release of minutes and voting records. The ECB




                                                                                                 19
does not publish minutes, and insists that it makes monetary policy decisions by unanimity.

The Fed and the Bank of England (BoE) do release minutes (and both recently expedited the

release), along with recorded votes. This information is particularly important for the BoE,

whose Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) members are individually accountable, and

therefore need to have their votes recorded and scrutinized. Interestingly, dissents on the

British MPC are much more frequent than they are on the FOMC, where decisions are

typically unanimous and dissent connotes fundamental disagreement. 16 Instead of releasing

minutes, some central banks (such as the ECB) hold press conferences immediately

following their policy decisions. Press conferences may provide less detail than minutes, but

they are more timely and more flexible, as they allow the media to ask questions. We will

return to this issue later.

        The economic outlook

        Another important aspect of a central bank’s communication strategy is the extent

and content of any forward-looking information it provides. This information set includes

the central bank’s assessment (forecast) of future inflation and economic activity, and its

own inclinations regarding future monetary policy decisions. Central banks differ sharply in

whether and how they communicate such information.

        Inflation-targeting central banks typically provide their assessment of expected

future inflation in periodic reports. In that context, the Bank of England’s display of

probability distributions through “fan charts” has many imitators. However, central banks

that are not inflation targeters also often release (some aspects of) their inflation forecasts.

In the case of the ECB, this is done through the staff projections (now published four


16
  On this point, see Blinder (2007), Henry Chappell, Rob Roy McGregor and Todd Vermilyea (2004), Ellen Meade
and Nathan Sheets (2005), and Laurence H. Meyer (1998).


                                                                                                         20
times a year), which serve as an input to the Governing Council’s discussions, but need

not be endorsed by it—a very different role from inflation forecasts in an IT strategy. The

Federal Reserve keeps its staff projections secret; but it now publishes FOMC forecasts of

inflation four times a year. The November 2007 changes in its communication practices

increased both the frequency and length of its publicly-released forecasts (see Bernanke

2007). Although these changes did not include the adoption of an explicit inflation target,

the new three-year-ahead forecast effectively reveals the inflation rate that policymakers

believe is consistent with the Fed’s mandate to achieve “stable prices.”

           Until recently, the diversity across central banks was even wider when it came to the

outlook for economic activity. However, the Federal Reserve has now joined the the Bank

of England and the ECB in providing more frequent official forecasts of output measures. A

number of central banks even publish estimates of the output gap. Given the difficulties in

measuring and forecasting potential output, 17 the latter option is practiced by only a few

central banks (including those of New Zealand, Norway, the Czech Republic, Sweden, and

Hungary).

           The path of future policy rates

           When it comes to likely future policy decisions, many central banks provide some

sort of forward guidance, albeit in very different ways. Some, such as the ECB, use indirect

signals, often in the form of code words like “vigilance” (David-Jan Jansen and De Haan,

2007). Other central banks are more explicit. The FOMC, for instance, sometimes (but not

always) issues a statement with a forward-looking assessment of future monetary policy.

These statements, which began in earnest in May 1999, have evolved over time. They were

originally phrased in terms of the policy “bias,” then in terms of the “balance of risks” for
17
     See, e.g., Orphanides (2001).


                                                                                                   21
the “foreseeable future,” and so on. At times, especially during the 2003–2005 period, the

FOMC has been quite direct about its expected future path of interest rates. 18

        A few central banks even provide quantitative guidance by publishing the numerical

path of future policy rates that underlies their macroeconomic forecasts. Sweden and

Iceland recently joined a small group that includes New Zealand and Norway in doing so.

Some observers view the central bank’s forecasting its own future behavior as the last

frontier of transparency, and none of the three major central banks on which we have

focused have yet been willing to go there. The issue remains highly controversial. 19

        Both Mishkin (2004) and Charles Goodhart (2001) argue against announcing the

path of the policy rate on the grounds that it may complicate the committee’s decision-

making process. It may also complicate communication with the public, which may not

understand the conditional nature of the projection. In practice, the main concern holding

back many central bankers is that such communications might be mistaken for

commitments. If the projected developments do not materialize, the discrepancy between

actual and previously-projected policy might damage the central bank’s credibility (Issing

2005). In addition, while forward guidance by the central bank is intended to correct faulty

expectations, and thereby reduce misallocations of resources, inaccurate forecasts might

actually induce such misallocations, e.g., if agents make economic decisions (such as taking

on a mortgage) based on the central bank’s communication.

        To guard against these potential pitfalls, all central banks that provide forward

guidance on interest rates emphasize that any forward-looking assessment is conditional on

current information—and therefore subject to change. For example, the Riksbank regularly

18
   For a detailed description of the evolution of the FOMC’s forward-looking language, see Rudebusch and Williams
(2008).
19
   The case in favor is made by Svensson (2006b) and Woodford (2005).


                                                                                                              22
stresses the conditionality of its projected repo rate path by repeating the mantra: “It is a

forecast, not a promise.”

3.2 How to communicate

        Just as the content of signals differs markedly across central banks, so does the

choice of communication tools. Central banks can choose from a large menu of

communication instruments, and each central bank uses its own mixture. 20 This subsection

provides a brief overview of one particularly important aspect of instrument selection,

namely, the choice of sender (e.g., whether a signal is sent by the committee or by an

individual committee member), which in turn may influence the precision of the signal.

When signals are sent by or on behalf of the monetary policy committee, the appropriate

content, timing, and channels must all be chosen. Communication by individuals raises

further issues—such as whether one member (e.g., the chairman or governor) should serve

as spokesperson for the committee, reflecting a more collegial approach to communication,

or each member should present his or her own views, representing an individualistic

communication strategy.

        Communication by committees

        The most natural occasion for communication by an MPC as a whole arises on

meeting days, when decisions are announced. The timing of this communication and the

amount of detail provided differ substantially across central banks. The Federal Reserve

provides a short press release containing the decision, a concise (and typically stylized)

explanation of its underlying reasoning, and (at times) some forward guidance. The Bank of

England’s press statement announces the decision, but normally provides an explanation


20
  See Blinder et al. (2001) for a detailed, though by now somewhat dated, account and explanation of the various
instruments used by central banks.


                                                                                                             23
only when interest rates are changed or when its decision was largely unexpected.

Somewhat later, but prior to the subsequent meeting, both central banks provide detailed

accounts and explanations of the decisions in the minutes. 21

        By contrast, the ECB not only releases a press statement with the policy decision,

but also holds a press conference on the day of Governing Council meetings, including a

question and answer session. 22 Compared to the approach of the other two central banks,

there are four main differences. First, while providing background information on the

rationale for the decision, the ECB press conference is generally less detailed than the

minutes of the Bank of England or the Federal Reserve. In particular, it does not provide

any information on voting. 23 Second, however, the press conference avoids the substantial

time delay of the minutes. Some observers have argued that there is a trade-off between the

timeliness of this type of communication and its accuracy (Goodhart 2005), as minutes

usually undergo a detailed sanitizing process to put the best possible face on the

committee’s views and intentions, which delays their release. Third, the Q&A session

allows the press to ask follow-up questions and thus can help clarify ambiguities (Ehrmann

and Fratzscher 2007a). Fourth, press conferences are typically televised live, which gives

the central bank an opportunity to reach out to the broader public.

        Another natural communication opportunity for a committee inheres in its legal

reporting requirements. For example, each of the three central banks is obliged to provide

an annual report and to testify before its legislature. For the ECB and the Federal Reserve,


21
   In addition to the minutes, the Federal Reserve eventually also releases the transcripts of FOMC meetings, albeit
only after a five-year lag.
22
   The central banks of the Czech Republic, Japan, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Sweden, and Switzerland also
hold regular press conferences.
23
   For a stimulating debate on the ECB’s decisions not to release either minutes or individual voting records, see
Willem Buiter (1999) and Issing (1999). One important argument in favor of publishing minutes is that they provide
some information about the internal deliberations.


                                                                                                                 24
these hearings provide the committee’s views, whereas Bank of England testimonies relate

more to members’ personal views.

           Among the most important reporting vehicles are regular publications such as the

ECB’s Monthly Bulletin, which is published one week after each monetary policy meeting

and contains both the assessment of economic developments and information on the

analytical framework—e.g., models, methods and indicators—used in its decision-making

process. For the Bank of England, the most closely-watched reports are its quarterly

Inflation Report, which sets out the detailed economic analysis that underlies the MPC’s

decisions and presents the Bank’s assessment of the prospects for inflation over the

following two years, and the Quarterly Bulletin, with its commentary on market

developments and monetary policy operations. The publication of the Inflation Report is

also accompanied by an hour-long press conference. The Federal Reserve’s closest

counterpart is its semiannual Monetary Policy Report to the Congress, presented with the

chairman’s testimony to Congress.

           Communication by individual committee members

           Most central banks these days make decisions by committee, reflecting an apparent

consensus that doing so leads to superior policy (Blinder, 2004, Chapter 2). But committees

come in a wide variety of shapes and sizes. Blinder (2004) distinguishes among three types

of committees—individualistic, genuinely collegial, and autocratically collegial—and

characterizes the Bank of England’s MPC as individualistic, the ECB’s Governing Council

as genuinely collegial, and the Federal Reserve’s FOMC under Alan Greenspan as

autocratically collegial. 24 He emphasizes that these distinct types of committees need

different communication strategies. In the individualistic case, the diversity of views on the
24
     The FOMC is clearly becoming more genuinely collegial under Ben Bernanke.


                                                                                                 25
committee should be apparent, as a way to help markets understand the degree of

uncertainty surrounding monetary policy making. But in the collegial case, a similar

diversity of views, if made public, might undermine clarity and common understanding.

Therefore, communication should mainly convey the committee’s views.

       Since the importance of individual views in the communication strategy of a

particular MPC will reflect the structure and functioning of the committee, it will vary both

across banks and across time. Despite its collegial structure, the Federal Reserve pursues a

somewhat individualistic communication strategy, which at times reveals highly diverse

opinions across FOMC members. This diversity stands in sharp contrast to the ECB, which

has followed a far more collegial communication strategy, often displaying a much higher

degree of consistency among the statements of individual committee members (Ehrmann

and Fratzscher 2007b).

       One difference between communications by individual members and by entire

committees is the greater flexibility in timing of the former. Communications by

committees are generally pre-scheduled, and thus somewhat inflexible in timing. But

changes in the circumstances relevant to monetary policy do not always coincide with

meeting dates or testimonies. Furthermore, the central bank might want to provide more

guidance to financial markets and the public in times of great uncertainty (Jansen and De

Haan 2005). Occasional speeches and interviews by individual committee members

between meetings offer a way to communicate changes in views rapidly, if so desired. But

the large variation across central banks in the intensity of inter-meeting communication

suggests that they differ greatly in how much importance they attach to timeliness.




                                                                                                26
       This section has shown that central bank practices differ enormously, both across

central banks and across time. However, there are clear trends toward more timely and more

open communication. We have also highlighted the huge variety of signals that are

subsumed under the symbol st in our schema. This huge heterogeneity in central bank

practices raises an obvious question: Are there better and worse ways of communicating?

This is clearly an empirical question—and a large one. The rest of this survey will suggest

partial answers based on recent empirical evidence.

       4. The impact of central bank communication on financial markets

       In Section 2, we noted that central bank communications (st) influence expectations

of future short-term rates (ret+j), which, in turn, influence long-term rates and other

financial-market prices (Rt). These prices, in turn, influence such macro variables as

inflation and output (yt and πt). But there are at least two crucial differences between the

earlier and later links in this causal chain. Both relate to timing. First, while central bank

communications, just like monetary policy, affect financial markets very quickly, interest

rates and asset prices affect the economy only gradually—with the proverbial long and

variable lags. Second, many factors other than monetary policy influence macro variables

such as yt and πt. But, at least over the narrow time windows used in many empirical

studies, it is arguable that financial market variables are reacting only, or at least mostly, to

central bank signals. The upshot is that it is a much easier econometric task to estimate the

effects of central bank signals using high-frequency data from financial markets (the subject

of this section) than using low-frequency data on macroeconomic performance (the subject

of the next section). So we begin with financial market reactions—where there is also, not

by coincidence, much more literature to survey.




                                                                                                    27
       In Section 4.1, we explain some of the methodological approaches that have been

used to identify and measure communication signals. Section 4.2 then moves on to what

seems to be the logically first substantive question: Do central bank signals successfully

steer market expectations about future monetary policy and therefore render policy more

predictable? The evidence suggests that they do, though imperfectly. Section 4.3 takes the

next step and inquires about the impact of central bank communications on interest rates

and other asset prices—as well as on their volatility. Some of these impacts appear to be

sizable, others less so. Finally, in Section 4.4, we turn to the possibility that some

communications wind up being miscommunications, so that, e.g., relatively noisy central

bank signals might actually increase, rather than decrease, uncertainty.

4.1 Identifying and measuring communication events

       As we have noted, central bank communications differ in many ways and are

sometimes difficult to measure. So we focus first on relatively well-defined, high-frequency

signals, such as announcements and speeches. It has become standard practice to identify

regular pre-scheduled communications (such as announcements of policy decisions) from

central bank websites and irregular statements (such as speeches and interviews) through

financial newswire reports. However, it is not always straightforward to determine exactly

when a communication “event” took place. For example, when a late-Thursday media

report on a Tuesday interview with a policymaker causes financial markets to react on

Friday morning, was the communication event on Tuesday, Thursday, or Friday?

       A second challenge is how to extract the intention or objective behind a policy

statement—which is, after all, essential if we want to know whether central bank

communications succeed. Different approaches to this issue have emerged. One line of




                                                                                               28
research does not even attempt to divine directional intent. Kohn and Sack (2004), Ellis

Connolly and Marion Kohler (2004), and Rachel Reeves and Michael Sawicki (2007) study

instead the effects of central bank communication events on the volatility of financial

variables. The basic idea is that, if communications affect the returns on financial assets, the

volatility of these returns should be higher on days of central bank communications, ceteris

paribus, because the signals contain news.

       Focusing on volatility makes it unnecessary to assign a direction to each statement,

which is both a strength and a weakness. The researcher just studies whether central bank

communications create news, not whether they move markets in the “right” direction. But

there are other problems. One is that many factors, some of them unobservable, affect asset

prices. So a rise in observed volatility may reflect the reaction of financial markets to

shocks other than central bank communication. A second problem is that communication

may be endogenous. A central bank may choose to communicate at a particular time

because of a sudden change in the economic outlook or some other news. In this case, asset

prices will probably be more volatile on communication days, but not necessarily because

of the statement (Reeves and Sawicki 2007). Such endogeneity is less of a problem when

the dates of major communications—such as policy decisions and testimonies—are known

in advance. But it may be especially problematic for speeches or interviews of committee

members, which are flexible in both timing and content (Ehrmann and Fratzscher 2007c).

       Kohn and Sack (2004) show that the volatility of various asset prices reacts

significantly to statements by the FOMC and its members. They argue that the increased

volatility is evidence that central bank communication conveys relevant information to

market participants. While this is an important first finding, it leaves several open questions.




                                                                                                   29
Their approach says nothing about whether the policymaker intended to move asset prices

in the way they did. It also does not tell us whether the rise in volatility reflects an increase

in market uncertainty or a decrease in uncertainty that is outweighed by the immediate

effect of the news. In other words, the Kohn and Sack approach establishes that central bank

communication creates news, but it cannot determine whether it reduces noise.

         Accordingly, a number of subsequent studies have attempted to quantify

communication in order to assess both the direction and magnitude of its effects on asset

prices—and thus to determine to what extent communication has its intended effects. 25 To

do so, all statements must be classified according to their content and/or likely intention,

and then coded on a numerical scale. Among the types of communications that have been

studied in the literature are: statements on monetary policy and communication about the

exchange rate (see Jansen and De Haan, 2005, for speeches and interviews by members of

the ECB Governing Council), policy inclinations and the economic outlook (see Ehrmann

and Fratzscher, 2007b, for communication by committee members at the Federal Reserve,

the Bank of England, and the ECB), price stability, the real economy, and monetary

indicators (see Helge Berger, Jan-Egbert Sturm and De Haan, 2006, for the introductory

statement of the ECB’s press conference and Stefan Gerlach, 2007, for the editorial in the

ECB’s Monthly Bulletin). All of these studies assign negative (positive) values to

statements that are perceived as dovish (hawkish), and zero to those that appear to be

neutral. Whereas some researchers restrict the coding to directional indications (e.g., Jansen



25
  This is similar to the so-called “narrative approach” to modeling monetary policymaking as, for instance, applied
by Romer and Romer (1989) to identify times when the Fed tightened. Similarly, John Boschen and Leonard Mills
(1995) generated a discrete measure of the Fed’s policy stance taking five different values {-2, -1, 0, 1, 2}, where -2
indicates a very tight policy stance, while 2 indicates a very loose policy stance. Like the Romer and Romer dates,
their indicator is based on FOMC minutes. But it is a more informative measure of monetary policy, since it
differentiates according to size as well as direction.


                                                                                                                    30
and De Haan 2005, Ehrmann and Fratzscher 2007b), others assign a finer grid that is at least

suggestive of magnitude (Carlo Rosa and Giovanni Verga 2007, Marie Musard-Gies 2006),

e.g. by coding statements on a scale from -2 to +2.

       The strength of the coding approach is that it helps us understand whether

communication succeeds or fails. But this comes at a price. First, the required classification

is necessarily subjective, and there may be misclassifications. This risk can be reduced

through content analysis (Ole Holsti 1969), such as when several researchers independently

classify statements (as in Berger et al., 2006); but it can never be eliminated.

       Second, when statements are identified through newswire reports (as in Jansen and

De Haan 2005, and Ehrmann and Fratzscher 2007b), communication is not measured at the

source, but rather via the media intermediary. But these intermediaries could be selective or

misleading in their reporting, or could release the story days after the interview. That said, if

researchers are interested in testing market responses to communication, it may make sense

to focus on statements that actually reach market participants, and on the content as

conveyed by the media.

       Third, subjective communication indicators are constructed ex post and may not

accurately reflect how financial markets understood the signals at the time. The latter is

likely to be affected by, e.g., expectations about monetary policy at the time of the

statement. As we know, efficient financial markets should react only to the unexpected

component of a statement.

       One approach to these issues, first suggested by Refet Gürkaynak, Sack, and Eric

Swanson (2005) and Gürkaynak (2005), and also implemented in Claus Brand, Daniel

Buncic and Jarkko Turunen (2006), employs indirect measures derived from financial




                                                                                                    31
market reactions. Gürkaynak et al. (2005) use a principal components method that identifies

two common factors that describe asset price movements around FOMC announcements.

The factor that is orthogonal to the surprise in the federal funds target rate is defined to be

the communication effect of the FOMC statement. Brand et al. (2006) make use of the

timing details of the ECB’s meeting day communications. The ECB announces its decisions

at 1:45 pm, without any explanatory statements, and then explains the decisions in detail in

the press conference 45 minutes later. Because of that delay, the market reaction to the

release of the decision can be distinguished from the market reaction to the forward-looking

communication by using very high-frequency data. Doing so leads to results that are similar

to those obtained with the principal components approach of Gürkaynak et al. (2005). Rosa

(2008) approximates the unexpected components of both FOMC and ECB statements by

estimating forecasting regressions that explain the content of each statement by the

preceding statement and the slope of the yield curve just prior to the release of the

statement. Interestingly, he finds stronger market reactions to unexpected Fed talk than to

unexpected ECB talk.

4.2 Does central bank communication enhance the predictability of monetary policy?

       Equation (5) in our conceptual schema posited effects of central bank signals on

expectations of future monetary policy decisions. It seems that successful central bank

communication efforts should make policy more predictable and market expectations of

future short rates more accurate. Is it true?

       Presumably, central banks are most concerned with long-term predictability, which

comes when the public develops a genuine understanding of the way the central bank thinks

and operates. This is what King (2000) meant by saying provocatively that a central bank




                                                                                                  32
should be “boring.” The idea is that the monetary policy reaction function should be so well

understood that all the relevant news for financial markets would stem from developments

in the economy, not from the actions or words of the central bank. In a similar vein, Blinder

(2004, p. 25) suggested that “perhaps the best a central bank can do is to ‘teach’ the markets

its way of thinking.”

        Unfortunately, long-term predictability is inherently difficult to gauge, so empirical

studies typically resort to predictability at short horizons, which is more measurable. 26

Often, financial market prices are used for this purpose. And indeed, research has shown

convincingly that the predictability of the interest rate decisions of the major central banks

has improved remarkably in recent years—so much so that financial markets’ expectations

nowadays are generally well aligned with actual decisions (Kerstin Bernoth and Jürgen von

Hagen, 2004).

        The case of the Federal Reserve, with its continuously increasing level of

transparency since the 1980s, has been studied most extensively. Poole and Robert Rasche

(2003) provide evidence that the surprise component of policy decisions decreased

considerably after February 1994. Joe Lange, Sack, and William Whitesell (2003) show that

the ability of Treasury bill yields to predict changes in the federal funds rate some months in

advance has increased since the late 1980s. Similarly, Swanson (2006) finds that U.S.

financial markets and private sector forecasters have become both better able to forecast the

federal funds rate at horizons out to several months and less uncertain about their interest

rate forecasts ex ante, as measured both by interest rate options and by the cross-sectional

variance of interest rate forecasts. Importantly, private sector forecasts of macroeconomic


26
  However, as more central banks begin to announce projected interest-rate paths, it will become possible to study
the extent to which these forecasts are incorporated in yield curves.


                                                                                                                 33
variables have not shown similar improvement, which points toward a specific effect of

communication about monetary policy rather than a general decline in macroeconomic

volatility (the so-called Great Moderation).

       Each of these authors argues that the Federal Reserve’s practice of making same-day

announcements of monetary policy decisions since February 1994 was an important factor

in reducing uncertainty. Furthermore, Selma Demiralp and Oscar Jorda (2002) provide

compelling evidence that announcing changes in the intended federal funds rate in real time

enabled the Fed to move the actual funds rate with smaller open market operations—which

suggests that greater transparency also helped make policy implementation more efficient.

       Other types of central bank communication should also enhance predictability.

Regardless of whether policymakers have superior information about the economy,

communicating their macro forecasts, and possibly also offering indications about the future

path of interest rates, should help financial markets predict future central bank actions

better. A study by Andrea Fracasso, Hans Genberg, and Wyplosz (2003) sheds light on this

issue. They develop a number of indicators of the quality of inflation reports for 19

countries and find that higher quality reports are associated with smaller policy surprises. In

particular, three subjective indicators—how convincing the report is judged to be, how well

it reflects the expertise of the staff, and the quality of the writing style—increase the

predictability of interest-rate decisions. These results suggest that clearer communication,

which creates a higher signal-to-noise ratio, reduces private agents’ uncertainty. While its

substantive concern (financial market volatility) is quite different, Jansen (2008) supports

this suggestion. Using objective measures of readability to measure the clarity of the




                                                                                                  34
Federal Reserve chairman’s semi-annual Humphrey-Hawkins testimonies, he finds that

greater clarity often reduces the volatility of interest rates.

       Particularly strong effects can be expected if a central bank communicates its

intentions about upcoming interest rate decisions. Unfortunately, we know of no research

that analyses the effects of the publication of quantitative forward guidance, as practiced for

years by the Reserve Bank of New Zealand (RNBZ) and, more recently, by Norges Bank

and Sveriges Riksbank. New Zealand has the longest history of doing so by far, and David

Archer (2004) provides some evidence that market reactions to the publication of the

RBNZ’s forward interest rate tracks are limited. He suggests that this might reflect the

market’s understanding of the conditionality of such publications: Market participants might

adjust rates to match the Bank’s forward path only if they share the underlying assumptions

about the evolution of the economy. Beyond this, however, our knowledge of the effects of

central bank interest rate projections on the market’s understanding of monetary policy is

minimal—which is inevitable given the short time span and the small number of central

banks that have revealed such information. As more experience is accumulated, e.g., in

Norway and Sweden, this will be a high priority area for future research. Already,

Norwegian data show that markets do not always uncritically adopt the central bank’s

projection.

       Another type of forward-looking information has been the subject of far more

scholarly attention: the qualitative guidance provided by the Federal Reserve’s (and other

central banks’) policy “bias” or “balance of risks.” As we will see in the next subsection,

these statements strongly affect financial markets. Surprisingly, however, their predictive

power for future monetary policy is mixed.




                                                                                                  35
       In interpreting this evidence on the Fed, it is important to distinguish between bias

statements made prior to and after May 1999. Until that date, the FOMC’s policy directives

were not public information. They were internal declarations of intent, focused narrowly on

the inter-meeting period and released only after the next FOMC meeting. By contrast, the

balance-of-risks assessments since May 1999 are external statements intended to provide

markets with information about possible future policy decisions.

       Consistent with their internal use, the pre-1999 bias statements have been found to

be a statistically significant indicator of the likelihood and direction of changes in the fed

funds target during the subsequent inter-meeting period (John Lapp and Douglas Pearce

2000), but not thereafter (Daniel Thornton and David Wheelock 2000). By contrast,

Ehrmann and Fratzscher (2007d) focus on the period since May 1999 and do find

consistency with subsequent interest rate moves. Similarly, Michael Pakko (2005) finds that

the information content of these statements is a statistically significant variable predicting

changes in the funds rate target in the context of an estimated Taylor rule.

       Strikingly, however, Ehrmann and Fratzscher (2007d) find that policy decisions after

May 1999 have not been anticipated better by financial markets than they were before.

Chart 1 shows one case in point by displaying the adjustment of the three-month T-bill rate

around two pairs of FOMC meetings: one prior to 1999, and one after. In both cases, there

was no change at the first of the two meetings (marked as day 0 on the horizontal axis) and

then a 25 basis points increase at the second (marked as day 30). Furthermore, in both cases,

the FOMC had actually adopted a tightening bias at the meeting on day 0.

       In both instances, the decision to raise the funds rate was well predicted by the

market: T-bill rates had already increased substantially by the time the FOMC acted. But the




                                                                                                 36
timing was very different in the two cases. When the tightening bias was released on day 0

(solid line), markets did most of the adjusting to the coming interest rate hike within one

day. By contrast, when the bias was not released (dashed line), interest rates adjusted much

later. Interestingly, T-bill rates started anticipating the Fed’s next rate move on the day of

Chairman Greenspan’s testimony before the US Senate (day 11 in the chart).

      Chart 1: Adjustment of market interest rates under alternative disclosure
regimes: March 25, 1997 versus February 2, 2000
               5.95                                                                                     5.7

               5.85                                                                                     5.6

               5.75                                                                                     5.5

               5.65                                                                                     5.4

               5.55                                                                                     5.3

               5.45                                                                                     5.2

               5.35                                                                                     5.1

               5.25                                                                                     5
                      -4 -2 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 2 4
                                Federal funds target           Jan/Feb 2000           Feb/Mar 1997
Source: Ehrmann and Fratzscher (2007d).
Note: Three-month money market rates for the 1997 tightening episode are shown on the right-hand scale whereas those
for the 2000 episode are depicted on the left-hand scale. Both tightening days are scaled so as to be shown on day 30 on
the horizontal axis. Day 0 refers to the corresponding previous FOMC meetings.



         While the chart shows just two exceptionally clear cases, Ehrmann and Fratzscher’s

statistical tests confirm this as a general tendency. Markets anticipated the Fed’s decisions

rather well both before and after release of the “balance of risks,” but the mechanisms were

different. Nowadays, they extract information from the statements, whereas before they

relied more on other types of Federal Reserve communication between meetings, such as

speeches and testimonies by FOMC members.



                                                                                                                           37
       A number of recent papers apply Pakko’s (2005) approach to the case of the ECB,

examining to what extent its communications add information to Taylor-type rules. There is

general agreement that models based exclusively on communication variables perform

worse than those that include relevant macroeconomic variables, like inflation and output

gaps. However, whether communication can improve the fit of standard Taylor rules is in

more dispute. Jansen and De Haan (2006a) find that the ECB’s communications do not add

informational value, but Rosa and Verga (2007) and Friedrich Heinemann and Karin Ullrich

(2007) find that the press conferences do.

4.3 Do financial markets respond to (which form of) central bank communication?

       The evidence obtained from various event studies demonstrates that central bank talk

can move financial markets substantially. An early contribution to this literature is Graeme

Guthrie and Julian Wright (2000), who, without distinguishing among different types of

communication, provide compelling evidence that communication by the RBNZ has sizable

and long-lasting effects on interest rates across the maturity spectrum.

       Communication by the Federal Reserve also affects financial markets. As one

indication of magnitudes, Table 1 reproduces the results of the seminal study by Kohn and

Sack (2004). It is apparent that both FOMC statements and Greenspan testimonies move

markets. The statements affect interest rates over short-to-medium-term horizons, while

testimonies by then-Chairman Greenspan affect the entire yield curve. In contrast, Kohn and

Sack find no significant effects of other Greenspan speeches on financial markets. Reeves

and Sawicki (2007), following the same approach, find similar evidence for financial

market effects of Bank of England communications. In particular, the release of the MPC




                                                                                               38
minutes and the Bank’s Inflation Reports seem to move financial markets significantly. 27

But just like Kohn and Sack, Reeves and Sawicki find that speeches do not.

                                                       Table 1
     Effects of Federal Reserve communication on the unconditional variance of asset
                                        prices

                                                  Increase in unconditional variance due to

                                       FOMC statements         Greenspan testimony Greenspan speeches
         Federal funds futures
             3 months ahead                     24.1 ***                  10.0 **                    1.0
         Treasury yields
            2-year                              37.5 **                   41.4 ***                   4.3
             10-year                            16.4                      37.1 ***                   3.9
         Treasury forward rates
             0 to 1 year ahead                  28.9 **                   21.8   **                  2.1
             1 to 2 years ahead                 49.7 **                   69.3   ***                 6.2
             2 to 3 years ahead                 43.7                      57.8   ***                 4.1
             3 to 4 years ahead                 28.7                      45.2   **                  1.8
Source: Kohn and Sack (2004).
Numbers report the increase in variance (corrected for the effect of macroeconomic and monetary policy surprises) relative
to that observed over the week preceding the communication events. Based on daily data.
***/**/* indicate significance at the 99%/95%/90% level.
Sample period: 1989-2003.

         However, other studies have found significant effects of speeches on financial

markets, perhaps due to different procedures for selecting communication events. Table 2,

taken from Ehrmann and Fratzscher (2007b), displays the estimated effects of interviews

and speeches by central bank committee members for the Federal Reserve, the Bank of

England, and the ECB. It shows that speeches and interviews affect interest rates through

most of the maturity spectrum, ranging from very short maturities up to five years. Since

these results are based on coded communication events as explained above, they offer

directional information, too. Ehrmann and Fratzscher (2007b) find that statements generally


27
   Details of timing may matter here. The Inflation Reports are found to move markets only when the frequency of
the data is increased from daily (as in Kohn and Sack) to intraday. This is presumably because, with relatively low
frequency data, the effects of other news gets mixed up with the communication effects. Using daily data, Connolly
and Kohler (2004) and Jaghit Chadha and Charles Nolan (2001) also fail to identify effects of the Inflation Report
on financial markets.


                                                                                                                             39
move financial markets in the intended direction: Statements suggesting tightening lead to

higher rates, while statements suggesting easing lead to lower rates. They identify the

largest effects for the ECB; statements containing some reference to monetary policy

inclinations move interest rates an average of 1.5-2.5 basis points.

         Musard-Gies (2006) finds similar results for the ECB, although the short end of the

yield curve reacts more sharply to statements than the long end. In stark contrast, statements

pertaining to the economic outlook are found to affect mainly US markets, especially at the

medium-to-long end of the yield curve, but not (or much less in) markets in the UK or the

euro area. Marek Rozkrut, Krzysztof Rybiński, Lucyna Sztaba, and Radosław Szwaja

(2007) repeat this analysis for the Czech Republic, Hungary, and Poland. They find that

speeches about monetary policy move markets, although to different degrees in each

country, but speeches about the economic outlook do not. Finally, Andersson et al. (2006)

find that speeches by the Riksbank’s Executive Board members are important market

movers.

                                                       Table 2
   Effects of interviews and speeches by central bank committee members on interest
                                          rates

                                                                      Bank of
                                              Federal Reserve                              ECB
                                                                      England
                    3-month interest rates           0.97   ***         0.46 ***            2.05   ***
                    6-month interest rates           0.46               0.80 ***            1.57   ***
                      1-year interest rates          0.88   **          0.95 **             2.47   ***
                      2-year interest rates          1.01   *           0.13                2.48   ***
                      5-year interest rates          1.14   *           0.15                1.96   ***
                     10-year interest rates          0.76              -0.21                0.61
                     20-year interest rates          0.64               0.02                0.44
Source: Ehrmann and Fratzscher (2007b).
Note: The table shows the response of interest rates in basis points to speeches and interviews given by committee
members of the different central banks (FOMC members, MPC members and Governing Council members, respectively),
containing some non-neutral reference to monetary policy inclinations. Statements that are perceived as suggesting a
policy tightening inclination coded as +1, statements that are perceived as suggesting a policy easing inclination as -1.
Based on daily data.




                                                                                                                            40
*/**/*** denote significance at the 90%/95%/99% level.
Sample period: 1999 (1997 for Bank of England) to 2004.

         Overall, the results from several countries are qualitatively consistent, even though

heterogeneity in both communication practices and monetary policy strategies makes direct

comparisons difficult. Central bank statements and speeches do get the attention of financial

market participants, which finds its way into market prices. The quantitative magnitudes

naturally differ across central banks. For example, the comprehensive study of different

communication tools in six central banks by Connolly and Kohler (2004) finds that

monetary policy reports in Australia, Canada, New Zealand, and the US provide

information that significantly affects markets’ expectations, and thus interest rate futures. 28

Parliamentary hearings affect futures rates in Australia, New Zealand, the UK (albeit only

marginally), and the US, but not in Canada or the euro area. However, where they have

effects, the impacts of hearings on interest rate expectations are the largest among the

various communication tools. There is also some evidence suggesting that the financial

markets respond more strongly when communication is from the head of the central bank

(Andersson et al., 2006, Ehrmann and Fratzscher 2007b).

         Central banks explain their policy decisions in different ways. As noted above, Kohn

and Sack (2004) find that FOMC statements are important market movers—a result

corroborated by Gürkaynak et al. (2005). In the principal components approach of the latter

(described above), the “path factor,” which is related to the forward-looking communication

in the statement, affects interest rates across the yield curve--and appears to be the dominant

factor at the long end. Similarly, Brand et al. (2006) find that the effects of the ECB’s

communications are particularly sizable at the long end of the yield curve.


28
  For the US, this effect also incorporates any effects of the Congressional testimony that coincides with publication
of the report, which might explain the relatively large effect that they find.


                                                                                                                   41
       The fact that the ECB reveals its decisions 45 minutes before it provides

explanations in press conferences offers an interesting opportunity to separate the effects of

the two different types of communication events. Ehrmann and Fratzscher (2007a) find that

press conferences have, on average, larger effects on asset prices than do announcements of

policy decisions. Interestingly, these larger effects on interest rates are accompanied by

smaller effects on volatility, indicating that the signal to noise ratio of the press conference

communication is high. Why? Their results suggest that the Q&A session gives journalists

the opportunity to digest the information provided, to compare it to their own prior

information, and to ask clarifying questions where necessary. In fact, there is evidence for

such a clarification role. When macroeconomic uncertainty—proxied by the diversity of

expectations about data releases—is higher, the market’s response to the release of the

monetary policy decision is more muted, suggesting that market participants wait for the

clarification provided in the press conference before they react.

       Central banks often provide substantially more detailed explanations of monetary

policy decisions in the minutes of policy meetings. For these to have meaningful news

content for financial markets, however, they must be released before the subsequent

meeting of the committee. In recent years, both the Federal Reserve and the Bank of

England have shortened the lag in releasing their minutes, moving it from after to before the

subsequent meeting. As shown by Reeves and Sawicki (2007) and Reinhart and Sack

(2006), there are discernable financial market reactions only with more timely release.

4.4 Communication about exchange rates

       Central bank communication is not confined to monetary policy proper. While it is

beyond the scope of this survey, some central banks make occasional statements on




                                                                                                   42
exchange rates, and this special type of central bank communication has spawned a rapidly-

growing literature of its own. We cannot summarize the literature on “oral interventions”

here, but a few findings are worth noting because they dovetail nicely with those on interest

rates:

         •   Given the small scale of actual forex interventions relative to today’s massive

             and liquid markets 29 —whether sterilized or unsterilized, words may be more

             effective than actions, perhaps because words serve as the focal point that

             coordinates the actions of market participants (Lucio Sarno and Mark Taylor

             (2001)). 30

         •   Communication can complement intervention as well as substitute for it

             (Fratzscher 2004, forthcoming).

         •   Central bank talk about exchange rates, just like central bank talk about interest

             rates, may have to substitute for interest rate cuts when the nominal interest rate

             reaches its zero lower bound (Lukas Burkhard and Andreas Fischer 2007).

         In summary, while the evidence is mixed, on balance it seems fair to say that, if the

central bank speaks clearly, its statements can (and apparently do) affect a variety of asset

prices in non-negligible ways. While financial market reactions depend on the details of the

communications, especially their timeliness and news content, central bank talk apparently

does contain news that is quickly incorporated into asset prices.




29
  See Kathryn Dominguez and Jeffrey Frankel (1993).
30
  For some empirical evidence, see Michel Beine, Gust Janssen, and Christelle Lecourt (2006), Fratzscher (2006),
Jansen and De Haan (2007), Dominguez and Freyan Panthaki (2007), and Siklos and Bohl (forthcoming).


                                                                                                               43
4.5 Uncertainty in central bank communication

         That said, we hasten to highlight an issue that has received scant attention in the

literature on central bank communication, yet might be highly relevant to its success:

namely, the role of uncertainty in central bank communication.

         Uncertainty can arise from various sources. First, inconsistent signals can arise when

different members of a monetary policy committee say different things—whether

intentionally (e.g., by conducting a debate in public) or unintentionally (e.g., via

uncoordinated communication). As Blinder (2007, p. 114) notes, “A central bank that

speaks with a cacophony of voices may, in effect, have no voice at all.” On the other hand,

Bernanke (2004) argues that “the willingness of FOMC members to present their individual

perspectives in speeches and other public forums provides the public with useful

information about the diversity of views and the balance of opinion on the Committee.”

Both views have validity. Whether communicating individual committee members’ views to

the public enlightens or confuses is ultimately an empirical issue. And whether doing so is

advisable or inadvisable depends, inter alia, on whether the committee has group or

individual accountability.

         As indicated by Bernanke’s comment, FOMC members do indeed communicate

with disparate voices (Ehrmann and Fratzscher, 2007b), whereas the ECB generally speaks

more with a single voice. 31 However, this has not always been so. Jansen and De Haan

(2006b) show that communication about monetary policy inclinations by individual



31
   Issing (1999, pp. 508 and 510) has justified this on the basis of the special circumstances in which the ECB
operates: “What matters for transparency is therefore clarity as well as openness. For a new and supranational
institution like the ECB, it is particularly important that it sends clear and coherent messages to the markets and the
wider public. … Speaking with one voice – or at least speaking ‘one language’ – is of particular importance for
transparency and clarity in the case of the Eurosystem.”


                                                                                                                     44
members of the Governing Council was relatively high in the initial years of the ECB, but

then declined over time.

       To what extent do consistency and other characteristics of central bank

communication practices affect the predictability of monetary policy? Ehrmann and

Fratzscher (2007e) find that more dispersed communication on Federal Reserve monetary

policy is associated with less predictable policy decisions at short- and medium-term

horizons, and that the magnitude of this effect is sizeable. In another recent study, Rozkrut

et al. (2007) corroborate this result for the central bank of Hungary; but for the Czech

National Bank, more dispersed communication actually enhances the predictability of

policy decisions.

       There is also evidence that the voting records of the Bank of England’s MPC

members help predict future policy changes (Petra Gerlach-Kristen 2004). Casting a

minority vote appears to be a bigger step, and therefore one that carries more information,

than merely expressing a personal dissenting view in public.

       Markets, of course, adapt to a central bank’s communication style. When central

banks give out relatively dispersed communications, financial markets attempt to identify

pivotal committee members and attach more weight to their statements. For example,

Andersson et al. (2006) find evidence that markets react more strongly to statements by the

Riksbank’s governor. Ehrmann and Fratzscher (2007b) show the same for the Fed

chairman. But they find that, in the case of the ECB’s more collegial approach to

communication, markets react more equally to statements by all Governing Council

members.




                                                                                                45
       Central bank communication is also a two-way street: It must have both a transmitter

and a receiver, and either could be the source of uncertainty or confusion. Moreover, on the

receiving end, the same message might be interpreted differently by different listeners who

may have different expectations or believe in different models. One good example is

provided by Fracasso et al. (2003), who use survey data to analyze whether inflation reports

of central banks reach different audiences equally well. They find that the same inflation

report is perceived differently by different respondents, and that interest rate surprises tend

to increase with the divergence in perceptions. Another example comes from De Haan,

Fabian Amtenbrink, and Sandra Waller (2004), who report substantial differences between

newspaper reports published the day after ECB policy decisions in the Financial Times (FT)

and the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung (FAZ). The British-based FT, which is critical of

the money growth pillar in the ECB’s monetary policy strategy, tends to pay relatively little

attention to it. In sharp contrast, the home-town FAZ clearly supports the idea that money

should have a prominent role in the ECB’s strategy, and accordingly gives that pillar

substantial attention.

       A similar phenomenon can arise when the identical message is interpreted

differently at different points in time. As one example, Berger, Ehrmann, and Fratzscher

(2006) study the quantity and tone of reporting on the ECB’s press conference in 57

international and national newspapers in the euro area. They find that the press seems to

take its cues from both prior market expectations and the inflationary environment. The tone

of the reporting is generally more critical when a policy decision takes markets by surprise.

The decisions are also discussed less favorably if the most recent euro area inflation figures

exceed 2%, thus violating the ECB’s definition of price stability.




                                                                                                  46
       5. The impact of central bank communication on inflation performance

       We turn now to the harder but perhaps more important question of whether and how

central bank communication affects the ultimate goal variables of monetary policy. As we

have noted, the combination of long lags in monetary policy and the myriad influences on

macro outcomes make it virtually impossible to isolate a link between a specific

communication event (such as a speech) and, say, inflation. So this section takes a longer-

term perspective by summarizing the literature on how (if at all) differences in

communication strategies, either over time or across central banks, influence economic

outcomes. Since there is almost no evidence on the effects of central bank communication

strategies on the real economy, we focus entirely on actual and expected inflation.

5.1 Anchoring inflation expectations

       Since a large number of central banks have adopted formal inflation targeting, and

others (such as the Swiss National Bank and the ECB) provide quantitative definitions of

price stability, a substantial body of research has emerged to assess the effects of an explicit

numerical inflation target on inflation outcomes. The central, but not the only, questions are

whether clear and consistent communication on the long-term inflation objective (a) anchors

the public’s long-run inflation expectations and (b) reduces inflation forecast errors.

       Before discussing the research findings, a number of caveats are in order. Michael

Dueker and Fischer (2006) identify various problems encountered by studies comparing

inflation targeters with non-targeters. First, even if a central bank is recognized as an

inflation targeter, the dating of the start of the new policy regime is often contentious. For

example, Bernanke et al. (1999) date the start of inflation targeting (IT) regimes by the

announcement of the target, while Laurence Ball and Niamh Sheridan (2005) date it by its




                                                                                                   47
implementation. Second, the classification of inflation targeters is not always clear. Some

central banks might declare themselves to be inflation targeters, but in practice lack some of

the institutional features that are generally associated with inflation targeting. Others might

insist that they are not inflation targeters, but share in the characteristic practices (Kenneth

Kuttner 2004). Third, results seem to depend crucially on the choice of control group, which

varies widely across studies.

       Last, and certainly not least, there is a potentially serious endogeneity problem. Just

ask yourself: Does the adoption of IT cause inflation to decline, or does high inflation cause

a country to adopt IT? Another version of this question is a bit more complex. The

introduction of IT can be thought of as a commitment device that changes the central bank’s

policy and, therefore, economic outcomes. But an alternative interpretation is that the

formal adoption of IT is a manifestation of a country’s intent to focus more vigorously on

reducing inflation. For example, Stephen Cecchetti and Ehrmann (2002) argue that central

bankers’ aversion to inflation variability increased during the 1990s in many countries,

including both inflation targeters and non-targeters.

       Subject to these caveats, what does the evidence show? A number of studies find

that IT has succeeded in anchoring inflation expectations. Various approaches appear in the

literature. David R. Johnson (2003) estimates the determinants of expected inflation (πe) in

the period prior to the announcement of an inflation target, and then uses the estimated

model to predict πe under the IT regime. The difference between actual and predicted πe is

then taken to measure the effect of inflation targeting. He finds large reductions in the level

of expected inflation in the period after the announcement of inflation targets in Australia,

Canada, New Zealand, and Sweden, but not in the United Kingdom.




                                                                                                   48
       Another approach, adopted in Johnson (2002) and in Andrew Levin, Fabio

Natalucci, and Jeremy Piger (2004), compares targeting to non-targeting countries.

Controlling for country, year, trend-inflation, and business-cycle effects, Johnson detects a

reduction in inflationary expectations in the IT countries but not in the control group. Levin

et al. provide evidence that long-term inflation forecasts exhibit a highly significant

correlation with a three-year moving average of lagged inflation in the control group, but

not in the IT group, suggesting that the inflation-targeting central banks have successfully

de-linked expectations from realized inflation.

       Gürkaynak, Levin, and Swanson (2006) take a different approach to the same

question. They show that long-term inflation expectations derived from index-linked bonds

are less responsive to macroeconomic data releases and monetary policy announcements in

Sweden and the United Kingdom, two inflation targeting countries, than they are in the

United States, which has no explicit inflation objective. Table 3 reports their results for the

United States. The first column shows that one-year nominal interest rates respond to the

surprise component of macroeconomic releases. The second column indicates that market

expectations of inflation over 10 years are also affected significantly. Gürkaynak et al. find

similar results for the United Kingdom prior to the Bank of England’s independence, as

shown by the first set of results in Table 4. However, since the BoE became an independent,

inflation-targeting central bank in 1998, short-term nominal rates in the UK are still

responsive to macroeconomic news but long-term inflation expectations are not—indicating

that expectations have been successfully anchored. Interestingly, this evidence suggests that

it is not just the existence of an explicit inflation objective that matters, but also the

institutional setup of the central bank.




                                                                                                  49
         Finally, Jansen and De Haan (2007) find evidence that communication by the ECB

regarding risks to price stability (measured by the frequency and intensity of the keyword

“vigilance”) reduced high-frequency inflationary expectations slightly in the second half of

2005, when a change in the ECB’s policy stance became increasingly likely.

                                           Table 3
Responsiveness of US interest rates and inflation expectations to macroeconomic news,
                                      1998-2005

                                                  1-year nominal   Inflation
                                                       rate      compensation
                           Capacity Utilization        1.57 ***       0.52
                           Consumer Confidence         1.46 ***       0.43
                           core CPI                    0.98           1.42 **
                           real GDP (advance)          2.17 **        1.77 **
                           Initial Jobless Claims     -1.13 ***      -0.51 **
                           NAPM/ISM Manufacturing      2.28 ***       1.48 **
                           New Home Sales              0.53           1.42 ***
                           Nonfarm Payrolls            4.44 ***       0.52
                           Retail Sales                1.69 ***       0.88
                           Unemployment Rate          -0.97          -0.11
                           Monetary Policy             0.23 **       -0.12
Source: Gürkaynak et al. (2006).
The coefficients denote the response of, respectively, 1-year spot nominal rates and inflation compensation (based on the
different reactions between the nominal and real one-year forward rate from nine to ten years ahead) to standardized
macroeconomic surprises.
***/** indicate significance at the 99%/95% level.



                                                        Table 4
Responsiveness of UK interest rates and inflation expectations to macroeconomic news

                                              1993-1997                     1998-2005
                                    1-year nominal    Inflation   1-year nominal    Inflation
                                         rate       compensation       rate       compensation
           Average Earnings              3.23 ***        0.15          1.81 ***       -0.26
           Real GDP (Preliminary)        1.75            1.80 **       2.04 ***       -0.49
           Manufacturing Production      0.76            0.33          1.26 ***       -0.04
           Producer Price Index          2.13 ***        2.22 **       0.21           -0.22
           Core Retail Price Index       2.39 ***        2.60 ***      2.60 ***       -0.76
           Retail Sales                  2.17 ***       -0.19          1.58 ***       -1.18 ***
           Monetary Policy               0.67 ***       -0.60 ***      0.72 ***       -0.13
Source: Gürkaynak et al. (2006).
The coefficients denote the response of, respectively, 1-year spot nominal rates and inflation compensation (based on the
different reactions between the nominal and real one-year forward rate from nine to ten years ahead) to standardized




                                                                                                                            50
macroeconomic surprises.
***/** indicate significance at the 99%/95% level.


         These studies all suggest notable effects of inflation targeting on inflation

expectations. However, other authors find that expectations are equally well anchored in

their control groups, casting doubt on whether the effect identified in the previous studies is

causal. Efrem Castelnuovo, Sergio Nicoletti-Altimari, and Diego Rodriguez Palenzuela

(2003) find that long-term inflation expectations are well-anchored in all countries in their

sample except Japan—regardless of whether the central bank has an inflation target, a

quantitative definition of price stability, or no quantified target at all.

         A related strand of the literature focuses on the uncertainty of inflation forecasts and

inflation forecast errors rather than on the forecast itself. Ippei Fujiwara (2005)

demonstrates that the publication of the Bank of Japan (BoJ)’s inflation and growth

forecasts influences those of professional forecasters; in particular, the heterogeneity across

forecasters decreases after the BoJ’s forecast is published. Pierre Siklos (2002) reports that

the adoption of an inflation target leads to lower forecast errors in a panel study of 12

countries.

         But subsequent studies do not support his result. Johnson (2002) compares the

standard deviation of expected inflation and the average absolute size of inflation forecast

errors in a panel of 11 countries, five with inflation targets and six without, over 1984 to

2000. He finds that, when actual inflation falls, uncertainty about future inflation falls in

both targeting and non-targeting countries. There is also little evidence that average absolute

forecast errors are lower in targeting countries. These findings are in line with those of

Vittorio Corbo, Oscar Landerretche, and Klaus Schmidt-Hebbel (2002), who analyze how

one-step-ahead inflation forecast errors (constructed from estimated country VARs) have



                                                                                                    51
evolved over time. They find that countries that adopted inflation targeting have converged

to levels of accuracy similar to those observed in the control group of non-targeters.

        Overall, inflationary expectations appear to be generally well anchored, and inflation

forecast errors small, in IT countries. And studies of countries undergoing regime changes

suggest a causal link between adopting IT and anchoring inflation expectations. However,

cross-sectional comparisons yield more ambiguous results; the choice of the control group

is apparently crucial. So communication of an explicit inflation target is surely not the only

way to anchor expectations.

5.2 Inflation and its dynamics

        Building greater trust by credibly communicating a long-term inflation objective

may also affect inflation itself. Most obviously, the introduction of IT might reduce the

average level of inflation—which was certainly the intent of the inventors of IT in New

Zealand and most (if not all) of its early adopters. IT might also affect the time-series

properties of inflation. If agents believe that inflation will return to its target level more

quickly when it deviates from that target, then inflation should be less persistent. King

(2002) argues that UK inflation has been lower, more stable, and less persistent since

inflation targeting was introduced. In support of this argument, Kuttner and Posen (1999)

report that the introduction of inflation targeting in Canada and the UK led to lower

inflation; but their findings for New Zealand are more mixed.

        By contrast, taking a cross-sectional perspective, Ball and Sheridan (2005) find no

empirical evidence that inflation targeting improves performance once you control for

regression to the mean. (High inflation tends to come down.) IT leads neither to lower levels

of inflation, nor to less inflation variability, nor to less persistence. It is true that IT-adopting




                                                                                                        52
countries saw their inflation levels drop after targeting began. But, controlling for the initial

level of inflation, the decline is similar for targeters and non-targeters. Ball and Sheridan

suggest that this finding reflects the endogeneity issue mentioned earlier: Countries that

adopted IT had above-average inflation prior to adoption.

       Luke Willard (2006), after dealing with the endogeneity problem in a variety of

ways, supports Ball and Sheridan’s conclusions. Similarly, Hu Lin and Haichun Ye (2007)

study 22 industrial countries over the period 1985–1999 and address the selection problem

by using a variety of recently-developed propensity score matching methods. Their main

result is that inflation targeting has no significant beneficial effects on targeting countries’

inflation or inflation variability. However, Marco Vega and Diego Winkelried (2005), using

a similar methodology as Lin and Ye, but for a larger set of countries, do find that IT has

helped reduce the level and volatility of inflation. Their results are robust to alternative

definitions of treatment and control groups. Analysing ten OECD countries, Alvaro Angeriz

and Philip Arestis (forthcoming) also find that IT has gone hand in hand with low inflation.

However, IT was often introduced after inflation had already begun its downward trend.

They also find that non-targeting countries have succeeded in achieving and maintaining

low inflation, but their control group consists of only two cases: the US and the European

Economic and Monetary Union.

       What is to be made of these disparate results? Mishkin and Schmidt-Hebbel (2007)

emphasize that a judgment on the effectiveness of inflation targeting in bringing down

inflation depends crucially on the choice of the control group. In particular, IT does not

appear to lead to performance superior to that of a group of successful non-targeters. The

main benefit they see in inflation targeting is as a disciplinary device that helps potentially




                                                                                                    53
wayward countries move closer to the performance of this successful control group.

Bernanke et al. (1999) even argue that inflation targets have often been adopted after central

banks have succeeded in lowering inflation. The primary purpose is to lock in earlier

disinflationary gains.

          Taking a broader perspective, Antonio Fatás, Ilian Mihov, and Andrew Rose (2007)

find for a sample of 42 countries over 40 years that inflation is lower in the presence of

some quantitative target when other determinants of inflation are taken into account.

According to their results, it is quantification that matters, not so much the exact target;

inflation, exchange rate, or monetary targets are all linked to lower inflation.

          Turning to inflation persistence, Levin et al. (2004) and Luca Benati (forthcoming)

find it to be considerably lower—sometimes even negative! —in the presence of inflation

targets. Table 5 reports estimates of inflation persistence for a number of countries,

separated by monetary regimes according to Benati’s classification. It is evident that

inflation persistence is particularly low under inflation targeting. But it is also low under the

Bretton Woods regime.

                                                               Table 5

                                        Measures of inflation persistence

                                      Canada                   Sweden                   New Zealand                   UK
                                      90% confidence           90% confidence             90% confidence       90% confidence
                               ρ                         ρ                          ρ                      ρ
                                          interval                 interval                   interval             interval
Interwar period                0.59     [0.38;0.80]     0.70     [0.42;1.02]      1.00      [0.68;1.05]    --          --
Bretton Woods                 0.71      [0.54;0.88]     0.29    [-0.01;0.58]      0.29      [0.03;0.55]    --          --
1971 to inflation targeting   0.90      [0.72;1.04]     0.52     [0.12;1.02]      0.82      [0.68;1.01]   0.78   [0.62;0.98]
Inflation Targeting           -0.33    [-0.76;0.14]     0.36    [-0.11;0.92]      0.41      [0.00;0.86]  -0.13 [-0.45;0.18]
Source: Benati (forthcoming).
The parameter ρ is the sum of the autoregressive coefficients in a regression of inflation on its own lags. If the confidence
interval includes a value of 1, the null hypothesis of a unit root cannot be rejected.

          In conclusion, the evidence suggests that adopting an inflation target may have

beneficial effects by lowering inflation, by de-linking long-run inflation expectations from


                                                                                                                                54
short-run data, and by reducing inflation persistence. However, these estimated benefits

may reflect a kind of selectivity bias: They seem to accrue primarily to countries that

succeed in stabilizing inflation. There appears to be no systematic difference in the

economic performance of low-inflation countries with and without explicit inflation targets.

       Accordingly, we conclude that inflation targeting is one way, but certainly not the

only way, to control inflation and inflationary expectations. One clear alternative is

establishing an anti-inflation track record that allows economic agents to make reasonably

accurate inferences about the central bank’s objectives and strategy. For example, Linda

Goldberg and Michael Klein (2005) analyze the response of euro-area asset prices to US

inflation news, and find that the ECB’s credibility in financial markets improved after it

went into its first tightening cycle.

       One issue that remains open is the role of communication during a disinflation. One

interesting comparison was made by Michael Bordo, Christopher Erceg, Levin, and Ryan

Michaels (2007), who show in three U.S. disinflation episodes that it is particularly

important for a central bank to communicate an aggressive policy stance, if it starts with

relatively low credibility. It would be nice to know whether the introduction of an inflation

target can facilitate the disinflation process under these circumstances, and what alternatives

a central bank should (and should not) consider.

       6. Assessment and issues for future research

       To what extent, then, is central bank communication a useful instrument for policy

makers? In 2001, Blinder et al. (p. 9) wrote: “To date, there is no research to report on.”

Since then, there has been a veritable explosion of research on central bank communication.

While the evidence reviewed here is not entirely one-sided, it seems safe to conclude that




                                                                                                  55
communication can be an important and powerful part of the central bank’s toolkit since it

has the ability to move financial markets, to improve the predictability of monetary policy,

and the potential to help the monetary authorities achieve macroeconomic objectives such

as low and stable inflation.

       More specifically, our review of the rapidly-growing empirical literature, virtually

all of which was written in this decade, suggests that:

       •   No consensus has yet emerged on what communication policies constitute “best

           practice” for central banks. Practices, in fact, differ substantially and are

           evolving.

       •   The predictability of monetary policy decisions has improved notably in many

           countries. With only a few exceptions, the empirical studies to date suggest that

           more and better central bank communication contributed to this improvement by

           “reducing noise.” We are tempted to call this issue “closed” but, of course,

           future research can always overturn a previous conclusion.

       •   That said, the predictability of monetary policy appears to be degraded

           somewhat when central banks speak with too many conflicting voices—as

           sometimes happens at the Federal Reserve, for example.

       •   What might be called “short-run” central bank communication—that is,

           disclosing central bank views on, e.g., the outlook for the economy and

           monetary policy—has a wide variety of impacts on financial markets, including

           on the levels and volatilities of various interest rates. Official statements, reports,

           and minutes appear to have the clearest and most consistent empirical effects on

           financial markets. The evidence on the impacts of speeches is more mixed. But




                                                                                                     56
           it, too, is mainly supportive of the idea that central bank communication “creates

           news.” The distinctions among different forms of communication merit further

           empirical evaluation (e.g., what works best?)..

       •   The limited number of studies that try to assess the directional intent of the

           central bank’s messages generally find that markets move in the “right”

           direction—that is, what used to be called “announcement effects” help the

           central bank rather than hinder it. But there has been relatively little such

           research to date. We need more evidence in order to be convinced on this point,

           plus further analysis of how, if at all, creating this type of directional news raises

           welfare.

       •   Regarding what might be called “long-run” central bank communication, the

           empirical evidence so far is largely limited to one set of questions: the effects of

           inflation targeting (IT) on inflation outcomes. Those are good questions, but not

           the only ones. So research on the links between communication and other macro

           variables is essential.

       •   For a variety of reasons, isolating clear effects of IT turns out to be harder than

           might be expected. But there is clear evidence that IT helps anchor inflationary

           expectations. (However, it is not the only way to do so.) The evidence that

           adopting IT leads to lower or less variable inflation is far less compelling. On

           such questions, the choice of the control groups seems to be critical.

       This list of research findings constitutes a quantum leap over what we knew at the

start of the decade, which was almost nothing. But there is a lot more to learn. For example,

the publication of projected paths for the central bank’s policy rate appears to be the “new




                                                                                                    57
frontier” in central bank communication. But it has been practiced in so few countries for so

few years that we have little empirical knowledge of its effects as yet. As more data

accumulates, this should be a high-priority area for future research.

        Another important, but barely explored issue is what constitutes “optimal”

communication policy, and how that depends on the institutional environment in which a

central bank operates, the nature of its decisionmaking process, and the structure of its

monetary policy committee. For example, the Bank of England has a committee of nine

members who are individually accountable, while both the FOMC and the ECB Governing

Council are larger committees with group accountability, and the Reserve Bank of New

Zealand still has a single decisionmaker. Central banks need to tailor their communication

strategies to these and other institutional features. Research on that important topic has

barely begun.

       Finally, virtually all the research to date has focused on central bank communication

with the financial markets. It may be time to pay some attention to communication with the

general public. Admittedly, studying communication with the general public will pose new

challenges to researchers—not least because financial market prices will be less relevant.

But the issues are at least as important. In the end, it is the general public that gives central

banks their democratic legitimacy, and hence their independence.




                                                                                                    58
References

       Amato, Jeffery D., Stephen Morris, and Hyun Song Shin. 2002. “Communication

and Monetary Policy.” Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 18(4): 495-503.

       Andersson, Malin, Hans Dillén, and Peter Sellin. 2006. “Monetary Policy Signaling

and Movements in the Term Structure of Interest Rates.” Journal of Monetary Economics,

53(8): 1815-55.

       Angeriz, Alvaro, and Philip Arestis. Forthcoming. “Assessing inflation targeting

through intervention analysis.” Oxford Economic Papers.

       Archer, David. 2004. “Communication with the Public.” In Practical Experience

with Inflation Targeting, Prague: Czech National Bank, 145-55.

       Ball, Laurence, and Niamh Sheridan. 2005. “Does Inflation Targeting Matter?” In

The Inflation-Targeting Debate, ed. Ben S. Bernanke and Michael Woodford. Chicago:

University of Chicago Press, 249-76.

       Beine, Michel, Gust Janssen, and Christelle Lecourt. 2006. “Should Central Bankers

Talk to the FX Market?” Unpublished, available at http://homepages.ulb.ac.be/~mbeine/

       Benati, Luca. Forthcoming. “Investigating Inflation Persistence across Monetary

Regimes.” Quarterly Journal of Economics.

       Berardi, Michele, and John Duffy. 2007. “The Value of Central Bank Transparency

When Agents Are Learning.” European Journal of Political Economy, 23(1): 9-29.

       Berger, Helge, Michael Ehrmann, and Marcel Fratzscher. 2006. “Monetary Policy in

the Media.” ECB Working Paper 679.




                                                                                            59
        Berger, Helge, Jakob De Haan, and Jan-Egbert Sturm. 2006. “Does Money Matter in

the ECB Strategy? New Evidence Based on ECB Communication.”, CESifo Working Paper

1652.

        Bernanke, Ben. 2004. “Fedspeak.” Remarks at the Meetings of the American

Economic Association, San Diego, available at:

http://www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/speeches/2004/200401032/default.htm.

        Bernanke, Ben. 2007. “Federal Reserve Communications.” Remarks at the Cato

Institute 25th Annual Monetary Conference, Washington, D.C., 14 November 2007,

available at http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/bernanke20071114a.htm.

        Bernanke, Ben, Thomas Laubach, Frederic S Mishkin, and Adam S. Posen. 1999.

Inflation Targeting: Lessons from the International Experience. Princeton, New Jersey:

Princeton University Press.

        Bernanke, Ben, Vincent R. Reinhart, and Brian P. Sack. 2004. “Monetary Policy

Alternatives at the Zero Bound: An Empirical Assessment.” Brookings Papers on Economic

Activity, 2: 1-100.

        Bernoth, Kirsten, and Jürgen von Hagen. 2004. “The Euribor Futures Market:

Efficiency and the Impact of ECB Policy Announcements.” International Finance, 7 (1): 1-

24.

        Blinder, Alan S. 1998. Central Banking in Theory and Practice. Cambridge MA:

MIT Press.

        Blinder, Alan S. 2004. The Quiet Revolution: Central Banking Goes Modern. New

Haven, CN: Yale University Press.




                                                                                           60
       Blinder, Alan S. 2007. “Monetary Policy by Committee: Why and How?” European

Journal of Political Economy, 23(1), 106-23.

       Blinder, Alan S., Charles Goodhart, Philipp Hildebrand, David Lipton, and Charles

Wyplosz. 2001. How Do Central Banks Talk? Geneva Reports on the World Economy 3,

Geneva/London: ICMB/CEPR.

       Blinder, Alan S., and Ricardo Reis. 2005. “Understanding the Greenspan Standard.”

In The Greenspan Era: Lessons for the Future, Kansas City: Federal Reserve Bank of

Kansas City, 11-96.

       Bordo, Michael D., Christopher Erceg, Andrew T. Levin and Ryan Michaels. 2007.

“Three Great American Disinflations.” NBER Working Paper 12982.

       Boschen, John F., and Leonard O. Mills. 1995. “The Relation between Narrative and

Money Market Indicators of Monetary Policy.” Economic Inquiry, 33(1): 24-44.

       Brand, Claus, Daniel Buncic, and Jarkko Turunen. 2006. “The Impact of ECB

Monetary Policy Decisions and Communication on the Yield Curve.” ECB Working Paper

657.

       Brunner, Karl. 1981. “The Art of Central Banking.” Center for Research in

Government Policy and Business, University of Rochester, Working Paper GPB 81-6.

       Buiter, Willem. 1999. “Alice in Euroland.” Journal of Common Market Studies,

37(2): 181–209.

       Burkhard, Lukas, and Andreas M. Fischer. 2007. “Communicating Policy Options at

the Zero Bound.” CEPR Discussion Paper 6563.

       Castelnuovo, Efrem, Sergio Nicoletti-Altimari, and Diego Rodriguez Palenzuela.

2003. “Definition of Price Stability, Range and Point Inflation Targets: The Anchoring of




                                                                                            61
Long-Term Inflation Expectations.” In Background Studies for the ECB’s Evaluation of Its

Monetary Policy Strategy, ed. O. Issing. Frankfurt-am-Main, Germany: European Central

Bank, 43-90.

       Cecchetti, Stephen, and Michael Ehrmann. 2002. “Does Inflation Targeting Increase

Output Volatility? An International Comparison of Policymakers Preferences and

Outcomes.” In Monetary Policy: Rules and Transmission Mechanisms, ed. Norman Loayza

and Klaus Schmidt-Hebbel. Santiago: Central Bank of Chile, 247-74.

       Chadha, Jaghit S., and Charles Nolan. 2001. “Inflation Targeting, Transparency and

Interest Rate Volatility: Ditching ‘Monetary Mystique’ in the UK.” Journal of

Macroeconomics, 23(3): 349-66.

       Chappell, Henry W., Rob Roy McGregor, and Todd A. Vermilyea. 2004. Committee

Decisions on Monetary Policy. Evidence from Historical Records of the Federal Open

Market Committee. Cambridge (MA): MIT Press.

       Clarida, Richard, Jordi Gali, and Mark Gertler. 1999. “The Science of Monetary

Policy: A New Keynesian Perspective.” Journal of Economic Literature, 37(4): 1661-1707.

       Connolly, Ellis, and Marion Kohler. 2004. “News and Interest Rate Expectations: A

Study of Six Central Banks.” In The Future of Inflation Targeting, ed. Christopher Kent and

Simon Guttman. Sydney: Reserve Bank of Australia, 108-34.

       Corbo, Vittorio, Oscar Landerretche, and Klaus Schmidt-Hebbel. 2002. “Does

Inflation Targeting Make a Difference?” In Inflation Targeting: Design, Performance,

Challenges, ed. Norman Loayza and Raimundo Soto. Santiago: Central Bank of Chile, 221-

69.




                                                                                              62
        Cruijsen, Carin A.B. van der and Sylvester C.W. Eijffinger. 2007. “The Economic

Impact of Central Bank Transparency: A Survey,” CEPR Discussion Paper, No. 6070.

        Cukierman, Alex. 2008. “The Limits of Transparency.” ECB Working Paper.

        Cukierman, Alex, and Allan Meltzer. 1986. “A Theory of Ambiguity, Credibility

and Inflation under Discretion and Asymmetric Information.” Econometrica, 54(4): 1099-

1128.

        De Haan, Jakob, and Sylvester C.W. Eijffinger. 2000. “The Democratic

Accountability of the European Central Bank: A Comment on Two Fairy-tales.” Journal of

Common Market Studies, 38(3): 393-407.

        De Haan, Jakob, Fabian Amtenbrink, and Sandra Waller. 2004. “The Transparency

and Credibility of the European Central Bank.” Journal of Common Market Studies, 42(4):

775-94.

        Demiralp, Selma, and Oscar Jorda, 2002. “The Announcement Effect: Evidence

from Open Market Desk Data.” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Economic Policy

Review, 8: 29-48.

        Dominguez, Kathryn M., and Jeffrey A. Frankel. 1993. “Does Foreign Exchange

Intervention Matter? The Portfolio Effect.” American Economic Review, 83(5): 1356–69.

        Dominguez, Kathryn M., and Freyan Panthaki. 2007. “The Influence of Actual and

Unrequited Interventions.” International Journal of Finance and Economics, 12(2): 171-

200.

        Dueker, Michael J., and Andreas M. Fischer. 2006. “Do Inflation Targeters

Outperform Non-targeters?”, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, 88(5): 431-50.




                                                                                          63
       Eggertsson, Gauti, and Michael Woodford 2003. “The Zero Bound on Short-Term

Interest Rates and Optimal Monetary Policy.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,

1:139–211.

       Ehrmann, Michael, and Marcel Fratzscher. 2007a. “Explaining Monetary Policy

Decisions in Press Conferences.“ ECB Working Paper 767.

       Ehrmann, Michael, and Marcel Fratzscher. 2007b. “Communication by Central Bank

Committee Members: Different Strategies, Same Effectiveness?” Journal of Money, Credit,

and Banking, 39(2-3): 509-41.

       Ehrmann, Michael, and Marcel Fratzscher. 2007c. “The Timing of Central Bank

Communication.” European Journal of Political Economy, 23(1): 124-45.

       Ehrmann, Michael, and Marcel Fratzscher. 2007d. “Transparency, Disclosure and

the Federal Reserve.” International Journal of Central Banking, 3(1): 179-225.

       Ehrmann, Michael, and Marcel Fratzscher. 2007e. “Social value of public

information: testing the limits to transparency.” ECB Working Paper 821.

       Ehrmann, Michael, and Marcel Fratzscher. 2008. “Purdah – On the Rationale for

Central Bank Silence Around Policy Meetings.” Forthcoming, Journal of Money, Credit,

and Banking.

       Eusepi, Stefano, and Bruce Preston. 2007. “Central Bank Communication and

Expectations Stabilization.” NBER Working Paper 13259.

       Fatás, Antonio, Ilian Mihov, and Andrew Rose. 2007. “Quantitative Goals for

Monetary Policy.” Journal of Money, Credit, and, Banking, 39(5): 1163-76.

       Faust, Jon, and Lars E.O. Svensson. 2001. “Transparency and Credibility: Monetary

Policy with Unobservable Goals.” International Economic Review, 42(2): 369-97.



                                                                                           64
        Fracasso, Andrea, Hans Genberg, and Charles Wyplosz. 2003. “How do Central

Banks Write?” Geneva Reports on the World Economy 2. Geneva/London: ICMB and

CEPR.

        Fratzscher, Marcel. 2004. “Communication and Exchange Rate Policy.” ECB

Working Paper 363.

        Fratzscher, Marcel. Forthcoming. “Oral Interventions versus Actual Interventions in

FX Markets–An Event-Study Approach,” The Economic Journal.

        Fratzscher, Marcel. 2006. “On the Long-Term Effectiveness of Exchange Rate

Communication and Interventions.” Journal of International Money and Finance, 25(1):

146-67.

        Fujiwara, Ippei. 2005. “Is the Central Bank’s Publication of Economic Forecasts

Influential?” Economics Letters, 89(3): 255–61.

        Garfinkel, Michelle and Seonghwan Oh. 2005. "When and How Much to Talk:

Credibility and Flexibility in Monetary Policy with Private Information," Journal of

Monetary Economics, 35(2): 341-357.

        Geraats, Petra. 2002. “Central Bank Transparency.” The Economic Journal, 112

(483): 532–65.

        Gerlach, Stefan. 2007. “Interest Rate Setting by the ECB, 1999-2006: Words and

Deeds.” International Journal of Central Banking, 3(3): 1-46.

        Gerlach-Kristen, Petra. 2004. “Is the MPC’s Voting Record Informative about

Future UK Monetary Policy?” Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 106(2): 299-313.

        Goldberg, Linda, and Michael Klein. 2005. “Establishing Credibility: Evolving

Perceptions of the European Central Bank.” NBER Working Paper 11792.




                                                                                              65
       Goodfriend, Marvin. 1986. “Monetary Mystique: Secrecy and Central Banking.”

Journal of Monetary Economics, 17(1): 63-92.

       Goodfriend, Marvin. (1991). “Interest Rates and the Conduct of Monetary Policy.”

Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 34: 7-30.

       Goodhart, Charles A.E.. 2001. “Monetary policy transmission lags and the

formulation of the policy decision on interest rates”. Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

Review, 83(4), pp. 165-81.

       Goodhart, Charles A.E.. 2005. “Dear Jean-Claude.” Central Banking, 16(1): 32-36.

       Gosselin, Pierre, Aileen Lotz, and Charles Wyplosz. 2007. “Interest Rate Signal;s

and Central Bank Transparency,” CEPR Discussion Paper 6454.

       Gürkaynak, Refet S. 2005. “Using Federal Funds Futures Contracts for Monetary

Policy Analysis.” Federal Reserve Board, Finance and Economic Discussion Series 2005-

29.

       Gürkaynak, Refet S., Andrew Levin, and Eric Swanson. 2006. “Does Inflation

Targeting Anchor Long-Run Inflation Expectations? Evidence from Long-Term Bond

Yields in the US, UK and Sweden.” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper

2006-09.

       Gürkaynak, Refet S., Brian Sack, and Eric T. Swanson. 2005. “Do Actions Speak

Louder Than Words? The Response of Asset Prices to Monetary Policy Actions and

Statements.” International Journal of Central Banking, 1(1): 55-93.

       Guthrie, Graeme, and Julian Wright. 2000. “Open Mouth Operations.” Journal of

Monetary Economics, 46(2): 489-516.




                                                                                           66
       Heinemann, Friedrich, and Karin Ullrich. 2007. “Does it Pay to Watch Central

Bankers Lips? The Information Content of ECB Wording.” Swiss Journal of Economics

and Statistics 3: 155-85.

       Holsti, Ole R. 1969. Content Analysis for Social Sciences and Humanities. Reading:

Addison-Wesley.

       Issing, Otmar 1999. “The Eurosystem: Transparent and Accountable, or ‘Willem in

Euroland’”, Journal of Common Market Studies, 37(3): 503–519.

       Issing, Otmar. 2005. “Communication, Transparency, Accountability – Monetary

Policy in the Twenty-First Century.” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, 87(2): 65-

83.

       Jansen, David-Jan. 2008. “Does the Clarity of Central Bank Communication Affect

Volatility in Financial Markets?” unpublished paper, De Nederlandsche Bank, March.

       Jansen, David-Jan, and Jakob De Haan. 2005. “Talking Heads: The Effects of ECB

Statements on the Euro-Dollar Exchange Rate.” Journal of International Money and

Finance, 24(2): 343-361.

       Jansen, David-Jan, and Jakob De Haan. 2006a. “Does ECB communication help in

predicting its interest rate decisions?” CESifo Working Paper 1804.

       Jansen, David-Jan, and Jakob De Haan. 2006b. “Look Who’s Talking: ECB

Communication During the First Years of EMU.” International Journal of Finance and

Economics, 11(3): 219-228.

       Jansen, David-Jan, and Jakob De Haan. 2007. “Were Verbal Efforts to Support The

Euro Effective? A High-frequency Analysis of ECB Statements.” European Journal of

Political Economy, 23(1): 245-259.




                                                                                            67
         Jansen, David-Jan, and Jakob De Haan. 2007. “The Importance of Being Vigilant:

  Has ECB Communication Influenced Euro Area Inflation Expectations?” CESifo Working

  Paper 2134.

         Jensen, Henrik. 2002. “Optimal Degrees of Transparency in Monetary Policy

  Making.” Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 104(3): 399-422.

         Johnson, David R. 2002. “The Effect of Inflation Targeting on the Behavior of

  Expected Inflation: Evidence from an 11 Country Panel.” Journal of Monetary Economics,

  49(8): 1493–1519.

         Johnson, David R. 2003. “The Effect of Inflation Targets on the Level of Expected

  Inflation in Five Countries.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 55(4): 1076–81.

         Kahnemann, Daniel. 2003. “Maps of Bounded Rationality: Psychology for

  Behavioral Economics.” American Economic Review, 93(5): 1449-75.

         King, Mervyn. 2000. “Monetary Theory: Policy in Practice.” Address to the joint

  luncheon of the American Economic Association and the American Finance Association,

  Boston, available at

         http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2000/speech67.htm.

         King, Mervyn. 2002. “The Inflation Target Ten Years On.” Speech delivered to the

  London School of Economics, available at

  http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2002/speech181.pdf

         King, Mervyn. 2005. “Monetary Policy: Practice Ahead of Theory.” 2005 Mais

  Lecture, delivered at Cass Business School, London; available at:

http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2005/speech245.pdf




                                                                                             68
       Kohn, Donald L., and Brian Sack (2004). “Central Bank Talk: Does it Matter and

Why?” In: Macroeconomics, Monetary Policy, and Financial Stability, Ottawa: Bank of

Canada, 175-206.

       Kuttner, Kenneth. 2004. “A Snapshot of Inflation Targeting in its Adolescence.” In

The Future of Inflation Targeting, ed. C. Kent and S. Guttmann. Sydney: Reserve Bank of

Australia, 6-47.

       Kuttner, Kenneth N., and Adam S. Posen 1999. “Does Talk Matter After All?

Inflation Targeting and Central Bank Behavior.” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff

Report 88.

       Lange, Joe, Brian Sack, and William Whitesell. 2003. “Anticipations of Monetary

Policy in Financial Markets.” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 35(6): 889-909.

       Lapp, John S., and Douglas K. Pearce. 2000. “Does a Bias in FOMC Policy

Directives Help Predict Inter-Meeting Policy Changes?” Journal of Money, Credit, and

Banking, 32(3): 435–41.

       Levin, Andrew T., Fabio M. Natalucci, and Jeremy M. Piger. 2004. “The

Macroeconomic Effects of Inflation Targeting.” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review,

86(4): 51–80.

       Lin, Shu, and Haichun Ye. 2007. “Does Inflation Targeting Really Make a

Difference? Evaluating the Treatment Effect of Inflation Targeting in Seven Industrial

Countries.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 54(8): 2521-33.

       Meade, Ellen E., and D. Nathan Sheets. 2005. “Regional Influences on FOMC

Voting Patterns.” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 27(4): 661-78.




                                                                                            69
       Meyer, Larry. 1998. “Come With Me to the FOMC. The Gillis Lecture.” Willamette

University, available at

http://www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/speeches/1998/199804022.htm.

       Mishkin, Frederic S. 2004. “Can Central Bank Transparency Go Too Far?” In The

Future of Inflation Targeting, ed. Christopher Kent and Simon Guttmann. Sydney: Reserve

Bank of Australia, 48-65.

       Mishkin, Frederic S. and Klaus Schmidt-Hebbel. 2007. “Does Inflation Targeting

Make a Difference?” NBER Working Papers 12876.

       Morris, Stephen, and Hyun Song Shin. 2002. “Social Value of Public Information.”

American Economic Review, 92(5): 1521-1534.

       Musard-Gies, Marie. 2006. “Do ECB’s Statements Steer Short-Term and Long-

Term Interest Rates in the Euro-Zone?” The Manchester School, 74 (Supplement): 116–39.

       Orphanides, Athanasios 2001. “Monetary Policy Rules Based on Real-Time Data.”

American Economic Review, 91: 964-85.

       Orphanides, Athanasios, and John C. Williams (2004). “Imperfect Knowledge,

Inflation Expectations, and Monetary Policy.” In The Inflation Targeting Debate, ed. Ben

Bernanke and Michael Woodford. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 201-34.

       Pakko, Michael R. 2005. “On the Information Content of FOMC Policy Statements:

Evidence from a Taylor-rule Perspective.” Economic Inquiry, 43(3): 558–69.

       Poole, William. 2001. “Expectations.” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review,

83(1): 1–10.




                                                                                           70
       Poole, William, and Robert H. Rasche 2003. “The Impact of Changes in FOMC

Disclosure Practices on the Transparency of Monetary Policy: Are Markets and the FOMC

Better “Synched”?”, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, 85(1): 1-10.

       Reeves, Rachel, and Michael Sawicki. 2007. “Do Financial Markets React to Bank

of England Communication?” European Journal of Political Economy, 23(1): 207-27.

       Reinhart, Vincent, and Brian Sack 2006. “Grading the Federal Open Market

Committee’s Communications.” Unpublished.

       Romer, Christina, and David Romer. 1989. “Does Monetary Policy Matter? A New

Test in the Spirit of Friedman and Schwartz.” In NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1989, ed.

Olivier Jean Blanchard and Stanley Fischer. Cambridge (MA): MIT Press, 121-70.

       Romer, Christina D., and David H. Romer. 2000. “Federal Reserve Information and

the Behavior of Interest Rates.” American Economic Review, 90(3): 429–457.

       Rosa, Carlo. 2008. “Talking Less and Moving the Markets More: Is this the Recipe

for Monetary Policy Effectiveness? Evidence from the ECB and the Fed.” Unpublished,

available at http://carlorosa1.googlepages.com/research.

       Rosa, Carlo, and Giovanni Verga. 2007. “On the Consistency and Effectiveness of

Central Bank Communication: Evidence from the ECB.” European Journal of Political

Economy, 23(1): 146-75.

       Rozkrut, Marek, Krzysztof Rybiński, Lucyna Sztaba, and Radosław Szwaja. 2007.

“Quest for Central Bank Communication. Does It Pay To Be “Talkative”? European

Journal of Political Economy, 23(1): 67-87.




                                                                                          71
       Rudebusch, Glenn, and John Williams. 2008. “Revealing the Secrets of The Temple:

The Value of Publishing Central Bank Interest Rate Projections.” In Asset Prices and

Monetary Policy, ed. John Y. Campbell. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

       Sarno, Lucio, and Mark P. Taylor 2001. “Official Intervention in Foreign Exchange

Market: Is It Effective and, If So, How Does It Work?, Journal of Economic Literature,

39(3): 839–68.

       Sibert, Anne C. 2006. “Is Central Bank Transparency Desirable?” CEPR Discussion

Paper 5641.

       Siklos, Pierre L. 2002. The Changing Face of Central Banking: Evolutionary Trends

Since World War II, Cambridge University Press.

       Siklos, Pierre L. and Martin T. Bohl. Forthcoming. "Policy Words and Policy Deeds:

The ECB and the Euro," forthcoming in International Journal of Finance and Economics.

       Swanson, Eric T. 2006. “Federal Reserve Transparency and Financial Market

Forecasts of Short-Term Interest Rates.” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 38 (3):

791-819.

       Svensson, Lars E.O. (2003). “What Is Wrong with Taylor Rules? Using Judgment in

Monetary Policy through Targeting Rules.” Journal of Economic Literature, 41(2): 427-

477.

       Svensson, Lars E.O. 2006a. “Social Value of Public Information: Morris and Shin

(2002) Is Actually Pro Transparency, Not Con.” American Economic Review, 96(1): 448-

451.




                                                                                            72
       Svensson, Lars E.O. 2006b. “The Instrument-Rate Projection under Inflation

Targeting: The Norwegian Example.” In Stability and Economic Growth: The Role of

Central Banks. Mexico: Banco de Mexico, 175-98.

       Thornton, Daniel. L., and David. C. Wheelock. 2000. “A History of the Asymmetric

Policy Directive” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, 82(5): 1–16.

       Vega, Marco and Diego Winkelried. 2005. “Inflation Targeting and Inflation

Behavior: A Successful Story?” International Journal of Central Banking, 1(3): 153-175.

       Willard, Luke. 2006. “The Effect of Inflation Targeting on Inflation: A

Reassessment,” Ph.D. dissertation essay, Princeton University.

       Woodford, Michael. 2001. “Monetary Policy in the Information Economy.” In

Economic Policy for the Information Economy. Kansas City: Federal Reserve Bank of

Kansas City, 297-370.

       Woodford, Michael. 2003. Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of

Monetary Policy. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

       Woodford, Michael. 2005. “Central-Bank Communication and Policy

Effectiveness.” In The Greenspan Era: Lessons for the Future. Kansas City: Federal

Reserve Bank of Kansas City, 399-474.




                                                                                          73
