                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            PORTRAITS OF THE ARTIST:
                 PERSONAL VISUAL ART IN THE TWENTIETH CENTURY

                                         David W. Galenson

                                        Working Paper 13939
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13939


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2008




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by David W. Galenson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Portraits of the Artist: Personal Visual Art in the Twentieth Century
David W. Galenson
NBER Working Paper No. 13939
April 2008
JEL No. J01

                                              ABSTRACT

Scholars of literature have devoted considerable attention to what they have called confessional or
personal poetry, in which Robert Lowell, Sylvia Plath, and a series of other poets, from the 1950s
on, made their art out of the experiences of their own lives. Yet art scholars have not analyzed a parallel
practice in the visual arts, in which painters and sculptors have used motifs drawn largely or exclusively
from their own lives. This practice was begun by Vincent van Gogh in the late nineteenth century,
and it subsequently influenced a diverse group of major artists, including such conceptual artists as
Edvard Munch, Frida Kahlo, Joseph Beuys, Bruce Nauman, Cindy Sherman, and Tracey Emin, and
the experimental artists Francis Bacon and Louise Bourgeois. Although van Gogh did not think of
his practice of painting himself and the people and things he cared most about as novel, others soon
recognized it as an innovation that would help them to achieve their artistic goals, and personal art
became a distinctive feature of the advanced art of the twentieth century. That personal art first appeared
in the late nineteenth century, and became more common in the twentieth, reflects the increased autonomy
of painters that was a consequence of the development of a competitive market for advanced art after
the Impressionists' successful challenge to the monopoly of the official Salon.


David W. Galenson
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
galenson@uchicago.edu
                                                   3


Introduction



                I am making a study of the soul, as I can observe myself closely
                and use myself as an anatomical testing ground for this soul study.

                                                                Edvard Munch, 19081



        In an essay written for a 1999 exhibition of Rembrandt’s self-portraits, the scholar Ernst

van de Wetering, professor of art history at the University of Amsterdam and chairman of the

Rembrandt Research Project, noted that Rembrandt “had painted himself before the mirror on at

least forty occasions, had etched himself thirty-one times, and had made a handful of drawn self-

portraits.” On the basis of this enumeration, van de Wetering made a dramatic declaration: “This

segment of his oeuvre is unique in art history, not only in its scale and the length of time it spans,

but also in its regularity.”2

        Van de Wetering’s striking claim is not even close to being accurate. The scholar Iris

Müller-Westermann observed that Edward Munch “recorded himself in more than seventy

painted works and about twenty graphic self-portraits, as well as in more than one hundred

watercolors, drawings, and studies; sometimes year by year, at times monthly or even daily.”3

Munch thus executed considerably more oil portraits of himself than Rembrandt, and Munch’s

total of more than 190 images of himself in all media was more than double Rembrandt’s total of

approximately 90. 4 Rembrandt first painted himself at 20, and continued to do so until near the

end of his life at 63, but this span of 43 years also falls far short of the 63 years that separated

Munch’s first self-portrait at 19 from his last at 81.5
                                               4
        That such an erudite scholar would make such a clear misstatement may be symptomatic

of a failure of art historians to recognize a phenomenon that began in the late nineteenth century

and became more common in the twentieth. This involves not simply self-portraiture, but a

broader artistic practice. Specifically, the twentieth century is the first in which a large number of

visual artists made most or all of their art about themselves and their lives. Before the modern

era, many painters made occasional self-portraits, but the bulk of their work treated subjects that

did not involve them personally. So for example Rembrandt’s paintings of himself probably

made up considerably less than 20 percent of his total output of paintings, and were greatly

outnumbered by the biblical scenes and commissioned portraits that were the products expected

by most purchasers of oil paintings in the seventeenth century.6 It was only in the modern era

that painters could not simply make self-portraits a larger share of their total output, but that

artists who wished to do so could make most or even all of their works about their own lives –

images of people and things they themselves knew and cared about.

Poets

               I write very personal poems but I hope that they will become the
               central theme to someone else’s private life.
                                                                     Anne Sexton7

        Although scholars have not drawn attention to the growing importance of personal visual

art, the same is decidedly not true for poetry. The present consideration of the practice of visual

artists can consequently benefit from some analyses of personal poetry.

        In 1984, the literary critic Alan Williamson observed that “what is most exciting and

original about the poetry of the last twenty-five years is its individualism: its willingness to set

values of universality at risk, in form of the authenticity of specific autobiography.” For

Williamson, the distinctive feature of “the personal poetry that emerged in the late 1950s ...
                                                5
[was] its tendency to make candor an aesthetic value and to suggest that complete self-definition

is a sufficient and possible goal for lyric poetry.”8 This was not a new claim. In 1973, Robert

Phillips declared that “we are living in a great Age of Autobiography,” in which the most

distinguished contributions were those of poets whose work was called “confessional.” This

poetry was highly subjective, privileged the personal over the universal, was written in the

language of ordinary speech, often took alienation as a theme, and recognized no subject matter

as off limits. Assuming objectivity to be impossible, the confessional poets were explicitly

subjective: “Whatever the cost in public exposure or private anguish, their subjects are most

often themselves, and always the things they most intimately know.” The common characteristic

of confessional poetry was the centrality of the poet’s self: “It uses the self as a poetic symbol

around which is woven a personal mythology.”9

       Confessional poetry was a reaction against the doctrine of persona, which was the

reigning orthodoxy of advanced poetry for much of the first half of the twentieth century.

Persona – originally the Latin word for the mask an actor wore onstage – was the term used by

Ezra Pound, T.S. Eliot, and others to stress the distinction between the poet and the speaker of a

poem: the “I” of a poem was not the poet, but a mask created by him.10 This separation generally

implied not only detachment but also objectivity on the part of the poet. Thus Eliot explained

that “Poetry is not a turning loose of emotion, but an escape from emotion; it is not the

expression of personality, but an escape from personality.”11

       During the 1950s, Allen Ginsberg and Robert Lowell were prominent younger poets who

reacted against the impersonality and absence of passion in contemporary poetry, and who

“created art out of the confusion of their lives.”12 As their influence spread, some critics

identified a change in regime. In 1972, for example, Lionel Trilling declared that “Within the last
                                             6
two decades English and American poets have programmatically scuttled the sacred doctrine of

the persona, the belief that the poet does not, must not present himself to us and figure in our

consciousness as a person, as a man speaking to men, but must have an exclusively aesthetic

existence.”13

       In heralding this revolution, the poet and critic Donald Davie proclaimed that “A poem in

which the ‘I’ stands immediately and unequivocally for the author” was “essentially and

necessarily superior to a poem in which the ‘I’ stands not for the author but for a persona of the

author’s.”14 Davie cited Robert Lowell’s prize-winning Life Studies, a pioneering work of the

new poetry, as an example in which the speaker was unequivocally the poet himself.15 In fact,

however, Lowell explained that the autobiographical poems in Life Studies were “not always

factually true. There’s a good deal of tinkering with fact.” Yet although Lowell conceded that he

had “invented facts and changed things,” his goal was nonetheless to create the appearance of

truth: “you want the reader to say, This is true … [T]he reader was to believe he was getting the

real Robert Lowell.”16 The poet John Berryman resolved the contradiction between Davie’s

criterion of the poet as speaker and Lowell’s practice of mixing fiction with fact by observing

that Life Studies was clearly based on Lowell’s personal experience rather than on invention and

symbol, but that “the ‘I’ of a poem can never be identical with the actual author,” even if only

because of the incompleteness of art: “The necessity for the artist of selection opens inevitably

an abyss between his person and his persona.”17

       Robert Elliott observed of Life Studies that for many readers “a substantial part of the

fascination, the strength, the poignancy of these poems resides in their claim to the truth.”18 Yet

not all confessional poetry shared Lowell’s goal of the appearance of truth. So for example

Lowell himself observed that the poetry of his former student Sylvia Plath was “personal,
                                                  7
confessional, felt, but the manner of feeling is controlled hallucination, the autobiography of a

fever.” Lowell remarked that in her final poems, “Plath becomes herself, becomes something

imaginary, newly, wildly, and subtly created – hardly a person at all, or a woman, certainly not

another ‘poetess,’ but one of those super-real, hypnotic, great classical heroines.”19

       Several issues raised in these analyses of confessional poetry can be useful in considering

personal visual art. One key question involves how objectively or subjectively the poet – or artist

– treats his own experience. Another involves explicitness: if the author employs symbols, are

their meanings accessible or are they esoteric? And another important issue concerns sincerity –

whether the work is intended to convince the reader that the speaker is the real author, as

opposed to an obviously exaggerated or distorted persona.

Vincent van Gogh (1853-1890)

               Painters … dead and buried speak to the next generation or to
               several succeeding generations through their work.
                                                       Vincent van Gogh, 188820

       The prototype of the visual artist who made his art entirely out of his own life was

Vincent van Gogh. This fact was recognized by Meyer Schapiro, who observed that “van Gogh

converted all [his] aspiration and anguish into his art, which thus became the first example of a

truly personal art, art as a deeply lived means of spiritual deliverance or transformation of the

self.”21 George Heard Hamilton stressed the integration of van Gogh’s words and images in

creating this art: “His autobiography in the form of some 755 letters to his devoted brother Theo

and a few friends is one of the most relentless documentations of the search for self in literary

history. In his paintings and drawings, van Gogh also illustrated that life, literally and

figuratively. Each of his pictures was a stage in his search, each ‘a cry of anguish,’ as he said, so

that to understand his art it is not enough to judge it in purely artistic terms.”22 Schapiro further
                                               8
recognized that van Gogh’s enterprise was a distinctive product of the new role of art in the

secular modern era, and that van Gogh provided a model for the pursuit of that role: “he

responded, as others did in his time, to the new function of art in the West, as an alternative to

older moral-religious means. But failing in this heroic effort to save himself, as his suicide

shows, he nevertheless sealed this function by his great example and the authenticity of his work;

he showed that art could reach that intimacy and intensity of the striving, loving, anguished

self.”23

           Van Gogh was an archetypal example of a conceptual artist whose art was intended to

express his own emotions. From an early stage of his career as a painter, he resolved to ignore

his critics and “to paint what I feel and feel what I paint.”24 Embracing precedents he saw in

Poussin, “in whose pictures all reality is at the same time symbolic,” and in the work of the

writer Guy de Maupassant, who declared “the artist’s liberty to exaggerate, to create in his novel

a world more beautiful, more simple, more consoling than ours,” van Gogh created a personal

symbolic language that pervaded his entire oeuvre. 25 So for example one of the last paintings he

made before leaving his parents’ home in Holland in 1885 was Open Bible – a still life in which

a large bible, open at Isaiah, lay open next to a small, battered paperback copy of Emile Zola’s

La Joie de Vivre. H.R. Graetz explained that the contrast between the books represented a

temporal and generational shift: “The little novel lying in front of the weighty Bible symbolizes

the opposition between the modern way of life and the strong religious tradition with the

condemnation in Isaiah of joy in living – of joie de vivre.” The image also expressed van Gogh’s

anguish from his relationship with his disapproving father: “His break away from these strong

ties of his earlier life – father and church – did not take place without pain; it is reflected in the

contrast between the powerful Bible with its reinforced edges and the tiny, frayed Joie de Vivre
                                               9
                                  26
with its visible marks of injury.” Schapiro observed that because of his persistence in painting

symbolically his own life, van Gogh “is able to transpose to the canvas with a singular power the

forms and qualities of things; but they are things that have touched him deeply,” so that a

painting that portrayed nothing but a pair of worn boots – a motif he executed no less than eight

times – became “a piece from a self-portrait.”27 When van Gogh painted portraits, they were not

of patrons, but of people he cared deeply about, for his goal was not to generate income but

instead to make a psychological statement – “to paint portraits which would appear after a

century to the people living then as apparitions. By which I mean … using our knowledge of and

our modern taste for color as a means of arriving at the expression and the intensification of the

character.”28

       Van Gogh realized that viewers of his paintings would not understand all the personal

meanings they had for him.29 Because of the remarkable explanation of his life, and work,

recorded in the letters that Theo carefully saved, it is possible to recognize, as Schapiro did, that

“Every stage of his art has a profound personal meaning, it engages him completely, and could

only have been produced in the place where he had lived and worked.”30 But even before the

letters were published, van Gogh’s art was widely appreciated, because of the obvious power of

the conceptual plastic devices he created. Thus Hamilton concluded that van Gogh’s art was

“totally self-expressive. When it achieves … a more than personal power and beauty, it is

expressive to such a degree that it became almost immediately … one of the principal sources for

the broader currents of European Expressionism.”31
                                                 10
Edvard Munch (1863-1944)

                 My art is a self-confession. Through it, I seek to clarify my
                 relationship with the world.
                                                               Edvard Munch, 193232

          One of the earliest expressionist artists to be influenced by van Gogh was Edvard Munch.

Munch saw a memorial exhibition of ten paintings by van Gogh in Paris in 1891, and the sharp,

exaggerated diagonal that van Gogh used to express sadness soon became one of Munch’s

favorite compositional devices.33 The example of van Gogh’s life remained vivid to Munch

throughout his own life. More than four decades after his first exposure to van Gogh’s art,

Munch reflected that “During his short life, van Gogh did not allow his flame to go out. Fire and

embers were his brushes during the few years of his life … I have thought, and wished … to

follow in his footsteps. Not to let my flame burn out, and with burning brush, to paint to the very

end.”34

          Early in his career, Munch’s conception of art was deeply affected by Hans Jaeger, a

charismatic philosopher who was the leader of a group of Norwegian bohemians. One of

Jaeger’s beliefs was that the individual could become free only through self-examination.35

Munch’s self-portraits were his response. Thus Arne Eggum observed that “To Munch, the self-

portrait was a mirror to reflect fundamental problems regarding our own existence. The great

majority of them have a very personal stamp, and most of them were never exhibited by Munch

himself.”36 But all of Munch’s paintings pursued the goal he took from Jaeger, as did the

notebooks he called his “soul’s diary”: “When I write these notes, it is not to describe my own

life … Just as Leonardo da Vinci studied the recesses of the body and dissected human cadavers,

I try from self-scrutiny to dissect what is universal in the soul.”37 Munch believed that his own

experience could be of value to others. Thus he reflected that his focus on himself “could … be
                                             11
called egotism. However, I have always thought and felt that my art might be able to help others

to clarify their own search for truth.”38

        Because of his desire for universality, Munch struggled to develop a vocabulary of

symbols that would communicate his feelings to viewers of his paintings. The most famous

instance of this stemmed from a memory he described in his diary in January of 1892:

                I was walking along the road with two friends. The sun set. I felt a
                tinge of melancholy. Suddenly the sky became a bloody red …
                        My friends walked on. I stood there, trembling with fright.
                And I felt a loud, unending scream piercing nature.39

Munch wanted to paint the experience of this episode, but a friend recalled that he was frustrated

by the fear that others wouldn’t see it as he had: “He was in despair because the miserable means

available to painting were not sufficient.”40 Yet he was determined to try nonetheless, and during

the next two years he made a series of preparatory sketches and paintings. As he worked, the

scene became simplified with flat, stylized areas of color, and progressive suppression of

descriptive detail. In the celebrated final version of The Scream, which Munch completed in the

fall of 1893, the central figure turns to face the viewer: “Its completely flat body loses all effects

of human anatomy and twists like a worm to conform to and extend the fjord landscape.”41 The

distorted figure, and the horror of its features as it presses its hands against the sides of its head,

have been widely seen as an early psychological expression of the anxiety of modern man.

        Munch’s conception of art was intensely personal: he wrote in his diary that “Art is one’s

heart-blood.”42 Throughout his life, he kept with him a newspaper clipping of a review of an

exhibition of his work in Paris in 1897, that read in part:
                                                 12
               The man and his work are indeed inextricably bound together; one
               serves to clarify and illuminate the other. His work lays bare
               thoughts that are felt, experienced … Munch, by means of his skill
               as a painter, opens his soul to us, revealing its most secret
               corners.43


Frida Kahlo (1907-1954)

               Where is the “I”?
                                                                Frida Kahlo, 193844

       Frida Kahlo began painting at the age of 19, as a result of an accident that almost killed

her. A collision between a tram and the bus she was riding on severely damaged her spine and

legs, and forced her to remain in bed, immobile for months. Out of boredom, she began painting

portraits of her family and friends to amuse herself. She also hung a mirror beside her bed, and

painted herself. When her injuries made it impossible for her to pursue the medical studies she

had planned, she made painting her career.

       The accident left Kahlo permanently wounded: she had more than 30 surgical operations

during the remaining 28 years of her life, including the eventual amputation of one leg, and she

lived in constant pain. The accident also influenced the character of her art: her biographer

Hayden Herrera observed that “it was the accident and its aftermath that led her eventually, as a

mature painter, to chart her state of mind – to set down her discoveries – in terms of things done

to her body … [I]n her paintings Frida was intent on making painful feelings known.”45 Kahlo

herself explained that from the time of the accident, she used art to express her own reality: “my

obsession was to begin again, painting things just as I saw them with my own eyes and nothing

more… Thus, as the accident changed my path, many things prevented me from fulfilling the

desires which everyone considers normal, and to me nothing seemed more normal than to paint

what had not been fulfilled.”46
                                               13
       Kahlo deliberately created a persona with her art. Gannit Ankori noted that “she was an

expert at hiding behind masks and facades of her own construction. It is no coincidence that she

was nicknamed by [her husband Diego] Rivera and by her closest friends la gran ocultadora –

‘the great concealer.’”47 Kahlo was fascinated by her own appearance, aand she surrounded

herself with mirrors.48 In her 28 years as an artist, “Kahlo produced over one hundred images

that explore aspects of her complex identity in relation to her body, to her genealogy, to her

childhood, to social structures, to national, religious and cultural contexts, and to nature.”49

       Kahlo’s approach to art was quintessentially conceptual: Ankori described her as “a

highly sophisticated and erudite artist who constructed each painting with utmost care, and with

deliberate artistic and expressive considerations.”50 Herrera noted that her subjects invariably

“came from a world close at hand – friends, animals, still lifes, most of all from herself. Her true

subjects were embodied states of mind, her own joys and sorrows.”51 In many of her paintings

Kahlo mimicked the narrative style of Mexican folk art – “the drawing is naively painstaking, the

color choices are odd, the perspective is awkward, space is reduced to a rudimentary stage, and

action is condensed to highlights. Adherence to appearances is less important than …

dramatization.”52

       Kahlo’s construction of her persona was not limited to her art. In spite of a 21-year age

difference, she married – and divorced and remarried – the flamboyant and egomaniacal Diego

Rivera, who was widely recognized as the greatest Mexican painter of his time. Their

tempestuous relationship, and his numerous affairs, made their marriage the subject of constant

gossip. From early in her career, Kahlo dressed exclusively in the colorful long dresses, jewelry,

and often also the headdresses of Mexico’s Tehuana region. André Breton described her as

“adorned like a fairy-tale princess,” and when she and Rivera visited San Francisco, the
                                           14
photographer Edward Weston remarked that “Dressed in native costume even to huaraches, she

causes much excitement on the streets… People stop in their tracks to look in wonder.”53 Kahlo’s

dramatic beauty attracted many admirers, and she was rumored to have had affairs with several

famous artists and other prominent figures of both sexes.54

       Kahlo developed a complex symbolic visual vocabulary, based on colors, objects and

forms that ran through her entire oeuvre.55 Yet she wanted her work to affect even viewers who

had not studied her life: Herrera concluded that “Although Frida’s paintings served a private

function, they were meant … to be accessible in their meaning.”56 The graphic images of her

self-portraits do make clear what one critic wrote in a eulogy for Kahlo: “It is impossible to

separate the life and work of this singular person. Her paintings are her biography.”57

Francis Bacon (1909-1992)

               My whole life goes into my work.
                                                                    Francis Bacon58

       Francis Bacon developed slowly as an artist: “I seem to have been a late starter in

everything. I think I was kind of delayed, and I think there are those people who are delayed.”59

His goals were visual: “I’m probably much more concerned with the aesthetic qualities of a work

than, perhaps, Munch was.”60 His art was not intended to make a statement: “I’m not really

trying to say anything, I’m trying to do something.”61 Indeed, for Bacon the test of a successful

image was that it not be susceptible to any logical verbal explanation: “After all, if you could

explain it, why would you go to the trouble of painting it?”62

       Bacon stressed the importance to his art of what he called accident: “I don’t in fact know

very often what the paint will do, and it does many things which are very much better than I

could make it do.”63 He found that distortions occurred in his images as he worked: “I terribly
                                              15
don’t want to make freaks, though everyone seems to think that that’s how the pictures turn

out.”64 A biographer argued that Bacon’s experimental inability to anticipate or control the final

appearance of his paintings was one source of his reluctance to paint commissioned portraits.

Thus Michael Peppiatt described an episode when Bacon painted a commissioned portrait of a

friend, the photographer Cecil Beaton. When Beaton described the finished work as the portrait

of a “monster cripple,” Bacon agreed to make a second attempt. Although Bacon felt the second

portrait was a success, when Beaton again found it shocking, Bacon destroyed it in

embarrassment.65 A friend and biographer, John Russell, contended that the distortions in

Bacon’s portraits were actually a result of his attempt to represent individuals as he perceived

them, as each portrait offered “a superimposition of states, in which certain characteristics of the

person concerned appear with exceptional intensity, while others are obliterated.”66

       As Bacon matured, the subjects of his work changed: “When I was young I needed

extreme subject matter for my paintings. Then as I grew older I began to find my subject matter

in my own life.”67 During the 1960s his primary subject matter was his friends: “It’s through my

life and knowing other people that a subject has really grown.”68 So for example one posthumous

exhibition of Bacon’s portraits presented 50 paintings of nine people, including 14 of the painter

Lucien Freud.69 Knowing his subjects was key to Bacon’s practice: “I couldn’t do people I don’t

know very well. I wouldn’t want to. It wouldn’t interest me to try and do them unless I had seen

a lot of them, watched their contours, watched the way they behaved.”70 The importance of

familiarity was magnified by Bacon’s recognition that semblance was not solely a visual

phenomenon: “Every form you make has an implication, so that, when you are painting

somebody, you know that you are, of course, trying to get near not only to their appearance but

also to the way they have affected you.” He wanted his portraits to have what he called “the
                                                16
living quality;” the problem “was to find a technique by which you can give over all the

pulsations of a person.”71 The distortions of Bacon’s portraits might be understood as a product

of both this elusive goal and his conception of relationships: “I’ve always thought of friendship

as where two people tear each other apart and perhaps in that way learn something from one

another.”72 Bacon wanted the result of his efforts to transcend the appearance of individuals: “In

catching the ‘likeness’ of his friends, Bacon also caught their dominant characteristics, which in

turn, he hoped, would give the portraits greater universality as images of human beings not

bound to specific circumstances.”73

        The focus of Bacon’s attention narrowed even further in the early 1970s. In the fall of

1971, the day before a major retrospective exhibition of Bacon’s work at Paris’ Grand Palais was

to be opened by the president of France, Bacon’s companion for much of the previous decade,

George Dyer, was found dead, of an overdose of drugs and alcohol, in their Paris hotel room. For

several years thereafter, Bacon’s paintings consisted almost exclusively of images of Dyer and

himself. Bacon brought his mourning for Dyer to an end in a large triptych of 1973, which

effectively reenacted his death. Yet self-portraits remained a dominant element in Bacon’s art for

the rest of his life: he claimed that he hated his own appearance, but “it’s all I’ve got left to paint

now.”74 In spite of the deaths of nearly all of the friends who had been the subjects of his art, and

his own failing health, Bacon continued to paint until his death at the age of 82. That the force of

his art is not generally considered to have diminished would not have surprised him, for he

believed that “Painting is an old man’s business.”75
                                                 17
Louise Bourgeois (1911- )

               All the work of an artist is the realization of a self-portrait. But
               very often it is unconscious. Very often, you do not realize that you
               reveal yourself that much.
                                                            Louise Bourgeois, 199576

       In 1982, at the age of 71, Louise Bourgeois was given her first major exhibition, a

retrospective at New York’s Museum of Modern Art. In an autobiographical slide show prepared

for that exhibition, for the first time Bourgeois publicly told a story from her childhood that she

described as the motivation for everything she had ever done as an artist. Beginning with the title

“Child Abuse,” Bourgeois revealed that a young English woman who had been hired as a teacher

for Bourgeois and her sister had in fact been the live-in mistress of Bourgeois’ father for a

decade, with the knowledge of Bourgeois’ mother. Bourgeois declared that she had felt betrayed

both by her parents and by the teacher, and that her work as an artist had been motivated by her

anger: “Everyday you have to abandon your past or accept it and then if you cannot accept it you

become a sculptor.”77

       Bourgeois had always been reticent about her past, and her explosive revelation prompted

a reevaluation of her work. She had previously conceded that her work had always been sexually

suggestive: “Sometimes I am totally concerned with female shapes – clusters of breasts like

clouds – but often I merge the imagery – phallic breasts, male and female, active and passive.”78

Yet Bourgeois worked visually, and although her sculptures clearly included elements that

derived from human anatomy, the final forms of her work resisted precise interpretation. Thus

she explained that “my sculptures are improvisational (i.e. free – the final result has only a

distant relation to the initial drawings with which they start), but with an obsessive intention and

theme.”79 Her motivation had consistently come from her early life: “My childhood has never
                                                   18
lost its magic, it has never lost its mystery, and it has never lost its drama.”80 Yet her motives

were not conscious: “After a work is finished, then you say, Ah my God! This is what I meant.”81

And even then, the meanings of her work remained obscure to viewers: “I work very hard and I

never – never! – get people to understand what I mean.”82 Ultimately, the work was independent:

“a work of art has to stand by itself, so … it is totally unnecessary to ask me what I want you to

see in a piece, because you are supposed to see it by yourself.”83 In view of her complete

commitment to a visual experimental approach, it is perhaps not surprising that Bourgeois’

favorite artist is Francis Bacon: “I like the way he talks and I like his kind of subjects, and I like

his rendering. It’s simply true.”84

        During the 1990s, Bourgeois made a series of installations called “cells,” large wire cages

that contained a variety of objects. In Cell (Choisy), the objects included a model of one of her

childhood homes, carved in pink marble. She explained that “To have really gone through an

exorcism, in order to liberate myself from the past, I have to reconstruct it, ponder about it, make

a statue out of it and get rid of it through making sculpture.” The work’s resemblance to a prison

was not incidental: “I have been a prisoner of my memories and my aim is to get rid of them.”85

Bourgeois believes that her love of her work has allowed her to repair the damage of her early

life: “When I see [my sculptures] I say: Louise, you turned a trauma into a very human, a very

happy person.” Over time, she has gained artistic sophistication: “All the time, and more and

more, I become more skillful, clearer, so there is an increasing pleasure.”86 She considers

tenacity a virtue: “I am a long-distance runner and I am also a lonely runner and that’s the way I

want it.”87
                                                19
Joseph Beuys (1921-1986)

               I did already a sculpture when I was born, on the first day. So
               every point of my life was considered under the point of view of
               sculpture. That is the whole biographical thing I did personally.

                                                                    Joseph Beuys88

       Joseph Beuys believed that creative lives were the product of a small number of “key

experiences.”89 On the occasion of a retrospective exhibition of Beuys’ work at the Guggenheim

Museum in 1979, the curator Caroline Tisdall wrote that for Beuys, “One event was absolutely

determining. In 1943 the [Luftwaffe bomber] that Beuys was flying was hit by Russian flak and

crashed in a snowstorm in the Crimea. He was found unconscious among the wreckage by

Tartars.” She then quoted Beuys:

               Had it not been for the Tartars I would not be alive today… [I]t
               was they who discovered me in the snow after the crash, when the
               German search parties had given up. I was still unconscious then
               and only came round completely after twelve days or so, and by
               then I was back in a German field hospital… [The Tartars] covered
               my body in fat to help it regenerate warmth, and wrapped it in felt
               as an insulator to keep the warmth in.

Tisdall then commented, “It is certainly true that without this encounter with the Tartars …

Beuys would never have turned to fat and felt as the material for sculpture.”90

       In 1980, the art historian Benjamin Buchloh described Beuys’ account of this episode as

a “spectacular biographic fable.” Buchloh went on to consider inconsistencies in Beuys’ account.

Among these were the photographs that purported to show Beuys with his wrecked plane.

Buchloh asked, “Who would, or could, pose for photographs after the plane crash, when severely

injured? And who took the photographs? The Tartars with their fat-and-felt camera?” In sum,

Buchloh contended that “Beuys’ ‘myth of origin’ … is an intricate mixture of facts and memory

material rearranged according to the dynamics of the neurotic lie: that myth-creating impulse that
                                                  20
cannot accept, for various reasons, the facticity of the individual’s autobiographic history as

such.”91 In 2001, Gene Ray noted that subsequent research had provided evidence that Beuys did

crash in the Crimea, though in 1944 rather than 1943, and that the day after the crash he was

delivered to a German field hospital. Beuys could thus possibly have been tended to by nomadic

tribesman for one day, rather than the 12 he claimed. Ray argued that it was possible “that Beuys

did not so much lie about his experiences under the Nazis before and during the war, as

inadequately address the full truth about them.”92

       Although much remains uncertain about the facts of this episode, it is striking how often

Beuys’ story is simply reported as a factual account.93 Careful observers, however, recognize that

“Beuys constructed a persona,” and that the only real dispute concerns whether this enterprise

was “honest creativity or hocus-pocus.” Most of Beuys’ artistic output, including the numerous

objects made from fat and felt, can only be understood through reference to his myth of origin:

“The material remains of Beuys’ work are the detritus of an operation that begins… at the point

at which he sacrificed his true identity for an assumed persona. He raided his previous life for

symbolism redeemable to this objective, and in his subsequent life everything similarly ceded

priority to its symbolic projection.”94

       One of Beuys’ central ideas was what he called “social sculpture,” his desire to expand

the concept of art to include the entire process of living. In keeping with this goal, he did not

restrict his own activities to producing art objects: among other projects, he became an early

ecological activist, and ran for the European Parliament as a founding member of the Green

Party, and he and the writer Heinrich Böll founded a Free International University for Creativity

and Interdisciplinary Research, based on a radical approach to education in which there would be

no entrance tests, no exams, no limits on enrollment, and no age limits for students.95
                                               21
        Donald Kuspit observed that Beuys’ art was entirely personal: “The art of most artists

does not seem to demand that we think of their lives… But Beuys’ art arises directly from his

life, and directly raises the question of art’s role in life, and life’s role in art.”96 Merilyn Smith

noted a consequence of the inseparability of Beuys’ life and art: “it is inconceivable that any

single work by Beuys would be so self-sufficient as to survive without attribution… [E]ach of

his statements is but a sentence in the large biography.”97

Bruce Nauman (1941- )

                I was using my body as a piece of material.

                                                                Bruce Nauman, 197098

        In 1964, during Bruce Nauman’s first semester as a graduate student in art, “one day he

had a revelation – that it didn’t make sense for students to sit in a circle all drawing a model in

the middle.” On the spot, he decided he would use his own body as the subject of his art.99

During the next few years, Nauman did this in a variety of ways, in a diverse range of genres, to

produce a series of works that made him one of the most influential American artists of the late

twentieth century.100 These included neon sculptures (e.g. Neon Templates of the Left Half of My

Body Taken at Ten-Inch Intervals, 1966), videos (e.g. Thighing, 1967), fiberglass, wax, or plastic

sculptures cast from parts of his body (e.g. From Hand to Mouth, 1967) or from objects he used

(e.g. A Cast of the Space Under My Chair, 1968), photographs (e.g. Self-Portrait as Fountain,

1967), and films (e.g. Walking in an Exaggerated Manner Around the Perimeter of a Square,

1968).101

        Nauman’s art is highly conceptual, and the concepts that interest him involve the

relationship of the artist to the making of art – “investigation of the function of an artist.”102 As a

result, his use of his body in his art is not aimed at exploring his own personality, or at presenting
                                               22
his own biography. He uses himself rather as a model – one example of an artist. The uses are

consequently quite impersonal, because he does not want to focus attention on his specific

characteristics, but instead to achieve universality. So for example in 1970 he explained that “I

use the figure as an object… [T]he problems involving figures are about the figure as an object,

or at least the figure as a person and the things that happen to a person in various situations – to

most people rather than just to me or one particular person.”103 Similarly, in 1987 he observed

that “if you examine yourself you make certain propositions that help with the work, certain

conclusions. Other people are interested because these are common experiences.”104

       In 1993, Neal Benezra contrasted the practices of Nauman and Joseph Beuys. Benezra

noted that “Beuys placed himself at the very epicenter of his work – making his persona

indispensable to its presentation and meaning. In contrast, … Nauman has established quite

another model. Whereas Beuys was a quintessentially ‘public’ figure, Nauman sees himself in a

different role: ‘When I give a public presentation of something I did in the studio, I go through

an incredible amount of self-exposure which can also function, paradoxically, as a defense. I will

tell you about myself by giving a show, but I will only tell you so much.’ While he has often

employed his own body as ‘raw material,’ he has also taken great care to mask his presence

psychologically.”105

Cindy Sherman (1954- )

               [P]eople seem to think that I must be revealing something of a
               personal or autobiographical nature, and they are constantly
               looking for it in the work.
                                                          Cindy Sherman, 1995106


       During 1977-80, Cindy Sherman made a series of 69 black-and-white photographs,

collectively called the Untitled Film Stills. She appeared in each photograph, always alone. In
                                               23
each photograph she wore different clothing, and in each she was shown in a different setting.

These photographs are considered her most important work. Sherman has explained that the

motifs grew out of her past: “As a child, I played dress-up, and it was fun because it was

artificial. It still is artificial to do any of that, so in the mid-seventies when I was starting to do

black and white work, it seemed interesting to be collecting these costumes that were relics of an

earlier age.” The Stills mimicked the artificiality of old movies: “It was just about me dealing

with these role models from film.”107

        Art scholars have engaged in complex theoretical analyses of Sherman’s photographs:

thus for example one recently described her as “a postmodern feminist, skillfully manipulating

media imagery to reveal the phallogocentric basis of a male-dominated society.”108 Sherman has

no objection to the extensive critical attention to her work, but she denies that it accurately

represents her intentions: “I could agree with many different theories in terms of their formal

concepts but none of it really had any basis in my motivation for making the work.”109 Contrary

to the complexity and subtlety of the critical analyses, Sherman considers her work to be direct

and simple: “I’m doing one of the most stupid things in the world which I can’t even explain,

dressing up like a child and posing in front of a camera trying to make beautiful pictures. And

people seem to fall for it.” Her real anxiety about her work concerns what might be an obvious

inference from it: “I have this enormous fear of being misinterpreted, of people thinking the

photos are about me, that I’m really vain and narcissistic.” In fact, her goal was universality:

“I’m trying to make people recognize something of themselves rather than me.”110 Her intended

message involved attitudes: “The role-playing was intended to make people become aware of

how stupid roles are, a lot of roles, but since it’s not all that serious, perhaps that’s more the

moral to it, not to take anything too seriously.”111
                                           24
       Although the meanings of Sherman’s work have been hotly debated, there is widespread

agreement that her use of her own image is not a result of either introspection or narcissism: thus

for example Arthur Danto remarked that “the stills do not compose a sequential exploration of

her own features, nor do they stand as a monument to feminine vanity.”112 Verena Lueken

stressed that the Film Stills were not self-portraits: “She is her own model and, as is the case with

all models, this does not make her the subject of her art.”113 Peter Schjeldahl agreed that

Sherman cast herself in a role: “Sherman the performer is wholly obedient to Sherman the

director. In herself, she has an extraordinary actress – selfless and undemanding, game for

unflattering angles.”114 And Danto offered personal testimony that the Stills were in fact not

about Sherman’s own identity: “I cannot imagine anyone who could recognize Sherman from the

stills. Though I had studied and indeed written about them, so little does she resemble her images

that I was surprised to see what she looked like when we met.”115

Tracey Emin (1963- )

               What you see is what I am.
                                                                      Tracey Emin116

       Tracey Emin’s art is highly diverse in form, but not in subject: “Emin’s exclusive subject

matter is her personal life, and that life, as read off from the art, has included underage sex, rape,

abortion, bouts of serious depression and long periods of drunkenness. These are represented in

words and pictures, in small, edgy monochrome prints and in large assemblages of sewn material

carrying inarticulate messages of love and hate.”117 The work embodies a basic ambiguity, for

“it is understood to promulgate a populist version of the hackneyed Romantic myth of the artist

as creative primitive, while nonetheless, in the more sophisticated context of the art world,
                                               25
cunningly exploiting the incongruity of its own naiveté for conceptual effect. It thus manages to

achieve the marketing coup of being simultaneously popular and elitist.”118

       Public debate over Emin’s art reached a peak in 1999, when she was shortlisted for the

Turner Prize, and her exhibition at the Tate Gallery included My Bed, an installation in which a

rumpled and urine-stained bed was surrounded by detritus that included blood-stained

underwear, discarded food packages, empty vodka bottles, and used condoms. Some critics

dismissed the work as a bad joke, as the editor of Art Review sneered that “Any list with Emin

cannot be taken seriously,” and the British Secretary of State for Culture commented that the

work of some young British artists “was giving the country a bad name abroad.” Yet in spite of

the elitist attacks and dismissals, the accessibility of Emin’s art made her display the sensation of

the exhibition, and a Financial Times critic observed that she had become the “people’s

choice.”119 Deborah Cherry noted, however, that a more serious issue emerged from the debate:

“The question that most preoccupied London critics was whether Tracey was telling the truth. If

art is no more and no less than the artist’s life, then authenticity becomes a key benchmark for a

critical practice that judges the artist rather than the work. Whereas those who supported her

argued for the unmediated translation of life into art, less enthusiastic reviewers questioned her

genuineness.”120

       The form and content of Emin’s art originated in a decision she made after graduating

from the Royal College of Art, where she had been intensely unhappy. She gave up painting,

destroyed all her previous work, and reacted against the goal of becoming a “picture-maker” by

making herself the subject of her art: “I realized I was much better than anything I ever made …

I was my work.”121 She adopted as the themes of her work all the ways her background made her

an outsider in the posh world of English art: “The fact that I’m not Anglo Saxon, I’m half
                                              26
Cypriot. The fact that my dad came here in 1948. The fact that my father never went to school.

The fact that I’m the first woman in my family to have an education … The fact that I left school

at thirteen … The fact that I haven’t got a rounded British accent. The fact that I’m not middle

class. The fact that I had to work really hard to get through things.”122 The form of her work

reinforced this content, as for example in her monoprints “it is the act of rapid drawing,

combined with quickly executed texts, that makes these works analogous to the unrehearsed,

firsthand accounts of someone reporting a catastrophic or shocking event.”123 Yet Julian

Stallabrass has noted that there is an ambiguity in Emin’s statements and in her art, for “there is a

continual slippage between memories of an event and poetic imagining.”124

       Emin has consistently maintained that her art is both genuine and sincere. In an interview

with the rock musician David Bowie, she denied that she ever uses irony: “Everything that I do is

totally sincere.”125 She told another interviewer that “I work with what I know. It is always based

on some real event, something that happened.”126 Her art is direct: “Art has always been, a lot of

the time, a mysterious coded language. And I’m just not a coded person.” Her goal is always to

make a statement to a wide audience: “I want society to hear what I’m saying. I’m not only

talking to galleries, museums and collectors. For me, being an artist … [is] some kind of

communication, a message.”127

       For Emin’s admirers, the perception of sincerity is the basis for much of her appeal.

Jennifer Doyle noted that “Emin’s work seems to offer itself up as an ‘unedited’ incorporation of

the remains of a messy sex life, as a fantasy of a (nearly) unmediated encounter with the artist

herself.” Admirers can therefore identify with the art: “Reviews almost invariably describe

weeping young women who identify with Emin’s narratives of abuse, humiliation, rebellion.

These spectators are so moved because they feel the work is not so much about ‘Trace’ as it is
                                                    27
                128
about them.”          These spectators validate Emin’s claim that although her own experience serves

as her point of departure, “it goes beyond that. I start with myself and end up with the

universe.”129

        Emin’s considerable recent success, which has brought her both fame and fortune, poses

an interesting potential problem for her personal art. Stallabrass observed that “Emin’s celebrity

is a problem for her work because it might compromise her authentic primitive self – thus her

continued mining of her childhood, adolescence and home-town happenings, the ineluctable past

time of innocence and its first loss, and thus her neglect of later events.”130 Emin freely

acknowledges her change in status, as in 2000 she told a tabloid reporter “I’m not an outsider at

all. I go to all the parties.”131 She also acknowledges that her audience might consequently lose

sympathy with her: “oh well she made all this work about how hard life was, now what’s she

going to do, make work about jumping into rich people’s swimming pools with bottles of

champagne?”132 She maintains, however, that the true basis of her art has not changed, because

her inner life has not been affected by the outward changes in her status: “On the outside it might

look like my life is very comfortable, but inside my life is still in turmoil over things. I still go to

bed crying, I still pray to God for a better life, I still curl up in a small fetal shape and cower from

the world and those feelings never change.”133

Conclusion

                  I purposely bought a mirror good enough to enable me to work
                  from my image in default of a model, because if I can manage to
                  paint the coloring of my own head, which is not to be done without
                  some difficulty, I shall likewise be able to paint the heads of other
                  good souls, men and women.
                                                             Vincent van Gogh, 1888134
                                                28
       In the late nineteenth century, Vincent van Gogh initiated a new form of artistic behavior,

by making his work entirely out of the experiences of his own life. He was soon followed by

Edvard Munch, and their examples reverberated throughout the twentieth century. So for

example Francis Bacon considered van Gogh “one of my great heroes,” and Tracey Emin left her

first course of art education “in love with Edvard Munch.”135

       In considering the practices of van Gogh, Munch and seven of the most important artists

who followed them in making their art from their own lives, this study found several significant

tendencies. In most of these cases, the artist’s biography was key: the real subject of the art was

the artist’s own life, and knowledge of the biography was consequently valuable for an

understanding of the art. This was not universally true, however. Although both Bruce Nauman

and Cindy Sherman used images of themselves in their most important works, the art was not

genuinely personal, for they effectively served only as models or actors, whose true identity was

not relevant to the art’s message.

       All but two of the artists considered here were conceptual innovators. In a majority of the

cases, their message was expressed through a personal symbolism that ran through much or all of

their work. Thus van Gogh, Munch, Kahlo, Beuys, and Emin all relied heavily on personal

symbols that became themes of their art over time. Although a complete understanding of these

symbols requires extensive study, and is therefore not available to most viewers, for most of

these artists the basic ideas of their work are clear even to casual observers. The obvious

exception to this is Beuys, whose work is nearly meaningless to anyone unfamiliar with his

personal history, and the myths he created around it.

       Any artist who frequently makes self-portraits, or uses only subjects that are of personal

significance, risks being accused of narcissism, or self-absorption. The probability of this
                                                29
accusation may increase if the artist exaggerates or distorts the appearance of his or her subjects

in the interest of personal expression. So it is not surprising that at some point this charge has

been leveled against each of the artists considered here. Interestingly, however, in spite of the

fact that all these artists have prominently featured themselves and their immediate interests in

their work, and have obviously departed considerably from objective portrayals, all have

attracted admirers who consider the significance of the work to transcend its ostensible subject

matter.

          Personal poetry has primarily been the domain of conceptual artists, including

prominently John Berryman, Allen Ginsberg, Sylvia Plath, Theodore Roethke, and Anne Sexton.

The same is true of visual art, as van Gogh, Munch, Kahlo, Beuys, Nauman, Sherman, and Emin

all used their work to express ideas and emotions. In neither art was this conceptual

predominance a monopoly, however. Thus just as Robert Lowell used confessional poetry

experimentally, to describe his own life and his relationships with his family and close friends,

so Bacon used personal painting to explore his vision of himself and his closest friends, and

Bourgeois has used personal sculpture to delve into her perceptions of her past and her

relationships with family members.

          Vincent van Gogh was a self-taught painter: early in his career, he wrote to his brother

Theo that “I have had no ‘guidance or teaching’ from others to speak of, but taught myself; no

wonder my technique, considered superficially, differs from that of others.”136 For him art was

not merely a career, but a means of expressing his deepest beliefs. Thus in 1884 he wrote to a

fellow painter of his conviction that “art is something which, although produced by human

hands, is not created by these hands alone, but something which wells up from a deeper source in

our souls.”137 Van Gogh was never taught the traditional academic hierarchy of artistic subjects,
                                                  30
and he had no interest in learning it, for to him there were no uninteresting or unimportant people

or places. He saw valuable motifs wherever he was. He believed that his task was to develop a

language that would communicate the strength of his feelings for the world around him,

including his own image: “it is difficult to know yourself – but it isn’t easy to paint yourself

either,” he wrote to his brother, less than a year before his death.138 For him it seemed natural to

paint the people he cared most about, the things he saw every day, and the places where he chose

to live. Although he didn’t think of this practice as novel, others soon recognized that it was an

innovation that would help them to pursue, or achieve, their own artistic goals. Personal art thus

became a key element of van Gogh’s legacy, and a distinctive feature of the artistic freedom of

the twentieth century.
                                               31
Footnotes

1.    Paul Erik Tojner, Munch In His Own Words (Munich: Prestel, 2001), p. 183.

2.    Christopher White and Quentin Buvelot, Rembrandt by Himself (London: National
      Gallery Publications, 1999), p. 10.

3.    Iris Müller-Westermann, Munch by Himself (London: Royal Academy of Arts, 2005), p.
      15.

4.    Svetlana Alpers estimated that Rembrandt depicted himself “approximately fifty times in
      paint, twenty in etching, and about ten times in surviving drawings;” Rembrandt’s
      Enterprise (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1988), p. 120. Adding the higher
      figure for each medium from van de Wetering’s and Alpers’ estimates – 50 paintings, 31
      etchings, and 10 drawings – yields a total of 91.

5.    White and Buvelot, Rembrandt by Himself, pp. 86, 229; Müller-Westermann, Munch by
      Himself, pp. 19, 176. Other artists have produced self-portraits at rates much higher than
      either Rembrandt or Munch for shorter periods. Vincent van Gogh, for example, painted
      all of his 43 self-portraits during the last five years of his life, and 26 of these were
      executed during the two years he spent in Paris; Fritz Erpel, Van Gogh Self-Portraits
      (Oxford: Bruno Cassirer, 1964).

6.    Alpers’ high estimate of 50 self-portraits divided by Bailey’s low estimate of 270 total
      paintings would yield 18.5 percent, which would appear to be an upper bound; Alpers,
      Rembrandt’s Enterprise, p. 120; Anthony Bailey, Responses to Rembrandt (New York:
      Timken Publishers, 1994), p. 10. For evidence on the distribution of subjects of
      seventeenth-century Dutch paintings, see e.g. John Michael Montias, Artists and Artisans
      in Delft (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1982), pp. 238-46.

7.    Robert Phillips, The Confessional Poets (Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press,
      1973), p. 15.

8.    Alan Williamson, Introspection and Contemporary Poetry (Cambridge: Harvard
      University Press, 1984), pp. 1, 8.

9.    Phillips, The Confessional Poets, pp. xi, 1, 17.

10.   Robert Elliott, The Literary Persona (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1982), pp.
      16-21.

11.   Phillips, The Confessional Poets, pp. 4-5.

12.   Louis Simpson, A Revolution in Taste (NY: Macmillan, 1978), p. xviii.
                                                32

13.   Lionel Trilling, Sincerity and Authenticity (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1972),
      p. 8.

14.   Trilling, Sincerity and Authenticity, pp. 8-9.

15.   Elliot, The Literary Persona, p. 53.

16.   Robert Lowell, Collected Prose (NY: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1987), pp. 246-47.

17.   Elliott, The Literary Persona, p. 58.

18.   Elliott, The Literary Persona, p. 55.

19.   Lowell, Collected Prose, p. 122.

20.   Vincent van Gogh, The Complete Letters of Vincent van Gogh, second ed., vol. 2
      (Greenwich, Conn.: New York Graphic Society, 1959), p. 605.

21.   Meyer Schapiro, Vincent van Gogh (New York: Harry N. Abrams, 1994), p. 12.

22.   George Heard Hamilton, Painting and Sculpture in Europe, 1880-1940 (Harmondsworth,
      UK: Penguin, 1972), p. 94.

23.   Schapiro, Vincent van Gogh, p. 12.

24.   Van Gogh, The Complete Letters of Vincent van Gogh, vol. 3, p. 420.

25.   Van Gogh, The Complete Letters, vol. 2, pp. 416, 534.

26.   H.R. Graetz, The Symbolic Language of Vincent van Gogh (New York: McGraw Hill,
      1963), pp. 39-41.

27.   Marianne Simmel, ed., The Reach of Mind (New York: Springer Publishing, 1968), pp.
      205-07.

28.   Van Gogh, Complete Letters, vol. 3, p. 470.

29.   Van Gogh, Complete Letters, vol. 2, p. 119.

30.   Schapiro, Vincent van Gogh, p. 12.

31.   Hamilton, Painting and Sculpture in Europe, p. 95.
                                               33

32.   Tojner, Munch in His Own Words, p. 135.

33.   Reinhold Heller, Edvard Munch: The Scream (New York: Viking Press, 1973), pp. 62-

34.   Tojner, Munch in His Own Words, p. 149.

35.   Sue Prideaux, Edvard Munch (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2005), p. 82; Tojner,
      Munch in His Own Words, p. 143.

36.   Robert Rosenblum, et. al, Edvard Munch (Washington: National Gallery of Art, 1978), p.
      11.

37.   Prideaux, Edvard Munch, p. 83.

38.   Tojner, Munch in His Own Words, p. 135.

39.   Heller, Edvard Munch, p. 65.

40.   Reinhold Heller, Munch (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1984), p. 82.

41.   Heller, Edvard Munch, pp. 78-80.

42.   Tojner, Munch in His Own Words, p. 134.

43.   Prideaux, Edvard Munch, p. 170.

44.   Emma Dexter and Tanya Barson, eds., Frida Kahlo (London: Tate Publishing, 2005), p.
      31.

45.   Hayden Herrera, Frida (New York: Harper and Row, 1983), p. 74.

46.   Herrera, Frida, pp. 74-75.

47.   Dexter and Barson, Frida Kahlo, p. 32.

48.   Gannit Ankori, Imaging Her Selves (Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 2002), p. 10.

49.   Dexter and Barson, Frida Kahlo, p. 31.

50.   Ankori, Imaging Her Selves, p. 6.

51.   Herrera, Frida, p. 97.
                                              34

52.   Herrera, Frida, p. 151.

53.   Dexter and Barson, Frida Kahlo, p. 77; Herrera, Frida, p. 120.

54.   E.g. see Herrera, Frida, pp. 197-214.

55.   E.g. see Dexter and Barson, Frida Kahlo, pp. 55-78.

56.   Herrera, Frida, p. 258.

57.   Herrera, Frida, p. 410.

58.   Dennis Farr and Massimo Martino, eds., Francis Bacon (New York: Harry N. Abrams,
      1999), p. 25.

59.   David Sylvester, Interviews with Francis Bacon (New York: Thames and Hudson, 1999),
      p. 70.

60.   Sylvester, Interviews, p. 82.

61.   Sylvester, Interviews, p. 198.

62.   Michael Peppiatt, Francis Bacon (London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 1996), p. 97.

63.   Sylvester, Interviews, pp. 16-17.

64.   John Russell, Francis Bacon, revised ed. (New York: Thames and Hudson, 1993), p. 53.

65.   Peppiatt, Francis Bacon, pp. 183-84.

66.   Russell, Francis Bacon, p. 124.

67.   Peppiatt, Francis Bacon, p. 207.

68.   Sylvester, Interviews, p. 68.

69.   Andrea Rose, Francis Bacon (Edinburgh: National Galleries of Scotland, 2005).

70.   Sylvester, Interviews, p. 73.

71.   Sylvester, Interviews, pp. 130, 174.

72.   Russell, Francis Bacon, p. 178.
                                              35

73.   Peppiatt, Francis Bacon, p. 208.

74.   Peppiatt, Francis Bacon, pp. 250-52.

75.   Russell, Francis Bacon, p. 182.

76.   Louise Bourgeois, Destruction of the Father, Reconstruction of the Father: Writings and
      Interviews, 1923-1997 (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1998), p. 313.

77.   Joan Acocella, Twenty-Eight Artists and Two Saints (New York: Pantheon Books, 2006),
      pp. 412-13; Bourgeois, Destruction of the Father, pp. 133-35, 283.

78.   Bourgeois, Destruction of the Father, p. 101.

79.   Bourgeois, Destruction of the Father, p. 81.

80.   Bourgeois, Destruction of the Father, p. 277.

81.   Bourgeois, Destruction of the Father, p. 285.

82.   Bourgeois, Destruction of the Father, p. 162.

83.   Bourgeois, Destruction of the Father, p. 168.

84.   Bourgeois, Destruction of the Father, p. 269.

85.   Bourgeois, Destruction of the Father, p. 257.

86.   Bourgeois, Destruction of the Father, p. 247.

87.   Bourgeois, Destruction of the Father, p. 261.

88.   Gene Ray, ed., Joseph Beuys (New York: Distrubuted Art Publishers, 2001), p. 177.

89.   Ray, Joseph Beuys, pp. 185-86.

90.   Caroline Tisdall, Joseph Beuys (New York: Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, 1979),
      pp. 16-17.

91.   Ray, Joseph Beuys, pp. 202-03.

92.   Ray, Joseph Beuys, p. 9.
                                                36

93.    E.g. Heiner Stachelhaus, Joseph Beuys (New York: Abbeville Press, 1991), pp. 21-22;
       Sam Hunter, John Jacobus, and Daniel Wheeler, Modern Art, third ed. (New York:
       Vendome Press, 2004), p. 366; Hugh Honour and John Fleming, The Visual Arts, sixth
       ed. (New York: Harry N. Abrams, 2002), p. 872.

94.    David Thistlewood, ed., Joseph Beuys (Liverpool: Liverpool University Press, 1995), pp.
       3, 7.

95.    Stachelhaus, Joseph Beuys, pp. 112-17.

96.    Thistlewood, Joseph Beuys, p. 35.

97.    Thistlewood, Joseph Beuys, p. 182.

98.    Robert Morgan, ed., Bruce Nauman (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2002),
       p. 242.

99.    Constance Lewallen, A Rose Has No Teeth: Bruce Nauman in the 1960s (Berkeley:
       University of California Press, 2007), p. 16.

100.   David Galenson, Artistic Capital (New York: Routledge, 2006), pp. 128, 132.

101.   For discussion and illustrations, see Lewallen, A Rose Has No Teeth.

102.   Morgan, Bruce Nauman, p. 309.

103.   Morgan, Bruce Nauman, p.241.

104.   Morgan, Bruce Nauman, p. 262.

105.   Morgan, Bruce Nauman, pp. 93-94.

106.   Joanne Kesten, ed., The Portraits Speak (NY: A.R.T. Press, 1997), p. 337.

107.   Kesten, The Portraits Speak, pp. 343-44.

108.   Eleanor Heartney, et. al., After the Revolution (Munich: Prestel, 2007), p. 173.

109.   Jeanne Siegel, ed., Artwords 2: Discourse on the Early 80s (Ann Arbor: UMI Research
       Press, 1988), p. 275.

110.   Kristine Stiles and Peter Selz, eds., Theories and Documents of Contemporary Art
       (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1996), p. 791.
                                               37

111.   Siegel, Artwords 2, p. 282.

112.   Cindy Sherman, Untitled Film Stills (New York: Rizzoli, 1990), p. 10.

113.   Betty van Garrel, ed., Cindy Sherman (Rotterdam: Museum Boijmans Van Beuningen,
       1996), p. 25.

114.   Peter Schjeldahl, The Hydrogen Jukebox (Berkeley: University of California Press,
       1991), p. 115.

115.   Sherman, Untitled Film Stills, p. 10.

116.   Neal Brown, Tracey Emin (London: Tate Publishing, 2006), p. 50.

117.   Julian Stallabrass, High Art Lite, revised ed. (London: Verso, 2006), p. 36.

118.   Mandy Merck and Chris Townsend, eds., The Art of Tracey Emin (London: Thames and
       Hudson, 2002), p. 40.

119.   Virginia Button, The Turner Prize: Twenty Years (London: Tate Publishing, 2003), p.
       152.

120.   Merck and Townsend, The Art of Tracey Emin, p. 142.

121.   Merck and Townsend, The Art of Tracey Emin, p. 36.

122.   Brown, Tracey Emin, pp. 15-16.

123.   Brown, Tracey Emin, p. 16.

124.   Stallabrass, High Art Lite, p. 37.

125.   Karen Wright, ed., Writers on Artists (London: DK Publishing, 2001), p. 214.

126.   Brown, Tracey Emin, p. 33.

127.   Brown, Tracey Emin, pp. 50-53.

128.   Merck and Townsend, The Art of Tracey Emin, pp. 112-14.

129.   Brown, Tracey Emin, p. 12.

130.   Stallabrass, High Art Lite, p. 43.
                                              38

131.   Merck and Townsend, The Art of Tracey Emin, p. 133.

132.   Wright, Writers on Artists, p. 213.

133.   Stallabrass, High Art Lite, p. 43.

134.   Van Gogh, The Complete Letters, vol. 3, p. 37.

135.   Sylvester, Interviews with Francis Bacon, p. 172; Brown, Tracey Emin, p. 92.

136.   Van Gogh, The Complete Letters, vol. 1, p. 364.

137.   Van Gogh, The Complete Letters, vol. 3, pp. 399-400.

138.   Van Gogh, The Complete Letters, vol. 3, p. 201.
