                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 DO FUNDS-OF-FUNDS DESERVE THEIR FEES-ON-FEES?

                                           Andrew Ang
                                      Matthew Rhodes-Kropf
                                            Rui Zhao

                                       Working Paper 13944
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w13944


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2008




We thank Stephen Brown, Joe Chen, Emanuel Derman, William Fung, Antti Ilmanen, Charles Jones,
Peter Muller, Eli Ofek, and Xiaoyan Zhang for helpful conversations and comments. We are grateful
to seminar participants at Columbia University, the Conference Board, the BSI GAMMA conference
on hedge funds in Milan, The Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta Financial Markets Conference, the
American Finance Association, and the Western Finance Association for helpful comments. The authors
acknowledge funding from a grant from the BSI GAMMA Foundation. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Andrew Ang, Matthew Rhodes-Kropf, and Rui Zhao. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Do Funds-of-Funds Deserve Their Fees-on-Fees?
Andrew Ang, Matthew Rhodes-Kropf, and Rui Zhao
NBER Working Paper No. 13944
April 2008
JEL No. G11,G12

                                              ABSTRACT

Since the after-fee returns of funds-of-funds are, on average, lower than hedge fund returns, it is easy
to conclude that funds-of-funds do not add value compared to hedge funds. However, funds-of-funds
should not be evaluated relative to hedge fund returns in publicly reported databases. Instead, the
correct fund-of-funds benchmark is the set of direct hedge fund investments an investor could achieve
on her own without recourse to funds-of-funds. We use asset allocation concepts to estimate characteristics
of the fund-of-funds benchmark distribution. Since the benchmark characteristics are reasonable, we
conclude that funds-of-funds, on average, deserve their fees-on-fees.


Andrew Ang                                           Rui Zhao
Columbia Business School                             BlackRock
3022 Broadway 413 Uris                               Rui.Zhao@blackrock.com
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
aa610@columbia.edu

Matthew Rhodes-Kropf
Columbia University
Graduate School of Business
3022 Broadway, Room 418A
New York, NY 10027-6902
mattrk1@gmail.com
1        Introduction
A fund-of-funds is a hedge fund that invests in other hedge funds. Investors in funds-of-funds
pay both the fees charged by the fund-of-funds, typically 1.5% and 10% in management and
incentive fees, respectively, and the fees charged by the underlying hedge funds, often 1.5% and
20%. From the perspective of an endowment manager or chief investment officer considering
the use of a fund-of-funds this “double” fee structure makes a fund-of-funds a costly alternative
to direct hedge fund investment. How should an investor decide if funds-of-funds are worth
their additional fees-on-fees?
        The majority of the work on the hedge fund industry compares hedge funds with funds-of-
funds and finds that, on average, funds-of-funds underperform hedge funds.1 By running dif-
ferent factor regressions, many studies find little or no alpha from a fund-of-funds investment
compared to a direct investment in hedge funds. Thus, many authors conclude that the extra
fees charged by funds-of-funds outweigh any investment gains. Others, in particular, Brown,
Goetzmann and Liang (2004), also claim that the extra fees do not provide an appropriate in-
centive for funds-of-funds managers. The general consensus is that the fund-of-funds industry
offers poor value to investors.
        The funds-of-funds industry is large and growing. In fact, a number of well-respected in-
vestors and endowment managers have chosen to use funds-of-funds even though they could
have chosen to directly invest in hedge funds. Since 2000, funds-of-funds have received approx-
imately 35 percent of the new inflows into hedge funds and now constitute about one quarter of
the total assets under the direct management of hedge funds, according to the Tremont TASS
database. In the early 1990’s, they received just 11 percent of new inflows and accounted for
just 20 percent of total hedge fund assets.2
        The promoters of funds-of-funds offer an number of arguments in their favor. First, they
allow investors to obtain exposure to hedge funds that are otherwise closed to new investments.
Second, funds-of-funds generally have much lower required investment minimums than those
required by hedge funds and they provide investors access to a diversified portfolio of managers.
Only investors with very large amounts of capital could replicate this degree of diversification.
Finally, they provide access to information and professional portfolio management that would
otherwise be difficult and expensive to obtain. Brown, Fraser and Liang (2008) show that op-
    1
        See, among others, Ackermann, McEnally and Ravenscraft (1999), Lhabitant and Learned (2002), Amin and
Kat (2003), Kat and Amin (2003), Capocci and Hubner (2004), Fung and Hsieh (2004), and Fung et al. (2007).
  2
    For funds in the TASS database, the total value of assets under management for funds of funds is $156 billion
compared to $635 billion for hedge funds as of June 2006. We compute the inflows from the TASS data.



                                                       1
erational risk, as contrasted with financial risk, is a major source of hedge fund failure, and
funds-of-funds’ managers have significant economies of scale in conducting due diligence with
resources not available to individual investors. All these reasons represent operational advan-
tages of funds-of-funds that direct hedge fund investment may not provide. We address the
issue that the relatively poor after-fee performance of funds-of-funds compared to hedge funds
may not offset these advantages.
       This paper has two goals. The first is to make it clear why observed hedge fund returns are
not the correct benchmark against which to assess funds-of-funds. The second is to propose a
method that investors can use to evaluate decision to choose a fund-of-funds versus investing
directly in hedge funds.
       The conventional analysis of directly comparing hedge fund and fund-of-funds returns does
not adequately measure the true trade-off between a fund-of-funds and a hedge fund. To com-
pare the decision to invest in funds-of-funds versus directly investing in hedge funds, an investor
must compare her own skills, costs, and ability to find and monitor hedge funds with those of a
fund-of-funds manager. Naturally, these costs include any costs like employing consultants to
evaluate or monitor hedge fund investments and represent any out-of-pocket expenses borne by
the investor not using a fund-of-funds. Thus, an investor should not compare a fund-of-funds to
the average hedge fund, but rather she should compare a fund-of-funds to the portfolio of hedge
funds she could construct on her own. Our method allows an investor to ask what returns she
could achieve in hedge fund investments by herself, without recourse to funds-of-funds, before
investing in funds-of-funds becomes economically viable.3
       We estimate the implied benchmark distribution for funds-of-funds for different types of
investors. We find that it is not hard to justify the use of a fund-of-funds and the conditions
under which investors choose a fund-of-funds over hedge funds are economically reasonable
and plausible. This is particularly true for smaller and more risk-averse investors. Consider an
investor holding a low-cost, benchmark portfolio of well-diversified domestic and international
assets who cannot short more than -20% with a risk aversion of γ = 6 (a risk aversion level
that implies that if she could invest in only the S&P 500 or the Lehman Aggregate Bond index,
she would choose approximately a 50%-50% portfolio), and who only has enough capital to
meet the minimum for one hedge fund. This investor finds that funds-of-funds add value if she
believes that her own direct investment in a hedge fund would result in an average return just
0.3% per annum lower than the median return of funded hedge funds in data. Put another way,
   3
       The analysis can also be used more broadly to examine the potential value of an asset class when markets are
incomplete and to compute the economic value of access to a new asset class.



                                                          2
even if this investor had the skill to choose a typical hedge fund if her expenses associated with
direct hedge fund investing were just 0.3% per annum on average, then she would still be better
off with a fund-of-funds. It does not seem difficult to conclude that funds-of-funds can provide
sensible investment vehicles to obtain exposure to hedge fund investment strategies.
       We comment that our analysis focuses only on how to characterize the true benchmark for
funds-of-funds and not on investigating the absolute performance of hedge funds or funds-of-
funds relative to standard asset pricing models. Whether hedge funds have average returns in
excess of their risk profiles is still an open question. Studies like Fung and Hsieh (2001) cannot
reject that there is no average excess performance of hedge funds after factors with option-like
payoffs are included. On the other hand, Bailey, Li and Zhang (2004) find evidence of the
average out-performance of hedge funds under the null of no arbitrage, even when non-linear
factor payoffs are considered. Jagannathan, Malakhov and Novikov (2006) also find statistically
strong and economically large outperformance of hedge funds relative to their style benchmarks
and evidence of strong persistence.4 Our work is silent on the absolute investment performance
of hedge funds and funds-of-funds as an asset class, and we focus only on the methodology
an investor should employ in order to optimally choose to pay, or not to pay, the added fees of
funds-of-funds.5
       The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 shows why funds-of-funds should
not be directly compared to hedge funds and discusses the true fund-of-funds benchmark. In
Section 3, we formulate the asset allocation problem and describe our data. We lay out our
empirical results evaluating the performance added of funds-of-funds relative to hedge funds in
Section 4. Section 5 finds that our results are robust to alternative ways of computing expected
returns. Finally, Section 6 concludes.
   4
       Other authors computing alphas of funds-of-funds and hedge funds include Fung and Hsieh (1997, 2001),
Ackermann, McEnally and Ravenscraft (1999), Liang (1999), Edwards and Caglayan (2001), Ben Dor, Jagan-
nathan and Meier (2003), Agarwal and Naik (2000, 2004), Brown and Goetzmann (2004), and Fung et al. (2007),
among many others.
  5
    We also do not address the question of optimal fees for hedge funds or funds-of-funds. Recent studies focusing
on the optimal fee structure of hedge funds or funds-of-funds include Anson (2001), Goetzmann, Ingersoll and
Ross (2003), Bhansali and Wise (2005), Hodder and Jackwerth (2007), and Stavros and Westerfield (2007).




                                                        3
2        Benchmarking Funds-of-Funds

2.1        Hedge Fund and Fund-of-Funds Returns
Using the Tremont TASS database from January 1994 to June 2006, we briefly document some
summary statistics of return performance of hedge fund and fund-of-funds returns in Table 1.6
To be included in our sample, we require each fund to have at least 12 consecutive monthly
net-of-fee returns. TASS divides the funds into two groups: live and graveyard. At the end of
June 2006, the database contains 4,841 hedge funds, of which 2,460 are live funds and 1,671
are graveyard funds, and 1,576 funds-of-funds, of which 1,097 are live and 479 are no longer
reporting. All the returns are after-fee returns. TASS only reports after-fee returns and generally
not enough information to construct pre-fee returns for most funds.
        Table 1 reports some details on the median fund incentive fee and management fee, along
with the proportion of funds that have high watermark provisions. The median management
fee for both hedge funds and funds-of-funds is 1.5%. Funds-of-funds have median incentive
fees half the size of the median incentive fees for hedge funds, at 10% and 20% for funds-of-
funds and hedge funds, respectively. Approximately half (56%) of funds-of-funds have high
watermarks, whereas the proportion of hedge funds having high watermarks is 65%.
        Consistent with a large literature on hedge fund and fund-of-funds performance, Table 1
reports that average returns and alphas for funds-of-funds are lower than the average returns and
alphas of hedge funds. For example, the median monthly excess return for funds-of-funds is
0.35% per month, which is lower than 0.46% per month for hedge funds. As a simple illustration
of hedge fund alphas, we compute monthly alphas for funds with respect to the aggregate TASS
hedge fund index and with respect to the nine TASS hedge fund styles.7 These alphas are also
lower for funds-of-funds than for hedge funds. For example, the median fund-of-funds alpha
with respect to the aggregate hedge fund index is -0.12% per month compared to 0.13% per
month for hedge funds, so that the average fund-of-funds underperforms a simple hedge fund
    6
        Prior to 1994, TASS backfills returns and does not include failed hedge funds (see comments by, among others,
Agarwal and Naik, 2004). However, papers do use TASS data prior to 1994, like Fung and Hsieh (1997, 2001),
Brown and Goetzmann (2003), and Brown Goetzmann and Liang (2004). Getmansky, Lo and Makarov (2004)
and Gupta and Liang (2005) use the full TASS sample. We do not investigate the absolute level of hedge fund
and fund-of-funds returns relative to performance benchmarks, where survivorship biases may create first-order
effects.
   7
     The TASS Tremont primary hedge fund strategy indices are convertible arbitrage; dedicated short bias; emerg-
ing markets; equity market neutral; event driven; fixed income arbitrage; global macro; long/short equity; managed
futures; and multi-strategy.



                                                           4
benchmark. The median fund-of-funds alpha with respect to the TASS hedge funds styles is
-0.17% per month compared to 0.03% per month for hedge funds. It is easy to conclude from
these results that funds-of-funds do not add much value relative to hedge funds. We now discuss
why this claim should not be made from comparing fund-of-fund returns to hedge fund returns.


2.2       The True Fund-of-Funds Benchmark
Comparing average risk-adjusted returns, or alphas, across two asset classes is valid if both
assets are directly comparable. For example, mutual funds can be compared to index funds
since investors can easily invest in either asset. However, investing in hedge funds is very
different. First, the best hedge funds are closed (presumably filled with the capital of smart
investors who recognized the superiority of these hedge funds at an early stage). Second, even
if a wealthy investor meets the high minimum requirements for investing in hedge funds, there
is no guarantee that a successful hedge fund will take that investor as a client. Third, and most
importantly, unlike listed stocks that must provide timely disclosure notices and accounting
reports, hedge funds are often secretive with little or no obvious market presence. Thus, it is
plausible to assume that fund-of-funds managers and individual investors have different abilities
in finding, evaluating and monitoring hedge funds, either because fund-of-funds managers have
expertise in picking good hedge funds, or because they gather superior information at a cost.
       Consider an investor deciding between investing in a fund-of-funds or directly making hedge
fund investments. This investor is not comparing a fund-of-funds to the set of hedge funds in
a published database. Rather, she is comparing the fund-of-funds to the set of hedge funds that
she can locate, evaluate and invest in by herself – without using a fund-of-funds. To varying
degrees, hedge funds are hard to find, evaluate and monitor; they have high minimums; and they
are often closed to new investors. Thus, to choose between direct hedge fund investments and
using funds-of-funds, an investor has to compare her own costs and skill at locating, evaluating
and monitoring hedge funds she could enter to the costs and skill of a fund-of-funds manager.
       For simplicity, we refer to an investor with sufficient expertise and skill to locate and evalu-
ate hedge funds as an informed or skilled investor. We refer to an investor with little expertise in
locating, evaluating and monitoring hedge funds as an uninformed or unskilled investor.8 Natu-
   8
       By unskilled investors, we do not mean investors with little capital or investors without any financial knowl-
edge. By law, most hedge funds and funds-of-funds are organized under the qualified investor exemption and are
limited to investors with a net worth of at least $5 million. By an unskilled investor, we mean an investor that does
not have the same opportunity set to find hedge funds, or has inferior skills to evaluate and monitor hedge funds
compared to a sophisticated, skilled investor. In our argument, we assume that fund-of-funds managers, on aver-



                                                          5
rally, an investor with a lot of expertise and skill in locating and monitoring hedge funds would
prefer to invest directly in hedge funds, rather than pay a fund-of-funds. But, for an investor
with little or no expertise, the probability of choosing a hedge fund that turns out to be a poor
investment may be very high as there are large cross-sectional differences in the performance of
individual hedge funds (see, for example, Li, Zhang and Zhao, 2005; Kosowski, Naik and Teo,
2007).
    But wait a minute! Surely if the data show hedge funds do better on average than funds-of-
funds, unskilled investors could just randomly select some hedge funds and would do better, on
average, than being in a typical fund-of-funds. This is not true because the data are furnished
by hedge funds and funds-of-funds which themselves are the result of an equilibrium where
investors with different skills sort themselves into direct investors in hedge funds and indirect
investors through funds-of-funds. The return differences from these hedge funds and funds-of-
funds that have received capital from these two types of investors do not directly answer the
question of whether funds-of-funds add value relative to hedge funds.
    Remember that those people investing in hedge funds have chosen whether or not to use
a fund-of-funds. Consider a world where the universe of hedge funds that we see in data are
funded and monitored either by expert fund-of-funds managers or by investors with sufficient
resources and skills that enable them to make high quality, direct hedge fund investments. (Ob-
viously this does not mean that ex post all hedge funds and funds-of-funds have good perfor-
mance because the decisions are made ex ante.) In this world, we do not observe the set of
hedge funds that received little or no funding, but would have received funding if unskilled
investors had to invest directly without recourse to funds-of-funds. In a world where unskilled
investors do not invest directly in hedge funds, unskilled investors use funds-of-funds and thus
manage to avoid the worst hedge funds.
    This intuition extends to the real world. The hedge fund databases tend to contain returns
only of hedge funds that are funded directly by skilled individuals and funded indirectly through
unskilled investors using expert funds-of-funds. The data truncate the returns of most of the
worst hedge funds that would have received funding from unskilled investors if they could not
use funds-of-funds. Consequently, the observable set of hedge funds is biased upwards com-
pared to the true set of hedge funds that would be available only to unsophisticated individuals
age, have such skills. To prevent poor hedge fund allocations, sophisticated investors spend significant resources
to evaluate the skill of the managers. William H. Donaldson, Chairman of the U.S. Securities and Exchange Com-
mission, notes in his May 2003 testimony to Congress that sophisticated hedge fund investors “perform extensive
due diligence prior to investing, often taking months to research a hedge fund before making an investment.” See
http://www.sec.gov/news/testimony/052203tswhd.htm


                                                        6
forced to directly invest in hedge funds. The data do not directly tell whether funds-of-funds
are adding value because the data do not necessarily contain returns of the hedge funds that
unskilled investors would have invested in if funds-of-funds were not available.
   Figure 1 illustrates this logic with a simple, but extreme, example. Assume that the invest-
ment returns of the true universe of hedge funds is normally distributed, as shown in the solid
blue curve. Assume also that only skilled fund-of-funds managers, taking capital from unskilled
individuals, and skilled individual investors are making direct hedge fund investments and they
are able to avoid the worst 20% of hedge funds. For simplicity, we assume that the skill of these
investors results in a truncation of the distribution so that the worst 20% of the true hedge funds
never get funded. The mean of the truncated distribution of returns is higher than the mean of
the original normal distribution, as skilled investors fund the best 80% of hedge funds.
   The data available to researchers to evaluate funds-of-funds performance, includes only the
set of hedge funds that receive funding by skilled investors. That data is too good relative to the
true universe of hedge funds. We never observe the bad hedge funds that would have received
funding if funds-of-funds did not exist. But, this true hedge fund distribution is the correct
benchmark for funds-of-funds. In the Appendix, we present a formal model to illustrate these
points.
   We can push this example a little further. Suppose we generated observed hedge fund and
fund-of-funds data according to the truncated distribution in Figure 1. We would find that funds-
of-funds and direct hedge fund investments would roughly perform the same before fees. After
fees, funds-of-funds would underperform hedge funds. Does this imply that funds-of-funds are
not adding value? Funds-of-funds prevent unskilled investors from investing in the bottom 20%
of funds. These funds do not show up in the data, but they are part of the true benchmark for
funds-of-funds. Should an investor who is unskilled at choosing and monitoring hedge funds
pay for this skill? Absolutely.
   But why can’t an investor just wait until the skilled investors have invested and then follow?
First, it may not be clear who the top investors are or when they have chosen to invest. Unlike
the stock market, there is no requirement to report large trades and so procuring this information
may be very hard. Second, because many top hedge funds close to new investors, unskilled in-
vestors may not be able to invest in the top hedge funds and will likely receive larger allocations
to worse funds. Third, because funds require ongoing monitoring, an unskilled investor may
often still be in the now poor fund after the skilled investors have exited. Finally, and this is a
point about operational rather than performance advantage, the best funds raise their minimums
and no longer deal with smaller investors. Thus, even investors with hundreds of millions under


                                                7
management could not successfully follow this strategy. To state this another way, it is simply
hard to believe that the least knowledgable investors can simply stand behind Yale Endowment
and enter only once they know Yale is in.
   We emphasize that this funding bias of existing hedge fund databases is very different from
the survivorship or reporting bias discussed in the literature. The reporting bias deals with the
many successful hedge funds which do not report to hedge fund databases (see Ackermann et
al., 1999), making observed hedge fund returns biased downwards. On the other hand, Malkiel
and Saha (2004) argue that many unsuccessful hedge funds, which ultimately fail, stop reporting
to the hedge fund databases, which causes hedge fund returns to be biased upwards. Reporting
biases cause the hedge fund databases to tend toward mediocrity. The funding bias is different
from these survivorship biases because the funding bias involves whether hedge funds that have
received funding report, or do not report, to a database. Our bias is that we never observe the
hedge funds that do not receive funding, but would have received funding if funds-of-funds did
not exist. It is this unobserved set of unfunded hedge funds, together with the observable set of
funded hedge funds, that constitutes the true fund-of-funds benchmark.


2.3   Constructing the True Fund-of-Funds Benchmark
The key to evaluating a fund-of-funds manager is finding the true fund-of-funds benchmark.
We have shown that the fund-of-funds benchmark is not the hedge fund universe in reported
databases; rather it is the set of hedge funds that an investor could invest in on her own without
recourse to funds-of-funds. The problem, of course, is that data on the true hedge fund universe
are not directly observable and we should not directly benchmark funds-of-funds against hedge
funds. In this section, we introduce a framework that uses revealed preference concepts which
allows an investor to gauge whether a fund-of-funds investment is worth the additional fees.
With this framework, and given an investor’s attributes such as size and tolerance for risk, we
estimate the implied fund-of-funds benchmark hurdle rate for funds-of-funds to add value.
   We start with the observation that an investor selecting a fund-of-funds must at least be
indifferent to directly selecting a hedge fund from her true hedge fund universe and a fund-of-
funds. This revealed preference allows us to back out various characteristics of the true hedge
fund distribution from observed fund-of-funds investments. In other words, we ask the indirect
question: What would investors have to believe about their own ability to invest in hedge funds
in order to make funds-of-funds a good idea? Answering this question also helps us to judge
whether funds-of-funds add value. Since investors choose to invest in funds-of-funds, the true
distribution of hedge funds these investors can access must be at least as bad as the distribution

                                                8
that makes them indifferent between the observed fund-of-funds investments and the true set of
hedge funds to which the investors can access.
        Formally, our methodology is as follows. We first determine the utility value of a typical
fund-of-funds investment for an investor with a particular risk tolerance and a given portfolio
composition and size. Note that the funds-of-funds have received funding and must represent
optimal positions in investors’ portfolios. We do not observe the true hedge fund distribution to
which this typical fund-of-funds should be compared.
        We construct the distribution of returns for the set of hedge funds in which the investor
could invest directly on her own (the true fund-of-funds benchmark) that would provide the
same utility as investing in a fund-of-funds. We compute the expected return (the hurdle rate)
so that the investor is indifferent between going it alone in direct hedge fund investments and
using a fund-of-funds. We denote this hurdle rate as µB , the mean of the benchmark fund-of-
funds distribution. The hurdle rate is determined so that, at the margin, the ex-ante utility of
adding a hedge fund drawn from the investor’s hedge fund investment opportunity set is the
same as the ex-ante utility of making the observable funds-of-funds investment.9
        The hurdle rate can also be interpreted as the belief an investor has about their own hedge
fund investments to think that funds-of-funds add value. If µB is relatively close to the observed
returns of hedge funds reported in databases, then it is relatively easy to believe that an investor’s
direct investment returns minus her own costs would be less than the benchmark. Thus, for this
investor it is easy to believe that a fund-of-funds would add value. Conversely, if we find that
investors need to believe that their own direct hedge fund investments perform implausibly
badly to justify a fund-of-funds, we would conclude that fund-of-funds are likely to be over-
charging for their investment performance.


3        Methodology

3.1        The Portfolio Allocation Problem
In this section, we describe how a standard portfolio allocation framework can infer the charac-
teristics of the benchmark fund-of-funds distribution. We assume that the investor has a standard
    9
        Naturally, it is also possible to characterize a benchmark standard deviation given some assumptions on the
benchmark return, which was considered in an earlier version. We focus on the benchmark return because it has a
more direct practical application as an internal hurdle rate for gauging hedge fund investments.




                                                          9
CRRA utility function over final wealth:10
                                                          µ            ¶
                                                               W 1−γ
                                            U (W ) = E                     ,                                 (1)
                                                               1−γ

where γ is the investor’s coefficient of risk aversion. The investor’s end-of-period wealth, W ,
is given by:                                        Ã                       !
                                                        N
                                                        X
                                        W = W0                exp(y j )αj       ,
                                                        j=1

where y j is the continuously compounded return of the jth asset, j = 1 . . . N , for N assets, and
                                                    P
αj is the portfolio position in the jth asset, with   αj = 1. Since CRRA is homogenous in
wealth we set W0 = 1. The optimal asset allocation decision problem is:
                                            µ 1−γ ¶
                                              W
                                     max E
                                      αj       1−γ
                                              N
                                              X
                                   subject to     αj = 1                                                     (2)
                                                          j=1

       We choose CRRA utility because it is a standard utility function that is widely used in
many asset allocation studies (see, for example, the review by Brandt, 2004). Naturally, our
methodology can be extended to more complex utility functions. Since it is well known that
unconstrained portfolio positions are sensitive to expected returns and can produce extreme
portfolio positions, we consider only a small number of assets and impose the cases of no short-
sale constraints as well as a shorting limit of -20%. To solve the asset allocation problem,
we solve the first order conditions corresponding to equation (1) numerically using quadrature
following Balduzzi and Lynch (1999) and Ang and Bekaert (2001), assuming asset returns are
log-normally distributed.
       To compute mean excess returns, we use the excess returns (raw returns less the one-month
T-bill rate). In the asset allocation problem, we assume a risk-free rate of 0.04/12 = 0.33% per
month and add this onto the mean excess return of each asset to produce total expected returns:

                                           E(y) = rf + E(y − rf ).

       We present benchmark results for investors with risk aversion levels of γ = 4, 6, 8, and 10.
To intuitively grasp the effect of these risk aversion levels on a typical stock/bond allocation,
  10
       In Ang, Rhodes-Kropf and Zhao (2006), we consider robustness of our results to using mean-variance utility
and considering a much wider universe of assets including U.S. large and small stocks, U.S. value and growth
stocks, U.S. bonds, commodities, foreign equity (U.K., Japan, Germany, France, and emerging markets), and
foreign bonds (U.K., German, and Japan Eurobond returns).


                                                         10
consider an investor who only allocates capital between the S&P 500 and the Lehman Aggregate
Bond index. Using data from January 1976 to June 2006, a standard position that is 60% stocks
and 40% bonds corresponds to a risk aversion of γ = 4. The γ = 6 investor holds a 50%/50%
portfolio. A more risk averse investor with γ = 10 holds a portfolio of 27% stocks and 73%
bonds.

Benchmarking One Fund-of-Funds to One Hedge Fund

We first consider the problem of an investor deciding between adding a single hedge fund or a
single fund-of-funds to a set of benchmark assets. This comparison is straightforward because
the characteristics of a typical fund-of-funds can be easily estimated from observable fund-of-
funds investments. After computing the utility of adding the fund-of-funds to the benchmark
assets we can compute the hurdle rate µB as follows. Suppose that the distribution of hedge
funds accessible by the investor has the same variance and correlations as the observed hedge
fund returns in data. Of course, this is a conservative assumption because we would a priori
expect the true set of hedge funds accessible by the investor to have at least as volatile returns as
the reported hedge funds in data. With this assumption, we consider a second asset allocation
problem of the investor adding a single hedge fund to the set of benchmark assets. We solve
for the benchmark return µB that yields the same utility as the first asset allocation problem
of adding the fund-of-funds investment. Other benchmark returns may be inferred by taking
different assumptions on the variance and correlations of the true hedge fund returns.

Benchmarking a Fund-of-Funds to Many Hedge Funds

A small investor with $200M under management might allocate a small position, say $10M, to
hedge funds. Given the large minimums required by many hedge funds this investor may only
be able to invest in a single fund-of-funds or a hedge fund. In contrast, an investor with several
billion dollars under management may be able to directly invest in a portfolio of hedge funds,
and so should compare fund-of-funds to an investment in a number of hedge funds. The analysis
in this section allows us to consider the funds-of-funds question for investors of different sizes.
      To make this comparison we create artificial portfolios of randomly chosen hedge funds
from the TASS database. At the end of each year, we randomly select 2, 5, 10, or 30 hedge
funds from data to form an artificial fund-of-funds. We equally weight these randomly chosen
hedge funds to form a portfolio and record the monthly returns of the portfolio over the next
year. These portfolios are rebalanced annually.11 This process is repeated 1,567 times to match
 11
      If a hedge fund in the artificial fund-of-funds moves into the TASS graveyard file, we assume that the remaining


                                                          11
the number of funds-of-funds in our sample. We call portfolios of hedge funds created this way
simple artificial funds-of-funds.
    A large investor able to invest in many hedge funds may not choose hedge funds completely
randomly but instead may optimally allocate to funds. To take this into account, we create
artificial funds-of-funds that optimize over the different TASS hedge fund styles. This analy-
sis uses hedge fund style data from January 1994 to June 2006, except for the multi-strategy
category which starts in April 1994. We form one artificial funds-of-funds using an optimal
weighting following equation (2) only over the TASS hedge fund styles, assuming no shorting
of hedge funds. We choose a random fund in each category, but rather than equally-weighting
the funds in the portfolio, we apply the optimal weighting scheme and repeat this process 1,567
times. Optimal artificial funds-of-funds created this way depend on the choice of risk aversion
(γ = 4 . . . 10) and are held mostly in market neutral, event driven, and global macro strategies.
By comparing a fund-of-funds investment with these artificial hedge funds, we can gauge what
an investor would have to believe about her own ability to select between many hedge funds on
her own or to prefer a fund-of-funds.


3.2     Benchmark Assets and Moments
We specify a small investment universe consisting of:

   1. U.S. Stocks – S&P 500 [Jan 1975 – Jun 2006]

   2. U.S. Bonds – Lehman Aggregate Bond Index [Jan 1976 – Jun 2006]

   3. Foreign Equities – MSCI world ex U.S. [Jan 1975 – Jun 2006]

   4. Foreign Bonds – Lehman Global Aggregate Bond Index ex U.S. [Jan 1990 – Jun 2006]

together with a risk-free bond yielding 4%/12 = 0.33% per month. The small investment uni-
verse highlights the illustration of our methodology on a select set of assets that would be com-
mon to all institutional funds managers. The representative index returns are standard bench-
marks and are provided by Ibbotson. Furthermore, this small set of assets also has relatively
low correlations with each other. In Table 2, we report monthly summary statistics for these
capital is evenly allocated to the remaining hedge funds. In reality these artificial funds-of-funds also cannot be
replicated because of lockup and redemption constraints. Thus, our artificial funds-of-funds are conservatively
upward biased and represent the highest bound for the performance of an unskilled, institutional investor.




                                                       12
base assets. We use these historical moments as inputs for the asset allocation problem.12 In
Section 5 we consider other sources for obtaining expected returns.
       To compute moments for hedge funds and funds-of-funds we use the cross-section of TASS
data. This allows us to take estimates for a typical hedge fund, compared to an aggregated
hedge fund or fund-of-funds index which smooths returns across a range of hedge funds and
funds-of-funds. For example, to compute the representative volatility of fund-of-funds returns,
we first compute the volatility of each individual fund-of-funds. Then, we take the median
volatility of the cross section to use as the input volatility of fund-of-funds returns in the asset
allocation exercise. The median not only represents a typical fund-of-funds, but the estimator
is also robust to extremely low or high outliers.
       Panel B of Table 2 lists the mean excess returns for hedge funds and funds-of-funds returns
we use in the asset allocation problem. Since Asness, Krail and Liew (2001), among others,
demonstrate that the returns of hedge funds are affected by nonsynchronous price movements,
we also consider typical standard deviations to be greater than the numbers in Table 2. However,
it is important to remember that the magnitude of the inputs is not very important to our study
as we are interested in comparing funds-of-funds to direct hedge fund investments.13
       Estimates of correlations drive diversification benefits in the optimal solution to any asset
allocation problem. To produce estimates of correlations that are robust to non-synchronous
reporting lags we introduce a methodology building on Dimson (1979), which is described
in Appendix B. Not taking into account these non-synchronous lags overstates the benefits
of investing in hedge funds or funds-of-funds. Panel B reports that the correlations of hedge
funds and funds-of-funds with U.S. equities are 0.46 and 0.80, respectively, but are lower with
U.S. bonds, at 0.08 and 0.23, respectively. These correlations are similar to those reported by
Capocci and Hubner (2004), among others.
       In Panel C of Table 2, we report the input moments to the asset allocation problem for the
artificial funds-of-funds, which are created by randomly drawing hedge funds from the TASS
database every year. The median excess return for the simple artificial funds-of-funds is slightly
higher than the median hedge fund excess return. This is because we resample the database to
  12
       The estimation of moments of hedge fund returns is sensitive to the choice of the sample period. In results
available on request, we also compute hurdle rates when returns from 1998 are omitted. These results are very
close to those reported in Table 3.
  13
     Our evaluation technique does not suffer from the typical “error magnification” problems typical of optimal
portfolio analysis. The central way in which the inputs matter is if the expectations are such that no investor wishes
to invest in either hedge funds or funds-of-funds. Under this scenario, we cannot compare the relative benefit of
one non-optimal asset class to another non-optimal asset class.



                                                         13
construct artificial funds-of-funds every year, and bad performing and liquidated hedge funds
tend to have less impact on the artificial fund-of-funds portfolios.14 As more funds are added
to the artificial funds-of-funds, portfolio diversification reduces the median standard deviation
from 3.74% per month for two funds to 1.84% per month for 30 funds. Funds-of-funds have
a lower standard deviation at 1.55% per month, indicating that fund-of-funds managers obtain,
on average, even better risk reductions than randomly selecting 30 hedge funds. The optimal
artificial hedge funds have volatilities ranging from 2.76% per month for a risk aversion level
of γ = 6, to 2.23% for a risk aversion of 10. These volatilities are also above the typical
fund-of-funds standard deviation.


4          The Fund-of-Funds Benchmark
To estimate the hurdle rate, µB , we assume that the underlying benchmark volatility, σB , is
either the observable median hedge fund volatility in Table 2 (Case 1) or 10% greater than the
reported volatility (Case 2). We assume that the investor is adding the hedge fund or fund-of-
funds to the four benchmark assets.
         Table 3 reports the results for the fund-of-funds benchmark where the reported µB makes
the investor indifferent between adding N hedge funds from the true, underlying hedge fund
distribution and adding a typical fund-of-funds. Each row corresponds to a different comparison
portfolio: N = 1 to 30 as well as the optimally chosen hedge fund portfolio. Entries in italics
indicate that an investor already prefers a fund-of-funds, rather than a typical direct hedge fund
investment. These investors would have to think they would do better than the typical hedge
fund if they invested on their own in order for them not to use a fund-of-funds. This is because
these investors are sufficiently risk-averse and favor the diversification benefits of funds-of-
funds.
         The entries in normal type in Table 3 report the highest possible µB that the investor could
believe she would obtain on a direct hedge fund investment from the true hedge fund universe in
order to choose a fund-of-funds. The median observable excess hedge fund return in TASS data
is 0.460% per month. Let us examine a γ = 6 investor who starts with the four benchmark assets
in her portfolio and who cannot short. Suppose this investor can add one hedge fund or one fund-
    14
         This annual resampling also leads to the simple artificial fund-of-funds portfolio of two hedge funds to have a
slightly larger median standard deviation than the median standard deviation of single hedge funds. This does not
affect our analysis because we always compare the true hedge fund distribution with funds-of-funds, not funds-of-
funds containing a certain number of underlying funds with other funds-of-funds containing a different number of
underlying funds.


                                                            14
of-funds. We also conservatively assume that the underlying hedge fund volatility is the same as
the reported hedge fund volatility in TASS in Case 1. Table 3 reports that this investor needs to
believe that on her own she would obtain an excess return less than 0.405% per month for her to
prefer to use a fund-of-funds. That is, she only needs to think her own hedge fund investments
would result in a mean excess return after her own expenses 12 × (0.460 − 0.405) = 0.66%
per annum worse on average before preferring a fund-of-funds. Imagine this investor had $5
million to put to work in hedge funds. Even if she could invest in the typical hedge fund, if she
spent more than $33,000 finding, evaluating and monitoring her investment she would be better
off in a fund-of-funds.
       If the γ = 6 investor moves from being able to hold a single hedge fund or fund-of-fund and
cannot short (where µB = 0.405% per month) to being able to hold positions down to -20%,
then µB increases to 0.434%. The ability to short increases the value of a fund-of-funds as the
investor takes leveraged positions in equity and the fund-of-funds. This increases the investor’s
utility and the hurdle rate on the true hedge fund distribution correspondingly increases to match
this higher utility.
       Now suppose the γ = 6 investor is large enough to hold 10 hedge funds. This investor’s µB
is now 0.388% per month, or she would need to believe she must earn an expected excess return
of 12 × (0.460 − 0.388) = 0.86% per annum worse than a typical hedge fund in TASS before
preferring a fund-of-funds. Alternatively, if the investor can obtain at least an excess return
of µB = 4.66% per annum (compared to an excess return of 5.52% per annum for a typical
hedge fund reported in data), then she prefers to directly enter hedge funds without a fund-of-
funds. To meet the minimum investment requirement on 10 funds implies the inventors has
on the order of $50 million to invest in hedge funds. Therefore, she can spend approximately
$430,000 per annum finding, evaluating and monitoring her hedge fund portfolio before she
prefers a fund-of-funds.
       Finally, if the same investor can optimally allocate her money among the nine hedge fund
styles, then the investor would have to believe she would earn an expected return of 12 ×
(0.460 − 0.330) = 1.56% per annum worse than a typical TASS hedge fund before choosing
a fund-of-funds. However, this comparison is slightly off because it compares an optimally
chosen benchmark against a typical fund. Actually the typical optimally chosen hedge fund for
a γ = 6 investor earns an excess return of only 0.349% per month.15 Therefore, compared to
a typical optimal artificial hedge fund, the γ = 6 investor needs to believe that she does just
  15
       This is less than the typical hedge fund because some high risk / high return fund styles are down-weighted in
the optimal hedge fund style mix.



                                                          15
12 × (0.349 − 0.330) = 0.23% per annum worse to prefer a fund-of-funds. So, if her own costs
are greater than 23 basis points per annum, she would prefer a fund-of-funds. Overall, a γ = 6
investor does not have to believe that she would perform very poorly on her own in order to
prefer a fund-of-funds.
         Naturally, for Case 2 where the assumed benchmark volatility is 1.1 times the typical hedge
fund volatility in TASS, the µB entries are larger than Case 1. Hence, investors have higher
hurdle rates before preferring to use direct hedge fund investments or investors need to believe in
fewer basis points of underperformance relative to a typical TASS hedge fund before they prefer
a fund-of-funds. Note that these performance “reductions” also include the costs of finding,
allocating and overseeing the hedge fund investments if a fund-of-funds is not employed. Thus,
investors who have a higher cost structure would find funds-of-funds even more attractive.


5          Robustness
In our main analysis above we have used expectations that are the realized returns of the differ-
ent assets. In this section, we take two alternative approaches to obtaining inputs of expected
returns and volatilities. We consider an equilibrium approach to back out expected excess re-
turns following Black and Litterman (1992) and we also take the expected returns and volatili-
ties from a leading investment manager, Yale Endowment, that has many years of experience in
investing in hedge funds and funds-of-funds.16

Equilibrium Expected Returns

We use a modified version of Black and Litterman (1992) to back out equilibrium expected
excess returns using a representative mean-variance investor combined with market weights. A
mean-variance agent with risk aversion γ holds a vector of weights w in N risky assets given
by
                                              1 −1
                                                Σ µ,  w=                                      (3)
                                              γ
for the excess return vector µ and Σ the covariance matrix of asset returns. If this agent is the
representative agent and w are the market capitalization weights of each asset class, then we
    16
         We have also conducted robustness checks to determine the sensitivity of our results to different inputs for the
fund-of-funds moments. These were done by taking different percentiles (25th and 75th percentiles) of the cross-
sectional distribution of the expected returns, correlations, and volatilities across the fund-of-funds returns. We find
that using realized moments for the fund-of-funds distribution in no way drives our results and that funds-of-funds
are likely to add value using these alternative inputs. These results are available upon request.



                                                             16
can invert equation (3) to solve for the equilibrium expected excess returns using

                                                    µ = γΣw.                                                     (4)

       We measure market weights of U.S. bonds, foreign bonds, U.S. equity, and foreign equity
by taking the corresponding MSCI market capitalizations and proportions at June 30, 2006.
These market values and proportions are:17

                                                         Mkt Cap
                                                       (Bil USD)      Proportion
                                   U.S. Bonds                7,789        19.18%
                                   Foreign Bonds             8,715        21.46%
                                   U.S. Equities           11,930         29.37%
                                   Foreign Equities        12,181         29.99%

Note that at this date the proportion of equity/bonds in terms of market values is very close to a
60%/40% mix.
       While the MSCI indices are representative and measure accurately the total amount of cap-
ital invested in these assets, we do not have a similar measure of committed capital to hedge
funds or funds-of-funds, particularly for a representative investor. We assume, arbitrarily, that
the proportion of the portfolio committed to hedge funds or funds-of-funds is wF oF . We then
scale the vector of portfolio weights of U.S. bonds, international bonds, U.S. equities, interna-
tional equities, and wF oF to be:
                                                                
                                                (1 − wF oF ) 0.19
                                                                
                                              (1 − wF oF ) 0.22
                                                                
                                                                
                                          w = (1 − wF oF ) 0.29 .
                                                                
                                              (1 − w ) 0.30
                                                     F oF       
                                                     wF oF

We take wF oF to be 5% or 10%, which represent typical holdings of an institutional fund in-
vested in hedge funds or funds-of-funds.
       Using these weights, we back out the expected excess returns of all using equation (4) by
taking γ = 4, 6, 8, 10. We estimate the unconditional covariance matrix from data using the
values in Table 2. We denote the equilibrium fund-of-funds excess return computed this way
  17
       We use the market capitalizations of these MSCI indices as they represent a consistent measure across asset
classes, but rely on the time-series of the indices in Section 3.2 to compute returns. This is because the historical
data for the MSCI bond returns is very short. Moreover, while the Lehman bond indices are most widely used in
industry, market capitalizations of the Lehman bond indices are not publicly available.


                                                        17
as µF oF . Then, we compute the benchmark hurdle rate µB to yield the same utility changing
the wF oF to a hedge fund position while making assumptions on the true hedge fund volatility
and correlations. In particular, we conservatively assume that the hedge fund volatility is the
median cross-sectional cross-sectional standard deviation of hedge fund excess returns in data
(2.94% per month). We can also compare µB against an equilibrium hedge fund expected excess
return, µe , which we compute in the same way as µF oF but now construct the covariance matrix
using observed hedge fund volatilities and correlations. Note that in these calculations the asset
weights are held fixed at their scaled market values together with the market weight assumption
of the hedge fund or fund-of-funds proportion.
   Table 4 reports the fund-of-funds hurdle rates computed using equilibrium expected returns.
The columns labelled “Equilibrium Risk Premia µe ” report the equilibrium expected excess
returns in percentage terms per month. Table 4 shows that with equilibrium returns it is also
likely that funds-of-funds add value. To more easily interpret the hurdle rate returns, we explic-
itly compare them with the equilibrium hedge fund returns in the last four columns. We report
12 × (µe − µB ), the annualized difference between the equilibrium hedge fund returns and the
benchmark fund-of-fund return. These numbers are small, so investors do not have to believe
that they would have to perform very poorly on their own in order to prefer a fund-of-funds. For
example, if the equilibrium hedge fund or fund-of-funds weight is 5%, then a γ = 6 investor
would only need to assume that she had a return 0.48% per annum worse than the equilibrium
hedge fund return to choose a fund-of-funds. If the equilibrium hedge fund weight is 10%, then
the difference is 0.60% per annum.
   The return differences are very small at less than 30 basis points for simple artificial funds-
of-funds created with 10 or 30 hedge funds, or for taking optimal artificial funds-of-funds. For a
simple artificial hedge fund of 30 hedge funds, it would only take additional costs of 8-12 basis
points of running an in-house portfolio of hedge funds rather than taking the after-fee returns of
a fund-of-funds holding the same number of hedge funds for an institutional investor to prefer to
invest in the fund-of-funds. These differences between µe and µB are even lower than looking
at the difference between the historical hedge fund return and µB in Table 3. This is because
the equilibrium expected returns for artificial funds-of-funds are much lower than the realized
0.46% per month return for hedge funds. Thus, using equilibrium expected returns makes the
case that funds-of-funds add value even stronger.

Forecasted Expected Returns and Volatilities

   Another alternative source of expected returns and volatilities is forecasts. The 2006 annual


                                               18
report of Yale Endowment provides the following forecasts of asset classes in our universe:18

                                                        Excess Return     Volatility
                                    Funds-of-Funds                  6%       12.5%
                                    U.S. Equities                   7%         20%
                                    U.S. Bonds                      3%         10%
                                    Foreign Equity                  6%         20%

We conduct our exercise among these four asset classes, dropping foreign bonds, as opposed
to the four main asset classes in the previous sections. We take the correlation structure from
data, given in Table 2. To solve for the benchmark fund-of-funds return, µB , we assume that
the hedge fund volatility is the same as that observed in the TASS database.
         Table 5 lists the results. The hurdle rates derived using Yale Endowment’s forecasts are
very similar to the hurdle rates in Table 3 computed using historical returns. For example, for a
γ = 6 investor who cannot short and is considering a single hedge fund versus a fund-of-funds
has a hurdle rate of 0.332% per month using Yale’s forecasts, versus 0.405% per month in
Table 3 using historical inputs for means and variances. This is a difference of just 0.073% per
month and well below 1% per annum. With an average hurdle rate of approximately 0.3% per
month, Table 5 states that a typical investor only needs to think that she would do approximately
12 × (0.46 − 0.3) ≈ 2% per annum worse than the reported median hedge fund return in TASS
before preferring a fund-of-funds. In summary, the conclusion that funds-of-funds are likely to
add value is robust to using Yale Endowment’s forecasts of expected returns and volatilities.


6         Conclusion
Funds-of-funds charge comparatively large fees-on-fees that are paid in addition to the fees
charged by the underlying hedge funds. The after-fee alphas and average returns of funds-of-
funds are lower than the after-fee alphas and average returns of hedge funds. It is tempting to
conclude from these results that funds-of-funds add little value relative to hedge funds. How-
ever, we argue that this comparison is not correct and funds-of-funds should not be evaluated
relative to the set of hedge fund returns we observe in data.
         The hedge funds that we observe in reported databases tend to receive capital either from
sophisticated, skilled investors, or from skilled funds-of-funds. An investor with no skill in
    18
         Available at http://www.yale.edu/investments/. The numbers for the funds-of-funds category is an average of
event and value driven categories in the annual report. We translate 1% real return on cash, which is an assumption
often used by practitioners (see, for example, Urwin, 2006).



                                                          19
locating and monitoring hedge funds would, on average, choose hedge funds that are worse
than the typical hedge fund observed in data, if she were forced to directly invest in hedge funds
without using a fund-of-funds intermediary. The existence of the fund-of-funds industry helps
investors gain access to a better skill set of finding, evaluating, selecting, and monitoring hedge
funds. For investors with relatively little skill or small investment amounts, funds-of-funds add
value, even if their after-fee returns are lower than the returns of hedge funds. Thus, the correct
benchmark for a fund-of-funds investor is the universe of hedge funds that she would face on
her own minus her own costs, rather than the set of observable hedge fund returns in data.
   This paper outlines a methodology investors can use to determine their hurdle rate for a
fund-of-funds decision. We answer the question: “What return do I need to achieve on my own,
given my capital, risk tolerances, and costs to decide that I should not use a fund-of-funds?” We
find that for many types of investors the hurdle rate is close to the return earned by the typical
hedge fund from the TASS database. Thus, if an investor thinks she would do just a bit worse on
her own or if her costs were bigger than this difference, then she would prefer a fund-of-funds.
Thus, it is not hard to conclude that funds-of-funds add value even for relatively large investors.
   Recently, there has been some debate regarding the regulation of hedge funds. Much of this
debate focuses on the trade-off between the potential benefits from allowing broader access to
hedge funds and the potential for the abuse of unskilled investors (see Edwards, 2006, for a
summary). Our analysis suggests that allowing broader access to funds-of-funds, who report
more information to investors, may be an appropriate solution. Even though the average after-
fee returns of funds-of-funds is lower than hedge fund returns in data, their ability to overcome
the frictions of hedge fund investing provides value to less skilled investors.




                                                20
Appendix

A A Simple Theoretical Model
This appendix provides a simple equilibrium model where unskilled investors pay extra fees relative to skilled
investors but earn the same before-fee return. In equilibrium, unskilled investors use funds-of-funds and both
funds-of-funds and hedge funds perform the same on a pre-fee basis, but funds-of-funds underperform hedge
funds on an after-fee basis. Funds-of-funds still add value in this economy because the alternative for an unskilled
investor is to directly invest in hedge funds, and consequently, earn lower returns than skilled investors.
     Consider an economy with two types of hedge funds: good hedge funds (G) with per period after-fee returns
                 2                                                                              2
rG ∼ N (µG , σG    ), and bad hedge funds (B) with per period after-fee returns rB ∼ N (µB , σB   ), where µG > µB
      2       2
and σG < σB . Thus, we assume that good hedge funds strictly dominate bad hedge funds. At each time period
new hedge funds are born. A fraction ϕ of new funds are good. New funds either receive an investment of one unit
of capital or they exit the market. Funded hedge funds produce a return for one period. At the end of that period
their qualities are revealed. Investors would like to add money to funds revealed to be good, but these funds are
closed to new investment. Investors withdraw money from bad funds which then exit the market. Good funds live
one more period before retiring.
     There are two types of investors in the economy. They are either skilled (S) or unskilled (U ) at evaluating the
quality of hedge funds. The probability that a skilled or unskilled investor evaluates the quality of a hedge fund
correctly is θS and θU respectively, with θS > θU ≥ 0.5. Thus, better skilled investors are more likely to know the
true quality of the hedge funds. Let λ equal the fraction of new investors who are skilled at finding investments,
and (1 − λ) equal the fraction of new investors who are unskilled. At each time period investors evaluate hedge
funds until they find one that they think is a good fund and invest. Therefore, conditional on their level of skill,
investors will invest in good funds with probability ρi , where ρi is given by:
                                                            ϕθi
                                            ρi =                          .
                                                   ϕθi + (1 − ϕ)(1 − θi )
Unskilled investors can become better with time. We assume that after one period a fraction χ of unskilled investors
become skilled. We solve the model for a steady state equilibrium that requires the assumption that χ = λ(ρS −
ρU )/(1 − ρU ). All results hold without this assumption but all solutions would be time dependent.
      Investors invest for two periods and then consume. For simplicity we assume hedge funds are the only asset
with positive expected return and that investors have mean-variance utility over final wealth such that they maxi-
mize: C = E(rp ) − γ2 var(rp ), where rp is the two period return of the investor’s portfolio of good and bad hedge
funds, and γ is the investor’s coefficient of risk aversion. There is also a riskless asset normalized to have a zero
return.
      In the steady-state equilibrium of the model, the universe of hedge funds includes good hedge funds that have
survived, but are closed to new investment, and new good and bad hedge funds that have received funding. We are
particularly interested in the expected return and variance of the average hedge fund in the market and the expected
utility of the unskilled investors. We examine two cases: an economy in which investors choose not to use funds-
of-funds and unskilled investors invest directly in hedge funds, and an economy in which unskilled investors use
funds-of-funds to channel their hedge fund investments.
      Since all unskilled investors are the same they will all make the same equilibrium choice with respect to
funds-of-funds. So, we will first examine a world where unskilled investors choose not to use a fund-of-funds and
compare it to a world in which they do use a fund-of-funds. We will also examine the decision of an individual
unskilled investor.
      If unskilled investors reject funds-of-funds, then both skilled and unskilled investors directly invest in hedge
funds based on their own ability θS and θU to select good funds. It is easy to show that, in steady state, the average
hedge fund (h) in the economy has an expected return and variance of:
                        E(rh ) = 2[λρS + (1 − λ)ρU ] µG + [1 − λρS − (1 − λ)ρU ] µB
                                                      2                           2
                      var(rh ) = 2[λρS + (1 − λ)ρU ] σG + [1 − λρS − (1 − λ)ρU ] σB .                           (A-1)
      Now we assume that unskilled investors choose to use funds-of-funds. We also assume that the funds-of-funds’
managers have the same ability as the skilled investors, and thus evaluate fund quality correctly with probability
θS . In the steady-state equilibrium of this economy, the average hedge fund (h) has an expected return and variance
of:
                                        E(rh∗ )    =   2ρS µG + (1 − ρS ) µB
                                       var(rh∗ )   =        2
                                                       2ρS σG              2
                                                              + (1 − ρS ) σB ,                                  (A-2)


                                                          21
where we use the asterisk to denote the economy with funds-of-funds. Since by assumption µG > µB and
 2    2
σG < σB , it is straightforward to show that:

                                 E(rh∗ ) > E(rh )     and      var(rh∗ ) < var(rh ).                          (A-3)

Thus, the existence of funds-of-funds alters the return distribution of funded hedge funds in the economy.
      Regardless of what other investors choose to do, an individual unskilled investor is maximizing her own
utility. With mean variance utility and 100% of her wealth in hedge funds, this is equivalent to maximizing
C = E(rp ) − γ2 var(rp ). For unskilled investors who choose not to use a fund-of-funds:
                                            γ
                           CU    = E(rpU ) − var(rpU )
                                        ³ 2 γ       ´             ³    γ 2´
                                                  2
                                 = 2ρU µG − σG         + (1 − ρU ) µB − σB  ,                                 (A-4)
                                              2                        2
where rpU is the unskilled investor’s return on direct hedge fund investments.
    Suppose that for an unskilled investor who chooses to use a fund-of-funds, the fund-of-funds’ manager charges
a performance fee f as a percentage of capital gains or losses. Then, the utility of the unskilled investor in the
economy with funds-of-funds is
                                           ∗    γ       ∗
                           CU∗   =    E(rpU ) − var(rpU )
                                          h     2                    i
                                                         γ
                                 =    2ρS (1 − f ) µG − (1 − f )2 σG
                                                                   2

                                                     h 2           γ             i
                                           +(1 − ρS ) (1 − f ) µB − (1 − f )2 σB
                                                                               2
                                                                                   ,                          (A-5)
                                                                   2
         ∗
where rpU denotes the after-fee return of the unskilled investor that uses a fund-of-funds.

Discussion

While simple, this model illustrates four important points in comparing the returns of hedge funds and funds-of-
funds.

Point 1 The expected after-fee return of the average fund-of-funds investment is lower than the expected return of
the average hedge fund, even though funds-of-funds’ managers are skilled investors.

      In an economy where unskilled investors choose to use funds-of-funds, hedge fund investors tend to be either
skilled direct investors or fund-of-funds managers. If they have a similar ability to evaluate hedge funds, then
they should earn the same expected returns before fees. But, the returns after fee-on-fees of funds-of-funds are
lower. Thus, to evaluate funds-of-funds, it is not meaningful to directly compare the average after-fee returns of
funds-of-funds to hedge funds because by doing so we are comparing the returns of unskilled investors (through
funds-of-funds) to the returns that skilled investors could achieve. Instead, we must compare the gains from funds-
of-funds to the gains that the same investors would have achieved with direct hedge fund investments. That is,
we need to compare the utility of the unskilled investors when they choose not to use a fund-of-funds with their
utility when they choose to use funds-of-funds and pay their added fees. These are exactly the certainty equivalent
comparisons we perform in Section 3.

Point 2 Unskilled investors can potentially increase their utilities by investing in a fund-of-funds even though the
average fund-of-funds does not outperform the average hedge fund.

     If unskilled investors directly invest in hedge funds without the benefit of a fund-of-funds intermediary, they
might expect a lower return and higher variance than the skilled investors, and thus an inferior utility. If funds-
of-funds exist, then the unskilled investors earn the same before-fee expected return and utility as the skilled
investors. Thus, as long as the fees of funds-of-funds are low enough, unskilled investors increase their utility by
using funds-of-funds, that is CU∗ > CU . Hence, it is wrong to conclude that funds-of-funds are not adding value
just by comparing the after-fee average returns of funds-of-funds and hedge funds.
     Importantly, the presence of funds-of-funds also alters the distribution of funded hedge fund returns. In an
economy with funds-of-funds, the distribution of all funded hedge funds returns is better (with higher mean and
lower variance) than the distribution of hedge fund returns when no fund-of-funds exists.



                                                        22
Point 3 Unskilled investors cannot just mimic skilled investors because good funds fill with the money from skilled
investors.

     In an economy with funds-of-funds it might seem that an unskilled investor should just wait and enter funds
after the skilled investors are in. However, in reality these top funds close, raise minimums, raise fees, or eventually
earn lower returns as they become larger. Thus, investors that only followed would earn lower returns than the
average hedge fund return. Furthermore, skilled investors monitor their investments and tend to withdraw when
things go awry. Thus, passive following could easily generate lower utility than a fund-of-funds investment.

Point 4 Theoretically, we could directly compare the utility of investors with and without the use of a funds-of-
funds. However, in reality we only see the data from the economy that includes funds-of-funds.

     In data, we only observe funded hedge funds that receive investments either through expert funds-of-funds or
by sophisticated, skilled, direct investors. If investors all invested directly in hedge funds without funds-of-funds,
then the set of funded hedge funds would be much worse than what we observe in data. This causes the observable
returns of hedge funds to not represent the full, true distribution of hedge fund returns. Thus, fund-of-funds returns
should not be directly compared with hedge fund returns.


B      Dimson (1979) Correlations
For each asset k and each fund i, we run a series of monthly excess returns on both contemporaneous and lagged
asset returns (using up to m = 1, . . . , 6 lags):

                               rti = αki + βk,0
                                            i           i
                                                rk,t + βk,1                   i
                                                            rk,t−1 + · · · + βk,m rk,t−m ,                        (B-1)

where rti is the excess return of the ith fund and rk,t is the excess return of the kth benchmark asset. If non-
                                                      i
synchronous trading exists, then the lagged betas βk,m    are non-zero. The Dimson (1979) beta for the ith fund with
                      i
respect to asset k, β̂k,m , is the sum of the βk,m betas across the lags:

                                            i      i      i            i
                                          β̂k,m = βk,0 + βk,1 + ... + βk,m .                                      (B-2)

    We compute the correlation implied by the Dimson beta, ρ̂ik,m , as:

                                                ρ̂ik,m = β̂k,m
                                                           i
                                                               · σk /σi ,                                         (B-3)

where σk is the standard deviation of asset k, and σi is the standard deviation of fund i. Since the beta estimates
computed using the Dimson correction are closer to the true betas, the correlation estimates in equation (B-3)
should provide more accurate estimates of the true correlations between fund returns and asset returns. We use the
median cross-sectional correlation across all funds indexed by i in our portfolio allocation analysis.
     The Dimson correlations lead to much higher correlations of hedge funds or fund-of-funds returns with other
asset classes than correlations without any adjustments for non-synchronous trading. For example, the correlations
with no Dimson adjustment for hedge funds and U.S. equities is 0.25, which increases to 0.45 with two Dimson
lags and 0.46 for three Dimson lags. Similarly, the correlations between funds-of-funds and U.S. equities increase
from 0.41 with zero lags to 0.77 (0.80) with two (three) Dimson lags. Thus, not taking into account the Dimson
lags overstates the diversification benefits of hedge funds of funds-of-funds.




                                                          23
References
[1] Ackermann, C., R. McEnally, and D. Ravenscraft, 1999, “The Performance of Hedge Funds: Risk, Return,
   and Incentives,” Journal of Finance, 54, 3, 833-873.
[2] Agarwal, V., and N. Y. Naik, 2000, “Multi-Period Performance Persistence Analysis of Hedge Funds,” Journal
   of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 35, 327-342.
[3] Agarwal, V., and N. Y. Naik, 2004, “Risks and Portfolio Decisions Involving Hedge Funds,” Review of Finan-
   cial Studies, 1, 7, 1, 63-98.
[4] Amin G., and H. Kat, 2003, “Hedge Fund Performance 1990-2000: Do the ‘Money Machines’ Really Add
   Value?” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 38, 251-274.
[5] Ang, A., and G. Bekaert, 2002, “International Asset Allocation with Regime Shifts,” Review of Financial
   Studies, 15, 4, 1137-1187.
[6] Ang, A., M. Rhodes-Kropf, and R. Zhao, 2006, “A New Measure for Measuring,” Institutional Investor’s
   Alpha, July/August, 40-45.
[7] Anson, M. J., 2001, “Hedge Fund Incentive Fees,” Journal of Alternative Investments, 4, 2, 43-48.
[8] Asness, C, R. Krail, and J. Liew, 2001, “Do Hedge Funds Hedge?” Journal of Portfolio Management, 28, 1,
   6-19.
[9] Bailey, W., H. Li, and X. Zhang, 2004, “Hedge Fund Performance Evaluation: A Stochastic Discount Factor
   Approach,” working paper, Cornell University.
[10] Balduzzi, L., and A. Lynch, 1999, “Transaction Costs and Predictability: Some Utility Cost Calculations,”
   Journal of Financial Economics, 52, 47-78.
[11] Bhansali, V., and M. B. Wise, 2005, “How Much Should Investors Pay for Leverage?” working paper,
   PIMCO.
[12] Ben Dor, A., R. Jagannathan, and I. Meier, 2003, “Understanding Mutual Fund and Hedge Fund Styles using
   Return-Based Style Analysis,” Journal of Investment Management, 1, 97-137.
[13] Black, F., and R. Litterman, 1992, “Global Portfolio Optimization,” Financial Analysts Journal, 5, 28-43.
[14] Brandt, M. W., 2004, “Portfolio Choice Problems,” working paper, Duke University.
[15] Brown, S. J., T. L. Fraser, and B. Liang, 2008, “Hedge Fund Due Diligence: A Source of Alpha in a Hedge
   Fund Portfolio Strategy,” forthcoming Journal of Investment Management.
[16] Brown, S. J., and W. Goetzmann, 2003, “Hedge Funds with Style,” Journal of Portfolio Management, 29, 2,
   101-112.
[17] Brown, S. J., W. Goetzmann, and B. Liang, 2004, “Fees-on-Fees in Funds-of-Funds,” Journal of Investment
   Management, 2, 4, 39-56.
[18] Capocci D. and G. Hubner, 2004, “Analysis of Hedge Fund Performance,” Journal of Empirical Finance, 11,
   55-89.
[19] Edwards, F., 2006, “Hedge Funds and Investor Protection Regulation,” Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta
   Economic Review, 91, 35-48.
[20] Edwards, F., and Caglayan, M. O., 2001, “Hedge Fund and Commodity Fund Investment Styles in Bull and
   Bear Markets,” Journal of Portfolio Management, 27, 97-108.
[21] Fung, W., and D. Hsieh, 1997, “Empirical Characteristics of Dynamic Trading Strategies: The Case of Hedge
   Funds,” Review of Financial Studies, 10, 2, 275-302.
[22] Fung, W., and D. A. Hsieh, 2001, “The Risk in Hedge Fund Strategies: Theory and Evidence from Trend
   Followers,” Review of Financial Studies, 14, 2, 313-341.
[23] Fung, W., and D. A. Hsieh, 2004, “Hedge Fund Benchmarks: A Risk Based Approach,” Financial Analysts
   Journal, 60, 65-80.
[24] Fung, W., D. A. Hsieh, N. Y. Naik, and T. Ramadorai, 2007, “Hedge Funds: Performance, Risk, and Capital
   Formation,” forthcoming Journal of Finance.
[25] Getmansky, M., A. Lo, and I. Makarov, 2004, “An Econometric Model of Serial Correlation and Illiquidity
   in Hedge Fund Returns,” Journal of Financial Economics, 74, 529-610.


                                                      24
[26] Goetzmann, W. N., J. E. Ingersoll, and S. A. Ross, 2003, “High Watermarks and Hedge Fund Management
   contracts,” Journal of Finance, 58, 4, 1685-1718.
[27] Grossman, S. J., and J. E. Stiglitz, 1980, “On the Impossibility of Informationally Efficient Markets,” Amer-
   ican Economic Review, 70, 3, 393-408.
[28] Gompers, P., and J. Lerner, 1997, “Risk and Reward of Private Equity Investments: The Challenge of Perfor-
   mance Assessment,” Journal of Private Equity, 1, 5-12.
[29] Gupta, A., and B. Liang, 2005, “Do Hedge Funds Have Enough Capital? A Value-at-Risk Approach,” Journal
   of Financial Economics, 77, 1, 219-253.
[30] Hodder, J., and J. C. Jackwerth, 2007, “Incentive Contracts and Hedge Fund Management,” Journal of Fi-
   nancial and Quantitative Analysis, 42, 811-826.
[31] Jagannathan, R., A. Malakhov, and D. Novikov, 2006, “Do Hot Hands Persist Among Hedge Fund Managers?
   An Empirical Evaluation,” NBER working paper 12015.
[32] Kat H., and G. Amin, 2003, “Welcome to the Dark Side: Hedge Fund Attrition and Survivorship Bias over
   the Period 1994-2001,” Journal of Alternative Investments, Summer, 57-73.
[33] Kazemi, H., and T. Schneeweis, 2004, “Hedge Funds: Stale Prices Revisted,” working paper, University of
   Massachusetts at Amherst.
[34] Kosowski, R., N. Y. Naik, and M. Teo, 2007, “Do Hedge Funds Deliver Alpha? A Bayesian and Bootstrap
   Analysis,” Journal of Financial Economics, 84, 229-264.
[35] Lhabitant F. and M. Learned, 2002, “Hedge Fund Diversification: How Much is Enough?” Journal of Alter-
   native Investments, 5, 23-49.
[36] Li, H., X. Zhang and R. Zhao, 2005, “Education, Career Concern and Incentive: Understanding Hedge Fund
   Performances,” working paper, Cornell University.
[37] Liang, B., 1999, “On the Performance of Hedge Funds,” Financial Analysts Journal, 55, 72-85.
[38] Malkiel, B., and A. Saha, 2005, “Hedge Funds: Risk and Return,” Financial Analysts Journal, 61, 80-88.
[39] Stavros, P., and M. M. Westerfield, 2007, “High Watermarks: High Risk Appetites? Hedge Fund Compensa-
   tion and Portfolio Choice,” forthcoming Journal of Finance.
[40] Urwin, R., 2006, “Asset Allocation in a Low-Return Environment,” CFA Institute Conference Proceedings
   Quarterly, December, 11-16.




                                                       25
                     Table 1: Hedge Fund and Fund-of-Funds Returns


                                                                        Hedge Fund      Fund-of-Funds

Number of Funds                    Live                                 2666 (55%)         1097 (70%)
                                   Graveyard                            2175 (45%)          479 (30%)
                                   Total                               4841 (100%)        1576 (100%)

Fee Structure                      Management Fee                              1.5%               1.5%
(Median)                           Incentive Fee                               20%                10%
                                   Proportion with High Watermark              65%                56%

Monthly Excess Returns             Mean                                       0.41%             0.30%
                                   Median                                     0.46%             0.35%
                                   Std Dev                                    2.94%             1.55%

Alphas wrt Hedge Fund Indices      Mean                                      -0.02%             -0.19%
                                   Median                                     0.13%             -0.12%
                                   Std Dev                                    1.31%              0.59%

Alphas wrt Tremont Style Index     Mean                                      -0.07%             -0.29%
                                   Median                                     0.03%             -0.17%
                                   Std Dev                                    2.17%              0.90%


 The table reports summary statistics of hedge fund and fund-of-funds returns from the TASS
 Tremont database from January 1994 to June 2006. For the fee structure statistics, the median
 management and incentive fees are reported, along with the proportion of all funds having a high
 watermark provision. The excess returns and alphas are all reported at a monthly frequency and
 excess returns are computed in excess of a one-month U.S. Treasury T-bill rate, all expressed in con-
 tinuously compounded terms. For excess returns and alphas, we report the cross-sectional monthly
 mean, median, and standard deviation. To compute the alphas with respect to the hedge fund in-
 dex, we run a regression of excess hedge fund returns onto the Tremont aggregate hedge fund index
 for each fund. The alphas with respect to the Tremont style indices are computed a similar way,
 except there are nine Tremont style factors representing the following styles: convertible arbitrage;
 dedicated short bias; emerging markets; equity market neutral; event driven; fixed income arbitrage;
 global macro; long/short equity; and managed futures.




                                                 26
               Table 2: Input Variables for the Asset Allocation Problem


                                                             Correlations with

                             Excess                U.S.       U.S.     Foreign    Foreign
                             Return    Std Dev    Equities   Bonds     Equities   Bonds

         Panel A: Base Assets

         U.S. Equities       0.55%      4.33%           1     0.25       0.60       0.04
         U.S. Bonds          0.20%      1.67%         0.25      1        0.15       0.43
         Foreign Equities    0.51%      4.73%         0.60    0.15         1        0.34
         Foreign Bonds       0.23%      2.43%         0.04    0.43       0.34         1

         Panel B: Hedge Funds and Funds-of-Funds

         Hedge Funds         0.46%      2.94%         0.46    0.08       0.35       0.04
         Funds-of-Funds      0.35%      1.55%         0.80    0.23       0.69       0.15

         Panel C: Artificial Funds-of-Funds

         Simple Artificial Funds-of-Funds
         2 Funds             0.45%    3.74%           0.39    0.06       0.37       0.01
         5 Funds             0.49%    2.74%           0.53    0.08       0.49       0.01
         10 Funds            0.51%    2.26%           0.65    0.10       0.59       0.01
         30 Funds            0.52%    1.84%           0.80    0.12       0.73       0.01

         Optimal Artificial Funds-of-Funds
         γ=4                 0.39%    2.39%           0.24    0.15       0.16       0.06
         γ=6                 0.35%    2.76%           0.24    0.17       0.16       0.06
         γ=8                 0.39%    2.46%           0.32    0.17       0.23       0.06
         γ = 12              0.43%    2.23%           0.41    0.16       0.30       0.06


Panel A reports input moments for the base assets in the asset allocation problem. U.S. Equities
represent returns on the S&P500 index from January 1975 to June 2006; U.S. Bonds are the Lehman
Aggregate Bond index from January 1976 to June 2006; Foreign Equities are the MSCI World Index
excluding the U.S. from January 1975 to June 2006; and Foreign Bonds are the Lehman Global
Aggregate Bond Index excluding the U.S. from January 1990 to June 2006. Panel B lists moments
for hedge funds and funds-of-funds, which are the median excess return and the median excess return
volatility in the cross section. The correlations with other asset classes are computed using Dimson
(1979) corrections for non-synchronous trading and are computed following the method outlined in
Appendix B. Panel C reports medians and cross-sectional medians of volatility for artificial funds-
of-funds (simple and optimal), which are described in more detail in Section 3.1. We use three
Dimson lags to compute the correlations with the benchmark assets. In Panels A-C, all returns are
expressed as monthly continuously compounded excess returns in percentages.




                                                 27
         Table 3: Characterizing the Benchmark Fund-of-Funds Hurdle Rate


                                  No Short Sales                         Short down to -20%

     Number of Funds       γ=4      γ=6      γ=8        γ=12      γ=4       γ=6     γ=8       γ=12

     Median Hedge Fund Return in Data = 0.460% per month

     Case 1: σB = σH = Median Hedge Fund Volatility in Data

     1                    0.357    0.405    0.446       0.481    0.389     0.434   0.475      0.516
     2                    0.371    0.441    0.501       0.554    0.415     0.483   0.545      0.608
     5                    0.372    0.406    0.437       0.464    0.394     0.429   0.459      0.490
     10                   0.372    0.388    0.404       0.418    0.383     0.400   0.415      0.430
     30                   0.369    0.370    0.371       0.372    0.370     0.370   0.371      0.372
     Optimal              0.277    0.330    0.371       0.388    0.297     0.361   0.396      0.411

     Case 2: σB = 1.1 × σH

     1                    0.370    0.427    0.476       0.518    0.407     0.461   0.511      0.560
     2                    0.382    0.465    0.535       0.597    0.434     0.513   0.586      0.659
     5                    0.386    0.428    0.466       0.499    0.414     0.455   0.493      0.531
     10                   0.386    0.408    0.429       0.448    0.401     0.424   0.444      0.463
     30                   0.384    0.386    0.391       0.396    0.386     0.389   0.391      0.396
     Optimal              0.283    0.346    0.394       0.416    0.307     0.382   0.424      0.444


The table reports the expected excess monthly return, µB , in monthly percentages which is con-
structed so that an investor is indifferent between adding a portfolio of hedge funds with this ex-
pected return, or adding a fund-of-funds to a set of four benchmark assets (U.S. equities, U.S. bonds,
foreign equity, and foreign bonds). In Case 1, we assume that the fund-of-funds benchmark standard
deviation, σB , is equal to the median cross-sectional standard deviation of hedge fund excess returns
in data, σH . (see Table 2). In Case 2, we assume that σB = 1.1 × σH . Entries in italics indicate that
the mean is greater than the observed median hedge fund excess return in data and consequently, in
these cases, investors already prefer a fund-of-funds even if they can obtain somewhat higher returns
on their own.




                                                   28
             Table 4: The Fund-of-Funds Hurdle Rate Computed Using Equilibrium Expected Returns


                                                                                             Annualized Difference
                            Equilibrium Risk Premia µe     Fund-of-Fund Benchmark µB           12 × (µe − µB )

     Asset                 γ=4     γ=6     γ=8     γ=12    γ=4     γ=6     γ=8     γ=12    γ=4    γ=6    γ=8    γ=12

     HF/FoF Weight = 5%

     Fund-of-Funds µF oF   0.131   0.197   0.262   0.328
     1 Hedge Fund          0.144   0.216   0.288   0.359   0.107   0.175   0.244   0.313   0.45   0.48   0.52   0.56
     2 Hedge Funds         0.176   0.264   0.353   0.441   0.107   0.189   0.271   0.354   0.83   0.90   0.97   1.04
     5 Hedge Funds         0.160   0.240   0.319   0.399   0.129   0.207   0.284   0.361   0.36   0.40   0.43   0.46




29
     10 Hedge Funds        0.155   0.233   0.311   0.388   0.139   0.216   0.292   0.368   0.19   0.21   0.22   0.24
     30 Hedge Funds        0.153   0.229   0.306   0.382   0.147   0.223   0.299   0.375   0.07   0.08   0.08   0.09
     Optimal Hedge Fund    0.067   0.120   0.180   0.242   0.047   0.086   0.154   0.223   0.24   0.40   0.31   0.23

     HF/FoF Weight = 10%

     Fund-of-Funds µF oF   0.129   0.194   0.259   0.323
     1 Hedge Fund          0.154   0.232   0.309   0.386   0.111   0.182   0.253   0.324   0.52   0.60   0.67   0.75
     2 Hedge Funds         0.197   0.295   0.393   0.491   0.115   0.202   0.289   0.375   0.97   1.11   1.25   1.39
     5 Hedge Funds         0.167   0.251   0.334   0.418   0.131   0.210   0.288   0.367   0.43   0.49   0.55   0.61
     10 Hedge Funds        0.158   0.237   0.316   0.395   0.139   0.215   0.292   0.368   0.23   0.26   0.29   0.32
     30 Hedge Funds        0.152   0.228   0.304   0.380   0.145   0.220   0.295   0.370   0.08   0.10   0.11   0.12
     Optimal Hedge Fund    0.075   0.137   0.196   0.255   0.052   0.096   0.163   0.230   0.28   0.50   0.40   0.31
Note to Table 4

The first four columns titled “Equilibrium Risk Premia µe ” report the equilibrium expected excess returns computed
using equation (4), which backs out expected excess returns from market weight capitalizations as of 30 June 2006.
We take the market weight proportions of U.S. equity, U.S. bonds, international equity, and international bonds and
scale these weights to sum to 95% or 90%. The remaining 5% or 10% weight we assume is invested in hedge funds
or funds-of-funds. The covariance matrix is estimated from data over the full sample using the inputs in Table 2. The
columns titled “Fund-of-Fund Benchmark µB ” report the hurdle rate µB which makes an investor indifferent between
holding a fund-of-fund in addition to the four benchmark assets with the Black-Litterman (1992) equilibrium expected
returns reported in the first four columns and hedge funds drawn from the investor’s true hedge fund distribution
with expected excess return µB . We assume that the benchmark volatility σB is equal to the observed median cross-
sectional standard deviation of hedge fund excess returns in data. Both µe and µB are expressed in monthly percentage
terms. The last four columns titled “Annualized Difference 12 × (µe − µB )” report the annualized difference between
µe and µB expressed in percentages.




                                                       30
   Table 5: The Fund-of-Funds Hurdle Rate Computed Using Forecasted Expected Returns


                                         No Short Sales                       Short down to -20%

            Number of Funds      γ=4      γ=6     γ=8        γ=12      γ=4       γ=6     γ=8       γ=12

            Median Hedge Fund Return in Data = 0.460% per month

            1                   0.359    0.332    0.323      0.323    0.348     0.323   0.323      0.323
            2                   0.387    0.380    0.378      0.378    0.384     0.378   0.378      0.378
            5                   0.370    0.338    0.327      0.327    0.358     0.327   0.327      0.327
            10                  0.361    0.318    0.296      0.296    0.344     0.299   0.296      0.296
            30                  0.352    0.300    0.265      0.257    0.331     0.274   0.258      0.257
            Optimal             0.282    0.269    0.259      0.254    0.266     0.261   0.259      0.254


The table reports the expected excess monthly return, µB , in monthly percentages which is constructed so that an
investor is indifferent between adding a portfolio of hedge funds with this expected return, or adding a fund-of-funds
to a set of three benchmark assets (U.S. equities, U.S. bonds, and foreign equity). Forecast returns and volatilities
for these asset classes are provided by Yale Endowment in its 2006 annual report. We compute the correlation matrix
using the inputs from data in Table 2. We conservatively assume that the fund-of-funds benchmark standard deviation,
σB , is equal to the median cross-sectional standard deviation of hedge fund excess returns in data (see Table 2).




                                                        31
                              Figure 1: Simple Example of Truncation Bias


                               Mean True HF Distn                        Mean Funded HF Distn
0.5




0.4




0.3
                                                                                          Funded HF Distn



0.2

       True HF Distn


0.1




  0
  −3                −2                 −1                  0                  1                  2                 3



Assume that the true hedge fund (HF) distribution is normal, which is shown in the solid blue curve. If only skilled
fund-of-funds managers and skilled individual investors are making direct hedge fund investments and they are able
to avoid the worst 20% of hedge funds, then the distribution of funded hedge funds becomes a truncated normal
distribution, shown in the solid black line. The mean of the truncated distribution is shifted to the right of the mean of
the true HF distribution.




                                                         32
