NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE DEVELOPMENT AND ROLE OF THE
NATIONAL BUREAU'S
BUSINESS CYCLE CHRONOLOGIES

Geoffrey H. Moore

Victor ZarnowitZ

Working Paper No. 1394

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 MassachuSetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138

July l98

is part of the NBER's research program
The research reported here
expressed are those of the
opinions
in Economic Fluctuations. Any
National Bureau of Economic Eesearch.
authors and nnt those of the

NBER Working Paper 111394
July 1984

The Development and Role of the National
Bureau's Business Cycle Chronologies
ABSTRACT
working definition, first formulated in the 1920's by Mitchell and
revised in the 1940s, has been in use at the National Bureau for over fifty
years and is still employed to identify and date business cycles. The NBER

historical chronologies for england, France, and Germany as well as the United
States have been intensively in economic research and are widely accepted. The

u.s. chronology, which is being updated as promptly as the data allow, also has
the important practical function of aiding the analysis of current business
conditions and forecasting near-term cyclical developments.

This paper

discusses the main aspects of the NB concept of business cycles; the early
views and developments bearing on the construction of the chronologies; the
problems and procedures involved; the characteristics and dependability of the

historical reference dates; and the National ureau's work in this field since
World War II. Some recent uses of the U.S. dates to measure the duration,
amplitudes, and diffusion of business expansions and contractions are

illustrated. Finally, we show and discuss chronologies of "growth cycles,"
i.e., trend—adjusted business cycles, for 13 countries in the post—World War IT
period.

Geoffrey H. Moore
Center for International
Business Cycle Research
-Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
808 Uris Hall
New York, NY 10027

Victor Zarnocitz
Graduate School of Business
University of (Thicago
1101 East SRth Street

Chicago, IL 06

DOP ND LE OF

I.

NATIAL REAU S SINESS CY.E CNO1GIES

.1

Defining Business Cycles

II. Early Views and Developments

6

.

III. Business Annals, Historical Statistics, and Reference Dates

IV. Monthly Business Cycle Chronologies: Problems and Procedures

V. The NBER Business Cycle Chronologies for 1854—193S
VI. On the Dependability of Historical Reference Dates

VII. TheU. S. BusinessCycleChronologySiflce 1933
VIII. Growth Cycle Chronologies

10
.12

15
.

19
23
27

T DE1OPM4? AND ROLE

OF ThE NATIONAL 1REA(J' S &JSINESS CYCLE CHRONOLOGIES

I.

Defining Business Cycles

Business cycles consist of recurrent sequences of expansions, downturns,
contractions, and upturns in a great number of diverse economic activities.
These movements are both sufficiently diffused and sufficiently synchronized to
create major fluctuations in comprehensive aggregates of employment, produc—

tion, real income, and real sales. They are as a rule asymmetric in that

expansions typically exceed contractions in size and duration. (In earlier
history, however, the differences in duration were relatively small and irreg-

ular, as will he shown below.) Of course, in any secularly growing economy,
expansions must necessarily be on the average larger than contractions. it is
a rare business cycle that does not contain a visible element of growth.

Persistent and pervasive fluctuations of this type are characteristic of
the course of industrial economies with large sectors of private enterprise and

markets relatively unconstrained by qovernments. They have accompanied the development of modern capitalism in the Western world. First systematic accounts
are over a hundred years old (Juglar, 1862). Authoritative studies date the
phenomenon back at least to the late eighteenth century.
As a rule, several years are required for the cumulative processes of bus-

iness expansion and contraction to complete a round from peak to peak or from

trough to trough. But business cycles, although recurrent, are in their directly observable manifestations nonperiodic, unlike the cycles of the seasons.1
Indeed, they vary considerably in duration and as well as in intensity and
scope, and do so in ways that appear to he largely unsystematic and
unpredictable.

Seasonal movements, which are periodic but often quite variable in
amplitude and incidence over the calendar year, may obscure the cyclical deve-

lopments to an observer of current changes in individual time series. In addition, short erratic movements are likewise continually present in most economic
indicators, and they too frequently impede the contemporaneous reading of busi-

ness cycle signals. Historically, however, and looking across data representing many different variables, business cycles can be clearly distinguished from
the other fluctuations in that they are usually larger, longer, arid more widely

dif fused. Seasonal movements typically run their course within a year; most
isolated random events also have repercussions of similar or shorter duration.
Thus it is business cycles that usually dominate changes in the economy over
spans of several years, just as seasonal and other shorter variations dominate

many changes over spans of a few weeks or a few months. The developments
across decades are, to he sure, primarily the work of forces of secular growth—
-rising population, labor force, and physical capital, as well as gains in
productivity attributable to technological, educational, and organizational

improvements. However, business cycles and long trends can and do interact in
varied and subtle ways (about which more later).
succinct definition of business cycles, first formulated in the 1920s,
and revised in the 1940s, runs as follows:

Fusiness cycles are a type of fluctuation found in the aggregate economic activity of nations that organize their
work mainly in business enterprises: a cycle consists of
expansions occuring at about the same time in many economic
activities, followed by similarly general recessions,
contractions, and revivals which merge into the expansion
phase of the next cycle; the sequence of changes is recurrent hut not oeriodic; in duration business cycles vary
from more than one year to ten or twelve years; they are
not divisible into shorter cycles of similar character with
amplitudes approximating their own.2

—3—

This working definition, in substantially its present form, has been in use at
the National Bureau of Economic Research for over fifty years, and is currently

employed by the NBER to identify and date the U. S. business cycle. These
dates are widely accepted by government, academic, and business analysts. The

definition served as the basis for the National Bureau's pre—Worid War II
business cycle chronologies for England, France, and Germany as well as the

United States. With a modest adjustment, namely to allow activity to be
measured relative to its long—run trend, the definition has been used to

develop "growth cycle" chronologies for many countries. it has surely passed a
severe test of time, considering all the far—reaching changes in the structure
of modern industrialized economies and the character of contemporary business
cycles.

The concept of "aggregate economic activity" is purposely vague, yielding
to the recognition that what matters is the evolution over time of a vector of
many diverse activities which are not readily reducible to any single aggre-

gate.3 The reasons are in part economic: for example, in times past when
prices fluctuated cyclically around a relatively stable level, GNP in current
dollars was often a more sensitive indicator than GN? in constant dollars, was
often in the recent era of long persisting inflation the opposite is qenerally

the case. Business cycles involve multidimensional processes, in which
quantities and prices, stocks and flows, outputs and inputs, real, monetary,
and financial variables all tend to participate, albeit with many timing and

amplitude differentials and at varying rates. The definition properly stresses
that the expansions and contractions occur with rough synchronism in "many
economic activities" (and, we would add, in a fair number of activities

generally regarded as "noneconomic" as well). The high cyclical conformity or
coherence of numerous variables, that is, the wide diffusion or pervasiveness

—4—

of business cycles was and remains their common and salient characteristic.

Statistical considerations are also important in this context. It is
simply a fact that no single comprehensive measure of the nation's economic ac-

tivity is available monthly or quarterly for a long historical period. Whether
the aggregates refer to output, income, expenditures, or employment, they
individually lack sufficient comparability of coverage and sufficient solidity

of estimation over long stretches of time. It seems best therefore to rely on
the evidence from a number of comprehensive indicators rather than any single

one. Particular attention needs to be paid to the comovement of the economic
variables, taking account of any systematic timing differences among them.

This also helps to reduce the risk of drawing erroneous inferences from data
containing measurement errors and biases due to changes in the quality of the
information.

In addition to being pervasive, business cycles are also persistent, i.e.,
the expansions and contractions are congeries of serially correlated as well as

cross—correlated movements in many activities. The requirement that business
cycles not be "divided into shorter cycles of similar character with amplitudes
approximating their own" has in practice meant that no rise or decline in
aqgreqate output, employment, etc., is recognized as a cyclical movement unless
it

is

at least as large as the smallest expansion or contraction in the histor-

ical record. Beyond that, no quantitative specifications are imposed upon
either the amplitude or the scope of the cycles.
The only numerical limits mentioned refer to the duration of a full cycle

(expansion and contraction) and they are broad: more than a year to ten or
twelve years. Thus the range of admissible fluctuations is wide, accommodating
short and long, weak and strong cycles. There is no recoqnition of any
systematic distinctions in these respects: unlike some other contemporary

—5—

scholars (Schumpeter, 1939; Hansen, 1941, 1951; R. A. Gordon, 1952), Burns and
Mitchell (1946, chs. 10 and 11) found no cogent reasons to differentiate a
priori between "minor" and "major" or between "Kitchin" and "Juglar" cycles.
However, 'this is a case of suspended judgment, not a definitive conclusion.

Important differences clearly exist, e.g., inventory investment plays a central
role in the short "Kitchiri" cycles, whereas fixed capital investment is more

instrumental in the longer "Juglar" cycles. But such distinctions, and more
generally all considerations of causality, are viewed as matters to he treated

in further research, not as parts of a tentatively accepted definition. The
long waves of fifty to Sixty years hypothesized by Kondratjeff in 1926 are

quite different phenomena whose precise nature, and even existence, has not yet
been widely accepted. Schuinpeter's 1935 hypothesis that each such long wave
contains six Juglar cycles of from nine to ten years duration, while every
Juglar is divisible into three Kitchin cycles of roughly forty months each, has
also failed to be validated.
Burns and Mitchell make it clear that by their definition a mere slowing

down or cessation of growth is not enough to qualify as a business cycle

contraction: what is required is an absolute fall in "aggregate economic
activity." Note, however, that this requirement has been modified in the
recent work on "growth cycles." The rise and fall is not restricted to some
limited measure of economic activity, e.g.,, production in manufacturing or

corporate profits, sufficient to define a business cycle: the latter must be
clearly reflected in economy—wide aggregates of output and employment.
Moreover, contractions as well as expansions are taken to be cumulative

movements, which implies that they cannot be very short. Historical evidence
indicates, for example, that a decline of less than six months could not reach
the dimensions that would qualify it as a cyclical contraction, in particular a

—6—

state in which a majority of industries experience falling demand (new orders
or sales), production, and employment.

II. Early Views and Developments
Business cycles must be strictly distinguished from the various "crises"
associated with foreign and civil wars, epidemics, bad harvests, earthquakes,

isolated and transient monetary disorders, speculative "manias," and other epi-

sodic or random disturbances. Such events, whether due to acts of nature or of
man, can disrupt the ordinary rhythm of economic life and cause much distress
at any time, and they did so for ages under all forms of social organization.
In contrast, business cycles, as defined above, "are found only in modern
nations where economic activities are organized mainly through business enterprises and where individuals enjoy considerable freedom in producing, pricing,

trading, and saving or investing" (Burns, 196R, p. 22).
In the early literature on the subject, business cycles have often been

viewed as the natural way growth takes in modern capitalist economies. The
latter have achieved historically unprecedented records of long—term development, e.g., approximately fivefold gains in output per capita in the United

States, France, and Germany.4 Private enterprise thrived on and fostered
advances in science and technology by seeking higher profits in surges of

innovative investment. There was increasing division and specialization of
labor as new techniques were introduced, new markets opened, new products dis-

covered. Inevitably, this was associated with various frictions, difficult
adjustments, and costly resource transfers in response to the (in large part
unanticipated) shifts in demands and supplies.
Over decades, fairly smooth rising trends in population and labor force
and much faster growth in the stock of reproducible capital can he broadly

ocumented.5 Improvements from the progress of

knowledqe,

new technologies,

—7.-

and new skills kept raising the quality and marginal productivity of human and

tanqible capital. This was sufficient to prevent a downward trend in the
profitability of new investment, which would otherwise have resulted, under the
law of diminishing marginal returns, from the growing abundance of physical
capital relative to labor and the norireproducible natural resources.6 Over
shorter periods, however, profit totals, margins, and rates were continually
undergoing large fluctuations induced by movements in sales, in product prices
relative to wages and costs of materials and finance, in investment, and in the

demand and supply of credit. In turn, the rise and fall of profits, cash flow,
and rates of return caused parallel movements in expectations of future
profitability and hence in business decisions concerning production, employ—
ment, and investment. Changes in money and credit interacted with these general
changes in economic expectations and activity.
To be sure, this is merely a brief, rough sketch of some trends in the
classic era of industrialization, economic growth, and business cycles that ori-

ginated about 200 years ago in ritain and spread worldwide in the past century.
Some observers placed more stress on real factors: cyclical innovations and
growth spurts, recurrent overjnvestment, imbalances between production of

capital and consumer goods, intersectoral shifts, Others emphasized monetary
processes: changes in the supply of bank credit, discrepancies between market
and equilibrium interest rates. Still others paid special attention to the role
of uncertainty and failure of foresight, interdependent expectations and waves

of errors of optimism and pessimism. Finally, the focus on cyclical changes in
relative prices and profits is also compatible with important roles being played

by other real forces as well as monetary and expectational variables, But it is
generally correct to see the early theories of business cycles as mainly endo—
genous, i.e., concentrating on the internal relations of the economic system

—8—

rather than on the effects of external shocks; multicausal, i.e., concerned with
interactions of the real, monetary, and expectational factors; and dynamic,
i.e., incorporating elements of long—term growth into the analysis of short-term
instability .'

The historical setting of business cycle phenomena suggests that they developed gradually along with the growing interdependence within and among the

modern capitalist economies. The processes and institutions that mark this evolution include the buildup of fixed capital in progressively mechanized pro-

duction requiring new sources of labor, energy, and materials; lessening of
barriers to trade through advances in transportation and communications; and the

spread of money transactions, banking and credit and investment finance. s
these factors moved the market economies of the Western world onto higher levels
of economic interdependence, strongly diffused and persistent business

fluctuations emerged where previously disjointed acts of nature and man—made
disturbances held sway. Since Juglar, 1862, it was widely recognized that the
acute financial crises that happened from time to time are merely transitory
events that cannot he well understood in isolation from the major problem of

recurrent sequences of general expansions and contractions. Between 1894 and
1927, most of the leading scholars in the field (Tugan—Baranovskii, Aftalion,
Mitchell, Spiethoff, S.chumpeter) strongly endorsed and elaborated the conception

of business cycles as a characteristic motion of the development of modern
capital—creating, money—exchange, market-oriented economies.
The dating of the earliest business cycles is imprecise and impeded by

severe limitations of the available data. Schumpeter (1939, vol. I, ch. VI.B,
esp. pp. 223—224, 248—252) argued that capitalism goes "as far hack as the element of credit creation" and that "there must have been also prosperities and
depressions of the cyclical type"

in

the seventeenth and eiqhteenth century.

—9—

But he concedes to the critics of this view that wars, poor harvests, and other
"noncyclical catastrophies" played a much greater role in the preindustrializa—
tion era than in the cycles of the later period.8

A reference chronology of cyclical turning points for eighteenth century
England has been compiled from fragmentary but carefully assembled and explained

chronicles and data by T. S. Ashton, and some of his results are summed up in
Table 1 •

Bad harvests occured frequently, causing shortages for small farmers

who produced qrain mainly for themselves and their livestock and depressing real
wages of industrial workers, the demand for textiles and other manufactured

products, and output of commodities subject to excise duties. Government revenue would fall at the same time as the costs of provisions for the navy and army

rose. The resulting deficits tended to raise the costs of borrowing and to
decrease public confidence. More grain had to be imported at high prices,
adversely affecting the balance of payments and the domestic supply of credit.
Large farmers may have henefitted from higher grain prices but overall the bad
consequences prevailed.

Althouqh Britain fought her wars on the seas or on alien soil, they were
recurrent, protracted, and often associated with other disasters such as epidem-

ics and famines. They had large but mixed effects on overall economic activity,
since the extent to which they curtailed civilian consumption or increased production varied greatly, as did the extent to which they were financed by
taxation vs. loans. The periods of decline, as dated by Ashton lasted loriqer,
on average, than the periods of growth.

In sum, weather and wars seem to account for much of the fluctuation in
economic fortunes before the industrial revolution in Britain of the 1780s.
But endogenous economic and financial processes played an increasingly impor-

tant role as well. Bank notes and commercial paper provided an elastic supply

—10—

of means of payment. Speculation in commodities and securities spread in prosperous times and financial crises accompanied or followed most of the peak

dates (Ashton, ch. 5). Longer building cycles also persisted (op. cit., ch. 4,

and John P. Lewis, 1965). Rostow (1980, pp. 37—38) compares the effects of bad
harvests on real incomes and the balance of payments to the effects of oil price
rises in 1973—74 and 1979 and the associated "supply—side recessions" in the

United States and elsewhere. It is interesting to note that the Ashton dates
suggest a sequence of sixteen "cycles" with durations concentrated heavily
between 3 and 6 years and averaging about 5 years (whether measured from trough

to trough or from peak to peak). This is very close to the average length of
the 28 cycles identified in Great Britain in the NBER chronology for 1792—1932
(59 or 60 months, see Burns and Mitchell, 1946, p. 371).

III. Business Annals, Historical Statistics, and Reference Dates
The first step taken by the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER)

toward identifying historical business cycles shortly after its founding in
1920, was to compile comprehensive chronological records of chanqes in qeneral

economic conditions in the United States and England (1790—1925), France (1840—
1925), Germany (1853—1925), Austria (1867—1925), and twelve other countries

(1890—1925). These "business annals" were based on detailed studies of a large
collection of official documents, reports by contemporary observers and students

of economic history, periodicals, pamphlets, and books. The resulting volume
by Willard Thorp (1926) lists several hundred sources. This was a major effort
to extract year—by—year information on the spread, timing, duration, and intensity of past business fluctuations in the "great commercial nations," both old
and new.

A second NBER project, also started in the early 1920s, was to collect sta—
tistical time series data on a variety of pertinent aspects of modern economies,

and to subject them to a systematic analysis. These materials are more massive

—11•—

yet, and they are obviously necessary as a basis for more precise quantitative

results as well as to check the inferences from the business annals. However,
it is also useful to check the inferences from the statistical data with the aid
of the reports of contemporary observers and other documents underlying the

annals. In short, the two collections of materials provide evidence that is to
a large extent complementary.

The time series cover shorter periods than the annals, and are limited to

four countries: the United States, England, France and Germany. The available
statistical record shrinks rapidly as one goes back into the iSOOs, and the
series extending to the earliest decades covered by the British and U. S.

business annals are very scanty. The early data are predominantly annual and
their coverage and quality leave much to be desired. This makes the business
annals indispensable for the study of the more distant past. Their materials
enabled Thorp and the NBER staff to characterize each successive year covered

according to the business conditions that prevailed. They called the generally
good and bad times "prosperity" and "depression," respectively, the generally
shorter upper and lower transition periods "recessions" and "revivals," often
attaching to these terms such adjectives as "brief," "slow," "rapid," "mild,"

"moderate," or "severe." Frequently, the recessions and revivals were dated
more closely within a year by such designations as "early" or "late," or even

by months or seasons. Thus a single year would be occasionally classified into
more than one of the four basic cycle phases.9
Although business annals and indexes of qeneral economic activity may differ with respect to the mix of the processes covered, measurement errors, etc.,

Mitchell (1926, pp. 20—31) presents evidence of a generally close agreement

between the two approaches on the fluctuations in the United States, 1875—192

and in Fnqland 1855—1914. Even

for

the earlier cycles, back to 1796, there is

—12—

a fairly good correspondence between the recession dates based on the annals

and those based on statistical series (mainly wholesale commodity prices).0
Table 2 compares the annual reference dates for the British and U. S. business cycles between 1790 and 1858, as estimated by Thorp from annals (U. S.

through 1833) and by Burns and Mitchell from annals and time—series studies. k
close correspondence between the cycles in the two countries is indicated.

Eight of the peak and three of the trough dates coincide. The degree of synchronization is particularly high for the (more precisely determined) dates of

financial crises, in 1815, 1825, 1836—37, 1847, and 1857. The business annals
for other countries available for the later period reinforce the finding that
many cycles had an international sweep, as do the more recent and statistically
firmer NBER chronologies for the U. S., England, France, and Germany (see below).

This again applies especially to the major cycles, which were often accompanied
by financial crises or panics as in 1873, 1893, 1907, and 1929.
according to the annual chronologies in Table 2, the durations of business

cycles in this era comprising seven decades of the rise of modern capitalism
and industrialization averaged about 4 1/2 years in both Great Britain and the

United States, whether measured from trouqh to trough or from peak to peak.

The standard deviations of these estimates are close to 2 years. Most contractions did not exceed one or two years. 'jve of the fourteen identified cycles
in either country fall into the early turbulent period of almost continuous
wars that ended in 1815.

IV. 4onth1y Business Cycle Chronologies: Problems and Procedures
For the United States and Britain since 1854, for France since 1865, and
for Germany since 1879, sufficient evidence could he assembled by the National
Bureau to permit estimation of monthly, as well as quarterly and annual, refer-

ence chronologies of business cycles. The work involved a painstaking

—1 3—

collective effort. Burns and Mitchell (1946, p. 80) credit Kuznets for taking
"a leading part in the preparation of the oriqinal set of reference dates" and

Abramovitz, Moore, Shiskin, Garvy, and Walt Rostow, among others, for help in
extending, revising, or criticizing the dates.

Before presenting and discussing the results (in the next section), we
need to consider the main problems encountered in this research and the methods

adopted to overcome them. The lack of a single sufficiently long and consistent measure of aggregate economic activity was already noted. There is no
doubt that no time series exists to fill this role for any country. This applies even to the recent periods covered by the quarterly data on national

income and product accounts, as will he argued later. For the years before
World War II, these series are anyway fragmentary and not very dependable.

In constructing their "reference scales" of business cycles after World
War I, the NBER team could draw on monthly series of production in manufact-

uring and mining, and of the number of factory employees. Before World War I,
however, these data have a slender sampling basis and leave much to be desired.
The series on bank clearings, wholesale prices, and interest rates are much

longer. Historically, their cyclical sensitivity tended to be high, and the
researchers found them on the whole very useful. Much reliance was placed,
too, on a variety of indexes of business conditions, mostly in physical terms.
In sum, the historical records decrease both in volume and reliability

when pushed back into the past. In general, they are more satisfactory for the
United States than for the foreign countries, but the reverse is true in a few
cases involving the data for unemployment and interest rates (Burns and
Mitchell, 1946, pp. 73—76).
Civen the limitations of the individual indicators, the task of identif y—

ing and dating the historical business cycles required the analysis of both the

—14—

voluminous business annals and numerous time series covering diverse activities.
Before deciding when a peak (trough) occurred, it is necessary to determine

whether the expansion (contraction) is of cyclical dimensions. To ascertain
the critical characteristics of the scope and size of the economy's movement,
there was no alternative to the laborious procedure of extracting common sig-.

nals from the noisy indications of fallible data on a whole range of economic

processes. This remains true even today when much better and more comprehen—
sive cyclical indicator statistics are available, because the diffusion aspect

of business cycles is as important as ever. It is still true as well, despite
the great improvement in the data, that measurement errors are mostly unknown

hut often large. A careful comparative analysis of interrelated but independently derived time series can help reduce the effects of such errors on a
business cycle chronology.
The working definition of business cycles cited above implies that peaks
and troughs of time series representing a broad array of economic processes are

not randomly interspersed but form alternating clusters. The clusters of peaks
and troughs typically extend over many months, but it is also true that they
show as a rule rather definite points of concentration (see, e.g., Moore, 1961,

Chart 7—3 and text, pp. 196—202). These dates, around which most of the series
reach their highest (lowest) local levels, indicate roughly the timing of the

peaks (troughs) in the otherwise not observable aggregate economic activity."
Of course, some series deserve more attention than others because they are
more comprehensive, more significant economically, more adequate statistically,
or more reliable with respect to their cyclical timing and conformity charac-

teristics. Some series such as unemployment tend to rise in contractions and
fall

in expansions, hence they must he used in inverted form. Some series such

as new orders for capital goods and construction contracts rise and fall early;

—15--

others such as the volumes of business inventories and loans typically move
late; still others move early at peaks and late at troughs, or vice versa.

These systematic differences in behavior, once known, can and should be taken
into account in identifying and dating the generalized expansions and
contractions——often by excluding them from the sample of series used in the
procedure.

It should be clear that the monthly or quarterly dates of business cycle

turns are of necessity uncertain estimates. No high degree of precision is
generally possible here; the best achievable result is a chronology that is

well supported by the most pertinent evidence one can obtain. But this is also
a major result and worth much effort. P well—designed and well—tested chronology is a valuable tool in the analysis and understanding of business cycle phenomena, some of which at least are of prime interest to macroeconomic theory

and policy. A common reference scale has many practical uses, one of them
being to confer the advantage of economies of scale on the handling of large

numbers of contemporaneous time series. As Burns and Mitchell said (1946, pp.
70—71), "If our analysis were restricted to a few time series, it would be sim—

pie to compare their specific cycles directly, But when the analysis covers
hundreds of series, it is clumsy and wasteful to compare the timing of each
series with every other; indeed, as clumsy and wasteful as it would he to express the exchange value of each commodity in terms of every other commodity."
Other analytical uses of the business cycle chronologies, for international
comparisons and the measurement of relative durations, amplitudes, and spread
of cyclical movementss are illustrated below (Chart 1 and Tables 4, 6, and 7).

V. The NBER Business Cycle Chronologies for 1854-1938
Table 3 shows the monthly, quarterly, arid annual lists of reference dates

compiled by the National Bureau for the periods before World War II. The hulk

—16—

of this information comes from Burns and Mitchell, as cited. Only a few of the
dates, all referring to the U. S. cycles in 1919—38, were subsequently changed

in light of additional and revised data. The resulting shifts were small. Two
dates were shifted by one month and two were shifted by two months.
The quarterly and annual dates are necessary for working with time series
cast in the corresponding time units, in particular where monthly data are not

available, but the monthly dates are basic since only they permit observation
of cyclical behavior in the essential detail (Burns and Mitchell, 1946, pp. 80—

81). Hence the monthly dates control the others and should be given preference
and used wherever possible.
If the monthly choice falls in the mid-month of the quarter, that quarter

is always taken as the quarterly reference date. If it falls on the first or
third month, the quarterly turn is placed either in the quarter in which the
reference month is located or in the quarter adjacent to that month, according
to the indications of a sample of important economic series measured by
quarters (including monthly data converted to quarterly).

Annual records alone are a poor guide to dating, since they obscure some

mild and short business cycles. Phases of 12 months or less that overlap two
calendar years (mostly contractions) have been frequent, particularly in the

United States since the 1870g. Independent annual dating can miss the short
business cycles and combine two or even three of them into one, while producing

only a rough oneto—one correspondence with the longer cycles in the monthly
chronology. There is ample statistical evidence that this is a serious measurement problem (Burns and Mitchell, ch. 6, esp. p. 262). Hence the adopted
procedure is to set monthly reference dates first and then make the annual ones
match

them as

well as possible. However, the annual turns are intended to

identify the years in which the overall activity in the economy reached a high

—17—

or a low point, and these years need not always coincide with those in which

the corresponding monthly peaks or troughs fall. When the monthly date occurs
early in the year t, the annual date may well he the year t—1; similarly, when
the monthly turn is late, the annual one will often be the year t+1

According to these chronologies, business cycles have indeed been recur-

rent but not periodic in each of the countries covered. Contractions ranged
from 7 to 65 months in the United States, 6 to 81 months in Britain, 8 to 68

months in France, and 12 to 61 months in Germany. The corresponding ranges for
expansion are 10 to 50, 8 to 64, 8 to 62, and 16 to 61 months. The shortest
full—cycle durations (measured from peak to peak or from trough to trough) are
17 months for the United States and Great Britain, 24 months for France, and 34

months for Germany; the longest are 101, 135, 110, and 122 months, respectively.
However, these measures are based on rare outliers; there is considerably
more of a central tendency among

business

cycles than they suggest. For example,

declines lasting from 10 months to 2 years account for 67 percent (43 out of 64)

of the business contractions recorded in Table 3. Expansions lasting 1 1/ to 3
1/2

years

represent 66 percent (42 out of 64) of all observations in this cate-

gory. Full

cycles

lasting 21/2 to 51/2 years account for 64 percent (41 out of

64) of all cycles measured from trough to trough. These ranges contain half or
more of the corresponding listings for each of the four countries covered.

It is important to note that business cycles have tended to be shorter in

the United States than in the foreign countries. Thus the period 1854-1938
witnessed 21 U. S. cycles averaging four years and only 16 British cycles

averaging 5—1/3 years. For 1879—1938, the comparison is as follows:

—18—

1879—1938

United States

Great Britain

France

Germany

Number of cycles CT to T)

17

13

14

10

Mean duration (months)

48

65

53

54

Chart 1 uses a schematic form to compare the timing of business cycle peaks

and and troughs in the four countries. It suggests a fairly high overall
degree of correspondence between the chronologies, as shown by the following
summary.

Number

Peaks
Percent

Troughs
Number
Percent

Matched turns for
all four countries

44

52

48

54

three countries

18

25

18

24

two countries

2

3

2

3

Unmatched turns

7

10

7

9

71

100

75

100

Total

A closer look at the diagram makes it clear that much of the time, notably during the four decades 1879-1919, the conformity between the business
cycles in the three European countries was very close, while the United States

followed a different pattern of shorter and more frequent fluctuations. In
the earlier years, the movements were generally less synchronized, in part

because of the annual dating for France and Germany. In the 1920s and 1930s,
the European countries were much less in phase with each other than in the
oreceeding forty years, hut the degree of conformity between their cycles and
those in the United States increased.11

—19--

VI. On The Dependability of

In the early

Historical

Reference Dates

U. S. business cycles, the average length of contractions

was close to that of expansions, whereas more recently expansions have become

much longer. This is clearly so according to the following measures of mean
duration of the cyclical phases dated by the N1ER.

1834—55

1857—82

1885—99

1900—18

1919—37

1948—82

5

5

5

5

5

8

Expansion, months CE)

26

31

22

26

26

45

Contraction, months (C)

24

28

19

20

19

11

1 .1

1 .1

1 .2

1.3

1 .4

4.1

Number of cycles

Ratio, E/C

Fluctuations

of trend-adjusted aggregates in the post-World War II period

show alternating phases of high and low growth that have similar durations (e.g.,
in 1948—75 for the U. S., these phases lasted on the average 20 and 18 months,

respectively). In such "growth cycles" (see section VIII below)

the near

symmetry is persistent and understandable because the fluctuations are measured
from a long—run upward trend laid flat, as it were; that is, the growth element

is eliminated. In contrast, the secular trend is retained in the measurement of
business

cycles as defined by the NBER, so that stages of less than average hut

positive

growth are included in expansions and only the periods of sufficiently

large and broad absolute decline qualify as contractions.

Accordingly, one might expect business cycle expansions to be significantly longer than contractions on the average over long periods of economic

development. If so, one might also be somewhat surprised by, and suspicious
of,

the near equality of the early

and C measures listed above.

These views are not compelling conceivably, the averages could reflect

—20--

the dominance of lengthy periods of slow decline among the contractions and of

short periods of rapid growth among the expansions. But it is also possible
that some of the historical reference dates refer to growth cycles rather than
business cycles, i.e., that some of the phases designated as actual declines
in the overall economic activity represent merely phases of low (less than the

trend) growth rates. The limitations of data available for the identification
of the early cycles, and the consequent reliance on business annals and selected indexes of business conditions, might well have produced a certain bias

in this direction. This applies in particular to the period 1834—52, the segment of the NBER reference cycle chronology for which there are no comprehen—
sive measures or indexes of economic activity without trend adjustments.
p. partial reappraisal of the evidence for the United States confirms that

generally the contractions in NBER chronology do represent cyclical declines in
either real income and output, or money income and spending, or both the real

and the nominal aggregates (Zarnowitz, 1981). It is important to note that,

historically, both groups of variables deserve a thorough consideration. In the
recent era of inflation, the cycles are mainly in the real aggregates, but in
the past, when the price level fluctuated and long periods of deflation
occurred, the cycles were often more pronounced in the nominal aggregates.

Nevertheless, a few episodes are doubtful. All of these go back to the
19th century. (The 1918—19 and 1926—27 contractions have been questioned by
some investigators but there is sufficient evidence in favor of their

inclusion.12) The most dubious is the 1845—46 phase, but 1869—70, 1887-97, and
1899—1900 are also uncertain. Given the limited information on hand, it seems
impossible to refute the hypothesis that these were periods of below—averaqe

growth rather than actual delines. Fewer doubts attach to some other minor
contractions (Zarnowitz, 1981, pp. 494—505).

—21—

If the four periods just listed were treated as growth cycle slowdowns

instead of business cycle contractions, the differences between the ! and

duration

?

measures would be substantially increased. The tabulation below

illustrates these effects.

1854—1919

1834—1855
5 cycles

4 cycles

16 cycles

13 cycles

Expansion, months ()

26

36

27

37

Contraction, months ()

24

27

22

23

1.1

1.3

1.2

1.6

Ratio,

Comparisons of the NBER and other chronologies disclose very few discrepancies and provide no good reasons for revisions (see references in note 14).
Comparisons with indexes of business activity (both trend—adjusted and, after
1882, unadjusted) also point to a very high degree of correspondence between
the cycles identified by the National Bureau and the consensus of fluctuations
revealed by the best available information from time—series data. Indeed, in
most cases there is a one-to-one agreement between the NBER dates and the
cyclical turning points in these indexes.13
Table 4 provides some evidence on how well the U. S. chronology fits the

cyclical movements in business activities phase by phase. It shows the percentages of series rising during each expansion and falling during each contraction for 18 indicators of commercial arid industrial activity (production,

trade, orders, bank clearings) and 28 indicators of prices and financial
activity (commodity and security prices, interest rates, bonds and shares

traded, business failures). The series that tend to move countercyclically

—22—

are inverted and allowance is made for fixed leads or lags——the timing charac—

teristics of the indicators. The diffusion measures are predominantly high:
about half of the phase percentages in columns 1—3 exceed 90, three quarters

exceed 80, and practically all exceed 50. However, the percentages tend to he
higher for the series that rise during expansions than for those that decline

during contractions (compare the entries in lines 1—20 and 30—49). The overall averages range from 80 to 97 percent (lines 25 and 54). Thus the represented variables are shown to have participated with substantial regularity in
the successive business cycle expansions and contractions dated by the
National Bureau, exhibiting a generally high level of cyclical conformity.

The diffusion ought to be positively correlated with the amplitude of cyclical fluctuations, that is, those movements which are more widely spread among
the various sectors, industries, and processes of the economy would also be expected to he larger in terms of the most comprehensive measures of economic

activity that are available. Table 4 provides.some evidence that this is indeed so. Here amplitudes are measured by the average of three trend—adjusted
indexes of business activity which cover the entire period 1854—1933 (column 4)

and by the average of four indexes without trend adjustments which begin in the

1870s or later (column 5). For either set of measures, the phases that rank
higher according to the amplitudes tend to have larger diffusion, i.e., higher
proportions of series conforming with respect to the direction of the economy's

movement (see the sections on "veraqes," lines 21-29 and 50—58, in the table).

we conclude that the NBR

historical

reference dates of U. S. business

cycles receive strong support from the phase-by—phase behavior of both the in—
dividual indicators and the weighted combinations of various time series

(indexes of business activity). However, it is important to keep in mind the
obvious fact that the chronologies cannot be made more reliable than the avai].

—23—

able information permits. The true cyclical movements in the economy at large
cannot be observed directly without comprehensive, nonduplicative measures of
aqqregate economic activity, but it is only for the most recent decades that
the required statistical data exist. The series used as proxies for such rneas—

ures could either underestimate or overestimate the true movements. Perhaps
the greater risk is that of overestimation because the data appear to represent
the cyclically sensitive sectors of the economy, notably manufacturing, better

than they do the other sectors. Still, the NBER—designated phases provide
about as good approximations to the historical incidence of business expansions

and contractions as the data allow. On the other hand, considerable uncertainty attaches to the precise dates of some of the early reference turns.
In comparison with the U. S. dates, Burns and Mitchell (1946, p. 113)

assessed the NBER chronologies for the foreign countries as being "at least
tolerable, if not equally good, approximations," while listing a few particular

doubts and difficulties.14 Independent compilations of turning points show on
the whole good agreement on the identification of the cycles; some more serious

discrepancies arise because of differences in how the cycles are defined and
divided into phases.15

VII. The U.S. Business Cycle Chronology Since 1933
Since World War II the National Bureau's work in this field has been

directed towards (1) maintaining the U.S. business cycle chronology along the
lines previously established and (2) developing the concept of a growth cycle

chronology and applying it to the U.S. and other major industrial countries.
In this section we discuss the chronology of the recent U.S. business cycles,
while the following section is devoted to growth cycles.

Table 5 gives the monthly, quarterly and annual business cycle dates for
the United States from 1933 to 1982, together with the durations of contrac—

—24—

tions,

expansions and full cycles.16 Ten cycles have occurred in the past 49

years, or about one every five years. In the preceding 143 years, from 1790
to 1933, there were 34 cycles, or about one every four years. Hence the fre-

quency of cycles has diminished somewhat. But the higqest change that the
chronology reveals is the shift in the length of contractions compared to

expansions. In the period for which only annual dates are available, 1790 to
1855, contractions averaged about 24 months, expansions 31 months. Then from
1854 to 1933, when monthly dates are available, the average durations are 22

and 25 months respectively. But since 1933 the average contraction has lasted
only 11 months while expansions have averaged 49 months (27 months when the
wartime expansions are excluded).

In other words, since the depression of the early 1930's, the contraction
phase of the business cycle has been reduced by about a year, while the expan-

sion phase has been extended by two years. Before 1933, recessions lasted
almost as long as expansions. Since then, expansions have been more than four
times as long as recessions: the economy has been in recession less than
twenty percent of the time.

Recessions have not only become shorter but also much more uniform in
length. Using the standard deviation as a measure, the variability among contractions in 1790—1855 was 18 months; in 1854—1933, 14 months; while in 1933—

82 it was only 3 months. In this sense, recessions have become more predict—
able. On the other hand, expansions have become less uniform in length. Between 1790 and 1855 the standard deviation of durations of expansions was 18

months, the same as for the contractions. From 1854 to 1933, the standard
deviation of expansions was 9 months. But from 1933 to 1983, it was 27
months. Fxpansions have become nine times as variable as contractions.
It is not our purpose here to investigate the reasons for this shift in

—25—

variability, or for the shift in the length of expansions relative to contrac-

tions. The latter appears to be connected with the rising trend of prices
since the 1930's which in turn may be related to the stronger effort of

government to control recessions (See Moore, 1983, Ch. 15). But this is a
worthy subject for further study.

The length of a period of rise or fall in aggregate economic activity is
one of the criteria considered in establishing the business cycle chronology.

The size and scope of the movement are also considered. Measures of these
1imensions, for all the expansions between 1949 and 1982 are given in Table 6,
.ihile all the contractions since 1920 are covered in Table 7, Measures sirni—

lar

to these, hut somewhat more extensive, have been used by the National

Bureau staff in deciding what intervals should be classified as expansions or
contractions and what the peak and trough dates should be.17
Study of the tables will reveal one development that led to a shift in

this procedure during the 1960's. During the three expansions 1949—60 and
during the five recessions 1923—38 and 1948—49, GNP in current dollars moved

in wider swings than did GNP in constant dollars, Prices moved up and down
with the business cycle, enhancing the current dollar swings, Since 1960,
apart from a small one—quarter decline in 1982, current dollar GNP has not

declined at all. Whereas before 1960 the current dollar aggregates for GNP,
sales and income had figured iinportantly in the determination of the business

cycle chronology, since the 1960's they have played no role at all. As long
as the rate of inflation remains persistently positive, this practice is
likely to continue.

The tables make it clear that not only have recessions become shorter,

hut that they have become milder as well. None of the recessions since 1948
have approached the Great Depression in depth, nor have they come close to the

—26—

major depressions of 1920—21 or 1937—38. All have been in a class either with
the fairly sharp recession of 1923—24 or the mild recession of 1926—27. The
tables record considerable "progress toward economic stability" (Burns, 1960).
A word should be said about the problem of identifying business cycles

contemporaneously. How soon a peak or trough can be recognized depends partly
upon how rapidly the economy descends from the peak or rises from the trough.
It also depends upon one's ability and willingness to make forecasts, for
example, that a decline in the several measures of aggregate activity will
last as long and go as deep as in previously recognized recessions, and that

the declines will be widespread. Since the National Bureea&s decisions on
dates have not depended on forecasts, turns in the business cycle have been

recognized only with a lag. For example, the trough date for the most recent
recession, November 1982, was determined by the National Bureau of Economic

Research in July 1983. Even that involved a presumption that the recovery
then underway would continue and ultimately develop the characteristics of a
business cycle expansion.
iDrie way to reduce this recognition lag has recently been developed by the

authors in a paper on sequential signals of recession and recovery (Zarnowitz

and Moore, 1982). The signals are based upon smoothed short-run growth rates
in the composite leading and coincident indexes published by the Department of

Commerce. When these growth rates reach certain pre—determined levels, a preliminary signal of a peak or trough occurs. If and when they reach another
set of levels, a second signal is passed, and so on with a third and final

signal. Safeguards against false signals are built into the system. Historical tests have shown that the signals would have identified each of the U.S.
business cycle peaks and troughs since 1949 without undue delays or false

signals. One of the potential uses for the system is to activate or
deactivate counter—cyclical policies.

—27—

viii.

Growth Cycle Chronologies

A modification of the concept of business cycles employed in the chronologies discussed above was developed by Miritz at the National Bureau in the

1960s (Mintz, 1969, 1974). The growth cycle represents a fluctuation around
the long—run growth trend of a nation's economy, i.e., a trend—adjusted busi-

ness cycle. Chronologies based upon this concept, using the classical business cycle definition cited above but applying it to data from which long—run

trends have been eliminated, are shown in Table 8 and Chart 2. The dates mark
the approximate time when aggregate economic activity was farthest above its
long—run trend level (peak) or farthest below its long—run trend level
(trough).

The specific procedures used to establish these chronologies, initiated
by Moore and Klein at the NBER in 1973, are as follows:

1. Measures of aggregate economic activity such as industrial production, gross national product, personal income, employment, unemployment and
sales of goods and services are expressed in physical units or in constant

prices, seasonally adjusted, and their long—run trend removed, The trend—
fitting procedure, called the phase-average trend, provides a fairly flexible
growth

in

trend that is substantially free of the shorter—term cyclical movements

the series (Boschan and Ebanks, 1978).

2. For each of the above series computer—selected peaks and troughs are
derived

from the deviations of the seasonally adjusted data from the growth

trend.

The program for turning point selection is described in Bry and

Boschan, 1971.

3. These turning points are visually inspected and sometimes altered by
shifting the date, omitting the turn, or adding another turn. These changes
are relatively rare, affecting perhaps five percent of the turning points.

—28—

4. Median dates in the clusters of peaks and troughs formed by all the
series mentioned above are computed.

5. A composite index based on the above series prior to their adjustment
for trend is constructed, the growth trend is removed from the index, and
turning points are selected in the deviations from trend.

6. The clusters of dates, the median dates and the composite index dates
are inspected and a decision is made on which monthly date best represents the

consensus. These dates are the growth cycle peaks and troughs.
Comparisons of growth cycle and business cycle chronologies show that the
number of growth cycles during a given period usually exceeds the number of

business cycles, because slowdowns that sometimes occur during long business

cycle expansions become actual contractions in the trend—adjusted figures. n
the United States, for example, such slowdowns occured in 1951—52, 1962—64 and
1966—67, interrupting the long business cycle expansions from 1949 to 1953 and

from 1961 to 1969. Hence growth cycles are, on average, shorter than business
cycles. Another difference is that peaks in the growth cycle usually occur
some months before the corresponding peaks in the business cycle, because

activity usually slows before a business cycle peak is reached. Growth cycle
and business cycle trouqhs tend to he more nearly simultaneous. As a result
of these differences, expansions and contractions are more nearly symmetrical,
in both duration and amplitude, in growth cycles than in business cycles.

Also, the variability in duration and in amplitude is more nearly uniform as

between expansions and contractions of growth cycles. The international
connections among growth cycles since World War II seem to be about as
pervasive as those among business cycles prior to the war (compare Charts 1
and 2).

—29—

The continuing public concern with slowdowns in growth, some of which
turn into declines in aggregate economic activity and some of which do not,

justifies further attention to this concept of the business cycle. So also
does the growing concern with the international spread of economic fluctua-

tions, since slowdowns in one country may become substantial declines in

another. The widening use of both business cycle and growth cycle chronologies in many countries testifies to the value of this well—tested tool for
research and public understanding.

F-i
Footnotes
1The term "cycles" is often applied to measurable and recurrent but non—
periodic fluctuations in sciences other than economics, as noted by Wesley
Mitchell who refers to sun—spot cycles which "varied in length from 7 to 17
years since 1788" (see his "Introduction" to Willard L. Thorp, 1926, pp. 32—
33).

2Burns and Mitchell, 1946, p. 1; for the earlier version, see Mitchell,
1927, p. 468.

3me term itself entered the definition in 1946; in Mitchell, 1913 and
1927, there is less apparent emphasis on overall aggregates and more on the

collective concept of "a species of fluctuations in the economic activities of
organized communities" or in "activities which are systematically conducted on

a commercial basis" (1927, P. 488). The development of the national income
and product accounts between 1927 and 1946 is of cource highly relevant here.
41n periods 1834—43 to 1963—67, 1831—40 to 1963—66, and 1850—59 to

1963—67, respectively. In the older developed countries of Europe and in
Japan, population almost tripled and total output increased by a factor of at

least fifteen over a century. These growth rates are far greater than those
which can reasonably he assigned to earlier eras. See Kuznets, 1971, pp. 10—
33 and 303—305; also, U. S. Department of Commerce, ureau of the Census,
1973.

5For the United States between 1869 and 1955, for example, the net

capital stock per member of labor force is estimated to have grown at least 14

percent per decade, according to Kuznets, 1971, pp. 64—67. (This covers not
only the very large component of business plant and equipment, but also
housing, inventories, and claims aqainst foreign countries.)

F—2

6For a discerning discussion of the nature and working of this process,
see Felirier, 1956, esp. chs, 4 and 8.

7me above characterizations apply broadly to most of the principal contributors to the literature on business cycles in the period between the 1890s

and the 1930s: Pugan—Baranovskii, Bouniatian, talion, Pigou, Hawtrey,
Robertson, Mitchell, Spiethoff, Schumpeter, and Hayek. For a review and
references, see Haberler, 1937 (new fifth edition, 1964).

8Schumpeter (1939, vol. I, pp. 224—225) refers to Mitchell and Spiethoff
as havinq a !strong aversion to admitting that we may speak of cycles
before the end of the eiqhteenth century, while others, historians among them,

do not hesitate to go far beyond that.
91n addition to these aggregate characteristics, the annals also provide
brief references to conditions in the main industries, markets, or sectors of
each economy in year.
10For a compilation of early data on U. S. business cycles, see W. B.
Smith and P. H. Cole, 1935, pp. 3—84.

1Cf. Morgenstern, 1959, ch. II, for a discussion of the international
L.LLLLIII'_j

L)J. )U.LI1b

1_._

10 l

12Eckler, 1933, and Gilbert, 1933, omit the 1918—19 contraction; Axe—
Houghton, 1931; Hubbard, 1936; and Ayres, 1939, omit the 1926—27 contraction.
See Burns and Mitchell, 1947, Table 27 and text, pp. 107—110, for a comparison
of the NBER with these and two other independently compiled chronologies

(Kitchin, 1923, and Persons, 1931). The available data indicate that 1918—19
is appropriately viewed as a sui generis end—of—the—war recession along with

the similar short 1945 episode. The 1926—27 recession is marginal but also
supported by the preponderance of the evidence. See also Zarnowitz, 1981, p.
504.

F-3

3See Burns and Mitchell, 1946, Chart 10 and text, pp 111—113, for the
check provided by the "standard pattern of short—term fluctuations in Pinerican

business activity" from Frickey, 1942. Also see Zarnowitz, 1981, Tables 3 and
4 and text, pp. 494—504, for comparisons with several indexes of trade and
industrial activity and deflated bank clearings.
14The German contraction 8/1903—2/1905 is acknowledged to be "dubious,"
the French dates in the 1860s and 1870s, and also after 1932, to be in need of
careful reexamination.
15Matthews (1959, pp. 215—226) stresses the longer cycles of 7—10 years'

duration, especially for Great Britain. Friedman and Schwartz (1982, p. 74)
omit the 1901 trough and the 1903 peak recognized in the NBER chronology for
Britain. In his German chronology published in 1955, Spiethoff, 1955, skips
the contraction of 1903—04 about which Burns and Mitchell had some doubts of

their own (on German chronologies, see Bry, 1960, App. B, pp. 474—480). These
authors concentrate on the characterization of annual data.
16The pre—World War II monthly NBER chronoloqies presented in Table 3

include the cycles through the 1938 troughs, for the United States and other

countries. But a new epoch in the U.S. economic history and policy opened after
the traumatic experience of the Great Contraction in 1929—33, and we find it
instructive to cover in Table 5 all subsequent reference dates and durations.
(Note that, therefore, the individual dates for the 1933—37-38 cycle are
included in both tables.)

17The National Bureau sources for the successive U. S. reference dates in

the post—World War II period are: Moore, 1961, vol. I, pp. 104—105 (through
1958)' NBER Annual Reports for 1961 (Moore, pp. 38—41), and 1962 (Moore, pp. 65—
66); supplement to National Bureau Report 8, May 1971 (Fabricant); NBER Annual
Reports for 1975 (Moore, pp. 23—26; Zarnowitz and Boschan, pp. 26—29) and 1977

F-4

(zarnowitz and Boschan, pp. 34—3). A comprehensive report on the 1973—76
developments, which shows in detail how the chronology for this period was

derived, is Zarnowitz and Moore, 1977. Since 1980, the turning points for the
United States are identified by the National Bureau's Committee on Businss Cycle
Dating; on the composition and work of the Committee and the analysis behind its
decisions concerning the recession and recovery of 1980, see Zarnowitz and
Moore, 1981 •

The NBER U. S. chronology is published in the U. S. Commerce

Department's monthly report on cyclical indicators entitled Business Conditions
Digest (BCTD).

R— 1

References

Axe, E. W., and Houghton, R., 1931. "Financial and Business Cycles,
Manufacturing Growth and Analysis of Individual Indicators, 1883—1930," The
Annalist, Jan. 16, pp. 150—151.

Ashton, T. S., 1959. Economic Fluctuations in England, 1700—1800. Oxford:
Clarendon Press.

Ayres, Leonard P., 1939. Turning Points in Business Cycles. New York:
Macmillan Co.

Boschan, Charlotte, and Ebanks, Walter W., 1978. "The Phase-Average Trend: A
New Way of Measurinq Growth," Proceedinqs of the Business and Economic

Statistics Section. washington, D.C.: merican Statistical Association.
Bry, Gerhard, 1960. Wages in Germany, 1871-1945. New York: NBER,

_______ and Boschan, Charlotte, 1971. Cyclical Analysis of Time Series:
Selected Procedures and Computer Programs. New York: Columbia University
Press for NBER,

Burns, Arthur F., 1960, "Progress Towards Economic Stability," American
Economic Review, vol. 50, no. 1 (March), pp. 1—19.

_______

1968.

"Business Cycles," International Encyclopedia of Social

Sciences, vol. 2, pp. 226—245.

_______ and Mitchell, Wesley C., 1946. Measuring Business Cycles, New York:
National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER).

Cloos, George W., 1963a. "How Good are the National Bureau's Reference
Dates?", Journal of Business, vol. 36, no. 1 (January), pp. 14—32.

_______

1963b. "More on Reference Dates and Leading Indicators," Journal of

Business, vol. 36, no. 3 (July), pp. 352—364.

Eckler, A. Ross, 1933. "

easure

of the Severity of Depressions, 1873-1932,

Review of Economic Statistics, vol. i, no. I (February), pp. 75—81.

R-2

Feilner,

William, 1956. Trends and Cycles in Economic Activity. New York:

Henry Holt and Co.

Frickey, Edwin, 1942. Economic Fluctuations in the United States. Cambridqe,

Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Friedman, Milton, and Schwartz, Anna J., 1982. Monetary Trends in the United
States and the United Kingdom: Their Relation to Income, Prices, and

Interest Rates, 1867—1975. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Gilbert, Donald W., 1933. "Business Cycles and Municipal Jpenditures," Review
of Economic Statistics, vol. 15, no.

(August), pp. 140—141.

Gordon, Robert Aaron, 1952. Business Fluctuations. New York: Harper &
Brothers.

Haberler, Gottfried, 1964. Prosperity and Depression. Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard university Press (new edition; first published by the League of
Nations in 1937).

Hansen, Alvin M., 1941. Fiscal Policy and Business Cycles. New York: W. W.
Norton & Co.

______ 1951.

Business Cycles and National Income. New York: W. W. Norton &

Co.

Hoffman, Walther G., 1965. Das Wachstum der deutschen Wirschaft seit der Mitte

des 19. Jahrhunderts. Berlin: Springer Verlag.
Hubbard, Joseph B., 1936. "Business Declines and Recoveries," Review of
Economic Statistics, vol. 18, no. 1 (February ),

pp.

16—23.

Juglar, Clment, 1862. Des crises cominerciales et de leur retour priodigue en
France, en Angleterre et aux Etats-Unis. Paris: Guillaumin.
Kitchiri, Joseph, 1923. "Cycles and Trends in Economic Factors," Review of
Economic Statistics, vol. 5, no. 1 (January), pp. 10—16.

R- 3

Kuznets, Simon, 1971. Economic Growth

of

Nations. Cambridge, Mass.: The

Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.

Lewis, John P., 1965. Building Cycles and Britain's Growth. London:
Macmillan; New York: St. Martin's Press.

Matthews, R. C. 0., 1959. The Trade Cycle. Cambridge: At the University
Press.

Mintz, use, 1969. Dating Postwar Business Cycles: Methods and Their
Application to Western Germany, 1950—67. Columbia University Press for
NBER.

_______

1974. "Datinq United States Growth Cycles," Explorations in Economic

Research, vol. 1, no. 1, pp.

Mitchell, Wesley C., 1913. Business Cycles. Berkeley: University of
California Press.

_______

1927.

Business Cycles: The Problem and its Setting. New York:

NBER.

Moore, Geoffrey H., ed., 1961. Business Cycle Indicators. Princeton:
Princeton University Press.

_______ 1967.

"What is a Recession?" The American Statistician, October

(reprinted, with more recent figures and refrences added, in Moore, 1980).

_______

1980. "Business Cycles, Inflation, and Forecasting. Ballinger Pubi.

Co. for NBER. Second edition, 1983.
Morgenstern, Oskar, 1959. INternational Financial Transactions and Business

Cycles. New York: NBER.
National Bureau of Economic Research, Amnual Reports: May 1961, June 1962,
September 1975, and September 1977; Supplement to National Bureau Report 8,
May 1971

R- 4

Persons,

Warren M., 1931. Forecasting Business Cycles. New York: John Wiley.

Rostow, W. W., 1980.

'Cycles in the Fifth Kondratieff Upswing," The Business

Cycle and Public Policy, 1929—80. A Compendium of Papers submitted to the
Joint Economic Committee, Congress of the United States, Washington,
D.C. :

U.S. Government Printing Office, pp. 34—66,

Schumpeter, Joseph A., 1939. Business Cycles: A Theoretical, Historical, and
Statistical Analysis of the pitalist Process.

2 vols. New York and

London: McGraw—Hill.
Smith, Walter B., and Cole, Arthur H., 1935. Fluctuations in American Business

1790—1860. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Spiethoff, Arthur, 1955. Die wirtschaftlichen Wechsellagen: Aufschwung,
Krise, Stockung. 2 vols., Ziirich: Polygraphischer Verlag; Thbingen:
Mohr.

Thorp, Willard L., 1926, Business Annals. New York: NBER.
Trueblood, Lorman C., 1961. "The

Dating

of Postwar Business Cycles,'

Proceedings of the Business and Economic Statistics Section, Washington,

D.C.: American Statistical Association.
U. S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, 1973. Long Term Economic

Growth 1860—1970. Washington, D.C.: U. S. Government Printing Office.

_______

Bureau of Economic Analysis, Business Conditions Digest (BCD),

monthly.

Zarnowitz, Victor, 1963a. "On the Dating of Business Cycles," Journal of
Business, vol. 36, no, 2 (April), pp. 179—199

1963b. "Cloos on Reference Dates and Leading Indicators A Comment,"
Journal of Business, vol. 36, no. 4 (October), pp. 461—463.

Zarnowitz, Victor, 1981. "Business Cycles and Growth: Some Reflections and
Measures," Wirtschaftstheorie und Wirtschaftspolitik: Gedenkschrift fiir Erich

R-5

Preiser, W. J. Mückl and A. E. Ott, eds., Passau: Passavia
Universitátsverlag, pp. 475—508.

________ and Moore, Geoffrey H., 1977. "The Recession and Recovery of
1973—76," Explorations in Economic Research, vol. 4, no. 4 (Fall), pp. 472—
557.

________ 1981.

"The Tinting

and the Severity of the Recession of 1980,"

Economic Reporter (Spring), NBER,

_______

pp.

19—21.

1982. "Sequential Signals of Recession and Recovery," Journal of

Business, vol. 55, no. 1 (January), pp. 57—85.

TAm 1

conoic Fluctuations

in

gland,

1700—1802

Poor Harvest,
Trough Peak

Financial Crisis

1700

1701

Feb.—Mar. 1701

1702

1704
1708

Oct.—Dec. 1704
Aug.—Dec. 1710

1712
1716

1714

1717—18

July—Dec. 1715
Mar. 1719; Aug.—Dec. 1720

1722

1724—5

Oct.—Dec. 1726

1727

1728
1733

Oct.—Dec. 1733

1706

1730
1734

1742
1746
1748

1751
1761

1708—09

1725—26

War with France, 1744—48
Sept. 1745—Apr. 1746
1757—58
1767—68
1773—75

1777

1781

1783

Sept. 1783—Jan. 1784

1782—84

1784
1789
1794
1798
1800

1787
1792
1796
1799
1802

May—June 1788
Nov. 1792—Apr. 1793
Feb.—June 1797
Aug.—Nov. 1799

1788—90

1764
1771—2

Victories in 1703—04,
reverses in 1705
Peace 1714
War with Spain;
Aug. 1718—1720
Abolition of duties cn
British exports, 1722
New War with Spain, 1727—29

1740—41

June—Dec. 1761
July—Oct. 1763
June 1772—Jan. 1773
Jan.—Apr. 1778

1755
1763
1769
1775

War
War of the Spanish
Succession since 1701

1728—29

1738
1743

1746

Short Supplies
of Grain

Seven Years war, 1756—63

U.S. War of Independence
1776

1796—98
1799—1800

Franco—Spanish cooperation against British
1778—81; Peace 1783

War with France,

17931802

ource Ashton, 1959. See ibid., pp. 172—173 (for columns 1—3), ch. 2 (for column 4), and ch.
3 (for column 5).

TABLE 2

Annual Reference Dates and
in

Duration

of Business

Great Britain and United States

Cycles

1790—1858

A.
Dates of Peaks and Troughs
by Years
Trough CT)
(1)

Peak (P)
(2)

Great Britaina

Contraction
(P to T)

Duration in Years
Expansion
CT to P)

Full

CT to T)

Cycle
(P to P)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

3

2

3
5
3
2

4
6
5

6
6
4
4
5

1 790

1793
1797
1803
1808
1811
1816
1819

1796
1802
1806
1810
1815
1818
1825

1826
1829

1
1

1

4

3

1

2

1

6

1828

1

1831

1

1832

1836

1

1837
1842
1848
1855
1858

1839
1845
1854
1857

2
2
4
2
3
6
2

5
3
7
3
3
5
5

Mean duration (years)
Standard deviation (years)

1

3

3
1
1

1.5

0.8

3.3
1.5

6

3

7
3
3
5
3

6
9

7
3

3

4.6
1.5

4.8
1.8

Table 2
(concluded)

B. United gtatesb
Dates of Peaks and Troughs
by Years
Trough CT)
(1)

(2)

1790
1799
1804

1802
1807

1810

l8l2

1812c
1821

1823
1826
1829
1834
1838
1843
1846
1848
1855

Peak (P)

Duration in Years
Contraction
(P to T)

pansion
CT to P)

(3)

(4)

CT to T)

(p to p)

(5)

(6)

3

9

3

5

6
5

6

1796
3
2
3

1815
1822
1825
1828
1833
1836

6

1

1

2
2
4
2

6
2
9
2
3
3
5

2
4

1

4

1

1

1

5

11/2

3

1/2

1
1
1

1839
1845
1847
1853

Mean duration (years)
Standard deviation (years)

Full Cycle

2

2

2.0
1.5

2.6
1.5

5
3
2
7

4.6
2.4

41/2
31/2
7

3
6
2

3
3

5
3

6

4.4
1.6

agource. Burns and Mitchell, 1946, Table 16, p. 79.
bgource. 1790—1833, Thorp, 1926, pp. 11.3—126; 1834—1855, Burns and Mitchell, 1946,
Table 16, P. 78.
Cm 1812 there is first a "brief recession," then a revival.
The corresponding
duration measures are based on the assumption that the recession occured in the
first half of the year, before the outbreak of the war with England (for evidence,
see Thorp, 1926, pp. 42 and 117).

TABLE 3

isiness Cycle Ctronoloqies and Durations

TO 1938

A. United States, 1854—1938
Dates of Peaks and Trouqhs
Duration in Months
By Months and Quarters
By Calendar Years
Contraction Expansion
Full Cycle
Peak (P)
Trough (T)
Trough (T) Peak (P)
(P to T)
(T to P)
T to T P to P
(1)

(2)

(4)

(3)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

Dec. 1854(IV)

June 1857(11)

1855

1856

Dec. 1858(1V)

Oct. 1860(11)

1858

1860

18

22

48

40

June 1861(111)

Apr. 1865(I)

1861

1864

8

46

30

54

Dec. 1867(I)

June 1869(11)

1867

1869

32

18

78

50

Dec. 1870(IV)

Oct. 1873(111)

1870

1873

18

34

36

52

Mar. 1879(I)

Mar. 1882(I)

1878

1882

65

36

99

101

May 1885(11)

Mar. 1887(11)

1885

1887

38

22

74

60

Apr. 1888(I)

July 1890(111)

1888

1890

13

27

35

40

May 1891(11)

Jan. 1893(I)

1891

1892

10

20

37

30

June 1894(11)

Dec. 1895(Iv)

1884

1895

17

18

37

35

June 1897(11)

June 1899(111)

1896

1899

18

24

36

42

Dec. 1900(IV)

Sept. 1902(iv)

1900

1903

18

21

May 1907(11)

1904

1907

23

33

42
44

39

Aug. 1904(111)
June 1908(11)

Jan. 1910(I)

1908

1910

13

19

46

32

Jan. 1912(IV)

Jan. 1913(I)

1911

1913

24

12

43

32

Dec. 1914(IV)

uq. 1918(111)

1914

1918

23

44

35

67

Mar. 1919(I)

Jan. 1920(I)

1919

1920

7

10

51

17

July 1921(111)

May 1923(11)

1921

1923

18

22

28

40

July 1924(111)

Oct. 1926(111)

1924

1926

14

27

36

41

Nov. 1927(Iv)

Aug. 1929(111)

1927

1929

13

21

40

34

Mar. 1933(I)

May 1937(11)

1932

1937

43

50

64

93

June 1938(11)

1938

30

13

56

63

Averages

21 Cycles, 1854—1938
Mean duration (months)

21

26

48

Standard deviation (months)

14

11

18

Mean duration (months)

23

28

50

fl

Standard deviation (months)

16

14

24

fl

48

35 Cycles, 1790_1938a

TABLE 3

cont.

B. Great Britain, 1854—1938

Duration in Months
Dates of Peaks and Troughs
Years
Full Cycle
Contraction
Expansion
By Months and Quarters
By Calendar
Peak
(P)
(PtoT)
(TtoP)
TtoT
PtoP
Peak
(P)
Trough
(T)
Trough (T)
(2)

(1)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

33

Dec. 1854(155)

Sept. 1857(IV)

1855

1857

Mar. 1858(I)

Sept. 1860(1V)

1858

1860

6

30

39

36

Dec. 1862(IV)

Mar. 1866(11)

1862

1866

27

39

57

66

Mar. 1868(11)

Sept. 1872(IV)

1868

1873

24

54

63

78

June 1879(11)

Dec. 1882(I)

1879

1883

81

42

135

123

June 1886(11)

Sept. 1890(111)

1886

1890

42

51

84

93

Feb. 1895(I)

June 1900(11)

1894

1900

53

64

104

117

Sept. 1901(IV)

June 1903(11)

1901

1903

15

21

79

36

Nov. 1904(IV)

June 1907(11)

1904

1907

17

31

38

48

Nov. 1908(IV)

Dec. 1912(I)

1908

1913

17

49

48

66

Sept. 1914(111)

Oct. 1918(111)

1914

1917

21

49

70

70

Apr. 1919(11)

Mar. 1920(11)

1919

1920

6

11

55

17

June 1921(11)

1ov. 1924(IV)

1921

1924

15

41

26

56

July 1926(111)

Mar. 1927(11)

1926

1927

20

8

61

28

Sept. 1928(111)

July 1929(111)

1928

1929

18

10

26

28

Pug. 1932(111)

Sept. 1937(111)

1932

1937

37

61

47

98

Sept. 1938(111)

1938

73

12

Averages

16 Cycles, 1854—1938
Mean duration (months)

26

37

63

64

Standard deviation (months)

19

18

29

33

22

39

60

62

24

28

29 Cycles, 1790_1938a
Mean duration (months)
Standard deviation (months)

TABLE 3 cont.

C. France,1865—1938
Duration in Months
Dates of Peaks and Trouqhs
Contraction Expansion
Full Cycle
By Months and Quarters
By Calendar Years
(P to T)
Peak (P)
(T to P)
Tto T P to p
Trough (T)
Trough (T) Peak (P)
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

Dec. 1865

Nov. 1867

1865

1866

Oct. 1868

Aug. 1870

1868

1869

11

22

34

33

Feb. 1872

Sept. 1873

1871

1873

18

19

40

37

Aug. 1876

Apr. 1878

1876

1878

35

20

54

55

Sept. 1879

Dec. 1881

1879

1882

17

27

37

44

Aug. 1887

Jan. 1891

1887

1890

68

41

95

109

Jan.

Mar. 1900(I)

1894

1900

48

62

89

110

Sept. 1902(111)

May 1903(11)

1902

1903

30

8

92

38

Oct. 1904(111)

July 1907(111)

1904

1907

17

33

25

50

Feb. 1909(I)

June 1913(111)

1908

1913

19

52

52

71

Aug. 1914(111)

June 1918(11)

1914

1917

14

46

66

60

Apr. 1919(11)

Sept. 1920(111)

1918

1920

10

17

56

27

July 1921(111)

Oct. 1924(111)

1921

1924

10

39

27

49

June 1925(111)

Oct. 1926(111)

1925

1926

8

16

47

24

June 1927(111)

Mar. 1930(I)

1927

1930

8

33

24

41

July 1932(111)

July 1933(111)

1932

1933

28

12

61

40

June 1937(11)

1935

1937

21

26

33

47

1895(I)

Apr.

1935(I)

Auq.

1938(111)

1938

23

40

14

Averages
Mean duration (months)

22

29

51

52

Standard deviation (months)

16

15

23

25

TABLE 3
D.

concluded

Germany, 1879—1932

Duration in Months
Dates of Peaks and Troughs
Full Cycle
Contraction Expansion
By Calendar Years
By Months and Quarters
T to T Pto P
(T to P)
Peak (P)
(P to T)
Trough (T)
Trough (T) Peak (P)
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

Feb. 1879(I)

Jan. 1882(I)

1878

1882

Aug. 1886(111)

Jan. 1890(I)

1886

1890

55

41

90

96

Feb. 1895(I)

Mar. 1900(11)

1894

1900

61

61

102

1 22

Mar. 1902(I)

Aug. 1903(111)

1902

1903

24

17

85

41

Feb.

July 1907(11)

1904

1907

18

29

35

47

Dec. 1908(IV)

Apr. 1913(I)

1908

1913

17

52

46

69

Aug. 1914(111)

June 1918(11)

1914

1917

16

46

68

62

June 1919(11)

May 1922(11)

1919

1922

12

35

58

47

Nov.

1923(Iv)

Mar. 1925(11)

1923

1925

18

16

53

34

Mar. 1926(11)

Apr. 1929(11)

1926

1929

12

37

28

49

1905(I)

Aug. 1932(111)

1932

35

40

77

Averages
Mean duration (months)

27

37

64

63

Standard deviation (months)

18

14

24

29

SOtJPCE: National ureau of Economic Research
Note: For a basic statement of the method of determining business cycle peaks and troughs,
see Burns and Mitchell, 1946, ch. 4. Some of the dates shown there (p. 78) have been revised.
acombines the observations in Table 2 for 1790—1855 (converted from annual to monthly
durations) ,ith observations in this table for the subsequent cycles through 1938.

TABLE 4
Measures of Diffusion and Aapfltude of Business Cycles,
United States, 1854—1933
Percent of Series Rising
Prices
Commercial
arid
and
Business
Financial
Industrial
Cycle
ActivityC
Activityb
Expansiona

Line

1854—57
1858—60
1861—65
1867—69
1870—73
1879—82
1885—87
1888—90
1891—93
1894—95
1897—99
1900—02
1904—07
1908—10
1912—13
1914—18
1919—20
1921—23
1924—26
1927—29

1

2
3

4
5

6
7
8
9
10
11

12
13

14
15

16
17
18
19

20

All
Series
Coveredd

Average Percentage Rise (Rank)
Three Trend—
Four Indexes
Not Adjusted
Adjusted
for Trend
Indexese

(1)

(2)

(3)

1 00

67

75

12.3 (2)

100

86

1 00
1 00
88

16.8 (8)
18.1 (11)

1 00

89
67
60
93
92
55
54
75
96
82
96

88
90

94

96

96

00
94
1 00

86
89
89
82

100
94
1 00

89
1 00

94
1

00

1

1 00
1 00
94

79

(4)

(5)

6.9 (1)

85
96

18.4
27.6
22.7
16.6
16.3
25.3
26.6

89

14.2(4)

36.8

98
91

20.2 (13)
25.6 (16)
13.6 (3)

91

29.8 (19)

45.8 (9)
47.5 (10)
24.0 (2)
54.4 (12)

93

17.9 (10)

30.9

89

38.0 (20)

54.5 (14)

71

83

17.8 (9)

34 .5 (6)

75

83

16.7 (7)

31

72

97
93
76
67

(12)
(18)
(14)
(6)
(5)
(15)
(17)

58 • 1 (15)
49.6 (11)
34.2 (5)
20.8 (1)
37.6 (8)
54.4 (13)

.6

Averages
1854—1 929g

21 Smallest (ranks 1—5)
ranks 6—10
ranks 11—15

22
23

24 Larqest (ranks 16—20)

25 All

98
99
96
96
97

71

80

12.7

75

85

17.2

82
91

88
94

20.9
29.5

80

87

20.1

1879—1 929h

26 Smallest (ranks 1—5)
ranks 6—10

27

28 Largest (ranks 11—15)
29

All

97

71

82

28.3

99
96

84
90
82

90

40.4

97

54.2

93
88

21 .9

41

.0

(7)

(3)

(4)

Table 4

continued

Line

Percent of Series Declining
Commercial
Prices
Business
and
and
Industrial
Financial
Cycle
Acti vi ty
Contractiona
Activi tb

30

1857—58

31

1860—61

32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39

1865—67
1869—70
1873—79
1882—85
1887—88

40
41

42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49

1890—91
1893—94
1895—97
1899—00
1902—04
1907—08
1910—12

1913—14
1918—19
1920—21
1923—24
1926—27
1929—33

All

Series
Coveredd

Average Percentage Fall (Rank)
Three Trend—
Four Indexes
Adj usted
Not Adjusted
Indexese
for Trend

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

100
100
100
40
50
88

100
100
83
89
100
100
68
79
100
79

100
100
85

21.0 (10)
14.1 (6)
11.4 (4)
7.9 (1)
26.9 (15)
27.9 (16)
11.2 (3)
17.0 (9)
30.7 (18)
24.3 (14)
14.4 (71/2 )

21 .1

14.4 (7 1/2 )

14.8

(6)

29.5 (17)
12.0 (5)
23.2 (13)
22.0 (12)
34.7 (19)
21.8 (11)
9.3 (2)
75.1 (20)

27.0
8.4
18.3
18.6

(12)
(2)
(9)
(10)
(13)

89
83
94
89
67

94
94
78
94
83
100
83
67

100

64
79
100
82
88
57
100
94
68
100

71

79

94
78

80
98
83
65
85
98
80
90
67
100
89
67
100

(5)

10.2
11 .0

28.8
17.4
9 .9

27.1
17 .0

(7)

8 .4

(1)

Averages
1857—1 933g

50

Smallest (ranks 1—5)

_i fl

ci

r,,bo

52
53
54

ranks 11—15
Largest (ranks 16—20)
All

75

78

76

10.4

82
98
85

23.6

QA

80

83

95
85

1 00

86

US
39.6
22.4

1882—1 927h

55
56
57

58

Smallest (ranks 1—5)
ranks 6—10
Largest (ranks 11—14)
All

77
89
94
86

72

87
84
83

74
83
98
84

9.6
17.2
26.0
20.9

(11)
(4)
(5)
(14)
(8)
(3)

1 7.0

Table 4 (Notes)

SOURCES: Columns 1—3: Burns and Mitchell, 1946, Tables 23 and 24, pp. 102—103;
columns 4 and 8: Moore, 1961, vol. I, Table 3.6, pp. 104—105; column 5:
Zarnowitz, 1981, Table 4, p. 500, based on NBER files. Number of series
covered: Column 1, 17—18 (before 1879, 8 or fewer); column 2, 15—28 (before
1879, 11 or fewer); column 3, 32—46 (before 1879, 19 or fewer).
aldentified by years of turning points in the NBER monthly reference
chronology (Table 3).
blncludes 10 indexes of general business activity, 4 series on orders for
investment goods, 2 on production, and 2 on foreign trade. For detail, see
Burns and Mitchell, 1946, Table 21, pp. 98—99.
Clncludes 9 indexes of general or wholesale prices, 6 series on wholesale
•prices for individual commodities, 9 series on volume of trade, prices, and
yields in money and security markets, and 4 series on business failures. See
ibid.

dlncludes the 46 series in the groups in notes b and c.

esince 1879, the figures are averages based on three seasonally and trend—
adjusted indexes: xnerican Telephone and Telegraph Company index of business
activity, index of industrial production and trade constructed by Warren M.
Persons and continued by the Barron's Publishing Company, and Ayres' index of
business activity compiled by the Cleveland Trust Company. Before 1879, the
entries are for Ayres' index alone. The rise from the specific cycle trough to
specific cycle peak in each index is taken as a percentage of the average level
of the index during the full specific cycle (trough to trough), and the fall
from specific peak to specific trough is taken as a percentage of the same
base. The amplitude measures are ranked from smallest (1) to largest (20).
Because the indexes are trend—adjusted, the contraction amplitudes are
approximately the same, on average, as the expansion amplitudes.

The indexes, adjusted for seasonal variations but not for trends, are:

(1) Bank clearings (1875—1918) and bank debits (1919—30). NBER

1938, Table 30, pp. A289—A296) deflated by
level; (2) Axe—Houqhton index of trade and

data (Macaulay,

Carl Snyder's index of general price
industrial activity (1879—1929) furn-

ished by P. W. Axe and Co., New York; (3) Babson index of physical volume of
business activity (1889—1929) furnished by Babson's Reports Inc.; (4) American
Telephone & Telegraph Co. (1899—1929), Chief Statistician's Division (a
confidential release, Sept. 6, 1944). 'or details, see Zarnowitz, 1981, pp.
499—502.
expansions and contractions are divided into four groups according
to the ranks recorded in column 4: the mildest ones (ranks 1—5), the most
vigorous or severe (ranks 16—20), and two intermediate groups. The entries are
simple arithmetic means of the corresponding figures in the columns above.
hThese expansions and contractions are divided into three groups according
to the ranks recorded in column 5: the mildest ones (ranks 1—5), the intermediate (ranks 6—10), and the most vigorous or severe (ranks 11—15 for expansions,
11—14 for contractions). The entries are simple arithmetic means of the corresponding figures in the columns above.

TABLE 5

Business Cycle

Cironologies

ai Durations, United

States,

1933—1982

Duration in Months
Dates of Peaks and Troughs
Contraction
Full Cycle
By
Calendar
Years
Expansion
By Months and Quarters
T
to T P to P
(T
to
P)
(P
to
T)
Trough
CT)
Peak
C?)
Peak
C?)
Trough (T)
(2)

(1)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

50

Mar. 1933(I)

May 1937 (II)

1932

1937

June 1938(11)

Feb. 1945 (I)

1938

1944

13

SOW

63

93

Oct. 1945(IV)

Nov. 1948(IV)

1946

1948

8W

37

88

45

Oct. 1949(IV)

July 1953(11)

1949

1953

11

45W

48

56

May 1954(11)

Aug. 1957(111)

1954

1957

lOW

39

55

49

Apr. 1958(11)

Apr. 1960(11)

1958

1960

8

24

47

32

Feb. 1961(I)

Dec. 1969(IV)

1961

1969

10

106W

34

116

Nov. 1970(IV)

Nov. 1973(iV)

1970

1973

11W

36

117

47

Mar. 1975(I)

Jan. 1980(I)

1975

1979

16

58

52

74

July 1980(111)

July 1981(111)

1980

1981

6

12

64

is

Nov. 1982(IV)

1982

.

28

16

Averages
10 cycles, 1933—1982
Mean duration (months)

11

49

60

59

Standard deviation (months)

3

27

26

31

Mean duration (months)

18

33

51

50

Standard deviation (months)

12

20

21

23

Mean duration (months)

20

33

52

51

Standard deviation (months)

15

20

24

22

30 cycles, 1854—1982

44 cycles, 1790—1982

Source: National Bureau of Economic Research

6,9
3.9
7,6
3.4

Rate of increase (percent per year)
CNP, current dollars
10.9
GNP, constant dollars
6.4
Industrial Production
11.4
Nonfarm employment
4.5

(percent)

was reachedC

100
July 1950

95
May 1955
92

Jan.

1959

3.8

5.5
14.1

6.2

—2.4

4.9

16.3
11.3
26.0
7,5

23

91

Dec.

1965

a
4.7
6.9
3.2

3.3
—3.6

78.9
33.7

49.2

a

106
a
105
104
109

Feb. 1961
Dec. 1969

1972

86

Mar.

a
4.3
6.6
2.9

4.5
—1.4

a
17.1
25.9
11.9

36
a
45
43
47

Nov. 1970
Nov. 1973

DIFFUSION OF EXPANSIONS

85

Feb.

1977

a
4.4
8.3
3.6

5.5
—3.3

37.4
19.1

a

24.3

59

58
a
60
48

Mar. 1975
Jan. 1980

73

Oct.

1980

a
3.5
9.6
1.9

7.1
-0.6

4.4
9.6
1.9

a

12

12
a
15
12

Nar

iu01

Souicc:

Uuru of

U.S. i)epartinent of Commerce, U.S. Department of Labor, Board
Economic Research.

of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System,

CEased on changes in employment over six month spans, centered on the
fourth month of the span, in 30 nonagricultural
industries, 1948—59; 172 industries, 1960—71; 186 Industries, 1972—81.

89

9.2
3.3

4.7

n.a.

—2.7

4.5

n.a.
21.1
35.9
14.4

46

46
n.a.
48
44

Se"en

Expansions

July 1981

Ave iage,
July 1980

bperceit age change from trough month or quarter in the series to the
peak month or quarter, over the intervals
shown. For the unemployment rate the minimum
figure is the lowest for any month during the expansion, and the
decreases are from the highest month to the lowest, In
percentage points.

'1No cycle.

maximum

with date when

with rising employment,

Nonfarm industries,
maximum percentage

1)iffuslon

2.5
3.6
—2.3

Unemployment Rate
H ininium
Dec rease

13.2

—5.3

24.0

21

31

44

30
24

42
35

24

Apr. 1958
Apr. 1960

48
45

Aug. 1957

May 1954

39
39
39

45

Oct. 1949
July 1953

MEASURES OF THE DURATION, VIGOR AND

23.7
9.1

6

43.8
28.1
50.1
17.7

CNP, current dollars
CNP, constant dollars
industrial Production
Nonf arm employment

increase (percent)b

Business Cycle
CNP, current dollars
CNP, constant dollars
industrial Production
Nonfarm employment

Duration (months)

Cele

Business Cycle Trough
Bus iess
Peak

TABLE

5,5C
+2,6C

11.9c
+10.3c

ApriLl 1924

95

n.e.

n.e.

n.e.

Nov.

71
1927

4,4C
+2.4C

7.0

—3.0
—2.0

n.e.

n.e.

3

8

3
14

13
12

—32.4

n.e.

1929

June 1933

100

24.9C
+21.7C

—49.6
—32.6
—53.4
—31.6

36
36
43

43
42

Aug.

Mar. 1933

Nov.

1921

Oct. 1926

—4.9
—4.1
—11.9

n.e

Diffusion (percent)
Nonfarm industries, maximum
percentage with declining
97
employment, and date when
maximum was reachedd
Sept. 1920

Depth (percent)b
GNP, current dollars
GNP, constant dollars
Industrial production
Nonfara employment
Unemployment Rate
Maximum
Increase

14

18
n.a.
n.a.
14
n.e.

6

May 1923
July 1924

Jan. 1920
July 1921

Dec.

97
1937

20.0
+9.0

—16.2
—13.2
—32.4
—10.8

11

12

9
6

13

22

27

8
6
n.a.

1945
1945

n.a.

4,3
+3.4

—38.3
—10.1

n.e.

—11.9

Feb.
Oct.

1920-82

May 1931
June 1938

MEASURES OF DURATION, DEPTH, AND DIFFUSION OF RECESSIONS,

Business Cycle Peak:
Business Cycle Trough:
Duration (months)
Business cycle
CNP, current dollars
GNP, constant dollars
Industrial production
Nofarm employment

TABLE 7.

Cycle Peak:

Oct.

5.9

Sept.

1957

88

7.3
+3.7

—2.8
—3.3
—13.5
—4.3

Oct.

1960

80

6.9
+2.0

—0.6
—1.2
—8.6
—2.2

10

13

3
9

10

Apr. 1960
Feb. 1961

5.9
+2.6

a
—1.0
—6.8
—1.5

6
13
8

a

11'

1970

1969

8.8
+4.3

a
—4.9
—15.3
—2.9

9
6

15

a

16-

+2.2

7.7

a
—2.3
—8.5
—1.4

4

16

a
3

6-

Nov. 1973 Jan. 1980
Mar. 1975 July 1980

80
88
77
May 1970 Jan. 1975 Apr. 1980

Dec.
Nov.

U.S. Department of Couinerce, U.S. Department of Labor, Board of Governors of the Federal
Kaerve System. National Bureau of Economic Research. For a fuller version of this table, see Solomon
Fabricant, "The Recession of 1969—1970," in The Business Cyjie
V. Zarnowttz, ed. (New York:
National Bureau of Economic Research, 1972), pp. 100—110.

Source:

spans, centered on the fourth month of the
in 30 nonagricultural industries, 1948—59; 172 industries, 1960—71; 186 industries, 1972—8g.
F'rior to 1948 based on cyclical changes in employment in forty—one industries.

4ince 1948 based on changes in employment over six month

Cfhe maximum figures are annual averages for 1921, 1924, 1928, and 1933 (monthly data not available).
lpcreasea, in percentage points, are for 1919—1921, 1923—1924, 1926—1928, and 1929—1933.

bpercentage change from the peak month or quarter in the series to the trough month or quarter, over
the intervals shown. For the unemployment rate the maximum figure is the highest for any month
during
the contraction, and the increases are from the lowest month to the highest, in percentage points.

Mar. 1954

87

+3.4

7.8
*4.5

9
14

15
13

—1.9
-3.2
9.4
—3.5

12

6

3.4
—1.5
—10.1
—5.2

6
6

13
14

8

12

1957
Apr. 1958

continued

Aug.

,

10

July 1953
May 1954

7

11
12

1949

Nov. 1968

Diffusion (percent)
Nonfarm industries, maximum
percentage with declining
90
employment, with date when
maximum was reachedd
Feb. 1949
n.a. Not available.
aNo decline.

Depth (percent)b
GNP, current dollars
CNP, constant dollars
Industrial production
Nonfarm employment
Unemployment rate
Maximum
Increase

Duration (months)
Business cycle GNP, current dollars
GNP, constant dollars
Industrial production
Nonfarm employment

Buinesa Cycle Trough:

Bu! tness

Table

Aug.

79

1982

10.7
+3.6

—3.1

—0.4
—3.0
—12.3

17

6
16

3

16

July 1981
Nov. 1982

7/52

T

P
T

12/82

12/78

3/73
3/75

5/83

6/81

10/77

2/74

5/70
3/72

1/68

3/69
11/70

4/65

6/66

10/67

9/61

8/60

8/55
1/58

4/51
11/52

Australia

6/79

7/74
10/75

9/70
7/71

10/64
7/68

!Jium

6/91
11/82

10/79
5/80

5/76
12/77

2/74
10/75

2/69
12/70

3/66
2/68

3/62
5/63

10/59
3/61

11/56
8/58

3/53
10/54

4/51
12/51

5/50

Canada

8/79

5/75

6/75

2/80

12/76
10/77

4/74

8/69
9/72

1/63

6/83

2/80

11/73
3/75

6/70
1/72

7/64
2/66

1/62

3/65

5/57
1/59

12/53
6/55

pj

9/63

10/56
7/59

/'t

11/69
11/71

6/66
5/68

2/64
6/65

8/59

8/57

France

7/76

2/74
6/75

1/69
3/72

8/66

South
Korea

CYCLE PEAK ANTI TROUGH 1)ATES,

12/79

9/76
11/77

7/75

8/74

8/72

11/70

8/67

11/65

2/63

3/61

5/58

10/56

7/50
6/52

7/78

6/74

7/70
7/72

2/65
7/67

4/74
8/75

5/70
1/71

5/68

4/64

9/58

6/83

6/79

6/73
8/75

6/69
2/72

8/67

2/66

2/63

3/61

12/55
11/58

3/51

United

1948—83

6/57

3/51
2/53

2/so

Swit—
Nether—
zer
lands Sweden land

THIRTEEEN COUNTRIES,

7/83

2/80

8/73
5/75

5/70
12/71

8/67

5/65

2/63

2/61

10/55
4/59

2/54

2/51

Germany

West

10/82

8/81

9/79
8/80

10/73
3/75

5/69
11/70

2/66
3/67

2/63

4/62

2/60
2/61

2/57
4/58

8/54

tries

Coon—

Three
Six

2/80

8/75

7/74

5/70
2/72

3/66
5/66

2/63

3/61

5/57
2/59

4/83

2/80

9/75

11/73

6/70
2/72

5/68

7/64

2/63

3/61

2/57
2/59

Coun—

Source:

For the United States, National Bureau of Economic Research.

For other countries, Center for International Business Cycle Research.

2/83

2/80

11/73
5/75

8/71

8/69

3/66
10/67

2/63

2/62

2/60
2/61

2/57
5/58

Coun—

Seven

tries tries tries

Coon—

Four

(Revised June 1984)

Note: The three, four, six and aeven
country chronologies are baaed on composite indexes of output, income,
employment and trade,
weighted by each country's CNP in .1970, expressed in U.S. dollars. The three
countries include the United States, Canada and
The four countries are the United Kingdom, West
Japan.
Germany, France and Italy. The aix countries include these four
plus Carads and
Japan, and the seven countries include the United States as well. The
chronologies
at
different
begin
dates because appropriate
data are nor available earlier. The abaence of a
recent date does not necessarily mean that a turn has not
occurred.

P
T

P
T

T

T

P

T

P

T

P

T

5/62
10/64

2/60
2/61

T

T

2/57
4/58

8/54

/5

3/51

p

p
T

7/48
10/49

United
States

1

P

Trough

Peak or

GROWTh

Table 8

Chart 1 (Notes)

For each country, the lines connect the dates of business cycle peaks (upper turning points) and

troughs (lower turning points). Thus the upward-sloping segments of each country line represent
expansions; the downward-sloping segments, contractions. The dashed links ( ) between the
country lines connect the matched peaks or troughs for two or more countries. The sign "x"
denotes an unmatched turn.

For France before 1865 and for Germany before 1879, the reference dates are annual. They
are plotted at mid—point of the given calendar year and connected with (—.-.)
reference dates are monthly and they are connected with solid(

lines.

All other

) lines.

German annual turning points 1855-1963 estimated from Waither G. Hoffman, 1965, by W. W.

Rostow, 1980, pp. 38—39. All other dates are from Burns and Mitchell, 1946, pp. 78—79.

I

1i

IU'.

'

5'

i*

L

I

i

'

i i

i

CHART

Iloo

"0

oui

'aL

L*
I

%

-_.

'i 'i

/\

2-

;\/

/

/

i

I

'10

'Il

i

-

'7i '7

'I

'g

IJ,ii ted States

_ Lrk
'ii

\

x

x

Germany

Irdnce

—I,

'go

'20

I

(riat Britain

Ii——-rr—r

'.LL

I

I

'Si..

/

I

I

'rn

'
I

'*

L.t- -I-.

____i
's'

'

I

I

\

'jo

Countries and Matched Turnkey Points, 1854—93B

.L 4LL__4_4
'ÔB

I

/

/
\. 1/
I

-

1rrrrrr-m--rrrI

Timing of Reference Cyc1c for

.-L--

.\

1.

'32

1L

ti

I

1

'3I

i

6

I*?

rir

Note:

2.

TIMING OF GROWTH CYCLES FOR FOUR COUNTRIES AND MATCHED TURNING POINTS, 1948-83

The chronologies begin and end at
varying dates depending upon whether the data are considered for
the purpose of deciding a turning point. An
important factor is whether the procedure for fitting
trends at the ends of series yields
sufficiently dependable results. The initial dates also depend
upon whether a sufficient number of the required series are availalile.

Chart

