                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         MACROECONOMIC CRISES SINCE 1870

                                        Robert J. Barro
                                         José F. Ursúa

                                     Working Paper 13940
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w13940


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    April 2008




This paper was prepared for presentation at the Brookings Panel, Washington DC, April 10,
2008. The National Science Foundation has supported this research. We thank for suggestions
Olivier Blanchard, John Campbell, George Constantinides, Emmanuel Farhi, Xavier Gabaix,
Claudia Goldin, Rustam Ibragimov, Dale Jorgenson, Greg Mankiw, Emi Nakamura, and Jón
Steinsson. We appreciate the help with the financial data from Bryan Taylor of Global Financial
Data. On the construction of the data base on GDP and personal consumer expenditure, we are
grateful for comments and contributions from many people worldwide. A non-exhaustive list
includes Roberto Cortés (Argentina); Felix Butschek, Anton Kausel, Felix Rauscher, Marcus
Schleibecker, and Rita Schwarz (Austria); Frans Buelens, Erik Buyst, Jean-Jacques Heirwegh,
Yves de Lombaerde, Kim Oosterlinck, Peter Scholliers, Yves Segers, Eric Vanhaute, and Guy
Vanthemsche (Belgium); Claudio Haddad (Brazil); José Diaz and Eric Haindl (Chile); Adolfo
Meisel, Carlos Posada, and Miguel Urrutia (Colombia); Jakob Madsen (Denmark); Riitta
Hjerppe and Visa Heinonen (Finland); Claude Diebolt, Thomas Piketty, Gilles Postel-Vinay, and
Pierre Villa (France); Carsten Burhop, Davide Cantoni, Nicola Fuchs-Schündeln, Albrecht
Ritschl, Mark Spoerer, Beatrice Weder, and Guntram Wolff (Germany); Violetta Hionidou,
George Kostelenos, and George Manolas (Greece); Guomundur Jónsson (Iceland); Mausumi
Das, Ramesh Kolli, Bharat Ramaswami, Bhanoji Rao, Partha Sen, S. L. Shetty, Rohini
Somanathan, and Nittala Subrahmanyasastry (India); Ann Booth, Pierre van der Eng, and Kees
van der Meer (Indonesia); Stefano Fenoaltea (Italy); Yana Kandaiya, H.R.H. Raja Nazrin, and
Wan Rahim Wan Ahmad (Malaysia); Aurora Gómez, Stephen Haber, Jaime de la Llata, and
John Womack (Mexico); Marjan Balkestein, Ferry Lapré, Herman de Jong, Hein Klemann,
Jan-Pieter Smits, and Jan Luiten van Zanden (Netherlands); Brian Easton, Anthony Endres, Les
Oxley, Andrew Petty, Jakob Preston, Keith Rankin, Grant Scobie, and John Singleton (New
Zealand); Ola Grytten and Karin Snesrud (Norway); José Robles (Peru); Ricardo Jose and
Richard Hooley (Philippines); Luzia Estevens, Pedro Lains, and José Tavares (Portugal); Paul
Gregory (Russia); Ichiro Sugimoto (Singapore); Olu Akimboade and Jon Inggs (South Africa);
Myung-Soo Cha, Nak-Nyeon Kim, Mitsuhiko Kimura, Jong-Wha Lee, and Dwight Perkins
(South Korea); Leandro Prados (Spain); Rodney Edvinsson (Sweden); Felix Andrist, Philippe
Bacchetta, Stefan Gerlach, and Stefanie Schnyder (Switzerland); Sevket Pamuk (Turkey); and
Jorge Alvarez and Inés Morales (Uruguay). Many other researchers provided invaluable
contributions through their published work. All errors remain our own. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

© 2008 by Robert J. Barro and José F. Ursúa. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Macroeconomic Crises since 1870
Robert J. Barro and José F. Ursúa
NBER Working Paper No. 13940
March 2008
JEL No. E01,E21,E23,E44,G12

                                              ABSTRACT

We build on the Maddison GDP data to assemble international time series from before 1914 on real
per capita personal consumer expenditure, C. We also improve the GDP data in many cases. The C
variable comes closer than GDP to the consumption concept that enters into usual asset-pricing equations.
(A separation of consumer expenditure into durables and non-durables is feasible for only a minority
of cases.) We have essentially full annual data on C for 22 countries and GDP for 35 countries, and
we plan to complete the long-term time series for a few more countries. For samples that start as early
as 1870, we apply a peak-to-trough method for each country to isolate economic crises, defined as
cumulative declines in C or GDP by at least 10%. The principal world economic crises ranked by importance
are World War II, World War I and the Great Depression, the early 1920s (possibly reflecting the influenza
epidemic of 1918-20), and post-World War II events such as the Latin American debt crisis and the
Asian financial crisis. We find 87 crises for C and 148 for GDP, implying disaster probabilities around
3.6% per year. The disaster size has a mean of 21-22% and an average duration of 3.5 years. A comparison
of C and GDP declines shows roughly coincident timing. The average fractional decline in C exceeds
that in GDP during wartime crises but is similar for non-war crises. We simulate a Lucas-tree model
with i.i.d. growth shocks and Epstein-Zin-Weil preferences. This simulation accords with the observed
average equity premium of around 7% on levered equity, using a "reasonable" coefficient of relative
risk aversion of 3.5. This result is robust to a number of perturbations, except for limiting the sample
to non-war crises, a selection that eliminates most of the largest declines in C and GDP. We plan a
statistical analysis that uses all the time-series data and includes estimation of long-run effects of crises
on levels and growth rates of C and GDP. We will also study the bond-bill premium (empirically around
1%) and allow for time-varying disaster probabilities.


Robert J. Barro
Department of Economics
Littauer Center 218
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
rbarro@harvard.edu

José F. Ursúa
Department of Economics
Littauer Center B28
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
jfursua@fas.harvard.edu
       An earlier study (Barro [2006]) applied the Rietz (1988) insight on rare economic

disasters to explain the equity-premium puzzle introduced by Mehra and Prescott (1985).

Key parameters were the probability, p, of disaster and the distribution of disaster sizes, b.

Because large macroeconomic disasters are rare, pinning down p and the b-distribution

from historical data requires long time series for many countries, along with the

assumption of rough parameter stability over time and across countries. Barro (2006)

relied on long-term international GDP data for 35 countries from Maddison (2003).

Using the definition of an economic disaster as a peak-to-trough fall in per capita GDP by

at least 15%, 60 disasters were found, corresponding to p=1.7% per year. The average

disaster size was 29%, and the empirical size distribution was used to calibrate a model of

asset pricing.

       The underlying asset-pricing theory relates to consumption, rather than GDP.

This distinction is especially important for wars. For example, in the United Kingdom

during the two world wars, GDP increased while consumer expenditure fell sharply—the

difference representing mostly added military spending.

       Maddison (2003) provides national-accounts information only for GDP. Our

initial idea was to add consumption, which we approximate by real personal consumer

expenditure, C, because of difficulties in most cases in separating durables from non-

durables in the long-term data. (We discuss later the breakdown of C into durables

versus non-durables for a sub-set of countries with available data for crisis periods.) We

have not assembled data on government consumption, some of which may substitute for

C and, thereby, affect asset pricing. However, this substitution is probably unimportant
for military expenditure, which is the type of government spending that moves a lot

during some disaster events.

       Maddison (2003), with updates available on the Internet at

www.ggdc.net/maddison, represents a monumental and widely used resource for

international studies using long-term GDP data. However, although much of the

information is sound, close examination revealed many problems. For our purposes, the

most important shortcoming is that Maddison tends to fill in missing data with doubtful

assumptions, and this practice is most common for major crises.

       As examples of problems, Maddison assumed that Belgium’s GDP during WWI

and WWII moved with France’s; Mexico’s GDP between 1910 and 1919, the period

including the Revolution and Civil War, followed a smooth trend (with no crisis); GDP

for Colombia moved over more than a decade with the average of Brazil and Chile; and

GDP in Germany for the crucial years 1944-46 followed a linear trend. There were also

mismatches between original works and published series for GDP in Japan and Austria at

the end of WWII, Greece during WWII and its Civil War, and South Korea during WWII

and the Korean War.

       Given these and analogous problems in other cases, our project expanded to

estimating long-term GDP for many countries. The Maddison information was often

usable, but superior estimates or longer time series can often be constructed. In addition,

results from recent major long-term national-accounts projects for several countries are

now available and have not been incorporated into Maddison’s Internet updates. These

studies cover Argentina, Brazil, Colombia, Greece, Sweden, and Taiwan. Appendix I

summarizes the key differences, by country and time period, between Maddison’s and




                                             2
our GDP data. We will make details and a complete list of data sources available on the

Internet.

        The next section describes the long-term data that we have assembled on real per

capita personal consumer expenditure, C, and GDP. Our main analysis uses annual data

from before 1914 for 22 countries on C and 35 countries on GDP. Section II discusses

the long-term data that we use on rates of return for stocks, bills, and bonds. This

information comes mostly from Global Financial Data. Section III describes our

measurement of C and GDP crises, based primarily on peak-to-trough fractional declines

during the crises. Section IV discusses the limited information available on the

breakdown of consumer expenditure into durables versus non-durables and services.

        Section V compares disaster sizes and timing based on consumer expenditure

with that on GDP. Section VI uses the crises data to measure disaster probabilities and

frequency distributions of disaster sizes. Section VII summarizes a representative-agent

Lucas-tree model that relates disaster experience to expected rates of return and the

equity premium. Section VIII simulates the Lucas-tree model using the empirically

estimated disaster probability and frequency distribution of disaster sizes. The simulated

model with a reasonable coefficient of relative risk aversion turns out to accord with

observed equity premia. Section IX modifies the simulation to use observed real stock-

price changes to gauge crisis returns on stocks. We also discuss the low average of real

bill returns observed during crises. Section X concludes with plans for additional

research.




                                             3
I. Long-term Data on Personal Consumer Expenditure and GDP

        We are dealing with national-accounts data for 42 countries. This sample is the

universe of countries that seem to be promising for constructing reasonably accurate

annual data since before World War I. The current study focuses on the countries for

which we have, thus far, assembled annual data from before 1914 to 2006 on real per

capita personal consumer expenditure, C (22 countries), and real per capita GDP (35

countries). 1 Henceforth, we sometimes refer to C as “consumption.”

        Table 1 has a list of included countries and starting years. Part 1 of the table

applies to 21 “OECD countries” (not including Turkey or recent members)—17 of these

are in our C sample, and all 21 are in our GDP sample. Part 2 covers 18 non-OECD

countries—only 5 of these are in our C sample, and 14 are in our GDP sample. The three

countries that we are studying that are omitted from Table 1 are Egypt, Ireland, and

Russia. We start our analysis of growth rates in 1870, although earlier data are available

in some cases.

        Most of our analysis uses growth rates of C and GDP and does not involve

comparisons of levels across countries. Therefore, for most purposes, we can use indexes

of C and GDP; for example, setting the values of both variables to 100 for each country

in 2000. However, the level comparisons matter for the construction of measures of C

and GDP for groups of countries, such as the total of the OECD. To facilitate this

analysis (and to allow for other uses of the data that depend on comparability of levels

across countries), we set the level of per capita GDP for each country in 2000 to the PPP-

adjusted value in 2000 international dollars given in the World Bank’s World


1
 GDP data are missing for Greece in 1944 and the Philippines in 1941-45, but we are able to include these
countries in our GDP analysis.


                                                    4
Development Indicators (WDI). For per capita consumer expenditure, we set the level

for each country in 2000 to the value given by the WDI for PPP-adjusted per capita GDP

multiplied by the share of nominal personal consumer expenditure in the country’s

nominal GDP.

           Sample-selection issues particularly affect disaster studies because data tend to be

absent during the worst crises, especially wars. As an example, Mexico has GDP data

since 1895 but is missing reliable information between 1910 and 1919, the period that

includes the Revolution and Civil War. Inclusion of the incomplete Mexican time series

since 1895 in our analysis would bias downward estimated disaster probabilities. That is,

the missing period almost surely contains a crisis. 2 An analogous situation is Turkey,

where data start in 1923, shortly after the likely crisis for the Ottoman Empire during

World War I. Even the United States is a concern because of missing data during the U.S.

Civil War, likely a crisis event, though prior to our starting date of 1870. Our main

response to this selection issue has been to try to expand the set of countries with at least

roughly estimated full time series. At present, we take the approach of excluding cases

with (selected) gaps in data. For example, our analysis of consumer expenditure and

GDP omits Mexico and Turkey, as well as Malaysia and Singapore, which are missing

data around World War II. Similarly, our analysis of consumer expenditure omits South

Korea because of missing data during World War II and the Korean War.

           The construction of estimates of real personal consumer expenditure relied on

various procedures. In many cases, we used existing long-term national-accounts studies.

Sometimes (e.g., Canada before 1926) we estimated C as a residual, starting from GDP

and subtracting estimates of the components of GDP aside from C. Sometimes (e.g.,
2
    We believe that we will eventually be able to fill in the missing Mexican data.


                                                        5
Switzerland before 1948 and Germany around WWI) we estimated C from quantities of

specific consumption items, using estimates of expenditure shares to calculate changes in

aggregate C. The details of our procedures will appear in a report to be posted on the

Internet.

        One recurring issue is the treatment of border changes. An illustration is the

reunification of Germany in late 1990. We have data on per capita C and GDP for West

Germany up to 1990 (ignoring, for now, the previous border changes) and also after 1990.

We have data for unified Germany from 1991 on. Since per capita C and GDP in East

Germany (not well measured prior to 1991) were much lower than in the West, the raw

data on per capita quantities would show sharp drops in 1991 if we combined the West

German values up to 1990 with the unified Germany values thereafter. That is, this

approach would treat the unification as a disaster event from the perspective of West

Germans leading up to 1990. This perspective may or may not be accurate for this

particular border change, 3 but we do not want to apply this approach to border changes in

general (where the implication would be that the initially richer part inevitably regards

the coming combination as a disaster, and vice versa for the poorer part).

        Even without border changes, the use of per capita C or GDP as a macro variable

neglects the distribution of expenditure and income within a country. This

macroeconomic approach, valid under some conditions, 4 assumes that we can apply a

representative-agent framework to the macro variables, despite the underlying

heterogeneity in productivity, wealth, and so on. In this case, the joining of West


3
 As an analogy, some South Koreans view a reunification with North Korea as a pending disaster.
4
 For example, Caselli and Ventura (2000) show that the neoclassical growth model can provide a
satisfactory representative-agent view of macroeconomic variables despite heterogeneity in underlying
productivity and wealth.


                                                    6
Germany with another state (East Germany) that happens to have distributions of

expenditure and income with lower mean values need not invalidate the representative-

agent representation. The appropriate macro-level procedure is then to smoothly paste

together in 1990-91 the initial per capita series for West Germany with that for unified

Germany thereafter. That is, the West German per capita growth rates apply up to 1991,

and the unified Germany growth rates apply thereafter—with no discrete shift in levels of

variables at the time of the reunification. We apply this methodology to all of our cases

of border change because we think that this approach can yield satisfactory measures of

per capita growth rates across these changes. However, this procedure can be misleading

with regard to levels of variables. These issues do not affect our main analysis but do

matter for our planned effort to construct measures of per capita C and GDP for broad

groups of countries, such as the total of the OECD.

         Table 2 shows means and standard deviations, by country, for annual growth rates

of real per capita consumer expenditure, C, and real per capita GDP. We consider here

only cases with annual data from 1914 or earlier. The sample periods end in 2006 and go

back as far as possible until 1870 (that is, the first observation is for the growth rate from

1869 to 1870).

         Table 3 considers three sub-periods: 1870-1913 (pre-World War I), 1914-1947

(which includes the two world wars and the Great Depression of the early 1930s), and

1948-2006 (post-World War II). The table shows averages across countries of growth

rates and standard deviations of growth rates (as shown for full samples in Table 2). 5 For

the full sample, 1870-2006, the average of the growth rates of C for 20 countries is 0.020,


5
 In order to have at least ten years of coverage for the 1870-1913 sub-period, this table considers only
countries with data back at least to 1904.


                                                      7
with an average standard deviation of 0.060. The average for the 17 OECD countries is

0.019 (s.d.=0.054), and that for the 5 non-OECD countries is 0.024 (s.d.=0.077). For

GDP, the average growth rate for 31 countries is 0.020 (average s.d.=0.057). The

average for the 21 OECD countries is 0.020 (s.d.=0.054), and that for the 10 non-OECD

countries is 0.020 (s.d.=0.062).

        Table 3 shows that the last sub-period, 1948-2006, has higher growth rates and

lower standard deviations than the first sub-period, 1870-1913. For example, for GDP

growth in the OECD countries, the reduction in the standard deviation—from 0.037 in

1870-1913 to 0.028 in 1948-2006—is the kind of change found by Romer (1986) for the

United States and plausibly attributed by her mainly to improved measurement of

macroeconomic aggregates. However, the most striking difference across the sub-periods

is the turbulence of the middle interval. For C growth in the OECD group, the average

standard deviation for 1914-1947 is 0.087, compared to 0.041 for 1870-1913 and 0.026

for 1948-2006. Similarly, for GDP growth in the OECD, the average standard deviation

for the middle interval is 0.089, compared to 0.037 and 0.028 in the other two periods.

        An important feature of the 1870-2006 samples is that they include realizations of

disasters, notably those that occurred in the 1914-1947 sub-period, which featured the

two world wars and the Great Depression. These realizations create fat tails indicated by

excess kurtosis and lead, thereby, usually to rejection in long samples of the hypothesis of

normality for growth rates of C or GDP. 6 For C growth, the 1 case out of 20 in which

normality is accepted (by a Jarque-Bera test) at the 5% level is the United States

(p-value=0.23). For GDP growth, normality is accepted among 31 cases only for Iceland

6
 The tendency for negative skewness—disasters rather than bonanzas—is less pronounced than we
anticipated. Over the long samples, for C growth, 11 of the 20 countries exhibit negative skewness, and for
GDP growth, 23 of the 31 exhibit negative skewness.


                                                    8
(p-value=0.07), Switzerland (p-value=0.15), Brazil (p-value=0.05), and Uruguay

(p-value=0.51).

       Appendix II has long-term graphs of real per capita GDP and consumer

expenditure, C, for the 22 countries that have annual data on both variables from before

1914. In each case, the vertical axis has a natural-log scale that ranges from 5.5 ($245 in

2000 U.S. dollars) to 11.0 ($59900 in 2000 U.S. dollars). These graphs bring out the

long-term trends and show the major economic contractions. Note that a movement by

0.1 along the vertical axis corresponds to a change in the level of per capita GDP or C by

about 10%.

       As an example, for Germany, GDP and C fell during World War II, World War I,

and the Great Depression of the 1930s. For France, the dominant contraction was during

World War II, with a lesser decline in World War I. For Spain, the main adverse event is

the Civil War of the late 1930s. The United Kingdom shows declines in C during the two

world wars. GDP did not fall during the wars but decreased during the war aftermaths.

In the United States, the main declines in C took place during the Great Depression of the

early 1930s and in the early 1920s. GDP also fell at these times, as well as in the

aftermath of World War II. Unusual is the very strong behavior of U.S. GDP during

World War II, while C remained fairly stable. The United States is also an outlier in the

sense of passing the “ruler test”—a ruler placed along the pre-1914 data happens to lie

along the observations post-1950. As noted in Cogley (1990, Table 2) and Barro (2009),

the United States is almost unique in displaying this apparent tendency for the GDP data

to return to a fixed trend line. In the other cases (even including Canada, which comes

close), the fixed-trend hypothesis is rejected by the GDP data.




                                             9
       We plan to examine thoroughly the statistical properties of the full time series of

GDP and C for our universe of countries in future research with Emi Nakamura and Jón

Steinsson. The data set corresponding to the appendix figures and to the available time

series for other countries will be posted on the Internet.



II. Rates of Return

       Our study involves the interplay between macroeconomic variables—represented

by consumer expenditure and GDP—and rates of return on various kinds of financial

assets. Our present work does not make a major contribution to the construction of long-

term data on asset returns. Instead, we rely mainly on existing information, primarily that

provided by Global Financial Data (see Taylor [2005]). Table 4 shows the dates over

which we have been able to assemble time series on real rates of return. In all cases, we

compute arithmetic real rates of return, using consumer price indexes to deflate nominal-

return indexes. As far as possible, the return indexes and CPIs apply to the end of each

year. Therefore, rates of return are averages for each year.

       Table 4 considers three types of assets: stocks, short-term bills (Treasury bills

with maturity of three months or less and analogous claims, such as deposits), and long-

term government bonds (usually ten-year maturity). For stocks, some of the information

comes from total-return indexes, which combine price changes and dividends. In other

cases, we estimated returns from stock-price indexes, using rough estimates of dividend

yields. We expect eventually to be able to use data from Dimson, Marsh, and Staunton

(2008) to extend our stock-return data backwards for at least Canada, Denmark, Italy, the

Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, and Switzerland.




                                             10
        Table 5 shows means and standard deviations of rates of return for countries with

nearly continuous annual time series back at least to the 1920s. 7 The first columns show

stock and bill returns, where a common sample applies in each case to the two types of

returns. The last columns show analogous information for bond and bill returns. We

emphasize in the present study the comparison between stocks and bills—and, hence, the

customary equity premium—though we plan in the future to analyze the premium of

bonds over bills.

        For 17 countries, the mean real rates of return over long-term samples were

0.0829 for stocks and 0.0072 for bills. (For each country, we used a common sample for

stock and bill returns.) Thus, the average equity premium was 0.0757. For the 15 OECD

countries, the average rates of return were 0.0793 for stocks and 0.0093 for bills, with an

average equity premium of 0.0699.

        Since the stock returns refer to levered equity, the equity premium for unlevered

equity would be smaller. For example, with a debt-equity ratio of one-half (roughly that

for U.S. non-financial corporations in recent years), the predicted premium for unlevered

equity would be 0.0757/1.5 = 0.050. Thus, we take as a challenge for the model to

explain an unlevered equity premium of around 5% per year. This type of challenge is

the one taken up long ago by Mehra and Prescott (1985).

        The model should also be consistent with observed levels of rates of return,

including an average real bill rate of less than 1% per year. However, in the model

simulations, we choose the rate of time preference, ρ, to accord with the observed

7
 The missing data for this group—involving 2-5 years each for 6 countries—are mainly during large wars,
for which real rates of return on all three assets were probably sharply negative. This sample selection
clearly biases all measured rates of return upward, although the quantitative effect cannot be too large
because of the small number of years involved. The effect on computed equity premia is likely to be even
smaller.


                                                   11
average level of the real bill rate (taken as a rough estimate of a risk-free rate, although

bills are not literally risk-free). The reasoning is that the main basis for assessing a

plausible value of ρ is to consider whether the implied levels of rates of return are

reasonable. Therefore, matching overall levels of rates of return does not provide a test

of the model.

       For 15 countries (14 OECD), the average long-term rate of return on bonds was

0.0266, compared to 0.0147 for bills over common samples. Thus, the average bond-bill

premium was 0.0119. The model considered later will not explain the bond-bill premium,

but extensions of this model may work (see Gabaix [2008]).

       Table 5 shows the familiar high annual standard deviation of stock returns—an

average of 0.248 for the 17 countries with matched bill data (0.235 for the 15 OECD

countries). The corresponding average standard deviation for bill returns was 0.089

(0.082 for the 15 OECD countries). Thus, bill returns had substantial volatility but not

nearly as great as stocks. As discussed later, the occurrences of low real bill returns tend

to be associated with high inflation rates.



III. Consumption and GDP Disasters

       To isolate economic disasters for C and GDP, we first follow the procedure in

Barro (2006) by computing peak-to-trough fractional declines that exceed some threshold

amount. The earlier study used a lower bound of 0.15, but we broaden this limit here to

0.10. The inclusion of contractions between 0.10 and 0.15 brings in a lot of events but

turns out to have only moderate implications for explaining asset returns.




                                              12
           The peak-to-trough method for assessing the size of contractions is reasonable if

growth-rate shocks are i.i.d., so that level shocks are permanent. However, the method

can be misleading when some shocks to levels are temporary. Later we modify the

approach by using one-sided Hodrick-Prescott filters to attempt to gauge long-run, as

opposed to transitory, economic contractions. In our ongoing research with Nakamura

and Steinsson, we are taking a formal statistical approach that considers transitional

probabilities for movements between normal and crisis regimes and that allows for

varying degrees of long-term effects of crises on levels of C and GDP.

           The full results on measuring C crises are in Tables 6 and 7. The coverage is 21

OECD countries—17 with enough data for our subsequent analysis—and 14 non-

OECD—5 in our later analysis. For GDP, shown in Tables 8 and 9, the coverage is 21

OECD countries—all used in our subsequent analysis—and 18 non-OECD—14 in our

later analysis. For the samples used later, the mean size of C contraction (87 events for

22 countries) was 21.8%, and the mean size of GDP contraction (148 events for 35

countries) was 20.8%.

           To highlight some cases, the United States has been comparatively immune to

crises, with C declines of 16% in 1921 (possibly influenced by the influenza epidemic of

1918-20) and 21% during the Great Depression in 1933. GDP declines were 10% in

1908 and 1914 (which featured banking panics 8), 12% in 1921, 29% in 1933, and 16% in

1947. The last contraction, likely precipitated by the post-World War II demobilization,

did not exhibit a consumption decline. For the United Kingdom, the two C crises were

during the world wars—17% in 1918 and 1943. There were no GDP disasters at these

times, but GDP did contract after the two wars—by 19% in 1921 and 15% in 1947.
8
    See Cagan (1965, p. 138).


                                               13
       For France, we found 3 war-related disasters for C: 16% in 1871 (Franco-

Prussian War), 22% in 1915 (WWI), and 58% in 1943 (WWII). For GDP, there were 6

contractions, the largest 41% in 1944. For Germany, there were 4 C crises: 42% in 1918

(WWI), 13% in 1923 (German hyperinflation), 12% in 1932 (Great Depression), and

41% in 1945 (WWII). There were also 4 crises indicated by GDP, the largest a

remarkable 74% in 1946 (reflecting the economic collapse late in WWII).

       Many other countries had sharp contractions during World War II. For example,

for C, Belgium fell by 53% up to 1942, Greece contracted by 64% up to 1944, Japan fell

by 64% up to 1945, the Netherlands contracted by 55% up to 1944, and Taiwan fell by

68% up to 1945. Other noteworthy cases for C were the contractions in Spain during the

Spanish Civil War by 46% up to 1937 and in Chile during the Pinochet “revolution” by

40% up to 1976.

       U.S. studies often focus on the severity of the Great Depression; in fact, some

researchers gauge disaster probabilities entirely from this single event (see, for example,

Chatterjee and Corbae [2007] and Cogley and Sargent [2008]). One reason for the U.S.

focus on the Depression is that the United States happened to do well economically

during the two world wars, which were major economic disasters for much of the rest of

the world, including many OECD countries. Even if one’s concern is limited to

forecasting U.S. disasters or studying disaster probabilities as perceived by investors in

the United States, it seems plausible that the global experience—particularly of

comparable OECD countries—would provide a great deal of information. Our

perspective is that U.S. prospects can be gauged much better by consulting the global

experience, rather than overweighting the own U.S. history—for which the few observed




                                             14
disasters are likely to be dominated by luck. Our ongoing research with Emmanuel Farhi

and Xavier Gabaix seeks to check this perspective by using prices of U.S. stock-index

options since the early 1980s to gauge directly the time-varying disaster probability as

perceived by U.S. investors.

       In a global context at least since 1870, the most serious economic disaster in

terms of incidence and severity of declines in C and GDP was World War II. This event

was followed in terms of economic impact by World War I and the Great Depression of

the early 1930s—which had similar overall consequences.

       For the broad group of 35 countries included for consumer expenditure in Table 6,

World War II had 22 crises with an average size of 34% (see Table 7). World War I had

19 crises with an average size of 24%, and the Great Depression had 18 with an average

size of 21%. The 1920s had another 10 events—8 with troughs in 1920-21—with an

average size of 19%. As already suggested for the United States, the contractions at the

start of the 1920s may reflect the influenza epidemic of 1918-20 (Ursúa [2008]). We also

found 21 pre-1914 events (for a truncated sample because of missing data) with an

average size of 16%.

       The post-World War II period was remarkably calm for the OECD countries—

only nine consumption crises, four of which were in Iceland (relating in part to shocks to

the fishing industry). The largest outside of Iceland was 14% for Finland in the early

1990s (a crisis thought to originate from the changed economic relationship with the

former Soviet Union). However, economic crises have not disappeared in the world, as is

clear from the 28 non-OECD consumption events with an average size of 18%. The

disasters here include the Latin-American debt crisis of the early 1980s, the Asian




                                            15
financial crisis of the late 1990s, and difficulties in 2001-02 in Argentina related to the

collapse of the currency board.

       Tables 8 and 9 provide a roughly similar picture for crises gauged by per capita

GDP. For the broad group of 38 countries included in Table 8, World War II had 25

events with an average size of 36% (see Table 9). World War I had 26 events with a

mean size of 21%, and the Great Depression had 22 cases with an average size of 22%.

The 1920s had another 15 events—10 with troughs in 1920-21—with a mean size of 18%.

The pre-1914 period (more plentiful than for consumer expenditure in terms of available

data) showed 46 events, with an average size of 16%. The post-World War II period

featured only 6 events for the OECD; the largest were the post-World War II aftermaths

for the United States (16%) and the United Kingdom (15%). Again, the situation was

much less calm outside of the OECD—24 events with an average size of 17%.



IV. Consumer Durables

       The consumption concept that enters into asset-pricing equations would be closer

to real consumer expenditure on non-durables and services (subsequently referred to as

non-durables) than to overall consumer expenditure. That is, we might want to exclude

durables outlays—or, better yet, include an estimate of rental income on the slowly

moving stock of durables. However, except for post-World War II OECD countries

(which had few crises), we typically lack the data to divide personal consumer

expenditure into durables versus non-durables.

       Table 10 shows the 28 cases among the C-disasters from Table 6 for which we

have been able to locate data that permit a breakdown in the decline in real personal




                                             16
consumer expenditure into durables versus non-durables. Among the 28 cases, 18 are in

our main sample of 87 C crises. Not surprisingly, the proportionate decreases in durables

were typically much larger than those in non-durables. On average for the 28 crises, the

proportionate fall in real per capita personal consumer expenditure was 18.3%, that in

durables was 39.6%, and that in non-durables was 15.1%. Thus, a substitution of non-

durables expenditure for overall consumer expenditure would reduce the mean size of

contraction among the selected 28 by about 3 percentage points.

        The main reason that the adjustment for durables has only a moderate, though

significant, impact is that the share of nominal durables expenditure in the total of

personal consumer expenditure is usually not large—averaging 8.0% at the peaks and

5.8% at the troughs for the 28 cases considered in Table 10. 9 As an extreme example, for

the United Kingdom during World War II, the measured durables share fell to only 2.3%

in 1943 (with household automobiles falling to near zero). But since the durables share

of nominal personal consumer expenditure at the peak in 1938 was only 4.9%, the

adjustment was still only 2.5 percentage points; that is, the proportionate fall in non-

durables was 14.4%, compared to 16.9% for personal consumer expenditure.

        Our measured durables adjustment of 3 percentage points likely overstates the

overall effects. The reason is that we are systematically missing data for the larger crises

on the durables/non-durables division—the mean contraction in C for the 28 cases in

Table 10 was 18.3%, compared to a mean of 21.8% for the 87 C contractions that we use

in our subsequent analysis. The largest C contractions in Table 10 are 46% for Spain in

1937, 36% for Finland in 1918, 33% for Chile in 1985, and 32% for Venezuela in 1989.

9
  The change in the nominal share of durables from peak to trough depends partly on the relative growth
rates of real durables versus non-durables and partly on the relative growth rates of prices of durables
versus non-durables.


                                                    17
        Consider an arithmetic formula for the magnitude of the proportionate change in

non-durables—this formula applies when durables and non-durables are both declining,

with the size of the fractional decline in durables exceeding that in non-durables:

                        ΔND   ΔC    D ⎡ ΔD ΔC               ⎤
        (1)                 =    −(   )⋅    −               ⎥,
                         ND   C     ND ⎢⎣ D   C             ⎦

where C is total consumer expenditure, D is durables expenditure, and ND is non-

durables expenditure. We already noted that the size of the adjustment is limited by the

modest share of durables in total expenditure—this effect comes through the term D/ND

in Eq. (1).

        An additional effect in Eq. (1) is that, as we consider contractions with larger

magnitude for ΔC/C, the difference between the size of ΔD/D and that of ΔC/C must, at

least eventually, get smaller. For example, the largest possible magnitude of ΔD/D is one.

In this extreme situation, the amount of adjustment in switching to non-durables has to

fall as the size of ΔC/C gets larger (with the adjustment approaching zero as the size of

ΔC/C approaches one). This reasoning suggests that the durables adjustment (in

percentage points) would tend to be less important for the larger crises—and these are the

ones that matter most for replicating the equity premium in our later analysis. We do see

this pattern in Table 10—for Spain in 1937, the adjustment is from 46.1% to 45.0%; for

Finland in 1918, the adjustment is from 36.0% to 35.3%; and for Venezuela in 1989, the

adjustment is from 32.0% to 29.9%. However, for Chile in 1985, the adjustment is much

larger—from 32.7% to 17.9%.

        In any event, we lack information in most cases on the breakdown of personal

consumer expenditure into durables versus non-durables. Although we may add a few

cases, we will not be able to go much beyond the coverage shown in Table 10. Therefore,


                                             18
we apply the rest of our analysis to crises gauged by personal consumer expenditure, C,

in Table 6, as well as to crises measured by GDP in Table 8.



V. Consumer Expenditure and GDP Disasters Compared

       Table 11 matches disasters for personal consumer expenditure, C, and GDP for

countries with full data (17 OECD and 5 non-OECD). We match the C and GDP

contractions in Tables 6 and 8, respectively, by trough years—either the same or a nearby

year. In some cases, a contraction by 0.10 or more in C or GDP does not pair up with a

decline by at least 0.10 in the other variable (in which case, the decline in the other

variable does not appear in Table 6 or 8). In those cases, we enter in Table 11 the actual

decline in the other variable (where, for a few cases, a negative value means that the

variable increased).

       Macroeconomists, particularly those familiar with U.S. data, tend to believe that

proportionate contractions in consumer expenditure during recessions are typically

smaller than those in GDP. Partly this view comes from the Great Depression, and the

numbers in Tables 6 and 8 verify this view: as an example, the proportionate declines in

the United States up to 1933 were 21% for C and 29% for GDP. The idea that C is

relatively more stable than GDP reflects also the general patterns in post-World War II

macroeconomic fluctuations, including those in the United States. Since 1954, the

standard deviation of the cyclical part of U.S. real GDP was 1.6%, compared to 1.2% for

real consumer expenditure (Barro [2008, p. 185]). The main counter-part of the smoother

behavior of C than of GDP was the sharply fluctuating investment. That is, the steep

declines in investment during U.S. recessions, including the Great Depression, partly




                                             19
buffered the decreases in consumer expenditure. 10 This buffering could also apply, in

principle, to the current-account balance; that is, a procyclical current account would

moderate the fluctuations in consumer spending (and investment) relative to those in

GDP. However, in the post-1954 period, the ratio of the U.S. current-account balance to

GDP was actually weakly counter-cyclical (Barro [2008, p. 429]).

        From a theoretical standpoint (and despite the validity of the permanent-income

idea), it is not inevitable that consumption would fluctuate proportionately by less than

GDP. These patterns depend on whether the underlying macroeconomic shocks impinge

more on investment demand or desired saving. This balance depends, in turn, on the

permanence of the shocks and whether they operate primarily as income effects or as

shifts to the productivity of capital. In a simple AK model with i.i.d. shocks to the

growth rate of productivity, A, consumption and GDP would always have the same

proportionate variations.

        An important consideration during wartime is the sharp increase in government

purchases for the military. This expansion of G decreases C (and investment), for given

GDP. 11 In our data, many of the C and GDP crises—and a disproportionate share of the

larger crises—feature these wartime expansions of G. In such circumstances, it is not

surprising that C would decline proportionately by more than GDP.

        Table 11 covers 102 contractions overall, 70 for OECD countries and 32 for non-

OECD. Of the 102 contractions, 26 featured participation as a war combatant and 76

were non-war (where the label “non-war” includes non-combatants during major wars).


10
   This pattern is stronger for consumption measured by expenditure on non-durables and services; that is,
when expenditures on consumer durables are grouped with investment.
11
   The declines in consumption and investment could be moderated by a fall in the current-account balance;
however, the option of borrowing from abroad tends to be severely limited during a global conflict.


                                                   20
In the 76 non-war cases, the average proportionate decrease in C was slightly greater than

that in GDP—14.5% versus 13.1% (12.7% versus 12.3% for the OECD countries). In the

26 war cases, the margin was greater—33.3% versus 28.8% (32.9% versus 28.4% for the

OECD countries).

       In terms of timing patterns, Table 11 shows for the full sample of 102 crises that

59 have the same trough years for C and GDP. The trough year for C comes later in 23

cases and earlier in 20 cases. Thus, at least in the annual data, there is no clear pattern as

to whether C or GDP declines first during non-war crises. For wartime cases, 13 of the

26 have the same year, whereas C moves later in 4 and earlier in 9. Thus, there is a slight

suggestion that the declines in C during wartime crises tend to precede those in GDP.

This pattern makes sense since the rise in government purchases early in a war could

reduce C before any physical destruction caused a fall in GDP.

       One concern is that the apparent excess of the average size of C contractions over

GDP contractions might reflect greater measurement error in the C data. In our planned

formal statistical analysis of the C and GDP time series, we will allow for measurement

error that might differ across countries, over time, and between the C and GDP data. For

now, we can get some idea about the role of measurement error by redoing the analysis

using trend values of log(C) and log(GDP) calculated from Hodrick-Prescott filters. We

use a conventional smoothing parameter for annual data of 100. Unlike the standard

setup, we use one-sided filters; that is, we considered only current and past values at each

point in time when estimating “trends.” (This procedure avoids the implication that

people knew in advance of a coming destructive war or depression, so that they knew that

a major decline in trend C or GDP was about to happen.) Instead of computing




                                              21
proportionate peak-to-trough decreases in C or GDP during crises, we now calculate the

proportionate peak-to-trough decreases in the HP-trend values. This procedure

downplays short-lived contractions and tends to count, instead, only the more persistent

declines. The procedure also tends to filter out downturns that are just a response to a

previous upward blip in C or GDP. Most importantly in the present context, the HP-filter

tends to eliminate “crises” that reflect mainly temporary measurement error in C and

GDP.

       The HP-filtering procedure substantially reduces the number of disasters—from

87 to 38 for C and from 148 to 68 for GDP. The full results are in Tables A1 and A2 in

Appendix III. We matched the C and GDP crises, as before. There are 28 non-war pairs,

17 OECD and 11 non-OECD. There are 21 wartime pairs, 19 OECD and 2 non-OECD.

In the non-war sample, the average size of C decline was 11.6%, compared to 13.8% for

GDP (8.8% versus 13.4% for the OECD countries). In the war sample, the mean size of

C decline was 29.1%, compared to 23.3% for GDP (27.4% versus 21.7% for the OECD

countries). Thus, the HP-filtered data generate patterns for war samples that are similar

to those found before—the average magnitude of C decline was notably larger than that

for GDP. However, the findings for non-war samples are reversed—the average size of

C decline was smaller than that for GDP. Thus, overall, the main robust finding is that C

tends to fall proportionately more than GDP during wartime crises. The relative

magnitude of decline during non-war crises is less clear and may be roughly similar for C

and GDP.




                                            22
VI. Disaster Probability and the Frequency Distribution of Disaster Sizes

        In this section, we study the sample of countries with essentially complete annual

time series since before 1914. We use 22 countries (17 OECD) on per capita consumer

expenditure, C, and 35 countries (21 OECD) on per capita GDP. 12 For the C-sample of

22 countries, we isolated 87 disasters (Table 6). The upper panel of Figure 1 plots the

frequency distribution of these C-declines. The bottom panel shows the frequency

distribution of the duration of these disasters (gauged, in each case, by the number of

years from “peak” to “trough”). The average size was 22%, and the average duration was

3.6 years. For the GDP-sample of 35 countries, we found 148 disasters (Table 8). The

upper panel of Figure 2 plots the frequency distribution of these GDP-declines, and the

bottom panel shows the frequency distribution of the disaster durations. The average size

was 21%, and the average duration was 3.5 years.

        In our subsequent simulation of a model of the equity premium, using the disaster

data to calibrate the model, the results depend mainly on the probability, p, of disaster

and the frequency distribution of proportionate disaster size, b. With substantial risk

aversion, the key aspect of the size distribution is not so much the mean of b but, rather,

the fatness of the tails; that is, the likelihood of extremely large disasters.

        Suppose that there are two states, normalcy and disaster. With probability p per

year (taken here to be constant over time and across countries), the economy shifts from

normalcy to disaster. With another probability π per year (also constant over time and

across countries), the economy shifts from disaster to normalcy. As mentioned before,

we found 87 disasters for C and 148 for GDP. Also as noted before, we measured

12
  We include Greece and the Philippines in the GDP sample. Although GDP data are missing for Greece
in 1944 and for the Philippines in 1941-45, we can compute the peak-to-trough GDP declines during WWII
in each case: 66% for Greece from 1939 to 1942 and 57% for the Philippines from 1939 to 1946.


                                                 23
disaster-years by the interval between peak and trough for each event. This calculation

yields 312 disaster-years for C and 516 for GDP. The total number of annual

observations is 2762 for C and 4511 for GDP. Therefore, the number of normalcy years

is 2450 for C and 3995 for GDP. We estimate p as the ratio of the number of disasters to

the number of normalcy years. This calculation yields p=0.0355 for C and 0.0370 for

GDP. 13 We estimate π as the ratio of number of disasters (all of which eventually ended)

to the number of disaster-years. This computation gives π=0.279 for C and 0.287 for

GDP. Therefore, whether we gauge by C or GDP, we can think of disasters as starting

with a probability of around 3.6% per year and ending with a probability of about 28%

per year.

         Our present theoretical model, summarized below, does not deal explicitly with

the duration of disaster states. In the theory, a disaster is a jump that takes place in one

period, which amounts to an instant of time. The model that we are constructing with

Nakamura and Steinsson will deal explicitly with the time evolution of the economy

during disaster states. For present purposes, we assume that the important aspect of a

disaster is the cumulative amount of contraction, b, which we gauge by the numbers

shown for C and GDP, respectively, in Tables 6 and 8. That is, we assume that, for a

given cumulative decline, the implications for the equity premium do not depend a great

deal on whether this decline occurs in an instant of time or is, more realistically, spread

out over a few years. 14


13
   The main reason that these disaster probabilities exceed those in Barro (2006) is the inclusion of disaster
sizes between 0.10 and 0.15. If we consider only disasters of 0.15 or greater, the probabilities are p=0.0213
for C and 0.0198 for GDP.
14
   Barro (2006, section V) studied the effect on the equity premium from varying the length of the period, T,
in the model—this extension was feasible within the context of a model with i.i.d. growth shocks. In this
setting, T represents the fixed duration of a disaster. Variations in T between 0 and 5 years did not have a
large impact on the implied equity premium.


                                                     24
       The frequency distributions for disaster size, b, shown for C and GDP,

respectively, in the upper panels of Figures 1 and 2, turn out to be well approximated by

Pareto or power-law forms. These representations have been found to apply to an array

of economic and physical phenomena, including amounts of stock-price changes and

sizes of cities and firms—see Mandelbrot (1963), Fama (1965), and Gabaix (1999). We

will work out the application to disaster sizes in future research with Rustam Ibragimov.



VII. A Lucas-Tree Model of Rates of Return

       The estimates of p and the b-distribution can be matched with rates of return

determined in a representative-agent Lucas-tree setting (Lucas [1978]). Our theoretical

framework, summarized briefly here, follows Barro (2009), which extends Barro (2006)

to use the Epstein-Zin-Weil (EZW) form of consumer preferences (Epstein and Zin

[1989] and Weil [1990]). That is, we allow for two distinct preference parameters: γ, the

coefficient of relative risk aversion, and θ, the reciprocal of the intertemporal elasticity of

substitution (IES).

       We set up the model, for convenience, in terms of discrete periods. However, the

formulas derived later apply as the length of the period approaches zero. The log of real

GDP evolves exogenously as a random walk with drift:

       (2)             log(Yt+1) = log(Yt) + g + ut+1 + vt+1.

The random term ut+1 is i.i.d. normal with mean 0 and variance σ2. This term reflects

“normal” economic fluctuations due, for example, to productivity shocks. The parameter

g≥0 is a constant that reflects exogenous productivity growth. Population is constant, so

Yt represents per capita GDP, as well as the level of GDP.




                                              25
         The random term vt+1 in Eq. (2) picks up rare disasters, as in Rietz (1988) and

Barro (2006). In these rare events, output and consumption jump down sharply. The

probability of a disaster is the constant p≥0 per unit of time. In a disaster, output and

consumption contract by the fraction b, where 0<b<1. The distribution of vt+1 is given by

                           probability 1-p: vt+1 = 0,

                           probability p: vt+1 = log(1-b).

The disaster size, b, follows some probability distribution, which we gauge by the

empirical densities shown in Figures 1 and 2.

         In the baseline Lucas-tree setting—a closed economy with no investment and no

government purchases—the representative agent’s consumption, Ct, equals output, Yt. 15

Given the processes that generate ut+1 and vt+1, the expected growth rate of Ct and Yt,

denoted by g*, is given by

         (3)                        g* = g + (1/2)σ2 – p·Eb,

where Eb is the expected value of b. (Note that we have allowed for disasters but not for

“bonanzas.”)

         A key simplification—which allows for closed-form solutions—is that the shocks

ut+1 and vt+1 in Eq. (2) are i.i.d.; that is, they represent permanent effects on the level of

output, rather than transitory disturbances to the level. An important part of our ongoing

research is to reassess this i.i.d. assumption; in particular, to allow for transitory effects

from disasters, such as wars and financial crises. (Another important extension, needed



15
  Results on asset returns are similar in an AK model with endogenous investment and stochastic (i.i.d.)
depreciation shocks—see Barro (2009). In this setting, a disaster amounts to a large-scale destruction of
Lucas trees. We can readily incorporate wartime related government purchases, Gt, which do not substitute
for Ct in household utility but do create a wedge between Yt and Ct. In this case, an increase in Gt amounts
to a decrease in productivity.


                                                    26
to match observations on rate-of-return volatility, is to allow for time variation in

uncertainty parameters, particularly the disaster probability, p.)

        In general, EZW preferences do not yield closed-form solutions for asset-pricing

equations. However, Barro (2009) shows that, with i.i.d. shocks (as in the present model),

the first-order optimizing conditions generate asset-pricing equations of familiar form:

                                              1
        (4)                      Ct−γ = (          ) ⋅ Et ( Rt ⋅ Ct−+γ1 ) ,
                                            1+ ρ *

where Rt is the one-period gross return on any asset. The differences from the standard

power-utility model (γ=θ) are, first, the exponent on consumption is the negative of the

coefficient of relative risk aversion, γ (not θ), and, second, the effective rate of time

preference, ρ*, differs from the usual rate of time preference, ρ, when γ≠θ. The formula

for ρ* is

                                    ⎧                             p                                        ⎫
        (5)    ρ * = ρ − (γ − θ ) ⋅ ⎨ g * −(1 / 2) ⋅ γσ 2 − (        ) ⋅ [ E (1 − b)1−γ − 1 − (γ − 1) ⋅ Eb]⎬ ,
                                    ⎩                           γ −1                                       ⎭

where E is the expectations operator and g* is the expected growth rate given in Eq. (3).

        The formulas for the expected rate of return on equity (unlevered claims to Lucas

trees), re, and the risk-free rate, rf , can be derived from Eq. (4), given the process that

generates Yt and Ct in Eq. (2). If we assume zero chance of default on either asset, the

results are

        (6)             re = ρ* + γg* - (1/2)·γ·(γ-1)·σ2 - p·[E(1-b)1-γ - 1 - (γ-1)·Eb],

        (7)             rf = ρ* + γg* - (1/2)·γ·(γ+1)·σ2 - p·[E(1-b)-γ - 1 - γ·Eb].

Hence, the equity premium is

        (8)             re - rf = γσ2 + p·[ E(1-b)-γ - E(1-b)1-γ - Eb],




                                                    27
which depends only on γ and the uncertainty parameters (σ, p, and the distribution of b).

In practice, the term γσ2 is negligible (as in the equity-premium puzzle found by Mehra

and Prescott [1985]). The disaster term is proportional to p and tends to be large.

            The key moments of the disaster-size distribution are E(1-b)-γ and E(1-b)1-γ.

Heuristically, we can think of the first term as reflecting the expected marginal utility of

consumption, conditional on a fractional decline in C by the amount b. 16 The second

term comes from the crisis-contingent expectation of the product of R, the gross return on

unlevered equity, and (1-b)-γ. Since real stock prices (for unlevered equity) fall in a crisis

by the same fraction, b, as C and GDP, the relevant expectation becomes E(1-b)1-γ. Note

that the two key moments depend on the form of the b-distribution and on γ.



VIII. Simulating the Lucas-Tree Model

            We now simulate the Lucas-tree model by viewing the Euler condition in Eq. (4)

as applying at each point in time to a representative agent at the country level. That is,

we neglect the implications of imperfect markets and heterogeneous individuals within

countries. However, we also assume that markets are not sufficiently complete

internationally for Eq. (4) to apply to the representative agent in the world. In future

work, we will assess how the analysis applies to multiple-country regions, rather than

country by country.

            In applying Eq. (4) to the determination of each country’s asset returns, we

neglect any implications from international trade in goods and assets; that is, we

effectively treat each country as a closed economy. With this perspective, we can view

each country/time-period observation as providing independent information about the
16
     This interpretation would be precise for power utility (γ=θ).


                                                        28
relation between macroeconomic shocks and asset returns. In particular, this

independence may be approximately right despite the clear common international

dimensions of crises—most obviously from wars but also from financial crises,

epidemics of disease, and natural-resource shocks.

       We apply the full historical information on disaster probability and sizes to the

simulation at each point in time. Thus, we implicitly assume that the underlying

parameters are fixed over time and across countries and are known from day one to the

representative agent in each country. That is, we neglect learning about disaster

parameters, an issue stressed by Weitzman (2007).

       We focus on the model’s implications for the expected rate of return on equity, re,

and the risk-free rate, rf—and, hence, the equity premium. As it stands, the model is

inadequate for explaining the volatility of asset prices, including stock prices. For

example, the model unrealistically implies a constant price-dividend ratio and a constant

risk-free rate. The most promising avenue for extending the model to fit these features—

including the high volatility of stock returns—is to allow for shifting uncertainty

parameters, notably the disaster probability, p. This possibility is explored in Gabaix

(2008)—his results suggest that the extended model can explain volatility patterns

without affecting much the implications for expected rates of return, including the equity

premium. In a related vein, Bansal and Yaron (2004) pursue the consequences of shifting

expected growth rates, g*.

       The calibrations of the model follow Barro (2009). We set the expected normal

growth rate, g, at 0.025; the standard deviation of normal fluctuations, σ, at 0.02; and the

reciprocal of the intertemporal elasticity of substitution, θ, at 0.5. These choices either do




                                             29
not affect the equity premium (g and θ) or else have a negligible impact (σ). The rate of

time preference, ρ, also does not affect the equity premium. However, ρ (along with g, σ,

and θ) affects levels of rates of return, including the risk-free rate, rf (see Eqs. [6] and [7]).

Given the lack of useful outside information on ρ, we set ρ* in Eq. (7) to generate

rf=0.01—roughly the long-run average across countries of real rates of return on bills

from Table 5. 17 Then ρ takes on the value needed to satisfy Eq. (5).

         The disaster probability, p, and the frequency distribution of disaster sizes, b,

come from our multi-country study of disaster events. We can then determine the value

of γ needed in Eq. (8) to replicate an unlevered equity premium of around 0.05—the

long-run average across countries implied by the data in Table 5. Since we always have

rf=0.01, an unlevered equity premium of 0.05 corresponds to an expected rate of return

on unlevered equity, re, of 0.06.

         Table 12 applies to crises gauged by consumer expenditure, and Table 13 uses the

crises gauged by GDP. For baseline cases, which encompass 87 observations of C crises

and 148 observations of GDP crises, a coefficient of relative risk aversion, γ, of 3.5 gets

the simulated results into the right ballpark for the observed equity premium; specifically,

re=0.061 in the C case and 0.069 in the GDP case. The respective rates of time

preference, ρ, are 0.046 and 0.054, and the corresponding effective rates of time

preference, ρ*, are 0.030 and 0.039.

         The results are sensitive to the choice of γ. For example, the second lines of

Tables 12 and 13 show that, if γ=3.0, the values for re fall to 0.043 in the C case and

0.046 in the GDP case.

17
  Real rates of return on Treasury Bills and similar assets are not risk-free—and tend particularly to be
lower than normal during crises that involve high inflation (see Section IX). Thus, rf may be lower than
0.01. However, pegging to a lower value of rf would not affect our analysis of the equity premium.


                                                    30
       The results are not very different if the sample encompasses only the OECD

countries, in which case the number of C disasters falls from 87 to 57, and the number of

GDP disasters falls from 148 to 75. We still get into the right ballpark for the equity

premium with γ=3.5 (or slightly higher for the case of C crises).

       The results do not change greatly if we truncate the b-distribution to eliminate

smaller crises. Tables 12 and 13 show the results when, instead of b≥0.10, we admit only

b≥0.15, b≥0.20, b≥0.30, or b≥0.40. Even in this last case—with only 11 remaining C

crises and 14 remaining GDP crises— re is still at 0.049 in the case of C and 0.055 in the

case of GDP. Thus, the larger crises are crucial for getting the equity premium into the

right ballpark with a “reasonable” amount of risk aversion, such as γ=3.5.

       This reasoning also applies when we examine non-war samples, a selection that

eliminates the biggest crises from the sample. (We define “war” as applying only to

active combatants.) For C crises, the consideration of a non-war sample—which retains

62 of the original 87 disasters—yields re=0.017. For GDP crises, with 111 of the original

148 disasters retained, the result is again re=0.017. Getting into the right ballpark here for

the equity premium requires a much higher coefficient of relative risk aversion, γ. For

example, Tables 12 and 13 show that γ=9 yields re=0.053 for C and 0.059 for GDP.

       As discussed before, we also redid the analysis using the trend values of log(C)

and log(GDP) calculated from Hodrick-Prescott filters. As already noted, this method

captures in an informal way the idea that crises may have less than permanent effects on

levels of C and GDP. In our planned formal statistical modeling, we will take a more

rigorous approach to dealing with transitory versus permanent shifts in C and GDP.




                                             31
       Tables 12 and 13 show that the HP-filtering procedure substantially reduces the

number of disasters—from 87 to 38 for C and from 148 to 68 for GDP—and, thereby,

lowers the estimated disaster probabilities—to 0.0157 for C and 0.0179 for GDP.

However, the size distributions of the crises are not so different from those in the original

procedure. For C crises, the mean of b is 0.236, versus 0.218 in the original case, and for

GDP, the mean of b is 0.226, rather than 0.208.

       If we again use a coefficient of relative risk aversion, γ, of 3.5, the HP-filtering

lowers the computed re to 0.030 for the C case and to 0.038 for GDP. However, γ does

not have to increase very much to restore a reasonable equity premium. For example, for

C, γ=4.5 yields re=0.051, whereas for GDP, γ=4 yields re=0.052.

       In terms of general patterns, the results based on consumer expenditure, C, in

Table 12 deliver results for the equity premium that are similar to those based on GDP in

Table 13. On the one hand, this finding suggests a kind of robustness in that the results

are not sensitive to measurement differences in these main macro aggregates. On the

other hand, this conclusion also means that fitting the equity premium does not depend on

our efforts in measuring consumer expenditure and, thereby, getting closer to measures of

consumption.

       Overall, the simulations in Tables 12 and 13 show that the model delivers

reasonable equity premia with “plausible” coefficients of relative risk aversion for a

variety of specifications. The main lack of robustness applies to elimination of the

biggest crises from the sample—for example, by removing the war-related crises.




                                             32
IX. Asset Returns during Crises

       In the model in section VII, crises feature downward jumps in consumption and

GDP at a point in time. More realistically, C and GDP fall gradually during crises of

varying lengths. In our empirical analysis, we approximated the crisis declines in C and

GDP by cumulated fractional amounts over peak-to-trough intervals, as shown in

Tables 6 and 8 and Figures 1 and 2. Now we carry out a preliminary analysis that

considers observed returns on stocks and bills during crises.



       A. Stock returns during crises

       In the theory, real stock prices jump down discretely at the start of a crisis. More

realistically, stock prices would fall sharply each time negative information hits the

financial markets. Since we are conditioning on crises that cumulate to at least a 10% fall

in C or GDP, the crises typically feature more than one adverse piece of news (or, rather,

more negative than positive news). Thus, the stock-price declines tend also to be spread

out during the crises. By analogy to our procedure for measuring decreases in C and

GDP, we measure the crisis changes in stock prices by cumulative fractional amounts.

Specifically, the real stock-price falls shown in Tables 6 and 8 are the total fractional

declines from the end of the year before the peak to the end of the year before the trough.

(Negative values indicate stock-price increases.) This procedure omits changes in stock

prices during the trough year—where the financial markets would likely be influenced by

information that the crisis had ended.

       Data on real stock prices are available for only a sub-set of the C and GDP

crises—51 of the 87 C crises (Table 6) and 71 of the 148 GDP crises (Table 8). The




                                             33
majority of these crises show declines in real stock prices—39 of 51 (76%) of the C

events and 55 of 71 (77%) of the GDP events. Figure 3 shows the size distribution of

real stock-price declines during crises (where negative values correspond to stock-price

rises). The left-hand panels are the full distributions, and the right-hand panels consider

only the stock-price decreases. The left-hand panels show a couple outliers with very

large price increases—Argentina in the late 1980s and Chile in the mid 1970s. In these

situations, periods of economic contraction were accompanied by major actual or

prospective reforms that were viewed favorably by the stock markets. 18 To admit stock-

price increases during crises into the model, we would have to expand to allow for shocks

to parameters, such as the expected growth rate, g*, or the disaster probability, p.

        The overall mean and median of fractional stock-price declines were 0.080 and

0.173, respectively, for C crises and 0.169 and 0.296, respectively, for GDP crises.

Conditioning on cases of stock-price decrease in the right-hand panels of Figure 3 shows

roughly uniform shapes for the frequency distributions in the range of sizes between 0

and 0.7. 19 In this range, the mean and median of stock-price declines were 0.334 and

0.325, respectively, for C crises and 0.375 and 0.374, respectively, for GDP crises.

        In Tables 12 and 13, we simulated the underlying asset-pricing model using the

observed distributions of C and GDP crises. The underlying assumption was that the size

of the fractional stock-price decline (for unlevered equity) during a crisis equaled the size

of the fractional decline, b, in C or GDP. We can instead simulate the model by using the

actual stock-price changes during crises from Tables 6 and 8 and Figure 3. Since these

18
   An analogous case is Venezuela in the late 1980s—a C crisis in Table 6 that is not included in the sample
currently being considered.
19
   Recall that the samples are selected by considering C or GDP declines of 0.10 or more. We could, instead,
select the sample by considering real stock-price declines of 0.10 or more. Our conjecture is that the size
distributions would then look like power-law functions, as in Figures 1 and 2.


                                                    34
stock returns refer to levered equity, this set of calculations applies to expected returns on

levered equity.

         The asset-pricing condition in Eq. (4) involves the term E[Rt·(1-b)-γ], where Rt is

the gross real stock return during crises, and b is the fractional decline in C (or GDP)

during crises. This expression is difficult to calculate accurately because stock-price

changes are highly volatile, particularly during crises. 20 In Table 14, we compute this

term in four alternative ways. First, we measure contractions by either C or GDP, and

second, we use either the full distributions of stock-price changes (the left-hand panels of

Figure 3) or the truncated distributions that consider only stock-price decreases (the right-

hand panels of Figure 3). We think that the last choice may lessen the effects from

measurement error.

         The calculations using the full distributions of stock-price changes do not accord

well with observed long-term average returns on levered equity of around 0.083 (from

Table 5). The simulations, using γ=3.5 as before, deliver an overall mean rate of return

on levered equity of 0.029 for C crises and 0.031 for GDP crises. The results fit better if

we use the truncated distributions, which eliminate cases of stock-price increases during

crises. In particular, for C crises, the simulated mean rate of return on levered equity is

then 0.077. Given the wide range of results, we cannot, at this stage, reach firm

conclusions from our attempts to simulate the model using observed stock-price changes

during crises.




20
  An additional difficulty is the imperfect matching of the timing of stock-price changes with the timing of
the declines in C or GDP. In our approach, stock-price changes are from the end of the year prior to the
peak to the end of the year prior to the trough. The changes in C or GDP are from the peak year to the
trough year, with C and GDP representing annual flows for each year.


                                                     35
       B. Bill returns during crises

       In the model from section VII, the risk-free rate is the same in normal times as in

a crisis, which lasts an instant of time. The same pattern would apply to the expected real

rate of return on short-term bills—the type of claim considered in Table 5—if we

introduce a constant probability of default or, for nominal claims, a time-invariant

process for inflation.

       Observed returns on short-term bills do not conform to these predictions.

Table 15 shows means and medians for real bill returns during the C and GDP crises

shown in Tables 6 and 8. (The bill returns for each crisis are mean values from the peak

year to one year prior to the trough year.) These results apply to the main samples (87 C

crises and 148 GDP crises) when data are also available on bill returns (53 for C and 69

for GDP). The average real bill return during crises was between -3% and -6% per year,

depending on whether we use a C or GDP sample and on whether we consider the mean

or the median. Hence, the average crisis return was well below the long-term average of

around 1% shown in Table 5.

       There are two main issues to consider. The first is whether a substantially

negative number, such as -3% to -6% per year, is a good measure of expected real bill

returns during crises. A major question here concerns inflation. The second is whether

our analysis of the equity premium would be much affected if the expected real return on

bills during crises were substantially negative. Since the second issue is more

fundamental, and we think the answer is no, we consider that question first.

       One possible reason for a low equilibrium real bill return during crises is that the

disaster probability, p, is unusually high. In this case, the risk-free rate and the expected




                                              36
real bill return would be unusually low in crises. However, the key issue for the equity

premium is not the level of the equilibrium bill return during crises (caused by a high p or

some other factor) but, rather, whether the incidence of a crisis imposes substantial real

capital losses on bills. Recall that bills correspond, empirically, to claims with maturity

of three months or less. Although the crisis induced changes in the real value of these

claims are hard to measure accurately, substantial real capital losses can arise only if

there are jumps in the price level or literal defaults on bills. Absent these effects, the

pricing of bills in normal times (and, hence, the equity premium) would not be much

influenced by the prospect of low equilibrium real bill returns during crises. 21 In contrast,

for long-term bonds, the real capital losses at the onsets of crises could be substantial and

would have to be compared with those on stocks. Thus, it would be useful to analyze the

crisis experiences of the 10-year government bonds included in Table 5. However, the

measurement of crisis-induced real capital losses on these bonds will be challenging.

        A different point is that the computed averages of real bill returns during crises

may understate expected real returns because of influences from inflation. Crises do

feature higher than usual inflation rates—the median inflation rates were 5.9% for C

crises and 6.9% for GDP crises, compared to 4.5% for long samples for all countries

taken together. (The inflation rate for each crisis in Tables 6 and 8 is the mean value

from the peak year to one year prior to the trough year.) Hence, one possible explanation

for the low average real bill return during crises is that the greater incidence of high

inflation corresponds to high unanticipated inflation and, thereby, to a shortfall of


21
  An analogous result holds for paper currency. The expected real return on currency would be low during
a crisis if the expected inflation rate were high. However—absent jumps in the price level or literal
defaults–currency held in normal times would still provide good protection against stock-market crashes
associated with crises.


                                                   37
realized real returns on nominally denominated bills from expected returns. A

shortcoming of this argument is that it requires inflation to be systematically

underestimated during crises (which are presumably recognized contemporaneously).

         A second possibility is that the reported nominal yields at times of high inflation

systematically understate the true nominal returns and, therefore, lead to under-estimates

of real returns. The reason is the understatement of the implications of compounding for

calculating true nominal returns. 22 We think that this issue is quantitatively important,

and we are attempting to improve our calculations in this regard.



X. Plans

         We plan to expand the 22-country sample for consumer expenditure and the

35-country sample for GDP. Promising candidates are Mexico, with gaps from 1911 to

1920, and Malaysia and South Korea, with gaps around WWII. Also promising are

Russia back to the pre-WWI Tsarist period and Turkey/Ottoman Empire, for which we

currently have data since 1923. We are considering Ireland, particularly whether we can

separate Irish macroeconomic variables from U.K. statistics for the period prior to Irish

independence in 1922. We plan also to reexamine the pre-1929 U.S. data, focusing on

the Civil War years.



22
  As an example, Peru’s crisis in 1987-92 featured very high inflation. In 1989, the price level increased by
a factor of 29. The IMF’s International Financial Statistics reports, on a monthly basis, nominal deposit
yields for 1989 averaging 1100% per year. The IFS people tell us that an annual rate of 1100% means that
the nominal value of funds held as deposits would rise over a year by a factor of 12. This nominal return,
in conjunction with the inflation experience, produces a real rate of return for Peru in 1989 of -0.58 per year.
Suppose, alternatively, that a nominal yield of 1100% per year means that returns are compounded monthly
at a rate of 92% (=1100%/12) per month. In this case, the nominal value would rise over a year by a factor
of 2500, implying an astronomically positive real rate of return. The point is that, when the inflation rate is
high, compounding errors of this type have large implications for calculated real rates of return—and we
think that these errors are regularly in the direction of understating true returns.


                                                      38
          We will try to go further in measuring the division of personal consumer

expenditure between durables versus non-durables and services. Table 10 shows the data

that we have been able to compile, thus far, for crisis periods. These data cover 28 of the

C crises contained in Table 6—18 of the 28 are in our main sample of 87 events. We

may also attempt to add data on government consumption. A key issue here is the

separation of military outlays from other forms of government consumption expenditure.

          We plan to construct time series for C and GDP per capita at the levels of regions

that include multiple countries—such as the OECD, Western Europe, Latin America,

Asia, the “world,” and so on. These regional aggregates can be relevant when countries

are integrated through financial and other markets. There are tricky aspects of this

exercise involving changes in country borders, and we are working on this issue. Once

we have these super-aggregate variables, we will examine C and GDP crises at regional

levels.

          In joint work with Rustam Ibragimov, we will use the method of Gabaix and

Ibragimov (2007) to estimate the distribution of disaster sizes, b, within a power-law

context. Preliminary analysis shows good results when treating (1-b)-γ as subject to a

power-law cumulative density with exponent α. With these results, we can compute the

key expectations in the model, such as E (1-b)-γ, in closed form (as functions of γ and α).

We can also redo the simulation of the model using the fitted density function for b,

rather than the observed histogram.

          We are working with Emi Nakamura and Jón Steinsson on a formal statistical

model of the evolution of per capita consumer expenditure and GDP. We will use the

full time series on C and GDP to estimate disaster probability (possibly time varying),




                                              39
evolution of economic contractions during disaster states, probability of return to

normalcy, and long-run effects from disasters on levels and growth rates of C and GDP.

We will also allow for trend breaks in growth rates, as well as for some differences in

uncertainty parameters across countries and over time.

       We are working with Emmanuel Farhi and Xavier Gabaix on a different approach

to measuring time-varying disaster probabilities. Our plan is to use U.S. data since the

early 1980s on prices of stock-index options to gauge changing market perceptions of the

likelihood of substantial adverse shocks. Aside from considering the equity premium, we

will apply this analysis to real rates of return on bonds in normal times and during crises.




                                             40
                                      References

Bansal, R. and A. Yaron (2004). “Risks for the Long Run: A Potential Resolution of

       Asset-Pricing Puzzles,” Journal of Finance, 59, August, 1481-1509.

Barro, R.J. (2006). “Rare Disasters and Asset Markets in the Twentieth Century,”

       Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121, August, 823-866.

Barro, R.J. (2008). Macroeconomics: A Modern Approach, Mason OH,

       Thomson/Southwestern.

Barro, R.J. (2009). “Rare Disasters, Asset Prices, and Welfare Costs,” American

       Economic Review, 99, forthcoming.

Cagan, P. (1965). Determinants and Effects of Changes in the Stock of Money,

       1875-1960, New York, Columbia University Press.

Caselli, F. and J. Ventura (2000). “A Representative Consumer Theory of Distribution,”

       American Economic Review, 90, September, 909-926.

Chatterjee, S. and D. Corbae (2007). “On the Aggregate Welfare Cost of Great

       Depression Unemployment,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 54, September,

       1529-1544.

Cogley, T. (1990). “International Evidence on the Size of the Random Walk in Output,”

       Journal of Political Economy, 98, June, 501-518.

Cogley, T. and T.J. Sargent (2008). “The Market Price of Risk and the Equity Premium:

       A Legacy of the Great Depression?” unpublished, University of California Davis,

       January.

Dimson, E, P. Marsh, and M. Staunton (2008). “The Worldwide Equity Premium: A

       Smaller Puzzle,” in R. Mehra, ed., Handbook of the Equity Risk Premium,




                                           41
       Amsterdam, Elsevier.

Epstein, L.G. and S.E. Zin (1989). “Substitution, Risk Aversion, and the Temporal

       Behavior of Consumption and Asset Returns: A Theoretical Framework,”

       Econometrica, 57, July, 937-969.

Fama, E.F. (1965). “The Behavior of Stock Market Prices,” Journal of Business, 38,

       January, 34-105.

Gabaix, X. (1999). “Zipf’s Law for Cities: An Explanation,” Quarterly Journal of

       Economics, 114, August, 739-767.

Gabaix, X. (2008). “Variable Rare Disasters: An Exactly Solved Framework for

       Ten Puzzles in Macro-Finance.” National Bureau of Economic Research

       Working Paper 13724 (January).

Gabaix, X. and R. Ibragimov (2007). “Rank-1/2: A Simple Way to Improve the OLS

       Estimation of Tail Exponents,” National Bureau of Economic Research Technical

       Working paper 342 (September).

Lucas, R.E. (1978). “Asset Prices in an Exchange Economy,” Econometrica, 46,

       November, 1429-1445.

Maddison, A. (2003). The World Economy: Historical Statistics, Paris, OECD (on the

       Internet at www.ggdc.net/maddison).

Mandelbrot, B. (1963). “The Variation of Certain Speculative Prices,” Journal of

       Business, 36, October, 394-419.

Mehra, R. and E.C. Prescott (1985). “The Equity Premium: A Puzzle,” Journal of

       Monetary Economics, 15, March, 145-161.




                                          42
Rietz, T.A. (1988). “The Equity Risk Premium: A Solution,” Journal of Monetary

       Economics, 22, July, 117-131.

Romer, C.D. (1986). “Is the Stabilization of the Postwar Economy a Figment of the

       Data?” American Economic Review, 76, June, 314-334.

Taylor, B. (2005). “GFD Guide to Total Returns on Stocks, Bonds and Bills,” available

       on the Internet from Global Financial Data at www.globalfindata.com.

Ursúa, J.F. (2008). “The 1921 World Recession: Was it World War I or the Flu?,”

       unpublished, Harvard University.

Weil, P. (1990). “Nonexpected Utility in Macroeconomics,” Quarterly Journal of

       Economics, 105, February, 29-42.

Weitzman, M.L. (2007). “Subjective Expectations and Asset-Return Puzzles,” American

       Economic Review, 97, September, 1102-1130.




                                          43
       Table 1 Starting Dates for Consumer Expenditure and GDP
                        Part 1: OECD Countries
Country              Starting Dates            Missing Values
                      C        GDP             C               GDP
Australia           1901       1820
Austria            1913*       1870     1919-23, 1945-46
Belgium             1913       1846
Canada              1871       1870
Denmark             1844       1818
Finland             1860       1860
France              1824       1820
Germany             1851       1851
Greece             1938*      1833**                           1944
Iceland            1945*       1870
Italy               1861       1861
Japan               1874       1870
Netherlands         1814       1807
New Zealand        1939*       1870     1940-43, 1945-46
Norway              1830       1830
Portugal            1910       1865
Spain               1850       1850
Sweden              1800       1800
Switzerland         1851       1851
U.K.                1830       1830
U.S.                1834       1790         1860-68          1860-68?




                                  44
                            Part 2: Non-OECD Countries
    Country                     Starting Dates         Missing Values
                               C          GDP        C            GDP
    Argentina                 1875         1875
    Brazil                    1901         1850
    Chile                     1900         1900
    Colombia                 1925*         1905
    India                    1919*         1872
    Indonesia                1960*         1880
    Malaysia                 1900*        1900†   1940-46        1943-46
    Mexico                   1920*        1895†                 1910-19?
    Peru                      1896         1896
    Philippines              1950*       1902††                  1941-45
    Singapore                1900*        1900†   1940-47        1940-49
    South Africa             1946*         1911
    South Korea              1911*         1911   1941-52
    Sri Lanka                1960*         1870
    Taiwan                    1901         1901
    Turkey                   1923*        1923†
    Uruguay                  1960*         1870
    Venezuela                1923*         1883


Note: C represents real per capita personal consumer expenditure. GDP represents real
per capita GDP. Missing values apply to period between country starting date and 2006.
OECD is defined to exclude recent members and Turkey. Criterion for inclusion in
samples is presence of continuous data back before World War I.

*Excluded from analysis for C sample because of insufficient coverage.
†Excluded from analysis for GDP sample because of insufficient coverage.
**Greece is included in the GDP sample with data for log(GDP) in 1944 interpolated
between values for 1943 and 1945.
††The Philippines is included in part of the analysis of GDP data despite the gap in
information for 1941-45. This gap does not prevent our estimating the cumulative
contraction in GDP associated with World War II.




                                           45
             Table 2 Growth Rates of Consumer Expenditure and GDP
           Means and Standard Deviations by Country (since 1870 or later)
                                      C                       GDP
                              mean          s.d.        mean           s.d.
                            Part 1: OECD countries
      Australia              0.0154       0.0506       0.0159        0.0423
      Austria                   --           --        0.0217        0.0709
      Belgium                0.0189       0.0904       0.0203        0.0838
      Canada                 0.0192       0.0474       0.0212        0.0511
      Denmark                0.0163       0.0538       0.0190        0.0370
      Finland                0.0239       0.0568       0.0237        0.0449
      France                 0.0162       0.0674       0.0191        0.0642
      Germany                0.0189       0.0570       0.0212        0.0811
      Greece                    --           --        0.0210        0.1013
      Iceland                   --           --        0.0254        0.0506
      Italy                  0.0173       0.0370       0.0213        0.0471
      Japan                  0.0261       0.0704       0.0277        0.0611
      Netherlands            0.0190       0.0854       0.0188        0.0757
      New Zealand               --           --        0.0143        0.0517
      Norway                 0.0194       0.0380       0.0231        0.0361
      Portugal               0.0272       0.0448       0.0207        0.0431
      Spain                  0.0204       0.0727       0.0200        0.0453
      Sweden                 0.0208       0.0458       0.0230        0.0362
      Switzerland            0.0150       0.0623       0.0150        0.0399
      U.K.                   0.0147       0.0283       0.0157        0.0293
      U.S.                   0.0185       0.0360       0.0217        0.0498
                          Part 2: Non-OECD countries
      Argentina              0.0189       0.0823       0.0164        0.0674
      Brazil                 0.0277       0.0780       0.0192        0.0507
      Chile                  0.0191       0.0905       0.0209        0.0620
      Colombia                  --           --        0.0236        0.0229
      India                     --           --        0.0140        0.0487
      Indonesia                 --           --        0.0160        0.0556
      Peru                   0.0174       0.0463       0.0207        0.0482
      South Africa              --           --        0.0130        0.0485
      South Korea               --           --        0.0352        0.0743
      Sri Lanka                 --           --        0.0144        0.0455
      Taiwan                 0.0344       0.0872       0.0386        0.0807
      Uruguay                   --           --        0.0143        0.0787
      Venezuela                 --           --        0.0251        0.0893

Note: Growth rates are for real per capita personal consumer expenditure, C, and real per capita
GDP. Countries included are those with full data from before World War I, as indicated in
Table 1. Periods are from 1870 (or the later starting date with available data) through 2006.



                                               46
              Table 3 Growth Rates of Consumer Expenditure and GDP
                      Means across Countries, Various Periods
                               C                              GDP
 Sample          Number mean of mean of           Number mean of mean of
                 countries growth standard countries growth standard
                             rates    deviations              rates deviations
 OECD
  1870-1913*           15        0.0139       0.0411          21         0.0141       0.0373
  1914-1947            15        0.0111       0.0871          21         0.0147       0.0887
  1948-2006            15        0.0266       0.0259          21         0.0287       0.0284
  1870-2006*           15        0.0188       0.0541          21         0.0205       0.0544
 non-OECD
  1870-1913*           5         0.0232       0.0874          10         0.0166       0.0682
  1914-1947            5         0.0139       0.0868          10         0.0131       0.0724
  1948-2006            5         0.0275       0.0577          10         0.0259       0.0448
  1870-2006*           5         0.0235       0.0769          10         0.0199       0.0624
 All countries
  1870-1913*           20        0.0162       0.0527          31         0.0149       0.0473
  1914-1947            20        0.0118       0.0870          31         0.0141       0.0834
  1948-2006            20        0.0268       0.0339          31         0.0278       0.0337
  1870-2006*           20        0.0200       0.0598          31         0.0203       0.0570


*Sample limited to countries from Tables 1 and 2 with data on growth rates from 1904 or
earlier (so that each country has at least ten observations for 1870-1913).

Note: Growth rates are for real per capita personal consumer expenditure, C, and real per capita
GDP. The means are for countries with available data in each sample for growth rates and
standard deviations.




                                               47
                   Table 4 Starting Dates for Real Rates of Return
                              Part 1: OECD Countries
Country                   Stocks                        Bills            Bonds
            Total Returns     Stock Indexes
Australia        1883              1876                1862*             1862*
Austria          1970         1923 [1939-44]      1885* [1938-44]         1946
Belgium          1951         1898 [1914-18,       1849 [1945-46]    1836* [1945-46]
                              1940, 1944-46]
Canada           1934              1916            1903 [1914-34]        1880*
Denmark          1970              1915                 1864             1822
Finland          1962              1923                1915*             1960
France      1896 [1940-41]    1857 [1940-41]           1841*             1841*
Germany     1870 [1917-23]         1841                 1854              1924
Greece           1977         1929 [1941-52]      1915* [1944-45]        1993
Iceland          2003              1993            1988 [2004-07]    1993 [2004-07]
Italy            1925              1906                 1868             1862
Japan            1921              1894                 1883             1871
Netherlands      1951         1920 [1945-46]           1881*             1881*
New Zealand      1987              1927                 1923             1926
Norway           1970              1915                 1819             1877
Portugal         1989         1932 [1975-77]           1930*              1976
Spain            1941         1875 [1936-40]            1883              1941
Sweden           1919              1902                 1857             1922
Switzerland      1967         1911 [1914-16]            1895              1916
U.K.†            1791              1791                 1801             1791
U.S.             1801              1801                 1836             1801




                                          48
                            Part 2: Non-OECD Countries
 Country                              Stocks                           Bills      Bonds
                        Total Returns         Stock Indexes
 Argentina                  1988             1939 [1958-66]            1978         --
 Brazil                     1988                  1955                 1995         --
 Chile                      1983                  1895                 1925         --
 Colombia                   1988                  1928                 1986         --
 India                      1988             1921 [1926-27]            1874       1874*
 Indonesia                  1988             1925 [1940-77]            1970         --
 Malaysia                   1973                  1974                 1960       1961
 Mexico                     1988                  1930                 1962       1995
 Peru                       1993                  1927                 1985         --
 Philippines                1982                  1953                 1950       1997
 Singapore                  1970                  1966                 1960       1988
 South Africa               1961                  1911                 1936       1896
 South Korea                1963                  1963                 1951       1957
 Sri Lanka                  1993             1953 [1975-84]            1951         --
 Taiwan                     1988                  1968                 1962       1990
 Turkey                     1987                  1987                 1973       1996
 Uruguay                      --                   **                   --          --
 Venezuela                  1988                 1930††                1948       1984


Note: Years in brackets are missing data. Rates of return are computed on an arithmetic
basis using end-of-year values of total-return indexes divided by consumer price indexes.
Stock returns computed from stock-price indexes include rough estimates of dividend
yields (or use actual dividend yields in a few cases). Bill returns are from short-term
government bills (maturity of three months or less) or, in some cases, for overnight rates,
deposit rates, or central bank discount rates. Bond returns are typically for 10-year
government bonds but sometimes for other maturities. Data are mostly from Global
Financial Data. Stock-price indexes for Japan 1893-1914 are from Fujino and Akiyama
(1977). Bill data for Colombia, Indonesia, and Peru are from IMF. In some cases, CPI
data come from sources other than Global Financial Data.

*Starting date limited by missing CPI data.
**Uruguay has stock-price data starting in 1925 but no estimates of dividend yields.
†U.K. data before 1790 were not used. U.K. bond data are for consols up to 1932 and
10-year government bonds thereafter.
††January 1942 stock-price index used to approximate year-end value for 1941.




                                            49
                                           Table 5 Long-Period Averages of Rates of Return
    Country                  Start          Stocks              Bills         Start        Bonds                                  Bills
                                                      Part 1: OECD countries
    Australia                1876        0.1027 (0.1616)         0.0126 (0.0566)        1870       0.0352 (0.1157)         0.0125 (0.0569)
    Belgium                   --                --                      --              1870      0.0291 (0.1584)**      0.0179 (0.1447)**
    Canada                   1916       0.0781 (0.1754)                 --              1916       0.0392 (0.1199)               --
    Denmark                  1915        0.0750 (0.2300)         0.0265 (0.0652)        1870       0.0392 (0.1137)         0.0317 (0.0588)
    Finland                  1923       0.1268 (0.3155)          0.0128 (0.0935)         --               --                     --
    France                   1870       0.0543 (0.2078)*        -0.0061 (0.0996)*       1870       0.0066 (0.1368)        -0.0079 (0.1000)
    Germany                  1870       0.0758 (0.2976)          -0.0153 (0.1788)       1924       0.0402 (0.1465)         0.0158 (0.1173)
    Italy                    1906       0.0510 (0.2760)          -0.0112 (0.1328)       1870       0.0173 (0.1879)         0.0046 (0.1191)
    Japan                    1894       0.0928 (0.3017)          -0.0052 (0.1370)       1883       0.0192 (0.1820)         0.0043 (0.1475)
    Netherlands              1920      0.0901 (0.2116)**        0.0114 (0.0474)**       1881       0.0308 (0.1067)         0.0118 (0.0512)
    New Zealand              1927        0.0762 (0.2226)         0.0234 (0.0529)        1926       0.0276 (0.1209)         0.0240 (0.0529)
    Norway                   1915        0.0716 (0.2842)         0.0098 (0.0782)        1877       0.0280 (0.1130)         0.0204 (0.0709)
    Spain                    1883      0.0610 (0.2075)†         0.0173 (0.0573)†         --               --                     --
    Sweden                   1902        0.0923 (0.2347)         0.0180 (0.0719)        1922       0.0292 (0.0941)         0.0176 (0.0448)
    Switzerland              1911      0.0726 (0.2107)††        0.0083 (0.0531)††       1916       0.0218 (0.0717)         0.0065 (0.0545)
    U.K.                     1870        0.0641 (0.1765)         0.0179 (0.0624)        1870       0.0280 (0.1049)         0.0179 (0.0624)
    U.S.                     1870        0.0827 (0.1866)         0.0199 (0.0482)        1870       0.0271 (0.0842)         0.0199 (0.0482)
                                                       Part 2: Non-OECD countries
    Chile                    1925        0.1689 (0.4590)         -0.0302 (0.1918)        --               --                     --
    India                    1921      0.0514 (0.2341)***       0.0133 (0.0835)***      1874       0.0191 (0.1147)        0.0240 (0.0785)
    South Africa             1911        0.0890 (0.2006)                 --             1911       0.0248 (0.1165)               --
    Overall means†††          --          0.0829 (0.248)          0.0072 (0.089)         --         0.0266 (0.131)         0.0147 (0.081)

*missing 1940-41, **missing 1945-46, †missing 1936-40, ††missing 1914-16, ***missing 1926-27
†††Averages of means and standard deviations for 17 countries with stock and bill data and 15 countries with bond and bill data

Notes: See notes to Table 4. Standard deviations are in parentheses. Columns for stocks and bills are for common samples with the indicated
starting date. Columns for bonds and bills are for common samples with the indicated starting date. End dates are 2006.




                                                                       50
                     Table 6 Consumption Disasters
                        Part 1: OECD countries
Country       Trough Peak C decline        Stock-price     Bills    Inflation
                                (fraction)    decline     rate of     rate
                                            (fraction)    return
Australia       1918    1913       0.238       0.144      -0.008      0.036
                1932    1927       0.234       0.069       0.086     -0.032
                1944    1938       0.301       0.225      -0.024      0.041
Austria (X)    1918     1913       0.451         --        0.034      0.019
                1933    1929       0.217       0.533       0.071     -0.004
               1947?    1938      0.438?         --          --         --
Belgium        1917     1913       0.445         --       -0.160      0.353
                1942    1937       0.530                  -0.024      0.034
Canada          1876    1873       0.152         --          --      -0.023
                1908    1906       0.113         --        0.014     -0.046
                1915    1912       0.130         --       0.022†      0.034
                1921    1918       0.196       0.210         --       0.104
                1933    1929       0.230       0.650         --      -0.054
Denmark         1921    1919       0.241       0.502      -0.113      0.201
                1941    1939       0.261       0.336      -0.120      0.193
                1948    1946       0.144       0.040       0.005      0.025
Finland         1892    1890       0.102         --          --         --
                1918    1913       0.360         --      -0.194††   0.389††
                1932    1928       0.199       0.207       0.115     -0.041
                1944    1938       0.254       0.168      -0.067      0.122
                1993    1989       0.140       0.620       0.092      0.045
France          1871    1864       0.158       0.212       0.027      0.007
                1915    1912       0.215       0.171       0.031      0.006
                1943    1938       0.580         --       -0.121      0.162
Germany        1918     1912       0.425       0.539      -0.101      0.186
                1923    1922       0.127       0.654      -0.970       34.5
                1932    1928       0.121       0.562       0.109     -0.035
                1945    1939       0.412      -0.366       0.000      0.020
Greece (X)      1944    1938       0.636      0.442*      -0.442       4.65
                1946    1945       0.113         --          --         --
Iceland (X)     1952    1947       0.250         --          --       0.202
                1969    1967       0.118         --          --       0.108
                1975    1974       0.107         --          --       0.515
                1993    1987       0.176         --       0.060^      0.144
Italy          1945     1939       0.286       0.429      -0.236       1.02
Japan           1945    1937       0.639       0.457      -0.066      0.101
Netherlands     1893    1889       0.098         --       -0.013      0.038
                1918    1912       0.440         --       -0.013      0.060
                1944    1939       0.545      -0.506      -0.050      0.069


                                  51
New Zealand (X)      1944     1939      0.224            0.089   -0.009    0.031
Norway               1918     1916      0.169           -0.035   -0.212    0.326
                     1921     1919      0.161            0.536   -0.032    0.094
                     1944     1939      0.100           -0.222   -0.062    0.090
Portugal             1919     1913      0.215              --       --       --
                     1936     1934      0.121           -0.434    0.044    0.010
                     1942     1939      0.104            0.084   -0.058    0.110
                     1976     1974      0.098              --    -0.136    0.242
Spain                1896     1892      0.182           -0.088    0.079   -0.024
                     1915     1913      0.128            0.065    0.021    0.026
                     1930     1929      0.101            0.090    0.027    0.028
                     1937     1935      0.461          0.238**   -0.051    0.058
                     1945     1940      0.145           -0.079   -0.021    0.107
                     1949     1946      0.131            0.014   -0.029    0.075
Sweden               1917     1913      0.115            0.095   -0.014    0.074
                     1921     1920      0.132            0.251    0.052    0.019
                     1945     1939      0.182            0.173   -0.030    0.059
Switzerland          1872     1870      0.190              --       --       --
                     1878     1876      0.225              --       --       --
                     1883     1881      0.142              --       --    -0.018
                     1886     1885      0.141              --       --    -0.059
                     1888     1887      0.157              --       --     0.010
                     1918     1912      0.108            0.475   -0.031    0.088
                     1945     1939      0.173            0.382   -0.052    0.074
U.K.                 1918     1915      0.167            0.490   -0.117    0.188
                     1943     1938      0.169            0.123   -0.032    0.047
U.S.                 1921     1917      0.164            0.584   -0.071    0.139
                     1933     1929      0.208            0.631    0.093   -0.064

  *1937-40, **1934-35, †1913-14, ††1915-17, ^1988-92
  X: Not in analysis for C sample.




                                         52
                   Table 6, Part 2: Non-OECD countries
Country        Trough Peak         C decline  Stock-price    Bills    Inflation
                                   (fraction)    decline    rate of     rate
                                               (fraction)   return
Argentina        1891     1887        0.123         --         --       0.080
                 1898     1895        0.283         --         --       0.030
                 1900     1899        0.195         --         --      -0.096
                 1902     1901        0.127         --         --       0.059
                 1907     1906        0.123         --         --       0.025
                 1917     1912        0.172         --         --       0.047
                 1932     1928        0.189         --         --      -0.028
                 1959     1958        0.101         --         --       0.507
                1982      1980        0.104       0.575      0.516       1.09
                 1990     1987        0.160      -3.264     -0.249       18.3
                 2002     1998        0.249       0.401      0.090     -0.009
Brazil           1905     1902        0.148         --         --      -0.029
                 1909     1906        0.157         --         --       0.023
                 1919     1918        0.109         --         --       0.123
                 1921     1920        0.147         --         --       0.099
                 1931     1928        0.201         --         --      -0.037
                 1990     1984        0.163      -0.271        --        6.42
Chile            1915     1911        0.322      -0.021        --       0.030
                 1922     1918        0.181       0.154        --       0.085
                 1932     1929        0.374       0.538      0.063      0.007
                 1956     1954        0.136      -0.315     -0.410      0.774
                1976      1972        0.401      -2.470     -0.516      3.47
                 1985     1981        0.327       0.684      0.165      0.191
Colombia (X)     1932     1929        0.181       0.263        --      -0.090
                 1943     1939        0.228      -0.053        --       0.041
                 1999     1997        0.099       0.043      0.095      0.172
India (X)       1942      1932        0.217      -0.814      0.003      0.016
                1946      1943        0.130      -0.305     -0.053      0.086
                 1950     1947        0.177       0.504     -0.025      0.038
Malaysia (X)     1916     1914        0.096         --         --         --
                 1920     1917        0.425         --         --         --
                 1932     1929        0.258         --         --         --
                1947?     1938       0.336?         --         --         --
                 1952     1951        0.118         --         --       0.164
                 1986     1984        0.145       0.434      0.036      0.014
                 1998     1997        0.124       0.533      0.036      0.029
Mexico (X)       1932     1926        0.317      0.406*        --      -0.025
                 1988     1981        0.161      -0.148      0.024      0.852
                 1995     1994        0.113       0.147      0.075      0.071


                                   53
Peru                    1914       1907       0.118              --           --           --
                        1932       1929       0.140            0.105          --        -0.043
                        1979       1975       0.179            0.325          --         0.437
                        1992       1987       0.300            0.519       -0.522         24.8
Singapore (X)           1916       1910       0.145              --           --           --
                        1920       1918       0.127              --           --           --
                        1931       1928       0.104              --           --           --
                        1951       1949       0.159              --           --         0.098
                        1959       1956       0.117              --           --         0.013
South Korea (X)         1998       1997       0.143            0.458        0.072        0.066
Taiwan                  1905       1903       0.219              --           --         0.076
                        1911       1910       0.127              --           --         0.082
                        1945       1936       0.684              --           --         0.148
Turkey (X)              1932       1929       0.120              --           --        -0.031
                        1946       1938       0.298              --           --         0.215
                        2001       2000       0.108            0.565       -0.078        0.390
Uruguay (X)             1965       1960       0.099              --           --         0.274
                        1984       1981       0.267              --           --         0.338
                        2002       1998       0.219              --           --         0.054
Venezuela (X)           1933       1930       0.311            0.074          --        -0.060
                        1936       1935       0.107           -0.069          --        -0.058
                        1952       1948       0.203            0.103       -0.025        0.048
                        1964       1957       0.223            0.329        0.020        0.016
                        1989       1982       0.320           -3.493       -0.048        0.183
                        2003       1993       0.147            0.690       -0.043        0.421

  *1929-31
  X: Not in analysis for C sample.

  Note: Declines of real per capita personal consumer expenditure, C, by 0.1 or greater are
  cumulative fractions from peak year to trough year. Declines of real stock prices are
  cumulative fractions from the end of the year prior to the peak to the end of the year prior
  to the trough (unless the timing is indicated otherwise because of missing data). A
  negative number means that real stock prices increased. Real rates of return on bills and
  inflation rates are mean values from the peak year to one year prior to the trough year
  (unless the timing is indicated otherwise because of missing data). Bold for trough year
  indicates current participant in external or internal war.




                                              54
                                       Table 7

             Consumption Disasters Grouped by Events/Periods

Pre-1914 (21)

OECD (11). Canada 2 (0.15, 0.11), Finland (0.10), France (0.16), Netherlands (0.10),
Spain (0.18), Switzerland 5 (0.19, 0.22, 0.14, 0.14, 0.16).

Non-OECD (10). Argentina 5 (0.12, 0.28, 0.20, 0.13, 0.12), Brazil 2 (0.15, 0.16), Peru
(0.12), Taiwan 2 (0.22, 0.13).

World War I (includes non-combatants) (19)

OECD (14). Australia (0.24), Austria (0.45), Belgium (0.45), Canada (0.13), Finland
(0.36), France (0.22), Germany (0.42), Netherlands (0.44), Norway (0.17), Portugal
(0.22), Spain (0.13), Sweden (0.12), Switzerland (0.11), U.K. (0.17).

Non-OECD (5). Argentina (0.17), Brazil (0.11), Chile (0.32), Malaysia (0.10), Singapore
(0.14).

1920s (10)

OECD (6). Canada (0.20), Denmark (0.24), Germany (0.13), Norway (0.16), Sweden
(0.13), U.S. (0.16).

Non-OECD (4). Brazil (0.15), Chile (0.18), Malaysia (0.42), Singapore (0.13).

Great Depression (early 1930s) (18)

OECD (7). Australia (0.23), Austria (0.22), Canada (0.23), Finland (0.20), Germany
(0.12), Spain (0.10), U.S. (0.21).

Non-OECD (11). Argentina (0.19), Brazil (0.20), Chile (0.37), Colombia (0.18), India
(0.22), Malaysia (0.26), Mexico (0.32), Peru (0.14), Singapore (0.10), Turkey (0.12),
Venezuela (0.31).

Spanish Civil War (includes non-combatant) (2)

OECD (2). Portugal (0.12), Spain (0.46).

Late 1930s (1)

Non-OECD (1). Venezuela (0.11).



                                           55
World War II (includes non-combatants) (22)

OECD (17). Australia (0.30), Austria (0.44), Belgium (0.53), Denmark (0.26), Finland
(0.25), France (0.58), Germany (0.41), Greece (0.64), Italy (0.29), Japan (0.64),
Netherlands (0.54), Norway (0.10), Portugal (0.10), Spain (0.14), Sweden (0.18),
Switzerland (0.17), U.K. (0.17).

Non-OECD (5). Colombia (0.23), India (0.13), Malaysia (0.34), Taiwan (0.68), Turkey
(0.30).

post-WWII (37)

OECD (9). Denmark (0.14), Finland (0.14), Greece (0.11), Iceland 4 (0.25, 0.12, 0.11,
0.18), Portugal (0.10), Spain (0.13).

Non-OECD (28). Argentina 4 (0.10, 0.10, 0.16, 0.25), Brazil (0.16), Chile 3 (0.14, 0.40,
0.33), Colombia (0.10), India (0.18), Malaysia 3 (0.12, 0.14, 0.12), Mexico 2 (0.16, 0.11),
Peru 2 (0.18, 0.30), Singapore 2 (0.16, 0.12), South Korea (0.14), Turkey (0.11),
Uruguay 3 (0.10, 0.27, 0.22), Venezuela 4 (0.20, 0.22, 0.32, 0.15).


Note: Numbers in parentheses show fractional declines in C during each crisis.




                                            56
                         Table 8 GDP Disasters
                        Part 1: OECD countries
Country     Trough   Peak GDP decline      Stock-price     Bills    Inflation
                              (fraction)      decline     rate of     rate
                                            (fraction)    return
Australia    1895    1889        0.271         0.067       0.085     -0.050
             1918    1910        0.118         0.188      -0.020     0.045
             1931    1926        0.221         0.179       0.061     -0.013
             1946    1943        0.145        -0.167       0.007     0.005
Austria      1918    1912        0.381           --        0.031     0.022
             1933    1929        0.235         0.533       0.071     -0.004
             1945    1941        0.587           --          --        --
Belgium      1918    1913        0.477           --       -0.225     0.492
             1934    1930        0.117         0.451       0.070     -0.052
             1943    1937        0.453        -0.764      -0.033     0.045
Canada       1878    1874        0.117           --          --      -0.020
             1921    1917        0.301         0.393         --      0.115
             1933    1928        0.348         0.558         --      -0.041
Denmark      1918    1914        0.160        0.132*      -0.045     0.128
             1941    1939        0.239         0.336      -0.120     0.193
Finland      1881    1876        0.120           --          --        --
             1918    1913        0.353           --      -0.194††   0.389††
             1940    1938        0.103         0.142       0.017     0.024
             1993    1989        0.124         0.620       0.092     0.045
France       1870    1868        0.095           --          --      -0.011
             1879    1874        0.102           --          --      -0.002
             1886    1882        0.133         0.296       0.028     0.000
             1918    1912        0.289         0.395      -0.055     0.117
             1935    1929        0.187         0.535       0.068     -0.039
             1944    1939        0.414           --       -0.147     0.197
Germany      1919    1913        0.357         0.736      -0.125     0.214
             1923    1922        0.135         0.654      -0.970      34.5
             1932    1928        0.280         0.562       0.109     -0.035
             1946    1943        0.736         0.068      -0.009     0.028
Greece       1872    1868        0.106           --          --        --
             1877    1873        0.152           --          --        --
             1891    1888        0.233           --          --        --
             1897    1896        0.151           --          --        --
             1901    1899        0.144           --          --        --
             1913    1911        0.419           --          --        --
             1919    1918        0.177           --       -0.553      1.38
             1923    1921        0.238           --       -0.203     0.369
             1942    1939        0.660       0.448**      -0.331      4.31


                                  57
Iceland          1883     1881        0.125      --       --       --
                 1918     1913        0.221      --       --    0.206
                 1920     1919        0.157      --       --    0.114
                 1952     1948        0.139      --       --    0.235
Italy            1920     1918        0.221    0.374   -0.101   0.195
                 1945     1939        0.413   0.429    -0.236    1.02
Japan            1944     1940        0.503   0.239    -0.026   0.054
Netherlands      1918     1913        0.258      --    -0.021   0.070
                 1934     1929        0.129    0.582    0.057   -0.032
                 1944     1939        0.525   -0.506   -0.050   0.069
New Zealand      1879     1878        0.174      --       --       --
                 1909     1907        0.110      --       --       --
                 1918     1911        0.107      --       --    0.040
                 1927     1925        0.117      --    0.057    0.009
                 1948     1947        0.119    0.003   -0.061   0.081
                 1951     1950        0.097   -0.049   -0.068   0.089
Norway           1918     1916        0.148   -0.035   -0.212   0.326
                 1921     1920        0.110    0.447   -0.117   0.194
                 1944     1939        0.193   -0.222   -0.062   0.090
Portugal         1928     1927        0.109      --       --       --
                 1936     1934        0.148   -0.434   0.044    0.010
Spain            1896     1892        0.119   -0.088   0.079    -0.024
                 1933     1929        0.096    0.464    0.061   -0.009
                 1938     1935        0.313   0.238†   -0.035   0.098
Sweden           1918     1916        0.150    0.169   -0.185   0.323
                 1921     1920        0.108   0.251    0.052    0.019
                 1941     1939        0.095    0.349   -0.071   0.104
Switzerland      1879     1875        0.161      --       --       --
                 1918     1912        0.191    0.475   -0.031   0.088
                 1942     1939        0.126    0.308   -0.080   0.105
U.K.             1921     1918        0.192    0.321   -0.069   0.130
                 1947     1943        0.148   -0.269   0.003    0.006
U.S.             1908     1906        0.105   0.365    0.019    0.041
                 1914     1913        0.095   0.160    0.034    0.020
                 1921     1918        0.118    0.293   -0.057   0.125
                 1933     1929        0.290   0.631     0.093   -0.064
                 1947     1944        0.165   -0.061   -0.062   0.076

  *1914-17, **1938-40, †1934-35, ††1915-17
  X: Not in analysis for GDP sample.




                                         58
                      Table 8, Part 2: Non-OECD countries
Country        Trough     Peak     GDP decline     Stock-price     Bills    Inflation
                                     (fraction)        decline    rate of     rate
                                                     (fraction)   return
Argentina        1891     1889          0.189             --         --      0.284
                 1897     1896          0.219             --         --      0.069
                 1900     1899          0.147             --         --      -0.096
                 1917     1912          0.289             --         --      0.047
                 1932     1929          0.195             --         --      -0.002
                 1959     1958          0.101             --         --      0.507
                 1982     1980          0.111           0.575      0.516      1.09
                 1990     1988          0.141          -3.430     -0.355      26.6
                 2002     1998          0.220           0.401      0.090     -0.009
Brazil           1887     1884          0.105             --         --      -0.020
                 1893     1891          0.262             --         --      0.248
                 1900     1895          0.135             --         --      0.033
                 1931     1928          0.201             --         --      -0.037
                 1992     1987          0.110           0.358        --       10.8
Chile            1903     1902          0.111           0.115        --      0.175
                 1915     1912          0.105           0.018        --      0.026
                 1919     1918          0.126          -0.018        --      -0.014
                 1932     1929          0.361           0.538      0.063     0.007
                 1975     1971          0.240          -2.081     -0.479      2.67
                 1983     1981          0.180           0.499      0.296     0.151
Colombia                                        none
India            1877     1875          0.154             --         --      -0.065
                 1896     1894          0.100             --       0.120     -0.060
                 1918     1916          0.146             --       0.004     -0.061
                 1948     1943          0.117           0.073     -0.058     0.082
Indonesia        1933     1930          0.114           0.406        --      -0.186
                 1945     1940          0.545             --         --      0.044
                 1999     1997          0.158           0.681     -0.066     0.440
Malaysia (X)     1904     1902          0.100             --         --         --
                 1935     1929          0.193             --         --         --
                 1937     1936          0.117             --         --         --
                 1941     1939          0.235             --         --        --
                1947?     1942          0.361             --         --        --
Mexico (X)      1914?    1909?         0.141?             --         --      0.031
                 1932     1926          0.320          0.406*        --      -0.025
                 1988     1981          0.128          -0.148      0.024     0.852
Peru             1932     1929          0.258           0.105        --      -0.043
                 1979     1975          0.104           0.325        --      0.437
                 1983     1981          0.136           0.879        --      0.728
                 1992     1987          0.325           0.519     -0.522      24.8


                                       59
Philippines     1904   1903    0.158      --       --    0.234
                1915   1913    0.116      --       --    -0.109
                1935   1929    0.134      --       --    -0.038
                1946   1939    0.572      --       --      --
                1985   1982    0.187   0.736    -0.050   0.285
Singapore (X)   1904   1902    0.214      --       --      --
                1913   1910    0.337      --       --      --
                1916   1915    0.174      --       --      --
                1920   1917    0.235      --       --      --
                1927   1925    0.389      --       --      --
                1932   1929    0.412      --       --      --
                1938   1937    0.151      --       --      --
                1952   1950?   0.345      --       --    0.192
                1957   1956    0.113      --       --    0.033
South Africa    1917   1912    0.229   0.139       --    0.031
                1920   1919    0.239   -0.200      --    0.009
                1987   1981    0.113   -0.156    0.006   0.147
                1993   1989    0.102   0.028     0.032   0.140
South Korea     1919   1918    0.111      --       --      --
                1945   1940    0.480      --       --      --
                1951   1949    0.151     --        --    0.492
Sri Lanka       1878   1870    0.158      --       --      --
                1886   1883    0.141      --       --      --
                1923   1913    0.138      --       --      --
                1932   1929    0.147      --       --      --
                1946   1942    0.211     --        --    0.147
Taiwan          1905   1903    0.214     --        --    0.076
                1911   1910    0.114      --       --    0.082
                1945   1936    0.662     --        --    0.148
Turkey (X)      1927   1926    0.134      --       --    0.033
                1932   1931    0.122      --       --    -0.025
                1945   1939    0.395      --       --    0.283
Uruguay         1875   1872    0.269      --       --      --
                1881   1878    0.153      --       --      --
                1887   1886    0.140      --       --    -0.054
                1890   1888    0.202      --       --    0.181
                1901   1896    0.156      --       --    0.045
                1905   1904    0.122      --       --    -0.081
                1915   1912    0.280      --       --    0.057
                1920   1919    0.142      --       --    0.099
                1933   1930    0.367      --       --    -0.005
                1943   1939    0.139      --       --    0.033
                1959   1957    0.118      --       --    0.190
                1984   1981    0.236      --       --    0.338
                2002   1998    0.186      --       --    0.054


                                60
Venezuela           1892       1890         0.235              --            --         --
                    1897       1893         0.225              --            --         --
                    1907       1903         0.134              --            --         --
                    1916       1913         0.167              --            --      0.025**
                    1933       1930         0.162            0.074           --       -0.060
                    1942       1939         0.155            -0.134          --       -0.003
                    1961       1957         0.152            0.270         0.007      0.020
                    1985       1977         0.295            0.616        -0.005      0.121
                    2003       1993         0.259            0.690        -0.043      0.421


  *1929-31, ** 1914-15
  X: Not in analysis for GDP sample.

  Note: Declines of real per capita GDP by 0.1 or greater are cumulative fractions from
  peak year to trough year. Declines of real stock prices are cumulative fractions from the
  end of the year prior to the peak to the end of the year prior to the trough (unless the
  timing is indicated otherwise because of missing data). A negative number means that
  real stock prices increased. Real rates of return on bills and inflation rates are mean
  values from the peak year to one year prior to the trough year (unless the timing is
  indicated otherwise because of missing data). Bold for trough year indicates current
  participant in external or internal war.




                                              61
                                         Table 9

                  GDP Disasters Grouped by Events/Periods
Pre-1914 (46)

OECD (19). Australia (0.27), Canada (0.12), Finland (0.12), France 3 (0.10, 0.10, 0.13),
Greece 6 (0.11, 0.15, 0.23, 0.15, 0.14, 0.42), Iceland (0.12), New Zealand 2 (0.17, 0.11),
Spain (0.12), Switzerland (0.16), U.S. 2 (0.10, 0.10).

Non-OECD (27). Argentina 3 (0.19, 0.22, 0.15), Brazil 3 (0.10, 0.26, 0.14), Chile (0.11),
India 2 (0.15, 0.10), Malaysia (0.10), Mexico (0.14), Philippines (0.16), Singapore 2
(0.21, 0.34), Sri Lanka 2 (0.16, 0.14), Taiwan 2 (0.21, 0.11), Uruguay 6 (0.27, 0.15, 0.14,
0.20, 0.16, 0.12), Venezuela 3 (0.24, 0.22, 0.13).

World War I (includes non-combatants) (26)

OECD (14). Australia (0.12), Austria (0.38), Belgium (0.48), Denmark (0.16), Finland
(0.35), France (0.29), Germany (0.36), Greece (0.18), Iceland (0.22), Netherlands (0.26),
New Zealand (0.11), Norway (0.15), Sweden (0.15), Switzerland (0.19).

Non-OECD (12). Argentina (0.29), Chile 2 (0.10, 0.13), India (0.15), Philippines (0.12),
Singapore 2 (0.17, 0.24), South Africa (0.23), South Korea (0.11), Sri Lanka (0.14),
Uruguay (0.28), Venezuela (0.17).

1920s (15)

OECD (11). Canada (0.30), Germany (0.14), Greece (0.24), Iceland (0.16), Italy (0.22),
New Zealand (0.12), Norway (0.11), Portugal (0.11), Sweden (0.11), U.K. (0.19), U.S.
(0.12).

Non-OECD (4). Singapore (0.39), South Africa (0.24), Turkey (0.13), Uruguay (0.14).

Great Depression (early 1930s) (22)

OECD (9). Australia (0.22), Austria (0.24), Belgium (0.12), Canada (0.35), France (0.19),
Germany (0.28), Netherlands (0.13), Spain (0.10), U.S. (0.29).

Non-OECD (13). Argentina (0.20), Brazil (0.20), Chile (0.36), Indonesia (0.11),
Malaysia (0.19), Mexico (0.32), Peru (0.26), Philippines (0.13), Singapore (0.41), Sri
Lanka (0.15), Turkey (0.12), Uruguay (0.37), Venezuela (0.16).

Spanish Civil War (includes non-combatant) (2)

OECD (2). Portugal (0.15), Spain (0.31).



                                            62
Late 1930s (2)

Non-OECD (2). Malaysia (0.12), Singapore (0.15).

World War II (includes non-combatants) (25)

OECD (14). Australia (0.14), Austria (0.59), Belgium (0.45), Denmark (0.24), Finland
(0.10), France (0.41), Germany (0.74), Greece (0.66), Italy (0.41), Japan (0.50),
Netherlands (0.52), Norway (0.19), Sweden (0.10), Switzerland (0.13).

Non-OECD (11). India (0.12), Indonesia (0.54), Malaysia 2 (0.24, 0.36), Philippines
(0.57), South Korea (0.48), Sri Lanka (0.21), Taiwan (0.66), Turkey (0.40), Uruguay
(0.14), Venezuela (0.16).

post-WWII (30)

OECD (6). Finland (0.12), Iceland (0.14), New Zealand 2 (0.12, 0.10), U.K. (0.15), U.S.
(0.16).

Non-OECD (24). Argentina 4 (0.10, 0.11, 0.14, 0.22), Brazil (0.11), Chile 2 (0.24, 0.18),
Indonesia (0.16), Mexico (0.13), Peru 3 (0.10, 0.14, 0.32), Philippines (0.19). Singapore 2
(0.34, 0.11), South Africa 2 (0.11, 0.10), South Korea (0.15), Uruguay 3 (0.12, 0.24,
0.19), Venezuela 3 (0.15, 0.30, 0.26).


Note: Numbers in parentheses show fractional declines in GDP during each crisis.




                                            63
       Table 10 Declines in Consumer Durables during Consumption Crises
Country             Share of Durables              Proportionate decline
                  in C (nominal values)             in real per capita:
                  Trough         Peak      Consumer Durables Non-durables
                                          expenditure
                                 OECD countries
Canada          1933 0.054 1929 0.085        0.230        0.507         0.201
Finland         1892 0.029 1890 0.042        0.102        0.132         0.101
Finland         1918 0.010 1913 0.017        0.360        0.655         0.353
Finland         1932 0.013 1928 0.030        0.199        0.636         0.182
Finland         1944 0.019 1938 0.038        0.254        0.634         0.237
Finland         1993  0.072   1989  0.138    0.140        0.512         0.062
Iceland         1969 0.101 1967 0.133        0.118        0.321         0.087
Iceland         1975 0.134 1974 0.181        0.107        0.340         0.043
Iceland         1993 0.102 1987 0.183        0.176        0.529         0.053
Portugal        1976 0.092 1974 0.101        0.098        0.195         0.091
Spain           1896 0.020 1892 0.018        0.182        0.063         0.185
Spain           1915 0.020 1913 0.034        0.128        0.405         0.109
Spain           1930 0.045 1929 0.057        0.101        0.238         0.090
Spain           1937 0.022 1935 0.034        0.461        0.642         0.450
Spain           1945 0.023 1940 0.019        0.145       -0.206         0.153
Spain           1949 0.025 1946 0.027        0.131        0.170         0.127
U.K.            1918  0.040   1915  0.037    0.167        0.198         0.166
U.K.            1943 0.023 1938 0.049        0.169        0.649         0.144
U.S.            1921 0.094 1917 0.094        0.164        0.227         0.158
U.S.            1933 0.076 1929 0.119        0.208        0.501         0.169
                               non-OECD countries
Chile           1985 0.060 1981 0.098        0.327        0.695         0.179
Colombia        1999 0.088 1997 0.110        0.099        0.314         0.060
Mexico          1995 0.070 1994 0.082        0.113        0.340         0.077
South Korea     1998 0.063 1997 0.089        0.143        0.363         0.096
Turkey          2001 0.150 2000 0.195        0.108        0.315         0.056
Venezuela       1964 0.042 1957 0.079        0.223        0.581         0.184
Venezuela       1989  0.047   1982  0.073    0.320        0.643         0.299
Venezuela       2003 0.076 1993 0.081        0.147        0.478         0.105

Overall means        0.058        0.080     0.183      0.396        0.151




                                     64
Note to Table 10: This table shows the universe of consumption crises considered in
Table 6 for which we have been able to break down the decline in real per capita personal
consumer expenditure, C, into durables versus non-durables and services. The latter
category should be closer than C to “consumption.” We have the necessary data for 28 C
crises (18 of which in our main sample of 87 C crises) from Table 6. The first four
columns show the share of nominal durables expenditure in nominal C at the trough and
peak years of each crisis. The last three columns show the proportionate fall in real per
capita consumer expenditure (the number contained in Table 6), the fall in real per capita
durables spending, and the fall in real per capita spending on non-durables and services.
The last measure would be closer than our Table 6 measures to the decline in per capita
consumption.




                                           65
              Table 11 Matched C and GDP Contractions
                       Part 1: OECD countries
Country                        C contraction       GDP contraction
                            Trough year     Size Trough year    Size
Australia                       1918       0.238    1918       0.118
                                1932       0.234    1931       0.221
                                1944       0.301    1946       0.145
Belgium                         1917       0.445    1918       0.477
                                1934       0.092    1934       0.117
                                1942       0.530    1943       0.453
Canada                          1876       0.152    1878       0.117
                                1908       0.113    1908       0.078
                                1915       0.130    1914       0.095
                                1921       0.196    1921       0.301
                                1933       0.230    1933       0.348
Denmark                         1917       0.074    1918       0.160
                                1921       0.241    1921       0.042
                                1941       0.261    1941       0.239
                                1948       0.144    1945       0.087
Finland                         1892       0.102    1892       0.075
                                1918       0.360    1918       0.353
                                1932       0.199    1932       0.062
                                1944       0.254    1940       0.103
                                1993       0.140    1993       0.124
France                          1871       0.158    1870       0.095
                                1878       0.085    1879       0.102
                                1884       0.085    1886       0.133
                                1915       0.215    1918       0.289
                                1936       0.062    1935       0.187
                                1943       0.580    1944       0.414
Germany                         1918       0.425    1919       0.357
                                1923       0.127    1923       0.135
                                1932       0.121    1932       0.280
                                1945       0.412    1946       0.736
Italy                           1919       0.026    1920       0.221
                                1945       0.286    1945       0.413
Japan                           1945       0.639    1944       0.503
Netherlands                     1893       0.098    1893       0.062
                                1918       0.440    1918       0.258
                                1935       0.045    1934       0.129
                                1944       0.545    1944       0.525
Norway                          1918       0.169    1918       0.148
                                1921       0.161    1921       0.110
                                1944       0.100    1944       0.193


                                66
                          Table 11, part 1, continued
Country                             C contraction        GDP contraction
                                Trough year       Size Trough year     Size
Portugal                             1919        0.215    1918        0.086
                                     1928        0.062    1928        0.109
                                     1936        0.121    1936        0.148
                                     1942        0.104    1945        0.048
                                     1976        0.098    1975        0.085
Spain                                1896        0.182    1896        0.119
                                     1915        0.128    1918        0.038
                                     1930        0.101    1933        0.096
                                     1937        0.461    1938        0.313
                                     1945        0.145    1945        0.084
                                     1949        0.131    1949        0.013
Sweden                               1917        0.115    1918        0.150
                                     1921        0.132    1921        0.108
                                     1945        0.182    1941        0.095
Switzerland                          1872        0.190    1870        0.052
                                     1878        0.225    1879        0.161
                                     1883        0.142    1883        0.065
                                     1886        0.141    1887        0.003
                                     1888        0.157    1887        0.003
                                     1918        0.108    1918        0.191
                                     1945        0.173    1942        0.126
U.K.                                 1918        0.167    1918       -0.022
                                     1921        0.005    1921        0.192
                                     1943        0.169    1943       -0.014
                                     1948        0.001    1947        0.148
U.S.                                 1908        0.037    1908        0.105
                                     1915        0.046    1914        0.095
                                     1921        0.164    1921        0.118
                                     1933        0.208    1933        0.290
                                     1947        0.001    1947        0.165
OECD total (70) mean                             0.190                 0.174
OECD war (22) mean                               0.329                 0.284
OECD non-war (48) mean                           0.127                 0.123
                 OECD timing breakdown for trough years
Total 70: 35 same year, 16 C later, 19 GDP later
War 22: 10 same year, 3 C later, 9 GDP later
Non-war 48: 25 same year, 13 C later, 10 GDP later




                                    67
                         Part 2: non-OECD countries
Country                                C contraction      GDP contraction
                                    Trough year     size Trough year   size
Argentina                              1891        0.123    1891      0.189
                                       1898        0.283    1897      0.219
                                       1900        0.195    1900      0.147
                                       1902        0.127    1902      0.049
                                       1907        0.123    1907      0.025
                                       1917        0.172    1917      0.289
                                       1932        0.189    1932      0.195
                                       1959        0.101    1959      0.101
                                       1982        0.104    1982      0.111
                                       1990        0.160    1990      0.141
                                       2002        0.249    2002      0.220
Brazil                                 1905        0.148    1904      0.040
                                       1909        0.157    1908      0.061
                                       1919        0.109    1918      0.044
                                       1921        0.147    1921      0.002
                                       1931        0.201    1931      0.201
                                       1990        0.163    1992      0.110
Chile                                  1903        0.048    1903      0.111
                                       1915        0.322    1915      0.105
                                       1922        0.181    1919      0.126
                                       1932        0.374    1932      0.361
                                       1956        0.136    1956      0.038
                                       1976        0.401    1975      0.240
                                       1985        0.327    1983      0.180
Peru                                   1914        0.118    1914      0.019
                                       1932        0.140    1932      0.258
                                       1979        0.179    1979      0.104
                                       1983        0.075    1983      0.136
                                       1992        0.300    1992      0.325
Taiwan                                 1905        0.219    1905      0.214
                                       1911        0.127    1911      0.114
                                       1945        0.684    1945      0.662
non-OECD total (32) mean                           0.199              0.164
non-OECD war (4) mean                              0.352              0.307
non-OECD non-war(28) mean                          0.177              0.144
               non-OECD timing breakdown for trough years
Total 32: 24 same year, 7 C later, 1 GDP later
War 4: 3 same year, 1 C later, 0 GDP later
Non-war 28: 21 same year, 6 C later, 1 GDP later




                                    68
                                Table 11, continued
                                            C contraction   GDP contraction
                                                       size               size
  Full sample total (102) mean                       0.193              0.171
  Full sample war (26) mean                          0.333              0.288
  Full sample non-war (76) mean                      0.145              0.131
                  full sample timing breakdown for trough years
  Total 102: 59 same year, 23 C later, 20 GDP later
  War 26: 13 same year, 4 C later, 9 GDP later
  Non-war 76: 46 same year, 19 C later, 11 GDP later


Note: We consider here only 17 OECD and 5 non-OECD countries that are in our full
samples for personal consumer expenditure, C, and GDP. Contractions in C and GDP of
size 0.10 or more come from Tables 6 and 8 (with additions from underlying data for
cases where C or GDP contractions were of magnitude less than 0.10). The C and GDP
contractions are matched by trough years (the same or nearby). Bold for trough year
indicates participation as combatant in war. The timing breakdowns compare the trough
years for C and GDP as to whether they are the same, C comes later, or GDP comes later.




                                          69
                              Table 12 Simulated Model based on C Disasters (rf=0.01 in all cases)
                 (1)               (2)         (3)        (4)   (5)    (6)       (7)         (8)                  (9)     (10)     (11)
      Specification                no.    no. disaster-    p     π     Eb E(1-b) E(1-b)1-γ
                                                                                     -γ
                                                                                                                   ρ       ρ*       re
                                disasters     years
      baseline (b≥0.10, γ=3.5)     87          312      0.0355 0.279 0.218      3.97        2.36                 0.046   0.030    0.061
      γ=3.0                        87          312      0.0355 0.279 0.218      3.01        1.91                 0.029   0.008    0.043
      OECD                         57          214      0.0286 0.266 0.223      3.87        2.37                 0.034   0.007    0.048
      non-OECD                     30           98      0.0654 0.306 0.219      4.14        2.34                 0.099   0.130    0.116
      b≥0.15                       54          226      0.0213 0.239 0.276      5.42        2.95                 0.043   0.019    0.058
      b≥0.20                       32          144      0.0122 0.222 0.349      7.80        3.87                 0.040   0.008    0.055
      b≥0.30                       17           87      0.0064 0.195 0.444 12.39            5.54                 0.036   -0.003   0.052
      b≥0.40                       11           60      0.0041 0.183 0.506 16.90            7.07                 0.034   -0.010   0.049
      non-war                      62          195      0.0242 0.318 0.170      2.02        1.64                 0.005   -0.050   0.017
      non-war, γ=9                 62          195      0.0242 0.318 0.170      7.69        5.89                 0.037   -0.037   0.053
      HP-filtered                  38          242      0.0157 0.157 0.236      3.85        2.42                 0.016   -0.030   0.030
      HP-filtered, γ=4.5           38          242      0.0157 0.157 0.236      6.58        3.85                 0.035   -0.011   0.051



Note: The baseline simulation uses the 87 consumption disasters of size b≥0.10 for the 22 included countries from Table 6. The
calibrated parameters (expected normal growth rate, g=0.025; standard deviation of normal fluctuations, σ=0.02; reciprocal of
intertemporal elasticity of substitution, θ=0.5) are discussed in the text, with the coefficient of relative risk aversion, γ, set at 3.5. For
subsequent rows, the entry in column 1 shows how the specification differs from that for the baseline case. Column 2 shows the
number of disasters in the selected sample, and column 3 shows the number of disaster-years for this sample. Column 4 shows the
estimated probability per year, p, for moving from normalcy to disaster, and column 5 shows the estimated probability per year, π, for
moving from disaster to normalcy. Eb in column 6 is the mean disaster size. E(1-b)-γ and E(1-b)1-γ in columns 7 and 8, respectively,
are the mean values of these key determinants of the equity premium (from Eq. [8]). ρ in column 9 is the rate of time preference, and
ρ* in column 10 is the effective rate of time preference, given in Eq. (5). The values of ρ and ρ* are chosen to generate rf=0.01 in
Eq. (7). re in column 11 is the overall expected rate of return on unlevered equity (from Eq. [6]).




                                                                      70
                           Table 13 Simulated Model based on GDP Disasters (rf=0.01 in all cases)
                (1)               (2)        (3)        (4)   (5)    (6)       (7)       (8)              (9)     (10)    (11)
     Specification               no.    no. disaster-    p     π     Eb E(1-b) E(1-b)1-γ
                                                                                   -γ
                                                                                                           ρ       ρ*      re
                              disasters     years
     baseline (b≥0.10, γ=3.5)    148         516      0.0370 0.287 0.208      4.09      2.33             0.054   0.039    0.069
     γ=3.0                       148         516      0.0370 0.287 0.208      3.02      1.88             0.033   0.012    0.046
     OECD                         75         263      0.0287 0.285 0.221      4.96      2.60             0.057   0.039    0.073
     non-OECD                     73         253      0.0527 0.289 0.196      3.19      2.06             0.046   0.040    0.060
     b≥0.15                       83         317      0.0198 0.262 0.277      6.06      3.08             0.049   0.025    0.065
     b≥0.20                       54         228      0.0126 0.237 0.336      8.29      3.89             0.047   0.017    0.063
     b≥0.30                       23         109      0.0052 0.211 0.459 15.82          6.39             0.042   0.002    0.058
     b≥0.40                       14          69      0.0032 0.203 0.532 23.13          8.63             0.039   -0.005   0.055
     non-war                     111         371      0.0268 0.299 0.168      2.02      1.63             0.005   -0.048   0.017
     non-war, γ=9                111         371      0.0268 0.299 0.168      7.76      5.92             0.041   -0.017   0.059
     HP-filtered                  68         433      0.0179 0.157 0.226      4.14      2.44             0.024   -0.019   0.038
     HP-filtered, γ=4.0           68         433      0.0179 0.157 0.226      5.64      3.13             0.037   -0.004   0.052



Note: The baseline simulation uses the 148 GDP disasters of size b≥0.10 for the 35 included countries from Table 8. See the notes to
Table 12 for discussion and definitions.




                                                                 71
            Table 14 Simulated Model Using Stock-Price Changes during Crises
                                                   C-crises            GDP-crises
Crisis sample                             All with Stock-price All with Stock-price
                                         stock data decreases stock data decreases
N: number of observations                     51             39      71          55
γ: coefficient of relative risk aversion      3.5           3.5     3.5         3.5
ρ*: effective time-preference rate           0.030         0.030   0.039       0.039
 (Eq. [5])
g: normal growth rate                        0.025         0.025   0.025       0.025
      -γ
(1+g)                                        0.917         0.917   0.917       0.917
p: disaster probability                     0.0355        0.0355  0.0368      0.0368
Eb: mean contraction size                    0.224         0.210   0.201       0.203
Stock-returns:
 E(Rt–1): overall mean (Table 5)            0.0829        0.0829  0.0829      0.0829
 E(Rt–1): mean in crisis sample            -0.0797       -0.3337 -0.1689      -0.3747
 E(Rt–1): implied non-crisis mean*          0.0889        0.0982  0.0925      0.1004
             -γ
 E[Rt·(1-b) ]: mean in crisis sample         3.574         1.970   3.577       3.246
Model simulation:
 E(Rt–1): implied non-crisis**               0.033         0.092   0.039       0.052
 E(Rt–1): implied overall mean*              0.029         0.077   0.031       0.036


  *Based on the formula:

         E(Rt) = p·(ERt)|crisis + (1-p)·(ERt)|non-crisis

  **Based on approximate formula derived from Eqs. (2)-(4) (neglecting the effects from
  normal fluctuations, σ):

         1+ρ* ≈ (1+g)-γ·{p· E[Rt·(1-b)-γ]|crisis + (1-p)·(ERt)|non-crisis}

  Note: The parameters γ, ρ*, g, and p come from Tables 12 and 13. Stock-price changes
  during crises are in Tables 6 and 8. The four crisis samples used are C-crises with data
  on stock-price changes (N=51), C-crises with stock-price decreases (N=39), GDP-crises
  with data on stock-price changes (N=71), and GDP-crises with stock-price decreases
  (N=55). For each of these samples, Eb is the mean of the fractional contraction size, b,
  for C or GDP; E[(1-b)-γ] is the mean of (1-b)-γ; and E[(1-b)1-γ] is the mean of (1-b)1-γ.
  “E(Rt–1): mean in crisis sample” is the mean for each crisis sample of the fractional
  change in real stock prices. “E[Rt·(1-b)-γ]: mean in crisis sample” is the mean for each
  crisis sample of the interaction between (1+fractional change in real stock prices) and
  (1-b)-γ.




                                                    72
               Table 15 Bill Returns and Inflation Rates during Crises
                                      C crises
                                                            mean                   median
 Real rate of return on bills (N=53)                        -0.060                 -0.029
 Inflation rate (N=81)                                       1.18                   0.059
                                     GDP crises
 Real rate of return on bills (N=69)                        -0.057                  -0.031
 Inflation rate (N=121)                                     0.970                   0.069



Note: The results apply to the crisis samples used in the main analysis: 87 C crises from
Table 6 and 148 GDP crises from Table 8. Data for real rates of return on bills and
inflation rates are for the sub- samples that also have data on bill returns or inflation rates,
as indicated in Tables 6 and 8. The cells show means and medians of real rates of return
on bills and inflation rates for these sub-samples.




                                              73
          20


          16


          12


            8


            4


            0
             0.1       0.2        0.3       0.4     0.5       0.6       0.7
                    C-d isas ter size (N=87, mean=0.218)

           20


           16


           12


            8


            4


            0
                1      2      3         4    5     6      7         8   9
                    C-d isaster duration (N=87, mean=3.6)

          Figure 1 C-Disaster Sizes and Durations (Years)

Note: Histograms show distributions of consumption disaster sizes (fractional declines)
and durations (years between trough and peak) for 87 cases from Table 6.


                                            74
           50


           40


           30


           20


           10


            0
                0.1    0.2       0.3     0.4          0.5       0.6   0.7
                      GDP-disaster size (N=148, mean=0.208)


           32

           28

           24

           20

           16

           12

            8

            4

            0
                 1     2     3     4     5        6         7    8    9     10
                      GDP-disaster duration (N=148, mean=3.5)

       Figure 2 GDP-Disaster Sizes and Durations (Years)

Note: The histograms show distributions of GDP disaster sizes (fractional declines) and
durations (years between trough and peak) for 148 cases from Table 8.


                                             75
  20                                                          6


                                                              5
  16

                                                              4
  12
                                                              3
   8
                                                              2

   4
                                                              1


   0                                                          0
        -3            -2           -1            0                0.0    0.1         0.2   0.3   0.4     0.5   0.6     0.7
               C-d isaster sto ck-pri ce decl i ne                 C-disaster stock-price decline (in cre a ses omi tted)
             (N=51, m ean=0.080, m edian= 0.173)                          (N=39, mean=0.334, me d i an = 0. 325)



  24                                                          6


  20                                                          5


  16                                                          4


  12                                                          3


   8                                                          2


   4                                                          1


   0                                                          0
        -3           -2          -1          0       1            0.0          0.2         0.4         0.6       0.8
              GDP -d isaster sto ck-pri ce decline                GDP-disaster stock-price decline (increases om itted)
             (N=71, m ean=0.169, m edian= 0.296)                         (N=55, mean=0.375, me d i an = 0. 374)




                                                     Figure 3

                      Stock-Price Decreases during Disasters

             (horizontal axes show fractional declines in real value)


Note: The sample for consumption, C, disasters is the 51 of 87 cases from Table 6 with
data on stock-price declines. The sample for GDP disasters is the 71 of 148 cases from
Table 8 with data on stock-price declines. We exclude cases in which missing data cause
the period for stock-price changes to deviate from that for the declines in C or GDP. A
negative number on the horizontal axes in the left-hand panels indicates that real stock
prices rose.



                                                         76
                                           Appendix I

          Main differences between Maddison’s GDP Data and our GDP data

                  Focus                In Maddison
                                                                                Our approach:
                 Period:            (updated version):
Argentina      Late 19th C.   Benchmark values provided        Used various sources, including recently
               [1870-1900]    only for 1870 and 1890;          published series based on sectoral output for
                              apparently calculated by         earlier decades (including agriculture, mining,
                              assuming same growth rates as    manufacturing, energy, construction, trade,
                              in 1900-1913.                    transports, and services). Sufficient coverage
                                                               allows starting the series in 1875.
Austria           WWII        Indicated source does not        Estimated growth rates for the years 1944-1946
               [1944-1946]    contain figure for 1945;         using a weighted average of indexes of
                              estimation procedure is          industrial production and livestock production
                              undisclosed.                     (as proxy for the agricultural sector); estimates
                                                               were constrained to fit the growth rate between
                                                               benchmark values provided in the original
                                                               source.
               19th-20th C.   Adjusted the series to present   Followed the criterion explained in the main
                              day boundaries of Austria.       text for territorial adjustment; output measures
                                                               corresponding to the Austro-Hungarian Empire
                                                               were used up to 1918 and to Austria from then
                                                               onwards.
Brazil         19th-20th C.   Presents a linear trend for      Constructed a continuous series starting in 1850
               [1850-1890]    1870-1890 (divergence with       combining various sources, among them the
                              respect to source is             most recent revision of Brazilian GDP for the
                              unexplained). Missing 1851-      20th Century that is currently available and
                              1869.                            which differs from the earlier estimates used in
                                                               Maddison's series.
Belgium           WWI         Assumed to move as in            Estimated based on the weighted movement in
               [1914-1919]    France.                          production of carbon, cast iron, steel, and
                                                               proxies for agricultural output in the form of
                                                               available cattle and imported malt for
                                                               breweries. Trends were matched with
                                                               productivity data in the carbon industry,
                                                               number of metallurgical facilities in operation,
                                                               and unemployment figures.
                  WWII        Assumed to move as in            Estimated based on benchmark values
               [1939-1947]    France.                          constructed using data on industrial activity
                                                               indexes, the production of carbon, steel and
                                                               electricity, in combination with transports data.
                                                               When industrial data were missing, information
                                                               on railroads, vehicles, merchandise and
                                                               travelers transports, among other
                                                               communications indicators, were weighted to
                                                               connect benchmark values.
Colombia       [1901-1912]    Interpolated with average        Used actual GDP estimates for Colombia
                              movement in Brazil and Chile.    starting from 1905 and constructed from the
                                                               production side.
Denmark        19th-20th C.   Starts 1820; territorial         Chose a different combination of sources
                              adjustment to eliminate impact   (series starts in 1818). Territorial adjustment to
                              of North Schleswig.              follow criterion explained in main text.




                                                 77
Appendix I      Focus                 In Maddison
(cont.)                                                                           Our approach:
               Period:             (updated version):
France       19th-20th C.   Interpolated between 1913 and        A different set of sources was chosen to have
              (WWI &        1920 based on figures of             GDP measures be consistent with the Private
               WWII)        industrial and agricultural          Consumption series that would be built in
                            output (assuming services            parallel. More recent and revised measures of
                            remained stable). Interpolated       the evolution of output during WWI and WWII
                            1938-1949 using information          were preferred. These are refinements of the
                            from a separate report on            official series produced by the French Institute of
                            national income.                     Statistics and Economics.
Germany         WWII        Assumed 1945 lay midway              Used level-comparable anchor values for 1944
             [1944-1946]    between 1944 and 1946; figures       and 1946. Estimated changes for 1945 and 1946
                            for these two years were linked      based on recently published data on industrial
                            from originally unconnected          production for West and East Germany, in
                            sources.                             combination with data on agricultural output
                                                                 (crops and livestock).
             19th-20th C.   Baseline series is adjusted to fit   Followed the criterion explained in the main text
                            borders in three points in time.     for territorial adjustment, i.e. smooth pasting of
                                                                 per capita growth rates during transition years of
                                                                 separation and unification.
Greece       19th-20th C.   Five benchmark values are            Used a continuous and longer time series based
             [1914-1920]    given for 1820-1921 (missing         on new estimates developed by a group of
                            1914-1920). Apparently, as in        researchers from the Centre for Planning and
                            an older but continuous version      Economic Research together with the Historical
                            of Maddison's series, these          Archives of the National Bank of Greece, based
                            benchmarks are assumed to            on output in primary, secondary, and tertiary
                            follow the aggregate for Eastern     activities, sectoral weights, price deflators and
                            Europe.                              measures of money supply.
                WWII        Mismatch with indicated source,      Estimated the evolution between the two
             [1938-1950]    which seems to contain only          benchmark years by appropriately weighting
                            benchmark values for 1938 and        data on industrial production and agricultural
                            1947; estimation for the years in    production (including crops and animals), which
                            between is undisclosed.              were calibrated to match the observed evolution
                                                                 of aggregate GDP during overlapping years.
                                                                 Absolute lack of data does not allow building an
                                                                 estimate for 1944.
Iceland      19th-20th C.   Not considered separately, but       Considered as a separate country; combined
                            as part of an aggregate of           sources to construct a continuous series starting
                            countries whose pre-1950             in 1870.
                            growth rates are assumed to
                            equal the averages of larger
                            Western European countries.
India          19th C.      Presents continuous series           Constructed a different series combining various
                            starting in 1884.                    sources that allow starting in 1872.
Indonesia       WWII        Missing figures.                     Built estimates following an indicators approach
             [1942-1948]                                         based on weighted movements in the following
                                                                 sectors: food and crops, mining, construction
                                                                 and housing, trade and services, public
                                                                 administration, oil and gas. Estimates were
                                                                 constrained to match actual GDP growth rates
                                                                 for surrounding years.




                                                78
Appendix I        Focus                In Maddison
(cont.)                                                                          Our approach:
                 Period:           (updated version):
Italy          19th-20th C.   Used previous estimates         Constructed a series with the same starting date but a
                              based on older official         different combination of sources, some of which are
                              statistical series.             recent revisions of the older statistical figures used
                                                              in Maddison's series and are supported in richer
                                                              estimates of industry, agriculture, and services.

Japan            WWII         Apparently, 1945 value was      Used the more recent consensus figures displaying a
                 [1945]       assumed to be half of 1944.     decline in output of approximately 50% spread over
                                                              both 1945 and 1946.



Malaysia         20th C.      Presents series starting in     Extended the series to 1900 using recently published
                              1911. Missing 1943-1946.        revisions of older series corresponding to Malaya.
                              Territorial adjustment to fit
                              figures to present day
                              Malaysia.

Mexico          Revolution    Used linear interpolation as    [Forthcoming] Estimated based on sectoral shares
               [1911-1920]    done in another source.         and output from oil, mining , sugar, breweries, steel,
                                                              textiles, sisal, transports, electricity, other
                                                              manufacturing, various harvests, and trade data.
                                                              (Maddison's population series is also a linear
                                                              interpolation between 1910 and 1920, which yields
                                                              incorrect measures of per capita output; a separate
                                                              population series was built from historical records.)

               [1896-1899]    Missing.                        Covered with official figures of GDP.
Netherlands    19th-20th C.   Started continuous series in    A new series was constructed with the purpose of
                 (WWI &       1820; covered World War         extending the series further back into the past, being
                  WWII)       years with undisclosed          explicit about proxies used as measures of GDP, and
                              aggregate measures.             taking advantage of new revisions to older series. In
                                                              particular, deflated measures of Gross Domestic
                                                              Income were used to extend the series to the early
                                                              years of the 19th Century. In the absence of a GDP
                                                              aggregate, WWI and WWII years were covered with
                                                              figures corresponding to Net National Product.

Singapore       Early 20th    Continuous series starts in     Used newly generated series of GDP starting in 1900
                    C.        1950. Benchmark for 1913        (but missing the period 1940-1949), based on the
                              is provided, apparently from    estimation of all demand side components of GDP.
                              the assumption that per
                              capita GDP moved
                              proportionately to that of
                              Malaysia.
South Africa     20th C.      Presents data starting in       Extended the series to 1911.
                              1950.




                                                  79
Appendix I       Focus               In Maddison
(end)                                                                        Our approach:
                Period:           (updated version):
South Korea   War periods    Mismatch with indicated       Estimated real growth rates for most of the period by
              [1941-1953]    sources, undisclosed          weighting movements in agricultural production,
                             estimation procedure.         commodities production, and provision of services.
                                                           In some cases, explicit assumptions were made due
                                                           to lack of continuous data points. An aggregate
                                                           measure of GDP was built for the last four years
                                                           with information reported by international
                                                           organizations during the Korean War.

Sweden        19th-20th C.   Source from an older study;   Extended the series to 1800 using recently published
                             series starts in 1820.        figures compatible with revised official data and
                                                           covering the two centuries.
Switzerland   WWI-1920's     Uses a baseline source that   Re-estimated GDP figures for this period following
              [1914-1929]    proxies output with moving    an indicators approach using a wider set of variables:
                             averages of railroad          private consumption (in turn estimated for 1851-
                             transport volume for 1914-    1948 from quantities of consumption items and
                             1924 (combined with           expenditure shares), expenditures of the
                             industrial production for     confederation, exports, imports, freight traffic on
                             1925-1929). Adjustments to    railways, gross consumption of energy, industrial
                             match movements in            production, number of new residences, number of
                             another source are not        stock companies and capital at year end of stock
                             detailed.                     companies. Whenever necessary, a CPI (built for
                                                           purposes of the Private Consumption series) was
                                                           used as deflator.

              19th-20th C.   Not fully explained           Preferred to construct a new series accounting for
                             adjustments based on a        specific details. For example, the use of an actual
                             combination of sources.       GDP deflator, which is available for the earlier part
                                                           of the series starting in 1851, and the use of Net
                                                           National Product to cover the lack of a GDP measure
                                                           during 1930-1948.
Taiwan        War periods    Covered 1939-1945 with        Used recently published series based on revised
              [1939-1949]    older estimates and 1945-     national accounts statistics for the 20th Century.
                             1949 by assuming equal        This new source presents constant price series based
                             percentage growth for each    on different deflating methods, all of which show
                             of these years.               different patterns compared to older estimates.

U.K.          19th-20th C.   Used various sources; made    Although patterns do not change markedly, we chose
                             assumptions related to        a different concatenation of sources. Some of these
                             territorial adjustments to    are themselves "compromise" series of earlier
                             present day boundaries.       estimates; official sources for post-WWII data.
U.S.            19th C.      Provides five benchmark       Continuous series starting in 1790 taken from a new
                             figures for 1820-1870.        edition of the Historical Statistics of the U.S. This
                                                           series is modified to incorporate our preferred
                                                           estimates for certain periods and to exclude the Civil
                                                           War years, which warrant further analysis.
Venezuela       19th C.      Discarded data from the       Started the series in 1884 using GDP estimates based
              [1884-1899]    source for pre-1900           on a wide coverage of sectors, including agriculture,
                             decades.                      commerce and finances, government, and transports.




                                               80
                                                           Appendix II

          Graphs of Long-Term per capita GDP and Consumer Expenditure, C

Note: All graphs use a natural-log scale, ranging from 5.5 ($245 in 2000 U.S. dollars) to
11.0 ($59900 in 2000 U.S. dollars).


          Austra lia GDP a nd C per capi ta (l og scale)                   Belgium GDP and C per ca pita (l og sca l e)
  11                                                                11


  10                                                                10


   9                                                                9


   8                                                                8


   7                                                                7


   6                                                                6


        1880   1900    1920    1940    1960    1980    2000              1880   1900   1920    1940    1960    1980       2000

                GDP           Consum er expenditure                              GDP          Consume r expenditure



           Canada GDP and C per capita (log scale)                         Denmark GDP and C per cap ita (log scal e)
  11                                                                11


  10                                                                10


   9                                                                9


   8                                                                8


   7                                                                7


   6                                                                6


        1880   1900    1920    1940    1960    1980    2000              1880   1900   1920    1940    1960    1980       2000

                GDP           Consum er expenditure                              GDP          Consume r expenditure




                                                           Figure A1

       GDP and Consumer Expenditure for Australia, Belgium, Canada, Denmark




                                                               81
       Finland GDP and C per capi ta (l og scale)                         France GDP and C per capita (l og scal e)
11                                                              11


10                                                              10


9                                                               9


8                                                               8


7                                                               7


6                                                               6


     1880   1900   1920    1940    1960   1980      2000               1880     1900    1920    1940    1960    1980     2000

             GDP          Consum er expenditure                                   GDP          Consume r expenditure



       Ge rm any GDP and C per ca pi ta (log scale)                           Italy GDP and C per capi ta (log scale )
11                                                              11


10                                                              10


9                                                               9


8                                                               8


7                                                               7


6                                                               6


     1880   1900   1920    1940    1960   1980      2000             70 80 90 00 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 00

             GDP          Consum er expenditure                                   GDP          Consume r expenditure




                                                      Figure A2


      GDP and Consumer Expenditure for Finland, France, Germany, Italy




                                                           82
         Ja pan GDP and C per capita (l og scale)                    Netherlands GDP and C per capi ta (l og scal e)
11                                                              11


10                                                              10


9                                                               9


8                                                               8


7                                                               7


6                                                               6


      1880   1900   1920    1940   1960   1980      2000             1880   1900   1920    1940    1960    1980   2000

              GDP          Consum er expenditure                             GDP          Consume r expenditure



         Norway GDP and C per capita (l og scale)                      Portugal GDP and C per cap ita (l og scal e)
11                                                              11


10                                                              10


9                                                               9


8                                                               8


7                                                               7


 6                                                               6


      1880   1900   1920    1940   1960   1980      2000             1880   1900   1920    1940    1960    1980   2000

              GDP          Consum er expenditure                             GDP          Consume r expenditure




                                                      Figure A3


     GDP and Consumer Expenditure for Japan, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal




                                                           83
           S pa in GDP and C per capi ta (lo g scale)                      Sweden GDP and C per capi ta (log scal e)
11                                                                  11


10                                                                  10


9                                                                   9


8                                                                   8


7                                                                   7


6                                                                   6


     70 80 90 00 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 00                           1880     1900    1920    1940   1960    1980     2000

                GDP          Consum er expenditure                                  GDP          Consume r expenditure



        Swi tzerland GDP and C per capita (log scale)                           U.K. GDP and C per capita (log sca l e)
11                                                                  11


10                                                                  10


9                                                                   9


8                                                                   8


7                                                                   7


6                                                                    6


       1880   1900    1920    1940    1960    1980      2000             1880     1900    1920    1940   1960    1980     2000

                GDP          Consum er expenditure                                  GDP          Consume r expenditure




                                                          Figure A4


       GDP and Consumer Expenditure for Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, U.K.




                                                               84
            U.S . GDP and C pe r capita (l og scale)                       Argentina GDP and C per capi ta (log scal e)
11                                                                 11


10                                                                 10


9                                                                  9


8                                                                  8


7                                                                  7


6                                                                  6


     1880     1900    1920    1940    1960    1980     2000             1880    1900    1920     1940   1960     1980      2000

                GDP          Consum er expenditure                                 GDP           Consume r expenditure



        Braz il GDP and C per capita (log scale)                               Chile GDP and C per capi ta (log sca l e)
11                                                                 11


10                                                                 10


9                                                                  9


8                                                                  8


7                                                                  7


6                                                                  6


     1880     1900    1920    1940    1960    1980     2000         1900        1920      1940       1960      1980        2000

                GDP          Consum er expenditure                                 GDP           Consume r expenditure




                                                         Figure A5


        GDP and Consumer Expenditure for U.S., Argentina, Brazil, Chile




                                                              85
            Peru GDP and C pe r capita (log scale)                  Taiwan GDP and C per capita (log scale )
11                                                          11


10                                                          10


 9                                                           9


 8                                                           8


 7                                                           7


 6                                                           6

     1900     1920     1940     1960     1980        2000    1900     1920     1940      1960     1980       2000

                GDP        Consumer expenditure                          GDP          Consumer expenditure




                                                     Figure A6


                      GDP and Consumer Expenditure for Peru, Taiwan




                                                            86
                                Appendix III

           Disasters Gauged by (one-sided) HP-Filtered C and GDP


            Table A1 Consumption Disasters (one-sided HP filters)
                         Part 1: OECD Countries
Country                       Trough          Peak             C decline
Australia                      1920           1913                0.202
                               1935           1928                0.167
                               1945           1938                0.215
Belgium                        1944           1938                0.505
Canada                         1923           1913                0.166
                               1935           1930                0.136
Denmark                        1943           1939                0.202
Finland                        1919           1913                0.201
                               1933           1929                0.105
                               1944           1939                0.181
France                         1874           1864                0.104
                               1918           1913                0.185
                               1944           1934                0.530
Germany                        1920           1913                0.384
                               1947           1940                0.356
Iceland (X)                    1995           1988                0.096
Italy                          1946           1940                0.221
Japan                          1936           1928                0.123
                               1946           1937                0.515
Netherlands                    1919           1913                0.264
                               1944           1934                0.487
Norway                                           none
Portugal                                         none
Spain                          1939           1929                0.416
Sweden                         1945           1940                0.106
Switzerland                    1945           1940                0.142
U.K.                           1918           1915                0.109
                               1944           1939                0.160
U.S.                           1934           1929                0.136




                                     87
                             Part 2: Non-OECD Countries
 Country                              Trough       Peak                   C decline
 Argentina                             1933        1929                     0.141
                                       1990        1980                     0.168
                                       2004        2000                     0.149
 Brazil                                1992        1985                     0.158
 Chile                                 1917        1913                     0.198
                                       1933        1930                     0.247
                                       1978        1973                     0.320
                                       1987        1981                     0.157
 Colombia (X)                          1945        1941                     0.095
 India (X)                             1942        1933                     0.184
 Malaysia (X)                          1922        1917                     0.297
                                       1934        1930                     0.141
 Mexico (X)                            1933        1929                     0.188
                                       1988        1982                     0.115
 Peru                                  1914        1909                     0.095
                                       1985        1976                     0.205
                                       1993        1988                     0.229
 Singapore (X)                         1916        1910                     0.103
 Taiwan                                1947        1937                     0.578
 Turkey (X)                            1946        1940                     0.222
 Uruguay (X)                           1985        1981                     0.189
                                       2004        2000                     0.134
 Venezuela (X)                         1933        1930                     0.499
                                       1971        1961                     0.148
                                       1990        1982                     0.331


Note: C declines (0.1 or greater) are cumulative fractions from peak year to trough year.
Bold indicates current participant in external or internal war. X denotes not in C sample.




                                            88
              Table A2 GDP Disasters (one-sided HP filters)
                       Part 1: OECD Countries
Country                  Trough            Peak             GDP decline
Australia                 1897             1891               0.255
                          1920             1913               0.109
                          1933             1928               0.163
Austria                   1920             1913               0.346
                          1936             1930               0.226
                          1947             1943               0.455
Belgium                   1919             1913               0.436
                          1935             1930               0.108
                          1945             1938               0.426
Canada                    1922             1917               0.191
                          1935             1930               0.250
Denmark                   1943             1939               0.165
Finland                   1919             1914               0.225
France                    1919             1913               0.208
                          1938             1930               0.180
                          1945             1939               0.310
Germany                   1920             1913               0.321
                          1933             1929               0.172
                          1949             1944               0.663
Greece                    1872             1862               0.200
                          1898             1888               0.174
                          1917             1912               0.260
                          1945             1939               0.626
Iceland                   1921             1915               0.189
Italy                     1946             1940               0.267
Japan                     1949             1943               0.439
Netherlands               1919             1914               0.174
                          1935             1930               0.128
                          1945             1939               0.426
New Zealand               1888             1879               0.116
                          1933             1925               0.125
Norway                    1945             1939               0.115
Portugal                                        none
Spain                     1939             1930               0.316
Sweden                    1921             1916               0.131
Switzerland               1883             1876               0.110
                          1919             1912               0.132
                          1944             1934               0.127
U.K.                      1923             1918               0.143
                          1949             1944               0.109
U.S.                      1934             1929               0.221




                                  89
                               Part 2: Non-OECD Countries
 Country                             Trough      Peak                      GDP decline
 Argentina                             1918      1912                        0.248
                                       1934      1929                        0.135
                                       1990      1980                        0.201
                                       2003      1999                        0.113
 Brazil                                1900      1891                        0.175
 Chile                                 1933      1930                        0.201
                                       1977      1972                        0.170
 India                                 1950      1943                        0.103
 Indonesia                             1947      1941                        0.517
 Malaysia (X)                          1941      1931                        0.184
 Mexico (X)                           1915?      1910                        0.106?
                                       1934      1926                        0.252
 Peru                                  1933      1929                        0.137
                                       1985      1976                        0.142
                                       1993      1987                        0.269
 Philippines                           1988      1983                        0.171
 Singapore (X)                         1916      1911                        0.212
                                       1928      1925                        0.153
                                       1932      1930                        0.178
 South Africa                          1994      1984                        0.156
 South Korea                           1952      1942                        0.486
 Sri Lanka                             1923      1914                        0.107
 Taiwan                                1947      1938                        0.594
 Turkey (X)                            1945      1940                        0.276
 Uruguay                               1901      1896                        0.112
                                       1917      1913                        0.176
                                       1935      1930                        0.210
                                       1967      1957                        0.169
                                       1986      1981                        0.171
                                       2003      2000                        0.105
 Venezuela                             1901      1895                        0.109
                                       1963      1958                        0.101
                                       1989      1979                        0.298
                                       2003      1993                        0.157


Note: GDP declines (0.1 or greater) are cumulative fractions from peak year to trough year.
Bold indicates current participant in external or internal war. X denotes not in GDP sample.




                                               90
    12

    10

     8

     6

     4

     2

     0
         0.1    0.2        0.3            0.4       0.5    0.6
     C (one-sided HP filter)-disaster size (N=38, mean=0.236)


    12

    10

     8

     6

     4

     2

     0
           3   4      5      6        7         8     9   10
     C (one-side HP filter)-disaster duration (N=38, mean=6.4)

Figure A7 C-Disaster Sizes and Durations (Years), HP-filtered




                                 91
     16

     14

     12

     10

      8

      6

      4

      2

      0
          0.1    0.2       0.3       0.4       0.5   0.6
     GDP (one-sided HP filter)-disaster size (N=68, mean=0.226)


     24

     20

     16

     12

      8

      4

      0
           3     4     5         6         7    8    9     10
     GDP (one-sided HP filter)-disaster duration (N=68, mean=6.4


Figure A8 GDP-Disaster Sizes and Durations (Years), HP-Filtered




                                     92
