NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

RESOLVING THE GLOBAL IMBALANCE:
THE DOLLAR AND THE U.S. SAVING RATE
Martin S. Feldstein
Working Paper 13952
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13952

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2008

The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Martin S. Feldstein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Resolving the Global Imbalance: The Dollar and the U.S. Saving Rate
Martin S. Feldstein
NBER Working Paper No. 13952
April 2008
JEL No. F1,F3
ABSTRACT
The large trade and current account deficits of the United States cannot continue indefinitely because
doing so would constitute a permanent gift to the U.S. economy. The process that will cause this gift
to shrink and that will eventually cause it to reverse is a fall in the dollar. The dollar will fall as private
investors and governments become unwilling to accept the risk of increasing amounts of dollars in
their portfolios, especially in a context in which they realize that the dollar must fall to reduce the trade
imbalance. Although a more competitive dollar is the mechanism that will cause the U.S. trade deficit
to decline, the fundamental requirement for a lower trade deficit is an increase in the U.S. national
saving rate. So a rise will be driven by higher household savings of the coming years as the two primary
forces that depressed savings in recent years are reversed: the exceptionally rapid rise in household
wealth and the high level of mortgage refinancing with equity withdrawal.

Martin S. Feldstein
President and Chief Executive Officer
NBER
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138-5398
msfeldst@nber.org

Resolving the Global Imbalance: The Dollar and
the U.S. Saving Rate
Martin Feldstein*

The massive deficit in the U.S. trade and current accounts is one of the most striking
features of the current global economy and, to some observers, one of the most worrying.
Although the current account deficit finally began to shrink in 2007, it remained at more than 5
percent of GDP—more than $700 billion. While some observers claim that the U.S. economy
can continue to have trade deficits of this magnitude for years—some would say for decades—
into the future, I believe that such enormous deficits cannot continue and will decline
significantly in the coming years.
This paper discusses the reasons for that decline and the changes that are needed in the
U.S. saving rate and in the value of the dollar to bring it about. The dollar must decline
substantially from its current value to shrink the trade deficit to a sustainable level. Although the
dollar began to decline rapidly in the first quarter of 2008, the key exchange rate measure—the
inflation-adjusted broad multilateral trade-weighted value of the dollar—was down at the end of
2007 by less than 6 percent from its value a decade earlier.
Reducing the U.S. current account deficit does not require action by the U.S. government
*Professor of Economics, Harvard University, and President and CEO, the National Bureau of
Economic Research. Forthcoming in the Journal of Economic Perspectives 2008.
-1-

or by the governments of America’s trading partners. Market forces alone will cause the U.S.
trade deficit to decline further. In practice, however, changes in government policies at home and
abroad may lead to faster reductions in the U.S. trade deficit. More important, the response of the
U.S. and foreign governments and central banks will determine the way in which the global
economy as a whole adjusts to the decline in the U.S. trade deficit.
Reductions in the U.S. current account deficit will of course imply lower aggregate trade
surpluses in the rest of the world. Taken by itself, a reduction in any country’s trade surplus will
reduce aggregate demand and therefore employment in that country—something that no country
wants. I will therefore look at what other countries—China, Japan, and European countries—can
do to avoid the adverse consequences of the inevitable decline of the U.S. trade deficit.

Can the U.S. Current Account Imbalance Be Sustained?

To understand why the U.S. current account deficit cannot go on as it is, it is helpful to
look at the evolution of the deficit and of its financing. The U.S. current account deficit is not
only large but has grown very rapidly. Even more important, it is being financed in a
fundamentally different way now than it was just a few years ago.
The annual current account deficit peaked in 2006 at $811 billion. Even after adjusting
for the rising price level, the real current account deficit was up 84 percent in five years and was
more than five times its level ten years earlier. The current account deficit declined in 2007 to
$739 billion, an 11 percent real decline. But even after this improvement, U.S. merchandise

-2-

imports were more than $1 trillion greater in 2007 than in 1997 while merchandise exports were
up by less than half that amount. During the same decade, U.S. net exports of services—which
include financial services, transportation, and tourism—remained essentially unchanged.
A nation that buys more than it sells must finance the difference by borrowing from the
rest of the world or by selling assets. As recently as the year 2000, the United States was able to
finance its entire current account deficit by attracting equity investments to the United States.

In that year, net stock purchases by foreigners were $192 billion while foreign direct capital
investments were $289 billion. The total of $481 billion exceeded the current account deficit of
$417 billion and was about three times the $162 billion inflow of debt.1 Foreigners bought shares
of American corporations on the stock market or bought entire businesses (like Daimler buying
Chrysler and Deutsche Bank buying Bankers Trust). Private funds came to the United States in
this way because they expected to receive returns that outweighed the risks of cross-border
investments. The situation has changed dramatically. The 2007 equity inflow to the United
States, including net share purchases and foreign direct investment, was only 52 percent of the
$739 billion current account deficit and about the same size as the inflow of debt. The net
purchases of stock were only $183 billion or about half of the inflow in the form of bond
purchases.

1

For these data on capital flows, see the webpage for the U.S. International Transactions
Accounts Data from the Bureau of Economic Analysis at
<http://www.bea.gov/international/bp_web/list.cfm?anon=71&registered=0>.

-3-

We don’t know with certainty who the buyers of U.S. stocks and bonds are, but I believe
that they are primarily governments or government-related entities. We don’t know the identity
of the buyers because the official U.S. Treasury data on capital flows only tell us who does the
trade and not the actual beneficial owner. For example, if a Middle East government uses a
British bank to buy U.S. Treasury bonds, the transaction is recorded as the purchase by a private
British buyer (Feldstein, 2005).
But the very fact that so much of the financing flow has gone from shares to bonds is a
clear indication that these funds are coming from governments rather than private investors. And
we have the corroborating evidence of the massive increases in the official foreign exchange
reserves of the countries with large current account surpluses. China has more than $1 trillion
dollars of reserves, Japan more than $500 billion , Korea more than $150 billion, Russia more
than $200 billion and the oil-producing countries more than $200 billion (Council of Economic
Advisers, 2008, table B-111). Most of these reserves have been accumulated since the year 2000.
This change in the way the current account deficit is being financed has important
implications for its sustainability. It is no longer possible to say, as it was back in the year 2000,
that the U.S. current account deficit is sustainable because it is being financed by private
investors who are attracted by the productivity and profitability of the U.S. economy. The funds
are coming into the U.S. economy now because foreign governments are willing to buy amounts
of debt that can finance the U.S. current account deficit. The foreign governments are willing to
do that to sustain their export surpluses with the United States. But how long will they be willing
to continue to do so?
The current trade imbalance has been a very favorable arrangement for the United States.

-4-

The U.S. economy receives goods and services from the rest of the world and gives them back
IOUs in the form of government and corporate debt. In 2007, the U.S. economy received $708
billion more in goods and services than America sent to the rest of the world, and all that the
U.S. economy had to give in exchange for these net imports was $708 billion of IOUs. Over the
past five years, the U.S. economy has traded several trillion dollars of IOUs for that much in real
goods and services. And when these IOUs come due, the U.S. economy only gives new IOUs in
exchange. The same is true for the interest that the U.S. economy owes on the IOUs. While it
would certainly be nice for the United States if this economy could continue indefinitely to
receive more goods and services from the rest of the world than it sends back, this is simply not
going to happen. If it did happen, these U.S. net imports would constitute a giant gift.
The only way for the United States to repay some of this cumulative gift is for U.S.
exports to the rest of the world to exceed imports. Since I cannot believe that the world will
continue to give the United States an enormous gift year after year, I am convinced that at some
point in the future, our trade deficit will end and the U.S. economy will have a trade surplus. We
have a long way to go before that happens—that is before the $708 billion trade deficit turns into
a trade surplus. But it will happen. And while a U.S. trade surplus may now strike readers as
implausible, isn’t it more implausible that the world will give the U.S. economy an enormous
gift each year though it will never get anything back in exchange?
Long before the U.S. economy reaches the time when it will have a trade surplus, the
U.S. trade deficit will decline. U.S. imports will shrink and exports will increase. What is the
mechanism by which this will occur? The key is the future decline in the dollar relative to the
foreign currencies that will occur as foreign investors, both public and private, become less

-5-

willing to keep adding dollar bonds to their portfolios.
Foreign governments that artificially depress their currencies in order to run large trade
surpluses and therefore accumulate dollar investments are foregoing the opportunity to invest
those resources in their domestic economy. Their real return on dollar bonds is less than 3
percent even if the dollar does not decline, while direct investment in their own economies can
be expected to produce substantially higher real returns (Dollar and Wei, 2007). The oilproducing countries are already making plans to shift from portfolio investments to substantial
infrastructure investments in their own countries, increasing imports instead of sending surplus
savings abroad.
There are two further reasons why foreign investors will reduce their demand for dollar
bonds. Prudent investors know that portfolios should be diversified. The Chinese, with about $1
trillion of U.S. bonds, are taking a risk that would have to be called imprudent. Shifting a portion
of that to equity investments, as the Chinese are now beginning to do, does not fundamentally
reduce their exposure to the level of the dollar and to the correlated risks between dollar interest
rates and U.S. equity prices. Even if the Chinese think the dollar is as likely to rise as to fall in
the near term, it is very risky to have such a large amount of dollar investments. The value of the
dollar portfolio is equal to about $1,000 per person in China, about the level of the total per
capita income in China at the official exchange rate.
But the primary reason why it would be unwise for foreign portfolio investors to continue
to accumulate dollar securities is that the dollar must eventually decline as part of the trade
adjustment process. Any investor who expects the value of the dollar to decline relative to other
major currencies would want to shift from investing in dollars to investing in those other

-6-

currencies. While investors like China that have a very large amount of foreign exchange
invested in dollars would have reason to fear that selling dollar bonds and buying bonds
denominated in other currencies might hurt themselves by causing the value of the dollar to
decline, those countries with smaller dollar balances can shift to euros or yen without such fears.
In turn, the knowledge that others are selling will force even large investors like China to realize
that they will face a loss if they do not diversify away from dollar bonds.
Central banks and other investors can be induced to hold a large amount of a currency
that is expected to decline if the interest rate on that currency is sufficiently high. But the interest
rates published in the weekly Economist magazine show that the interest rate on dollar bonds is
now actually less than the interest rate on euro bonds with similar default risk. There is no
compensation in these interest rates for the potential decline of the dollar that will be necessary
for the ratio of U.S. external debt to stop rising. Any investor that shifted from dollar bonds to
euro bonds a year ago would have received slightly lower interest income (because euro interest
rates only recently exceeded those on dollar bonds) but would have seen a rise in the dollar value
of their assets of more than 15 percent. For example, $100 would have grown to less than $105 if
invested in U.S. Treasury bonds but to more than $115 if invested in comparable euro bonds and
then converted back into dollars.
Although most central banks are reluctant to discuss the composition of their foreign
exchange reserves, some relatively large central banks have disclosed that they have begun to
reduce the share of dollars in their portfolios.2 The low level of foreign investments in U.S.
equities suggests that private investors have also been reducing the share of dollar securities in

2

This evidence is reported by the IMF in its “COFER: Currency Composition of Foreign
Exchange Reserves” webpage at <http://www.imf.org/external/np/sta/cofer/eng/index.htm>.
-7-

their portfolios.
But as long as the United States has a large trade deficit, the U.S. economy must continue
to attract sufficient funds from foreign sources to finance the trade and current account deficits.
While any individual private or public investor can shift away from dollars, foreign investors as
a whole cannot sell the dollars that they have accumulated and must continue to supply the
additional dollars needed to fund the ongoing current account deficits.
How does this situation get reconciled? If governments and private investors are
unwilling to buy dollar bonds because they fear or expect a future dollar decline, the dollar must
fall enough so that they are no longer expecting a further fall—or, more accurately, until the
expected annual fall in the dollar is no larger than the extra interest rate that investors get for
investing in dollar funds.
The specific mechanism that will cause the dollar to decline is this: When foreign
exporters get dollars by selling products to U.S. buyers, they bring those dollars to their
commercial banks and ultimately to their central bank to exchange them for their local currency.
If the central bank does not want to add those dollars to existing foreign exchange reserves, it
will try to sell them. If there are not willing buyers at the prevailing exchange rate, the dollar will
fall until it becomes attractive enough to some potential buyers. Similarly, if an investor or a
central bank wants to reduce its existing holding of dollars, it must try to sell those dollars in the
market. If there are not willing buyers at the existing exchange rate, the value of the dollar must
fall.
In recent years, the demand for dollars has been sustained by the desire of some central
banks to accumulate large amounts of foreign exchange to protect themselves against the

-8-

speculative attacks of the type that occurred in the late 1990s. Korea, Taiwan, and others have
therefore accumulated such large amounts that no private speculator would consider trying to
attack their currency, as long as it was not fundamentally overvalued. Having now acquired more
than enough funds for this purpose, these countries no longer have such a counterspeculative
motive for further accumulation of dollars.
Some central banks, most notably the Chinese and Japanese, have also pursued a strategy
of keeping their currency undervalued as a way to stimulate a trade surplus. While this strategy
may be reasonable in the short run to increase aggregate demand and employment, it makes no
sense in the long run to stimulate exports in exchange for perpetual IOUs when a similar
stimulus to aggregate demand and employment could be achieved by better domestic policies, a
subject to which I return below.
In summary, the large trade and current account deficits of the United States cannot
continue indefinitely because doing so would constitute a permanent gift to the U.S. economy.
The process that causes this gift to shrink and that will eventually cause it to reverse is a fall in
the dollar. The dollar will fall as private investors and governments become unwilling to accept
the risk of increasing amounts of dollars in their portfolios, especially in a context in which they
realize that the dollar must fall to reduce the trade imbalance.

The Role of National Saving

Although a more competitive dollar is the mechanism that will cause the U.S. trade
deficit to decline, the fundamental requirement for a lower trade deficit is an increase in the U.S.

-9-

national saving rate. For any country, national saving is the difference between what that country
produces (its GDP) and what it consumes (both household consumption and government
consumption). The output that is produced but not consumed (and thus is saved) can be used for
investment in business equipment, housing, and other structures, or it can be exported to the rest
of the world. This is a basic implication of the national income accounts identity that saving
minus investment equals exports minus imports.
In the United States, saving is now so low that America must import from the rest of the
world to have enough product to invest in domestic equipment and structures. More specifically,
despite the relative decline in both business investment and housing construction, their combined
level exceeds national saving, forcing the U.S. to import more than it exports. Low national
saving is the fundamental cause of the U.S. trade deficit.3
National saving includes both household saving and the saving of corporate businesses
(their retained earnings) and is reduced by government dissaving (when the government runs
budget deficits). The primary reason for the present low national saving rate in the United States
is the current saving behavior of households. Business saving has been quite high, reflecting the
relatively high level of profits. And the government deficit, although potentially heading for
trouble in the next decade because of the rising cost of government pensions and health care for
the aged, is now quite low at less than 1.5 percent of GDP. (These saving rates, as recorded in

3

Although the ability of the U.S. economy to attract large amounts of capital is helped by the
large amounts of saving in other countries (especially China and the oil producers), those funds
come to the United States because of the gap between U.S. investment and U.S. saving instead of
going to other parts of the world. The availability of large amounts of saving in other countries
has been described by some as a “saving glut,” although in reality global saving has not
increased. The non-U.S. excess of saving over investment is due to a relatively lower level of
investment (Feldstein, 2006).
-10-

the national income and product accounts, are available each year in the annual Economic Report
of the President.)
But household saving in the U.S. economy is now essentially zero—just 0.5 percent of
disposable personal income in 2007. The saving of those households that do save—that is, those
who spend less than their after-tax incomes—is just about balanced by the dissaving of those
households that dissave by borrowing or running down existing assets.
Because the trade deficit is the difference between national investment and national
saving, reducing the trade deficit requires an increase in the U.S. saving rate or an equally large
fall in business investment and residential construction. The recent sharp fall in housing
construction has reduced overall investment and permitted a modest decline in the trade deficit. I
believe that over the longer term, the adjustment will come primarily through a higher saving
rate and that this will happen without any specific change in government policy. The household
saving rate will rise because the two primary forces that have driven savings down to the current
level—the exceptionally rapid rise in household wealth and, 2) more recently, the high level of
mortgage refinancing with equity withdrawal—will come to an end. The Flow of Funds data
available from the Federal Reserve at <http://www.federalreserve.gov/releases/z1> provide
evidence on the rise of household wealth and the sharp increase in mortgage borrowing in the
early part of the current decade.
The sharp rise in wealth is being checked by the decline in home prices that has recently
begun and that is likely to continue for some time (Shiller, 2007). The prices of stocks are also
not likely to outperform earnings in the future in the way that they have been doing. And
mortgage refinancing will not generate spendable cash for households as it has in the past

-11-

because fewer households have existing mortgages with rates that exceed the rates available on
new mortgages and because the aggregate value of net housing equity that can be accessed by
borrowing is in decline.
The increase in saving (or, more accurately, of saving relative to investment) is a
necessary condition for reducing the trade deficit, but it is not sufficient. Households and
businesses in the United States and abroad must be also have an incentive to spend more on
American-made goods and services and less on the goods and services made elsewhere in the
world. That incentive, of course, is a change in the relative prices of American and foreign goods
and services. This change will come about through a decline in the value of the dollar relative to
the value of other major currencies, including the euro, the yen, the Chinese yuan, the British
pound, and others. When the dollar declines relative to the euro, as it has been over the past year,
American goods become cheaper relative to European goods. That change pushes American
households and businesses to buy less in Europe and more in America. The same happens in
reverse for European buyers.4

4

It is of course possible in theory for the relative prices of American and foreign goods to
change without any change in the nominal exchange rate. If the prices of all American goods and
services were to fall by (say) 20 percent while the exchange rates remained unchanged, that
would achieve a 20 percent real devaluation of the dollar. That would have the same effect as a
20 percent fall in the nominal exchange rate while the prices of U.S. and foreign goods remained
unchanged (or rose together at the same rate). It is the theoretical possibility of such a decline of
the dollar’s real value without a fall in its nominal value that causes some economists to say that
the trade deficit can decline substantially without a fall in the dollar. There is, of course, no
chance that U.S. prices would actually fall by anything like that. Similarly, while a 20 percent
rise in all foreign prices would also cause such a change in the real exchange rate if nominal
exchange rates remained unchanged, there is no chance of such an inflationary shift now that
most countries are managing monetary policy to keep inflation very low. In short, changing
relative prices will require a change in the nominal exchange rate.
-12-

Some people worry that even a large decline in the value of the dollar would not be able
to change purchasing patterns enough to reduce the U.S. trade deficit. It is common to hear the
concern that the U.S. economy no longer has the ability to manufacture and export, or the worry
that it will never be able to compete with the low labor costs that drive imports from countries
like China or Vietnam.
Both of these worries are unfounded. The U.S. economy is a major exporter, selling more
than $1 trillion of goods to the rest of the world each year. As a lower dollar causes the price of
those goods to become more competitive relative to the goods made in other countries, U.S.
exports will rise more rapidly. Caterpillar tractors compete with the Komatsu tractors made in
Japan. Boeing airplanes compete with European Airbus planes. California wine competes with
wine from France and other euro countries. And as the dollar declines, these U.S. products will
be more attractive to buyers at home and abroad.
About half of U.S. imports come from high-wage countries including Canada, western
Europe, and Japan. A lower dollar relative to those currencies will cause a substitution of
American-made goods for the similar goods that the U.S. economy now imports from abroad.
But what about the goods that come from countries in which wages are very low? It is
certainly true that American workers will not be able to compete in the production of such lowcost goods. We will not see American factories making the products now produced in very lowcost factories in some Asian countries. But instead of substituting American-made goods for
very similar imports, the lower dollar will cause Americans to buy a different mix of goods and
services that are produced in the United States. As the dollar declines relative to the Chinese
yuan, the Korean won, and the Thai bhat, the dollar prices of those products will rise. American

-13-

consumers will find them less attractive at those higher prices and will shift to buying U.S. goods
and services. Much of that substitution will be to services that can only be produced in the U.S.
and cannot be imported. For example, as imported clothing and electronic equipment become
more expensive, American consumers will spend more on meals away from home and on local
travel and entertainment in the United States.
Some skeptics about the ability of the dollar to shrink the trade deficit point to the fact
that the trade deficit increased until 2006 despite a 7 percent decline during the previous three
years in the real trade-weighted value of the dollar. There are four distinct reasons for this
apparent lack of responsiveness: First, the rise in the price of oil increased the total U.S. outlays
for imported oil. Second, imports and exports only respond to a lower dollar with some delay
because of buying habits and institutional arrangements. Third, and more fundamentally, U.S.
imports rise more rapidly when American incomes increase than the imports of America’s
trading partners do when their incomes rise, reflecting the fact that foreign purchases from the
United States involve relatively large quantities of agricultural products and other goods with
relatively low income elasticities of demand. This pattern implies that even if U.S. incomes and
those in the rest of the world rose at the same rate, it would require a falling dollar just to keep
the U.S. trade deficit from rising. Finally, the trade gap is difficult to close because U.S. imports
are currently more than 70 percent larger than exports, implying that it takes an even larger
proportionate rise in exports just to keep the trade imbalance from rising. For all of these
reasons, reducing the trade deficit will require a large reduction in the dollar relative to that of
other currencies.
Why has the dollar not declined more rapidly relative to the euro, and why has it hardly

-14-

declined at all relative to the Japanese yen and the Chinese yuan? A decline of the dollar would
naturally be driven by the combination of an expectation that the dollar must eventually fall to
shrink the trade deficit and the current positive difference between interest rates on euro bonds
and dollar-denominated bonds. A variety of forces have delayed the full adjustment of the dollar.
These include the misleading statements of governments (including the familiar statement of all
the U.S. Treasury secretaries since Robert Rubin that “A strong dollar is good for America”), by
international financial institutions (like the IMF), and by some economists that suggest that the
imbalances can be eliminated without a decline of the dollar. But the most obvious reason for the
dollar’s lack of adjustment has been the policies of the Chinese and Japanese governments aimed
at keeping their currencies undervalued.

Reducing China’s Trade Surplus

The Chinese have achieved an enormous and growing trade surplus (now equal to 7
percent of China’s GDP) by keeping their currency, the yuan, artificially depressed.5 Until 2005,
the yuan was fixed relative to the dollar, and since then it has been allowed to appreciate by only
about 5 percent a year. Because the euro has risen substantially more during the same period, the
yuan has had little change on a trade-weighted basis. Moreover, since the prices of Chinese
exports have fallen relative to the U.S. price level, the real value of the yuan has actually
declined relative to the dollar.

5

The trade surplus of China and other countries is reported weekly in The Economist magazine,
both in dollars and as a percentage of the country’s GDP. For a broader review of current
information on the Chinese economy, see the World Bank’s China Quarterly Update, available
at <http://www.worldbank.org/cn>.
-15-

To keep the yuan from appreciating, the Chinese central bank has had to purchase not
only all of the foreign exchange generated by China’s enormous trade surplus, but also the funds
that have come to China in anticipation of a future currency appreciation. The result has been a
rise in China’s foreign exchange reserves to more than $1 trillion, an amount that is likely to
increase in 2008 by an additional several hundred billion dollars.
The Chinese have kept the yuan undervalued despite calls for greater currency flexibility
from the United States, the G-7 (a group of high-income countries including Canada, France,
Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, and the United States), and the International Monetary
Fund because of a fear that a stronger yuan will cause a decline in exports that will make it more
difficult to create the large number of jobs required to absorb the growing population and the
shift of the labor force from agriculture to industry. China has agreed to move to a more flexible
exchange rate and has recently widened the daily limit in the movement of the currency,
although without actually allowing it to appreciate that much. China has also established a goal
in its recent five-year plan of eliminating the trade surplus, although again without taking
significant steps to achieve that goal.
The key to shrinking China’s trade surplus is to reduce the remarkably high national
saving rate, currently more than 40 percent of GDP. Reducing the saving rate can be achieved by
increasing both household consumption and the level of government spending on public
programs in health and education. Both of these changes would create the additional demand
needed to absorb the growing nonagricultural labor force. Moreover, an increase in household
consumption is appropriate because household consumption and incomes have not been growing
nearly as fast as GDP in recent years, implying that households have not shared in the increasing

-16-

affluence of the nation. China’s goal of achieving a more “harmonious growth” by raising the
living standard in rural, western, and interior regions and in the lower-income groups in urban
China would also be served by a pro-consumption policy.
China’s officials recognize that both primary and secondary education in the rural areas,
where more than two-thirds of the population now live, have declined significantly since the
labor market reforms no longer permit forcing young college graduates to go as teachers to the
countryside. It is also clear that health services everywhere are grossly inadequate for a nation of
rising incomes and aspirations.
China’s current fiscal condition—a relatively low level of national debt and official
annual deficits of only about 1 percent of GDP—should permit pro-consumption tax policies and
increased government spending. Even if China raised its fiscal deficit to as much as 3 percent of
GDP, the ratio of national debt to GDP would be declining because of China’s rapid growth rate.
Moreover, China’s official budget deficit figure does not take into account the earnings retained
by state-owned enterprises or partially state-owned enterprises. If that income is taken into
account, China now has a fiscal surplus.
Several policies could increase consumer spending. A better mortgage market and a
consumer credit market would allow individuals to pay for durable products as they consume
them instead of having to save in advance. A better health insurance market would reduce the
need for individuals to accumulate funds in anticipation of potential medical expenditures. An
expanded Social Security retirement system would reduce household retirement saving.
While China has the largest global trade surplus of any country, other countries must also
reduce their trade surpluses as part of global adjustment. They too can do this without reducing

-17-

domestic employment and growth if they pursue appropriate fiscal and regulatory policies.
Japan, for example, could offset higher interest rates and a stronger yen by adopting revenueneutral tax changes that stimulate consumption and business investment. A temporary
investment tax credit financed by a concurrent higher corporate tax rate would not change the
budget deficit but would cause a higher level of investment. A cut in the personal tax rate that is
balanced with a concurrent gradual rise in the value-added tax would encourage more short-run
spending, too.
While Europe as a whole does not have a trade surplus, part of the reduction in the U.S.
trade deficit will be felt in Europe. To offset the decline in European exports, the individual
countries of Europe could also adopt revenue-neutral fiscal policies to raise consumer spending
and investment.
It is important to begin focusing on these reforms before the growing international
imbalances cause a much more painful adjustment of domestic spending and employment.

The Inadequacy of the IMF Multilateral Surveillance Process

The International Monetary Fund decided in 2006 to go beyond its usual advice to
individual countries in an attempt to achieve a coordinated action to reduce the global
imbalances (IMF, 2006). I believe that the IMF’s approach will not succeed in achieving any
reduction in the U.S. trade deficit and the corresponding trade surpluses around the world. The
key missing ingredient in the IMF advice is a recognition that resolving the global trade
imbalance requires a fundamental realignment of currencies, with a substantial decline of the

-18-

dollar relative to the euro, the Japanese yen, the Chinese yuan, and other Asian currencies. The
actions that the IMF has called for are ones that the key countries can claim that they are already
doing.
According to the IMF guidelines, the U.S. government should reduce its fiscal deficit
and thereby shrink the U.S. demand for imports. The IMF urges the European governments to
follow the “Lisbon Agenda” (described at
<http://europa.eu/scadplus/glossary/lisbon_strategy_en.htm>), which is a set of policies intended
to promote a dynamic knowledge-based economy in Europe to accelerate economic growth and
thereby raise imports. The oil-producing countries are told to invest in increased oil production
capacity, presumably leading to a lower price of oil and therefore reduced oil revenue. For its
part, China should allow a more flexible exchange rate.
These proposed policies are unlikely to induce significant changes in behavior. The
United States can point to the progress that is already being made in reducing the fiscal deficit,
coming down from 2.5 percent of GDP in 2005 to less than 1.5 percent in the 2007 fiscal year.
The European governments can assert that they are already pursuing the Lisbon Agenda. The
OPEC countries can point to the substantial investments that they are making in exploration and
drilling. China can note that it has widened the dollar–yuan exchange rate band and allowed the
yuan to appreciate by more than 10 percent over the past two years. Each of the participants can
therefore assert that it is already complying with the proposals of the IMF.
Even if the IMF did succeed in changing behavior along the lines that they advocate, it is
not clear that this would reduce global imbalances. A rise in U.S. national saving without a
concurrent increase in the competitiveness of the dollar—something the IMF does not

-19-

advocate—would lead to lower economic activity and higher U.S. unemployment with little
effect on the current account imbalance. Moreover, a lower fiscal deficit in the United States that
is achieved by repealing the current favorable tax rates on dividends and capital gains could
cause household saving to fall, leaving national saving no higher than before. While an increase
in European growth would raise imports if the greater output reflected higher aggregate demand,
the opposite could be true if an increase in growth were caused by greater productivity, the goal
of the Lisbon Agenda. Greater productivity would raise supply relative to demand and permit
lower real prices, leading to increased European exports. An increase in oil-producing capacity
could lead to lower prices, but the combination of the lower price and the increased quantity
could raise the total OPEC revenue, increasing the total imbalance. An increase in the flexibility
of the Chinese exchange rate that caused Chinese goods to be more expensive would help to
reduce the trade deficit. But despite the enormous size of the Chinese trade surplus, it would take
a very large increase in the yuan alone to cause a significant reduction in the overall trade
imbalance if other currencies did not also appreciate.
While the need for a more competitive dollar as a key to shrinking the trade deficit is
clear to most professional economists, the IMF officials and the political leaders who participate
in the G-7 process are reluctant to speak about the exchange rate out of fear that they will trigger
a much larger movement that will destabilize domestic activity in key countries. While this
reluctance is understandable, it has lead to increasingly large imbalances that run the risk of
causing greater instability when they are resolved. It now threatens to lead to currency
intervention that will, if successful, only postpone the ultimate resolution of the global
imbalances.

-20-

References

Council of Economic Advisers. 2008. Economic Report of the President. Washington, DC: U.S.
Government Printing Office.
Dollar, David, and Shangjin Wei. 2007. “Das Wasted Kapital in China: Firm Ownership and
Investment Efficiency in China.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 13103.
Feldstein, Martin. 2005. “Monetary Policy in a Changing International Environment: The Role
of Global Capital Flows.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 11856.
Feldstein, Martin. 2006. “The 2006 Economic Report of the President: Comment on Chapter
One (The Year in Review) and Chapter Six (The Capital Account Surplus).” Journal of
Economic Literature, 44(3): 673–79.
IMF. 2006. “IMF to Begin Multilateral Consultations with Focus on Global Imbalances.” IMF
Press Release No. 06/118, June 5. At
<http:///www.imf.org/external/np/sec/pr/2006/pr06118.html>.
IMF. 2008. “Currency Composition of Official Foreign Exchange Reserves (COFER)”
<http://www.imf.org/external/np/sta/cofer/eng/index.htm>.
Shiller, Robert. 2007. “Understanding Recent Trends in House Prices and Home Ownership.”
National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 13553. (Forthcoming in Housing,
Housing Finance and Monetary Policy, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City.)

-21-

