NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

AGRICULTURAL TRADE REFORM AND RURAL PROSPERITY:
LESSONS FROM CHINA
Jikun Huang
Yu Liu
Will Martin
Scott Rozelle
Working Paper 13958
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13958

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2008

The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Jikun Huang, Yu Liu, Will Martin, and Scott Rozelle. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Agricultural Trade Reform and Rural Prosperity: Lessons from China
Jikun Huang, Yu Liu, Will Martin, and Scott Rozelle
NBER Working Paper No. 13958
March 2008
JEL No. F1,O1,Q17,Q18
ABSTRACT
Tariffs on agricultural products fell sharply in China both prior to, and as a consequence of, China's
accession to the WTO. The paper examines the nature of agricultural trade reform in China since 1981,
and finds that protection was quite strongly negative for most commodities, and particularly for exported
goods, at the beginning of the reforms. Since then, the taxation of agriculture has declined sharply,
with the abolition of production quotas and procurement pricing, and reductions in trade distortions
for both imported and exported goods. Rural well-being has improved partly because of these reforms,
and also because of strengthening of markets, public investment in infrastructure, research and development,
health and education, and reductions in barriers to mobility of labor out of agriculture. Many challenges
remain in improving rural incomes and reducing rural poverty.

Jikun Huang
Center for Chinese Agricultural Policy
Rm 3826
Chinese Academy of Sciences
Jia 11, Datun Road, Anwai
Beijing 100101 CHINA
jkhuang.ccap@igsnrr.ac.cn

Will Martin
Development Research Group, MSN3-303
World Bank
1818 H St NW
Washington DC 20433
wmartin1@worldbank.org

Yu Liu
Center for Chinese Agricultural Policy
Jia 11, Datun Rd, Anwai
Beijing 100101 CHINA
liuy.04b@igsnrr.ac.cn

Scott Rozelle
Stanford University
Encina Hall East, E301
Stanford, CA 94305-6055
rozelle@stanford.edu

Agricultural Trade Reform and Rural Prosperity:
Lessons from China
China’s agriculture has grown rapidly in recent years, despite radical reductions in
agricultural tariffs (Huang and Chen, 1999; and Huang et al., 2004). China’s agriculture
has moved from a focus on self sufficiency and industry-first growth, through the Open
Door Policy of the 1980s, to a much more market-oriented regime. Accession to the
World Trade Organization was allowed only after China promised major institutional
reforms and a virtually unprecedented degree of tariff reduction, the abolition of export
subsidies, and introduction of constraints on domestic support (Lardy, 2001; Bhattasali,
Li and Martin 2004).
In response to the committment to reform trade as well as domestic markets, there
were fears that such sharp liberalization would have dire consequences for the rural
population. In poor countries, government officials know that agricultural price shifts can
have important effects on domestic food production, farm household incomes, national
poverty rates and overall rural stability. Many voices focused on the cuts in agricultural
tariffs and warned that poverty in China would be exacerbated and rural incomes would
fall if the nation were to follow through with their ambitious domestic market and trade
liberalization policies (Carter and Estrin 2001; Li et al. 1999; Schmidhuber 2001, Ni
2007). Even in light of these concerns, policy makers have pushed ahead.
By the mid-2000s, the concerns about rural incomes of critics of trade policies had
not been realized. Even scholars who have long worried about poor income growth in the
rural areas are admitting the incomes and rural welfare are rising as never before.
Although the gap in incomes between urban and rural people remains large, conventional
measures of this gap are overstated by neglecting the lower costs of living in rural areas

and by the exclusion of rural migrants living in urban areas when calculating average
urban incomes (Sicular, Ximing, Gustaffson and Li 2006; Chen and Ravallion 2007,
NBSC 2007).
Although there has long been an interest in the agricultural economy (e.g., Lardy,
1983; Sicular, 1988b; Lin, 1992; Rosen et al., 2004), it is quite surprising to many that
the agricultural sector of China actually has a very impressive record. Growth rates of
gross domestic product, agricultural value added and food per capita increased
dramatically between the early 1980s and the mid-2000s. Indeed, China's performance in
agriculture over the past two decades was more impressive than any other country in
Asia. Markets have boomed. The structure of agriculture has fundamentally shifted.
Despite having the largest population in the world and high income growth (which has
radically changed consumption patterns), China has remained a net exporter of
agricultural products until very recently, with a recent switch to net import status due
largely to increased cotton imports needed for burgeoning exports of textiles and
clothing. A new report by the National Bureau of Statistics of China (NBSC, 2006)
demonstrates that rural incomes grew robustly between 2002 and 2005 and did so in all
income deciles and all provinces (see Table 1).
The overall goal of this paper is to address these questions using two specific
approaches. The first is to present estimates of indicators of direct and indirect
interventions of China’s government in agriculture from 1981, when it first became
possible to assess the stance of trade policies, to 2005, when almost all of China’s WTO
commitments had been phased in. To achieve this objective, we examine the differences
in prices between international prices and domestic prices at the border (Nominal Rates

2

of Assistance or NRA at the market level and NRAf at the farm level). Because inputrelated policies were relatively small over most of our sample period, we focus on the
transfers associated with changes in commodity prices, although we include the effects of
input measures in our estimates of support to farmers. In the most general terms, we find
that China shifted from an economy that was highly distorted with a generally taxed
agricultural sector, to one that was highly integrated with the world economy.
In the second part of the paper, we seek to understand what allowed the rural
economy to do as well as it has in the face of falling prices for some products. To do so,
we examine four factors: investments in agricultural technology; the policy responses
aimed at deregulating agricultural markets and promoting structural adjustment; the new
set of programs that has redirect resources towards rural infrastructure and services as
well as relatively non-distorting transfer programs and tax cuts; and policies aimed at
facilitating the movement of labor from agriculture to industry and from rural to urban.
The wide scope of our goals and objectives necessitate certain limitations. First,
the absence of data precludes our examining the entire agricultural sector. Instead, we
examine commodities that account for two-thirds or more of gross output value over our
study period. Second, although we are able to judge from the price trends and our
understanding of domestic marketing and trade policy reforms the broad sources of the
shifts in the distortions of the agricultural economy, we can not identify the exact source
of changes and must rely on earlier work by the authors and others examining these
causal linkages in more detail (Huang and Rozelle, 1996; deBrauw et al., 2004). Thirdly,
because of the complexity of agricultural trade instruments during the period—including
state trading, quotas, licenses, tariffs and exchange rate distortions—we were forced to

3

use price comparison approaches even though exchange rates were distorted by a two-tier
exchange rate system up to 1994. During this period, we used an exchange rate adjusted
for the two-tier exchange rate system to compare international prices with prices in
China’s domestic economy, an approach used in (Martin et al., 2006).
Before showing these results in the following section, we discuss our quantitative
approach and sources of data. The results of the distortion analysis are presented and
discussed in the next section. The following section discusses three policy responses that
are likely part of the reason for the robust performance of China’s rural sector. The final
section concludes.

Methodology and data sources
In this paper, we have utilized the approach specified in Anderson, Martin, Sandri
and Valenzuela (henceforth, Anderson et al., 2008). The approach is primarily based on
comparisons between domestic and international prices. During the reform era these price
comparisons provide indicators of the incentives for production, consumption and trade,
and of the income transfers associated with interventions.
Our approach essentially creates two main measures of distortions for each
commodity. The basic measure in our analysis is the Nominal Rate of Assistance (NRA),
used to compare the prices of commodities in the domestic economy (at the port) with the
international prices of commodities at the border (that is, cif in the port for importables;
fob in the port for exportables).
Because of barriers within the domestic economy, the extent of protection (or disprotection) provided by trade policies may not be the same as the protection to farmers.

4

Since we have independent observations on the prices obtained by farmers in local
markets we are able to estimate the nominal rate of assistance at the farm level taking
into account both border distortions and domestic distortions affecting farmer returns
(NRAf’s). NRAf‘s are calculated after allowing for quality adjustment, taxes or subsidies,
and transport, storage and handling costs in moving commodities from the farm to the
wholesale level. Differences between NRAs and NRAf’s can arise from subsidy or
transfer payments that cause the prices received by farmers to differ from what they
would receive under competitive internal market conditions.1

The data
In compiling our data we necessarily had to make choices on commodity
coverage. We included 11 commodities: rice, wheat, maize, soybeans, cotton, pork, milk,
poultry, fruit (using apples as a representative product), vegetables (using tomatoes as a
representative product) and sugar (both sugarbeet and sugarcane). Over the study period,
these commodities accounted for roughly 75 percent (in the late 1980s) and 60 percent
(during the early 2000s) of the value of agricultural output in China. Because production
and consumption decisions were only gradually being allowed to respond to domestic
prices, and because we do not have access to reliable data on secondary market exchange
rates prior to 1981, we focus on the period from 1981.
Much of the data on margins, transportation costs and other transaction costs are
from an extensive set of surveys by Huang and Rozelle during the 1990s and the early
2000s, surveys which also served to establish which commodity price series provided
appropriate bases for price comparisons. Some of this was previously reported in Rozelle

5

et al. (2000) and Huang et al. (2004), which provided information on substantial quality
differences between some imported and domestic commodities and resulting
methodologies for ensuring valid price comparisons. For more recent years, survey teams
from the Center for Chinese Agricultural Policy interviewed traders in 10 cities around
China in 2006. The complete data series are in the appendices of Huang et al. (2007).
When calculating the rate of support to farmers, we took into account direct
support measures using data from the Price Department of the National Development and
Reform Commission. These measures included three applying since 2002—direct grain
supports, the seed subsidy program, and agricultural machinery subsidies. We also took
into account the negative assistance imposed by agricultural taxes on production of
specific commodities. We did not take into account the input subsidy program that pays
subsidies to state-owned-enterprises (SOEs) producing fertilizers, fertilizers and
mulching film on the grounds that all or part of this may be a subsidy to the SOEs, rather
than to the farmers. Nor did we include the “grain for green” payments made to convert
fragile agricultural land to forest or pasture (see OECD 2008 for details of both of these
measures).

Results
The role of domestic price and marketing policy
Before examining the role of distortions at the border, it is useful (and necessary) to
examine the relationship between the available domestic price series for farm and retail
prices for two major grain crops (Figure 1, Panels A and B). The importance (and role) of
China’s domestic price and marketing policy for rice and wheat (the two largest crops in

6

China—one an exportable and the other an importable) can be seen by comparing the
state-set urban retail price and the state-set farm-gate procurement price with the rural
retail price, a free market price. Until 1992 the urban retail price for rice was generally
well below the free-market price in rural areas, despite the costs associated with
transferring rice to urban areas. Only urban residents could buy rice at these low prices
and only with ration coupons that were available in limited quantities.
The relatively low selling price of grain at the farm gate by farmers shows that
China’s food system in the 1980s was set up to transfer income from rural to urban
people (Figure 1, Panels A and B). The amount that farmers received for their mandatory
deliveries was far below the free market price although, in the case of rice, it was above
the urban retail price, suggesting urban prices were held down by a subsidy as well as by
taxation of farmers. However, there is some question about the effects of the depressed
rural prices on farmers’ incentives given the infra-marginal nature of many of these
transfers (Sicular 1988a). This is because from the mid-1980s farmers were able to sell
additional amounts at higher market prices once they had met their obligation to deliver a
quota at the low purchasing price. As shown by Sicular (1988a), the higher out-of-quota
price is the relevant incentive for production at the margin. However, as shown by Wang
et al. (1999), even such policies may not be fully decoupled from incentives, with
seemingly infra-marginal transfers giving rural household members an incentive to move
out of agriculture.
After 1992, however, changes to China’s domestic marketing and procurement
system appear to have eliminated this additional layer of taxation and regulation for
producers of rice, and wheat (Figure 1, Panels A and B). In the early 1990s the urban

7

price began to rise above the farm gate price; urban and rural retail prices also came
much closer together. The gap between urban and rural retail prices essentially
disappeared. And the gap between the rural retail price and the farm price declined,
possibly suggesting an improvement in marketing efficiency (Park et al. 2002).

Nominal rates of assistance for China’s main agricultural commodities
In this section we focus on the distortions faced by farmers in China between
1981 and 2005. To do so, we examine plots of NRAs and NRAf’s over time for an
illustrative subsample of our 11 commodities. A more comprehensive analysis is
contained in Huang et al. (2007).
Distortions to the grain economy before 1995. The distortions to the rice
economy of China in the 1980s and early 1990s are characterized by two important
features (Figure 2, Panel A). First, the NRA of rice, an exportable commodity, is negative
in every year between 1980 and 1995. Ranging between -40 and -10, the negative NRAs
show that China was highly competitive in international rice markets during these years.
Trade policy, and particularly the state trading monopoly, kept exporters from shipping
large quantities of rice onto world markets and kept market prices of rice in China’s port
cities below world prices.
The second feature demonstrates how domestic marketing and procurement
placed a greater tax on farmers and insulated the domestic price of rice from the world
market price even if trade policy had been liberalized (Figure 2, Panel A). The state’s
artificially low procurement price kept the price received by farmers systematically
below the free market price of rice as seen by the NRAf’s. Because of this the total tax on

8

rice ranged from -70 in the early 1980s to -30 in the early 1990s. Rice producers were
among the most heavily taxed farmers in China—given the large share of the crop’s sown
area and large negative rates of disprotection.
Unlike rice, the NRA measures show that trade policy offered high rates of
protection for wheat in China between 1981 and the mid-1990s (Figure 2, Panel B). In
most years after 1980 the free market price of wheat in China’s port cities was about 60
percent above international prices (cif, China’s port cities). Unlike rice farmers, wheat
producers—who have been shown to produce at a higher cost than producers in many
other countries (Huang and Ma, 2000)—benefited from high market prices for their
marginal output. ‘By keeping out imports and keeping domestic prices high, trade policy
appears to have been focused on food self-sufficiency, rather than on providing
inexpensive food to urban consumers.
The differences between rice and wheat illustrate that trade liberalization in China
should not have been expected to hurt everyone and emphasize the importance of looking
at distortions on a commodity by commodity basis. Trade liberalization clearly had the
potential to help rice producers, in particular. By contrast, the removal of the high
protection rates for wheat observed in the 1980s and early 1990s, would have had the
potential to hurt wheat producers. Our analysis of why trade policy reform has been
accompanied by rural income rises seems most relevant for the case of crops, such as
wheat, that were receiving positive protection in the 1980s and 1990s.
Domestic marketing policies, however, were working in the opposite direction.
The trends in NRAf’s show how the forced deliveries under wheat quotas largely
insulated farmers from much of the benefit of protection (Figure 2, Panel B). Although

9

there was still positive protection for wheat in most years between 1980 and 1995, the
average rates were lower (all below 50 percent except for in 1994 and 1995) and were
zero and even slightly negative in 5 of the 16 years (1981; 1982; 1990; 1992; 1993).
These figures suggest that policy for wheat was trying to increase production through the
higher market prices, but to transfer income from producers to consumers through the
infra-marginal transfers captured in the NRAf. Huang et al. (2007) show that the story for
maize is similar to that of wheat.
Distortions to the grain economy after 1995. After 1995 our distortions analysis
shows that China’s international trade and domestic marketing policies have changed
strikingly (Figures 2—right hand sides of panels). That China’s reformers were able to
eliminate the procurement policies that had been taxing rice and wheat (and maize)
farmers is apparent from the way the differences between NRAs and NRAf’s narrow and
disappear. In other work, Huang et al. (2004) show that elimination of the procurement
quota system contributed significantly to a reduction in the tax burden on farmers. In part,
then, procurement policy reform itself was one of the ways that help increase rural
incomes to farmers during the 1990s.
The liberalization of domestic policies in the mid-1990s was accompanied by
liberalization of trade policy, at least in the case of China’s major food grains. After 1995
the taxation and subsidization of rice and wheat were being phased out as the NRAs for
rice steadily rose (became less negative) and the NRAs for wheat fell. Likely in part in
preparation for its accession to the WTO, China’s leaders liberalized trade for its main
food grains to such an extent that between 1995 and 2001 most of the protection for these

10

crops was eliminated. Since 2001, the NRAs for both rice and wheat have been almost
zero.
Edible oils, milk and sugar. Outside the grain economy, marketing and trade
reform, as in the case of wheat, removed positive protection from a number of key
commodities. The biggest difference between the analysis of distortions for grain crops
and cash crops (in our case, for soybeans) is that domestic marketing policy has
historically played less of a role for cash crops. Although some counties had procurement
delivery quotas for soybean producers, this was not as widespread as for grain and the
implicit taxes on soybeans in counties with quotas were generally lower than for staple
grains. There was, as a consequence, little difference between the graphs for NRAs and
NRAf’s. The same applies for the remaining commodities (livestock; horticulture and
milk and sugar), because there was no state-mandated procurement for these
commodities, As a result, the discussion in the rest of this section focuses on trade policy.
Before 1995, our analysis shows that soybeans fluctuated between being taxed
and protected (Figure 3). Although the average level of protection was roughly zero, it
varied from -20 percent up to 30 percent. A paper by Rozelle and Huang (2004) shows
that much of this fluctuation was due to domestic policy cycles that switched between
encouraging and discouraging production, while allowing little trade.
The trends in NRAs after 1995 show the strong commitment to trade
liberalization for soybeans (Figure 3, right hand side of the graph). Beginning in the late
1990s and continuing through 2005 protection for soybeans fell from around 30 percent
to almost zero. This falling protection, in fact, should not be a surprise given the
integration of China into world soybean markets and the monotonic rise in imports

11

(which exceeded 25 million tons in 2005). The story of soybeans after 1995 parallels that
of wheat. In fact, because of the high level of imports, the case of soybean producers
often raised in discussions about the adverse effects of trade policies on farmers (see
Rozelle and Huang, 2004 for a complete description). In fact, Rozelle and Huang (2004)
empirically show using CAPSiM (an agricultural simulation model developed by the
authors) that soybean prices and the incomes of soybean producers would have been
higher in the absence of trade reform. Therefore, in the case of soybeans the government
carried through with its commitment to trade reform.
Protection of milk and sugar began earlier and remained higher than for soybeans.
During the 1980s the NRAs for milk and sugar were large and positive (Figure 4, Panels
A and B), with milk ranging between 50 and over 200 percent between 1980 and 1987,
and sugar above 40 percent through the late 1990s. NRAs for milk fell dramatically in the
late 1980s, and subsequently fluctuated between zero and 50 percent. Protection for sugar
also fell in the late 1980s, but subsequently rose, with the average NRA fluctuating
around 40 percent.
Livestock and horticultural commodities. The case of livestock (Figure 5 for pork)
and horticulture (not shown here—see Huang et al., 2007) show that trade liberalization
directly helped raise farm incomes in certain regions and sectors. During the early reform
era there was heavy implicit taxation of livestock and horticultural commodities.
Although China can competitively produce labor-intensive livestock and horticultural
products, producers were not encouraged to produce or export these commodities on a
large scale. Part of the resistance to exports was from China’s own barriers, such as
quotas on exports to Hong Kong. Another part of the price gap shown in these figures

12

reflects trade barriers facing China in export markets. While there quite possibly were
grounds for some of these barriers (for example, foot and mouth disease is widespread in
China), even blatantly false claims could not be contested since China was not a WTO
member. As a consequence, China’s livestock and horticultural producers produced
commodities far below the world market price yet were unable to increase exports into
global markets.
Aggregate impacts. We separated the commodities in our study into importable
and exportable groups, and used production weights at undistorted prices to aggregate
them. Assuming that our study commodities largely reflect the distortions to all
commodities, there is a striking pattern (Figure 6—left hand side of figure) that reinforces
the positive relationship between trade liberalization and rural incomes. In the 1980s and
through the mid-1990s, importables (such as wheat, soybeans, milk and sugar) were
protected. On average, their protection rates were between 15 and 35 percent. The same
was true for exportables, except the distortions show that commodities such as rice,
livestock commodities and horticultural commodities were taxed at rates ranged from 40
to 50 percent. With exportable agricultural products accounting for a larger share of
output than importables, China’s average agricultural distortions were negative. In other
words, China was taxing its agriculture—with both its international trade and domestic
marketing policies.
One of the main findings of this study is evident from the right hand side of
Figure 6. After 1995, the NRAs of importables fell from around 20 percent to less than 10
percent. During this period, the NRAs of exportables rose, or the implicit taxes on them
fell, from about 40 percent to around 15 percent. When taken together, the distortions in

13

China’s agriculture fell to less than 10 percent. In many years overall protection was
between 0 and -5 percent. The combination of domestic marketing reforms and
international trade liberalization has created an economy that is one of the least distorted
in the world. It also helped China enjoy rising incomes (in the aggregate) at the same
time that it was reforming trade policies. One key to this was the removal of agricultural
taxation. Another was allowing farmers to produce the goods that would generate the
greatest benefit at international prices.
When considering the impact of trade reform on the agricultural sector, it is not
sufficient to consider only the instruments directly affecting the sector. The pathbreaking
study of distortions to agricultural incentives in developing countries (Krueger, Schiff
and Valdés 1991) showed that the indirect taxation of agriculture resulting from
protection to other sectors was generally more important than direct agricultural
distortions.
In the case of China, this question requires particular attention since there have
been enormous reductions in non-agricultural barriers, including tariffs, exchange rate
overvaluation, quotas and licensing. We have combined estimates of these distortions
into a composite measure of non-agricultural distortions depicted as an NRA for nonagricultural tradeables in Figure 7. In a simplified two-sector model what matters is the
relative rate of assistance (RRA) also shown in this figure. This figure shows that the
agricultural sector benefited from a rapid reduction in both direct and indirect taxation
between the early 1980s and 1995. In the period since 1995, the RRA has become
positive and continued to rise, albeit at a much slower rate than in the 1981-1995 period.
The reduction in taxation of the agricultural sector evident in this diagram is consistent

14

with the improvement in the terms of trade for agriculture relative to non-agriculture
within China observed by Zhu and Hong (2007) using data on relative prices for
agricultural and non-agricultural goods.
Distinguishing the impacts of WTO accession. One final issue that needs to be
recognized when considering the impacts of reforms associated with WTO accession is
the nature of commitments in the WTO. China’s main WTO accession commitments on
agriculture were commitments that tariffs would not rise above the bound levels agreed in
China’s WTO accession schedule. These commitments were negotiated through an
intensive process that took into account the market access interests of existing members,
and the previously prevailing applied tariff rates. Given the nature of China’s trade
regime, however, the relationship between these tariff rates and China’s actual protection
was weak. For many products, the relationship between domestic and world prices was
determined more by state trading, quotas and licenses than by tariffs.
Table 4 shows the relationship estimated by Ianchovichina and Martin (2004)
between applied protection prior to accession, the applied tariff, and the bound tariff
associated with WTO accession. From the Table, it is clear that the applied tariffs for
many commodities were strikingly above the protection actually provided. For rice, the
applied tariff of 114 percent was quite irrelevant, with the actual protection applied being
negative. Similarly, the applied rates of protection on wheat and maize were far below the
applied rates of 114 percent. For only a few commodities, such as soybeans, did the
bound rate agreed at the WTO require reductions in the protection previously applied.
This distinction between reductions in applied rates and reductions in actual agricultural
protection is extremely important. Much of the concern about potential adverse impacts

15

of WTO commitments expressed either in prospect by authors such as Schmidhuber
(2001) or Carter and Estrin (2001) or retrospectively by authors such as Ni (2007) is
based on the reductions in tariff rates required by WTO accession.

Policies to Support Market and Trade Liberalization
Our analysis that documents reductions in the distortions to China’s agriculture helps us
meet our first objective. China’s policy makers have successfully carried out their
promises to liberalize markets and trade. In some sense the analysis also helps explain the
second puzzle. Because of the rising share of livestock and horticulture in China’s
agricultural economy, and because trade liberalization actually eliminated negative
protection in these sectors, the average level of protection (combining the net effects of
commodities that were having their positive protection removed and the commodities that
were being less taxed) moved towards zero. In this way, trade policy was helping to
increase farm incomes. In the period since 1995, liberalization elsewhere in the economy
reduced the taxation of the agricultural sector leading to the rise in the relative rate of
assistance noted in Figure 7. In this way trade policy changes can contribute, in part, to
the explanation of how rural China avoided declining during trade liberalizations.
However, the story needs more explanation. In part, the additional explanation is
needed because rural incomes not only rose on average, but rose in all provinces (Table
1). The rise in income occurred in all provinces, including those in northern, northeastern
and northwestern China. In these regions of China, farmers produce many crops (wheat,
maize, soybeans and cotton) that were still receiving positive protection during the late
1990s and early 2000s. With this set of crops accounting for a large share of the crop area

16

in northern, northeast and northwestern China, there remains a puzzle to explain. Why
did incomes rise in those areas even though we know that incomes of some producers
would have suffered from trade liberalization-induced cuts in protection. Part of the
explanation is presumably the reduction in the cost structure resulting from rapid
liberalization in the rest of the economy. In the rest of this section we discuss several key
policy reforms that we believe contributed to rural incomes rising even while agricultural
protection fell.

Development and Dissemination of Agricultural Technology
The importance of agricultural research and extension in increasing agricultural
productivity in developing countries is now widely recognized. Successful development
has been shown to be tied closely to productivity growth in the agricultural sector (World
Bank 2008). In a country like China, where agriculture is dominated by small, poor
farms, it is even more important.
During the reform era, it was not always clear whether China would be able to
maintain the pace of technological advance needed to maintain farm incomes in a
dynamic economy. While decollectivization played the key role in boosting productivity
(Lin, 1992) in the early stages of reform, this provided only a one-off boost to
productivity. After 1985, the evidence suggests that technological advance has been the
main engine of productivity growth (Huang and Rozelle, 1996). China was one of the
first countries to develop and extend Green Revolution technology in the 1960s, 1970s
and 1980s. Hybrid rice was developed by China’s scientists in the late 1970s and, until

17

the mid-1990s, it was the only country in the world to have commercialized this new
technology.
Despite these and other successes, China’s system of agricultural research faced
great challenges by the late 1980s (Pray et al., 1997). Research investment, almost totally
publicly funded, was declining. Incentives were poor and funding was being allocated in
ways that did not always reward excellence. The system was not responding to many
demands for new technologies and, the extension system was in shambles.
A nationwide reform in research was launched in the mid-1980s (Pray et al.,
1997). The reforms attempted to increase research productivity by shifting funding from
institutional support to competitive grants, supporting research useful for economic
development, and encouraging applied research institutes to support themselves by
selling the technology they produced. In addition, in the late 1980s and early 1990s, new
horticultural seeds, improved breeding livestock (Rae et al., 2006) and new technologies
for dairy were all imported (Ma et al., 2006).
After declining between the early 1980s and the mid-1990s (Pray et al., 1997),
investment in R&D also began to rise. Funding was greatly increased for plant
biotechnology, although only only Bt cotton has been commercialized in a major way to
date (Huang et al., 2002). China now ranks among the global leaders in agricultural
biotechnology. In the late 1990s China invested more in agricultural biotechnology
research than all other developing countries combined. Its public spending on agricultural
biotechnology was second only to the US and, according to some projections, it will soon
outspend the US government on plant biotechnology research. Investment in
government-sponsored R&D increased by 5.5 percent annually between 1995 and 2000

18

and by over 15 percent per year after 2000 (Hu et al., 2007). During the past decade, the
increase in investment in rural research and development has been the most rapid of any
large nation.
The investment in R&D has been paying off. During China’s early reform period
the yields of major food crops rose steadily (Table 2, column 1). Although some of that
yield increase came from greater efficiency in input use, technological improvements
appear to have accounted for some of this growth, since indices of aggregated inputs (that
is, measures of land, labor and material inputs) for rice, wheat, and maize actually fell for
all the crops during the early 1980s (column 2).
Although there was concern about the effect of the slowdown in R&D spending
during the 1980s and early 1990s, the analysis shows that the growth of output continued
to outpace that for inputs (Table 2, columns 3 and 4). And, productivity trends continued
to rise (Table 3, column 2). During this time—and during the early reform period—
China’s TFP has been rising at the healthy rate of about 2 percent per year. Such rises,
which occurred in all provinces and with all crops, could not have helped but increase
incomes—of all farmers—regardless of whether the crop was being protected or taxed.

Policies to Encourage Market Integration and Efficiency
Price and marketing reforms have been key components of China’s transition strategy
from a centrally-planned to a market-oriented economy. These policies were
implemented in a gradual way (Sicular, 1995). In the initial years there was little effort to
move the economy to one in which most all resources and factors were allocated
according market price signals. Over time the government’s position on market reform

19

has gradually evolved. As officials in charge of the overall economic reforms began to be
committed to use markets as the primary means to allocate resources for the economy,
the commitment to allowing markets in agriculture also deepened (Sicular, 1995).
As markets began to emerge, China’s leaders took steps to encourage the
efficiency of markets and, perhaps more importantly, stepped aside and allowed them to
expand in an environment with minimal distortions. Above all national and regional
governments invested in the hardware—roads, landline telephones and cellular
technology—that reduced transaction costs and accelerated the flow of information and
goods (Park et al., 2002). Many regional and local governments invested in marketing
sites and tried to attract commercial interests to set up businesses. Finally, except for a
short period in the late 1990s, government officials have stepped back and allowed the
entry of private traders and private transport and done little to interfere with markets.
Licensing fees and taxes are low or non-existent. Markets were encouraged for both
agricultural outputs and inputs.
In assessing the health of the rural economy, it is important to understand how
China’s markets are functioning. Markets—whether classic competitive ones or some
workable substitute—increase efficiency by facilitating transactions among agents to
allow specialization and trade and by providing information through a pricing mechanism
to producers and consumers about the relative scarcity of resources. With better markets,
producers can begin to specialize, become more efficient and increase their incomes.
According to price data from private reporting stations and information firms, it
appears that China’s markets function relatively well. For example, maize prices in for
different cities in Northeast China track each other closely (Rozelle and Huang, 2003).

20

Soybean prices in markets in different regions of the country move almost in perfect
concert with one another (Rozelle and Huang, 2004). Rice markets also have been shown
to function as well as or better than those in the United States in terms of the efficiency of
moving commodities around and between China’s producing and consuming regions
(Huang et al., 2004). Horticultural, dairy and livestock markets are all dominated by
millions of small traders who are operating in extremely competitive environments
(Wang et al., 2007; Wu et al., 2007; Bi et al., 2007).
The improvement in markets has allowed individual producers to specialize as
never before. According to one national survey, the number of villages that have become
specialized producers of a single commodity rose from less than 20 percent in 1995 to
nearly 40 percent in 2004 (Rosen et al., 2004). Such integration has allowed relatively
small and poor farmers to participate in emerging markets and to accrue the substantial
income gains associated with moving from subsistence to a market orientatin (Wang et al.,
2007; Bi et al., 2007; Balat and Porto 2006). In fact, in a recent survey of the greater
metropolitan Beijing area, it was found that poor farmers living in poor villages were the
main beneficiaries of new demands for horticultural commodities.
Most importantly, according to deBrauw et al. (2004), when markets in China
have begun to become more competitive and efficient, they have led to rising
productivity and efficiency. The link between improved markets and rising incomes is
important because it is consistent with our puzzle. Even where market and trade
liberalization has reduced protection and necessarily adversely affected income, the rising
productivity and efficiency effects have at least partly offset these negative impacts. This
interpretation is supported by the modeling work in Huang et al. (2005) which finds when

21

trade policy positively affects some prices (e.g., horticultural crops), but negatively
affects others (e.g., wheat), farmers mitigate the downside effects by transferring
production into the commodities with rising prices.

Public Investment, Services and Subsidies
Any visitor to most parts of rural China is struck by one thing: Agriculture is still
being carried out in many environments that can only be described as backward. Except
in a few suburban and coastal regions, the infrastructure in rural China is extremely poor.
Roads and bridges, irrigation and drainage, drinking water, schools and health facilities
are far from modern and decades behind the infrastructure in China’s cities. Yet
development economists know that for a country to modernize, its infrastructure has to be
able to support the production and marketing activities of a complex economy.
Although the stock of infrastructure is poor there have been improvements in
recent years. Research has shown that on average each village in China had about one
infrastructure project during the late 1990s (Luo et al. 2007). This is far higher than in
most other developing nations in Asia. In recent years, the level of investment activity
has risen sharply (to almost one project per year). Most of these projects are public goods
(and not activities, such as orchards, in which governments frequently invested during the
1980s). In addition, research suggests that this investment is being targeted fairly well,
with increasing amounts going to poor, minority and remote parts of China.
Although the level of public goods investment per capita has risen from about 40
to 100 US dollars (in PPP terms), it is still far below the levels that were enjoyed by rural
residents in Japan during the 1950s and South Korea during the 1970s (Luo et al., 2007).

22

Quality, while rising, is still low in many villages (Liu et al., 2007). China is just
beginning the process of narrowing the gap between rural and urban infrastructure and it
will take an enormous and sustained effort to transform the rural economy.

Education and Health Programs
Rural services—in particular education and health—are perhaps the weakest part of the
rural economy, despite the recognition by development economists of their importance.
Rural education by any metric is abysmal. Fees—until recently—were high, even for
elementary school. Buildings and equipment are outdated and poor. Teaching quality is
poor. Because of poor education, there is evidence that even as the nation accelerates its
drive towards industrialization and urbanization—and agriculture is becoming more
complex and demanding—retention rates for farm children remain very low beyond the
compulsory nine years of schooling. Partly because tuition and associated fees are so
high—an estimated one-quarter of total expenditure for many poor households—
participation rates in high school (grades 10-12) are less than 15 percent for the rural
population. A national survey found that nearly half of rural residents believe education
has not improved in recent years (Liu et al., 2007).
There has been a new surge of interest by the government in improving rural
education and reducing the cost of education—especially in poor, rural areas. In 2005,
fees for elementary schools were eliminated in poor areas. In 2006, this was expanded to
the entire rural economy. By 2007 all compulsory education (grades 1-9) was supposed to
be free. The income effects of such policies are potentially enormous. Huang et al. (2004)

23

show that the elimination of government tuition fees provided a benefit more than twice
as large as the losses resulting from tariff reductions for China’s protected crops.
The national and regional governments have also begun to build a rural health
care program. In its initial years, while funding was scarce, it is in high demand. By 2007
the government was investing up to 30 yuan per capita into the program.

Farm Subsidies and Taxes
The government launched a massive program of direct subsidies in 2004 and this
program is projected to expand further in the coming years. Designed in part to boost
production of grain (for national food self-sufficiency) and in part as a rural income
transfer, the national Grain Subsidy and the national new technology program have in a
very short time become fixtures in the rural economy. Nearly 80 percent of farm
households receive subsidies. Participation in the program is as high in poor areas as is it
is in higher-income areas (Tan et al., 2006). Although they were relatively small in the
first year of the program, by the second year, between the two programs, many farmers
were receiving about 10 to 15 yuan per mu, which is more than 70 yuan per acre.
While farmers were obviously predisposed to favoring the program (who does not
like direct subsidies), there are several issues that China must weigh in considering the
long term benefit and sustainability of the program. First, is whether or not payments
under the Grain Subsidies should be counted towards the nation’s Aggregate Measure of
Support (AMS) at the WTO. In its accession to WTO, China agreed to keep its distorting
payments in agriculture below 8.5 percent of Agricultural Gross Domestic Product.
Obviously, if these payments were counted against the AMS, China could rapidly

24

approach its maximum level of payments. But there is a question about whether these
payments are “distorting or not.” In 2004, a survey by RCRE found that more than 70
percent of the payments were decoupled, with farmers receiving the payment whether
they planted grain or any other crop. If this were the case, then such payments arguably
could be counted as pure, unlinked transfers and not counted. However, during the
second year of the program there was more of an effort to target households that
produced grain. If the payment is linked to the type of crop planted, it is likely to be
classified as a distorting subsidy with careful accounting needed to ensure it does not
violate the restriction on distorting subsidies under China’s WTO commitments.
In addition to subsidies, the national government has eliminated almost all taxes
and fees in rural villages. In 2001 and 2002, all fees were converted to a single
agricultural tax that was not to exceed 8.5 percent of a household’s (village’s) gross value
of agricultural output. However, no sooner had this been implemented than the tax was
eliminated altogether. By 2007, surveys showed that farmers were paying almost no
taxes.
When added together, the recent policy innovations in rural infrastructure, free
rural school tuition, grain and other agricultural subsidies, tax reductions and health
insurance subsidies are substantial. These government programs have likely injected
enough funds to contribute importantly to the observed improvements in household
incomes in rural areas.

25

Improving Mobility of Labor out of Agriculture
China began the period under study with around half of its workforce in agriculture and
will reduce this fraction to just a few percent by the time she reaches high income status.
The rate of migration out of agriculture consistent with China’s growth path is one of the
most rapid ever observed. In almost all rapidly-growing economies, the resistance to this
adjustment, particularly due to sector and region-specific investments in human capital, is
frequently seen as the source of a “farm problem” in which farm incomes fall below
incomes in the rest of the economy.
The usual resistances to labor out-migration are compounded by a number of
China-specific factors. One is the hukou residence permit system, which has restricted
mobility of labor into urban areas (see Sicular and Zhao 2004). Another is the land tenure
system, where households leaving the agricultural sector completely must relinquish their
land without compensation (Zhao 1999). Other China-specific resistances have come
from factors such as the low quality of educational opportunities in rural areas discussed
above. Unless these structural rigidities to mobility of labor out of agriculture are
reduced, the effectiveness of other reforms, such as tax cuts or price supports, is likely to
be diminished greatly, as excess labor remains bottled up in agriculture, earning low
returns. Where out-migration is feasible, de Brauw and Giles (2008) show that it
increases the living standards of the family members remaining, and tends to increase
their land holdings, although not necessarily their investment in other assets.
During the period we consider, the hukou system has been relaxed considerably,
to the point where it is regarded by some, but not all, labor economists as a relatively
minor source of resistance to overall labor mobility out of agriculture. Relatively little

26

appears, so far, to have been done to change the land tenure system to reduce this barrier
to mobility. The improvements in rural education discussed above seem likely to play a
key role in enhancing mobility, both by increasing returns from work outside agriculture,
and by lowering the costs of adjusting (Fan and Hertel 2004).

Conclusions and Implications
The main finding of this paper is that the nature of policy intervention in China’s
agriculture has changed dramatically over the past 25 years, transforming the agricultural
sector from one characterized by high and variable distortions to one that is relatively
liberal. In the 1980s and early 1990s (or the early reform period) there were distortions in
both external and domestic policies that isolated domestic producers and consumers from
international markets.
During the early reform period domestic marketing and pricing policies actually
served to make the prices that domestic producers and consumers faced almost
independent from the effects of trade policy. In the case of rice and other exportable
commodities, heavy border distortions that reduced domestic prices were compounded by
a domestic procurement system that depressed farm prices and the prices paid by urban
consumers.. Similar dynamics characterized importable commodities such as wheat and
soybeans where, despite fairly high rates of protection from trade policies, producer
prices were relatively low.
In contrast, since the late 1980s and early 1990s (the late reform period), the
liberalization of domestic markets has reduced the distortions from domestic policies (as
the market gradually has replaced the state as the primary mechanism for allocating

27

resources and has became the basis for farmers’ production and marketing decisions). At
the same time, especially in the case of importable commodities, trade policy has been
liberalized, with distortions from border measures falling substantially. As a result, we
find that in recent years (that is, by the end of the late reform period), China’s agriculture
is much less distorted in two ways. First, the differences between international and
domestic market prices have narrowed considerably for many commodities due to trade
policy liberalization. Second, the elimination of domestic policy distortions increased
farm prices for many commodities. Reductions in protection to non-agricultural
tradables—a major element of the WTO accession negotiations—also appear to have
reduced the costs imposed on the agricultural sector.
The main question, once the trade liberalization is established, then, shifts gear
and the focus of our analysis begins to try to understand how it could be—when there are
many places in China that have experienced large falls in protection to the agricultural
tariffs that they produce—that rural incomes still rose almost nationwide. In trying to
explain this puzzle, we examine three sources of income increases that might help offset
the fall in income brought on by trade liberalization. We explored the role of agricultural
technology, the rise of markets and the emergence of new subsidy and support policies.
In our analysis we find that at the same time that trade liberalization policy was
reducing returns to some products that had been receiving positive protection, a number
of other elements were working to offset these effects. One was the reductions in taxation
of other important commodities, such as rice. At the same time, investments in R&D, the
fostering of markets and the new investment and subsidy programs appear to have
generated wide-ranging, positive income effects in rural China.

28

The implications of these findings are that, although trade policies may have had
negative effects on incomes in certain parts of the agricultural community, the magnitude
of these adverse impacts appears to have been widely overstated. This is partly because
the usual way of assessing the impact of WTO commitments—comparisons of bound
tariffs with prior applied tariffs—widely overstates the extent of liberalization required in
China. Another reason that these adverse impacts have frequently been overstated is that
the agricultural sector as a whole was negatively protected at the beginning of the period,
and most of this taxation has been eliminated. Another important source of gains was the
reduction in protection to some less-efficient import-competing sectors, which allowed
farmers to increase the value of their output. There were also important dynamic benefits
as new export activities emerged, and the cost to burden on agriculture of protection to
nonagricultural sectors was reduced.
The reforms undertaken in China have included both trade policy reforms and
complementary domestic reforms that have helped to create greater opportunities for
rural people—a combination of policies widely seen as necessary if the greatest benefits
are to be achieved. China’s experience over the past quarter century appears to provide
some important lessons both for the future, and for policy makers grappling with similar
challenges in other countries.

29

References
Anderson, K., W. Martin, D. Sandri and E. Valenzuela. 2008. “Methodology for
Measuring Distortions to Agricultural Incentives,” Working paper, Development
Research Group, World Bank, Washington DC.
Balat, J. and G. Porto. 2006. “The WTO Doha Round, Cotton Sector Dynamics, and
Poverty Trends in Zambia” ch 6 in Hertel, T. and L.A. Winters eds. Poverty and
the WTO: Impacts of the Doha Development Agenda. Palgrave Macmillan and the
World Bank, Basingstoke and Washington DC.
Bhattasali, D., Li, Shantong and Martin, W. eds. 2004. China and the WTO: Accession,
Policy Reform and Poverty Reduction Strategies. Oxford University Press and the
World Bank, Washington DC.
Bi, X., J. Huang and S. Rozelle. 2007. “Modern Supply Chains, Expansion of Demand
and the Poor in China: The Case of Livestock,” Working Paper, Center for
Chinese Agricultural Policy, Institute of Geographical Sciences and Natural
Resource Research, Chinese Academy of Sciences.
Brandt and T. G. Rawski (eds). Forthcoming. China’s Economy: Retrospect and
Prospect, Cambridge Univ. Press.
de Brauw, A. and J. Giles. 2008. Migrant labor markets and the welfare of rural
households in the developing world: evidence from China, Mimeo, World Bank.
Carter,C.A., and A. Estrin. 2001. "China's Trade Integration and Impacts on Factor
Markets" Working Paper, University of California,Davis.
Chen, S. and M. Ravallion. 2004. ‘Welfare impacts of China’s accession to the WTO’ in
Bhattasali, D., Li, Shantong and Martin, W. eds China and the WTO: Accession,
Policy Reform and Poverty Reduction Strategies. Oxford University Press and the
World Bank, Washington DC.
Chen, S. and Ravallion, M. 2007. ‘China's (uneven) progress against poverty’ Journal of
Development Economics 82:1– 42
CNBS (National Statistical Bureau of China). Statistical Yearbook of China, various
issues from 1981 to 2006. Beijing (China): China Statistical Press.
CNBS (National Bureau of Statistics of China). China Yearbook of Agricultural Price
Survey. Various issues. China Statistics Press. Beijing
China Customs. Import and Export Database. Beijing.
deBrauw, A. J. Huang and S. Rozelle. 2004. “The Sequencing of Reforms in China’s
Agricultural Transition,” Economics of Transition 12, 3: 427-466.
30

Fan, Z. and Hertel, T. 2006. ‘Labor market distortions, rural-urban inequality and the
opening of China’s economy’ Mimeo, www.gtap.org
Huang, J. and C. Chen. 1999. Effects of Trade Liberalization on Agriculture in China:
Commodity and Local Agricultural Studies. United Nations, ESCAP CGPRT
Centre, Bogor, Indonesia.
Huang, Jikun and Hengyun Ma. 2000. “International Comparison of Agricultural
Prices,” International Trade, No.10 (2000):20-24.
Huang, J and S. Rozelle. 1996. “Technological Change: Rediscovering the Engine of
Productivity Growth in China's Agricultural Economy. Journal of Development
Economic. 49: 337-369.
Huang, J., S. Rozelle and M. Chang. 2004. “The Nature of Distortions to Agricultural
Incentives in China and Implications of WTO Accession,” World Bank Economic
Review 18(1): 59-84.
Huang, Jikun, Yu Liu, Will Martin and Scott Rozelle. 2007. Agricultural Distortion and
China’s Agriculture, 1981 to 2004. Working Paper. World Bank, Washington,
DC.
Huang, J, S. Rozelle, C. Pray, and Q. Wang. 2002. "Plant Biotechnology in China,"
Science, Vol.295(25): 674-677.
Huang,, J., N. Li and S. Rozelle. “Trade Reform, Household Effects and Poverty in Rural
China,” American Journal of Agricultural Economics 85, 5 (December 2003):
1292-1298.
Hu, R., K. Shi, Y. Cui, and J. Huang. 2007. "Changes in China's Agricultural Research
Investment and Its International Comparison," China's Soft Science, No. 194
February 2007: pp53-58 and 65.
Jin, S., H. Ma, J. Huang, R. Hu, and S. Rozelle. 2007. “Productivity, Efficiency and
Technical Change: Measuring the Performance of China’s Transforming
Agriculture,” Paper for Conference on “Trends & Forces in International
Agricultural Productivity Growth," March 15, 2007, Washington DC.
Krueger, A., Schiff, M. and Valdés, A. 1991. The Political Economy of Agricultural
Pricing Policy Johns Hopkins University Press for the World Bank: Baltimore.
Lardy, N. R. 1983. Agriculture in China's Modern Economic Development. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Lardy, N. 2001. Integrating China into the Global Economy. Washington, D.C. (USA):
Brookings Institution.

31

Li, S., F. Zhai and Z.Wang. 1999. The Global and Domestic Impact of China Joining the
World Trade Organization, A Project Report, Development Research Center, the
State Council, China
Lin, J. 1992. “Rural Reforms and Agricultural Growth in China.” American Economic
Review 82: 34-51.
Liu et al. 2007. “Infrastructure Investment in Rural China: Is Quality Being
Compromised during Quantity Expansion?” Working Paper, Center for Chinese
Agricultural Policy, Institute of Geographical Sciences and Natural Resource
Research, Chinese Academy of Sciences.
Luo et al. 2007. “Investing in Rural China: Tracking China’s Commitment to
Modernization” Working Paper, Center for Chinese Agricultural Policy, Institute
of Geographical Sciences and Natural Resource Research, Chinese Academy of
Sciences.
Luo, Renfu, Linxiu Zhang, Jikun Huang and S. Rozelle. 2007. Village Elections, Public
Goods Investments and Pork Barrel Politics, Chinese-style, Mimeo, Stanford
University and the China Center for Agricultural Policy, http://iisdb.stanford.edu/pubs/21657/Elections_Investments_wrkpap.pdf
Ma, Hengyun, Allan Rae, Jikun Huang and Scott Rozelle. 2006. “Enhancing Productivity
on Suburban Dairy Farms in China,” Working Paper, Freeman Spogli Institute for
International Studies, Stanford University.
Martin, W., Jikun Huang and Scott Rozelle. 2006. Exchange Rates and Agricultural
Distortions in China’s Agriculture, 1981 to 2004. Working Paper. World Bank,
Washington, DC.
Ministry of Agriculture. China’s Agricultural Yearbook, various issues, China
Agricultural Press, Beijing.
Ministry of Agriculture. China Agricultural Development Report, China Agricultural
Press, Beijing
Ministry of Commerce, China Foreign Trade Yearbook, various issues, China Foreign
Economic and Trade press, Beijing.
National Development and Reform Commission, Price Department. Agricultural
production cost and revenue materials compilation, various issues, China statistics
Press, Beijing.
National Development and Reform Commission, Center for Price Monitoring. National
Major Commodity (Service) Price Monitoring Data Compilation. Unpublished,
NDRC, Beijing.

32

Ni, Hongxing. 2007. “Why Are Special Products and the Special Safeguard Mechanism
Essential to China?” Bridges 11(3):3-5.
OECD (Organization of Economic Cooperation and Development). OECD PSE/CSE
database.
OECD. 2005. OECD Review of Agricultural Policies: China. Organization for Economic
Cooperation and Development, Paris.
OECD. 2008. China: Estimates of Support to Agriculture, Contact Person Andrzej
Kwiecinski http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/54/57/38525650.htm
Office of Tariff Regulation, the State Council. Import and Export Tariff Regulation of the
People's Republic of China, 1996, 1997 and 1998, Law Press, Beijing.
Office of Tariff Regulation, the State Council. Import Tariff and Export Tariff Rebate
Compilation, 2005, Economic and Scientific Press, Beijing.
Rae A. N., H. Ma, J. Huang, and S. Rozelle. 2006. “Livestock in China: CommoditySpecific Total Factor Productivity Decomposition Using New Panel Data”
American Journal of Agricultural Economics 88 (3): 680–695.
Park, A., H. Jin, S. Rozelle, and J, Huang. 2002. “Market Emergence and Transition:
Arbitrage, Transition Costs, and Autarky in China’s Grain Market," American
Journal of Agricultural Economics 84,1 (February):67-82.
Pray C. E., Rozelle S, and Huang Jikun. 1997. “Can China’s Agricultural Research
System Feed China?” Working Paper. Department of Agricultural Economics,
Rutgers University, New Brunswick, NJ.
Rosen, D., J. Huang and S. Rozelle. 2004. Roots of Competitiveness: China’s Evolving
Agriculture Interests. Policy Analysis in International Economics, Volume 72.
Institute for International Economics: Washington DC. June 2004.
Rozelle, S. and J. Huang. 2003. “China’s Maize Economy: Supply, Demand and Trade,”
Report for the US Grains Council, Beijing, China.
Rozelle, S. and J. Huang. 2004. “China’s Soybean Economy: Supply, Demand and
Trade,” Report for the American Soybean Association, Beijing, China
Rozelle, S., A. Park, J. Huang, and H. Jin. 2000. “Bureaucrat to Entrepreneur: The
Changing Role of the State in China’s Transitional Commodity Economy,”
Economic Development and Cultural Change 48, 2: 227-252.
Schmidhuber, J. 2001. ‘Changes in China’s Agricultural Trade Policy Regime: Impacts
on Agricultural Production, Consumption, Prices, and Trade’ in Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development, China’s Agriculture in the
International Trading System, OECD Proceedings. April.

33

Sicular, T. 1988a. “Plan and Market in China’s Agricultural Commerce” Journal of
Political Economy 96 (2): 283-307.
Sicular, T. 1988b. “Agricultural Planning and Pricing in the Post-Mao Period” China
Quarterly 116, pp. 671-703
Sicular, Terry. 1995. Redefining State, Plan, and Market: China’s Reforms in
Agricultural Commerce. The China Quarterly 144: 1020–46.
Sicular, T., Ximing, Yue, Gustafsson, B. and Li, Shi. 2006. ‘The Urban-Rural Income
Gap and Inequality in China’, Research Paper No. 2006/135, WIDER, Helsinki.
Tan et al., 2006 Working Paper, Center for Chinese Agricultural Policy, Institute of
Geographical Sciences and Natural Resource Research, Chinese Academy of
Sciences.
Wang, Honglin, Xiaoxia Dong, Jikun Huang, Thomas Reardon, and Scott Rozelle. 2005.
Small Traders and Small Farmers: The Evolution of China’s Horticulture
Economy. Working Paper, Center for Chinese Agricultural Policy. Beijing.
Wang, D., Scott Rozelle, J. Huang. 1999. “The Impact of Procurement Quota on
Agricultural Production in China’s Agriculture,” Working Paper, Center for
Chinese Agricultural Policy, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Beijing,
China.
Wu, Yunhua, J. Huang and S. Rozelle. 2007. “Modern Supply Chains, Expansion of
Demand and the Poor in China: The Case of Livestock,” Working Paper, Center
for Chinese Agricultural Policy, Institute of Geographical Sciences and Natural
Resource Research, Chinese Academy of Sciences.
Zhao, Y. 1999. ‘Leaving the countryside: rural--to-urban migration decisions in China’
American Economic Review 89(2):281-86.
Zhu, Jing and Hong, Wei. 2007. Trade Openness, Domestic Terms of Trade, and
Welfare of Agricultural Producers in China, Paper presented to the Summer
Symposium of the International Agricultural Trade Research Consortium, Beijing.
http://aede.osu.edu/programs/Anderson/trade/37JingZhu.pdf

34

Table 1: Real Per Capita Net Income of Rural Households by Province in
China, 2000-2005 (in Real 2005 Yuan).
Province

2000

2005

Beijing
Tianjin
Hebei
Shanxi
Inner Mongolia
Liaoning
Jilin
Heilongjiang
Shanghai
Jiangsu
Zhejiang
Anhui
Fujian
Jiangxi
Shangdong
Henan
Hubei
Hunan
Guangdong
Guangxi
Hainan
Chongqing
Sichuan
Guizhou
Yunnan
Tibet
Shanxi
Gansu
Qinghai
Ningxia
Xinjiang
National Average

4790
3830
2711
2127
2318
2671
2215
2339
5809
3960
4603
2095
3467
2255
2960
2195
2526
2452
3838
1991
2346
2015
2109
1513
1615
1414
1620
1656
1729
1891
1796
2462

7346
5580
3482
2891
2989
3690
3264
3221
8248
5276
6660
2641
4450
3129
3931
2871
3099
3118
4690
2495
3004
2809
2803
1877
2042
2078
2053
1980
2151
2509
2482
3255

Growth (%)
in 2005 over
2000
53.36
45.68
28.41
35.90
28.97
38.18
47.37
37.75
41.97
33.25
44.70
26.08
28.36
38.77
32.80
30.80
22.68
27.17
22.22
25.32
28.06
39.39
32.90
24.02
26.40
46.99
26.68
19.53
24.40
32.64
38.24
32.21

Annual
growth rate
(%)
8.93
7.82
5.13
6.33
5.22
6.68
8.06
6.61
7.26
5.91
7.67
4.74
5.12
6.77
5.84
5.52
4.17
4.92
4.10
4.62
5.07
6.87
5.85
4.40
4.80
8.01
4.84
3.63
4.46
5.81
6.69
5.74

Note: values are in real 2005 Yuan using rural consumer price index by
province.
Data source: NBSC, Statistical Yearbook of China, 2001-2006.

35

Table 2. Annual growth rate (%) of yield and total cost of main grain crop in China, 1985 to 2004.
1985-1994
1995-2004
Crop
Output
Input
Output
Input
Early Indica

0.05

1.72

0.08

-2.31

Late Indica

1.37

2.12

0.80

-1.16

Japonica

1.79

3.99

0.17

-1.99

Wheat

2.84

2.58

1.38

-0.22

Maize

3.66

1.87

1.04

-0.63

Soybean

0.71

2.24

1.06

-1.36

Data source: Jin et al., 2007.

36

Table 3. Annual Growth Rate (%) of Main Grain Crops’s Total Factor Productivity (TFP) and Decomposition into Technical Efficiency (TE) and
Technical Change (TC) in China, 1985 to 2004.
1985-1994

1995-2004

TFP

TE

TC

TFP

TE

TC

Early Indica

1.84

-0.03

1.88

2.82

0

2.82

Late Indica

1.85

0.26

1.59

2.92

0.21

2.71

Japonica

-0.12

-0.37

0.26

2.52

0.15

2.37

Wheat

0.25

1.08

-0.83

2.16

1.06

1.10

Maize

1.03

0.61

0.42

1.70

-0.23

1.94

Soybean

0.11

0.19

-0.09

2.27

-0.08

2.35

Data source: Jin et al., 2007.

37

Table 4. Actual protection, applied tariffs and out-of-quota tariff bindings.

Rice
Wheat
Corn
Soybean
Sugar
Cotton

Actual Protection
1995
%
–5
25
20
30
44
20

Applied tariff

Out-of-quota tariff
bindings
%
65
65
65
3
50
40

%
114
114
114
22
114
30

38

Figure 1. Rural Retail Price (free market price), Urban Retail Price and Farm-gate Sales
Price in China, 1980 to 2005 (Real 2005 Yuan).
Panel A. Rice
rural retail price

urban retail price

farm gate price

2700
2400
2100
Yuan/Ton

1800
1500
1200
900
600
300
0
1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

Panel B. Wheat
rural retail price

urban retail price

farm gate price

2200

Yuan/Ton

2000
1800
1600
1400
1200
1000
800
600
400
200
0
1980

1985

1990

1995

Data Source: China Price Yearbook, 2005

2000

2005

Figure 2: Nominal Rates of Assistance (NRAs) and Nominal Rates of Assistance for
Farmers (NRAfs) for rice and wheat in China, 1981-2005
Panel A. Rice
RICE
10
0

percent

-10 1981

1985

1989

1993

1997

2001

2005

-20
-30
NRAf

-40

NRA

-50
-60
-70

Panel B. Wheat
WHEAT
70

percent

60
50
40

NRAf

30

NRA

20
10
0
-10 1981
-20

1985

1989

1993

1997

40

2001

2005

Figure 3. Nominal Rates of Assistance (NRAs) and Nominal Rates of Assistance for
Farmers (NRAfs) for soybean in China, 1981-2005
SOYBEAN
40
30

percent

20
10
NRAf

0
-10 1981

NRA
1985

1989

1993

1997

-20
-30

41

2001

2005

Figure 4. Nominal Rates of Assistance (NRAs) and Nominal Rates of Assistance for
Farmers (NRAfs) for industrial processed goods (milk and sugar production) in China,
1981-2005
Panel A. Protection measures for milk
MILK

200

percent

150

NRAf
100

NRA

50
0
1981

1985

1989

1993

1997

2001

2005

-50

Panel B. Protection measures for sugar
SUGAR

120

percent

100
80

NRAf

60

NRA

40
20
0
-20 1981

1985

1989

1993

1997

42

2001

2005

Figure 5. Nominal Rates of Assistance (NRAs) and Nominal Rates of Assistance for
Farmers (NRAfs) for pork in China, 1981-2005
PORK
20

percent

0
-20 1981 1984 1987 1990 1993 1996 1999 2002 2005
-40
NRAf

-60

NRA

-80
-100

Note: These measures are calculated in the same way as NRAs and NRAfs reported for
other commodities. However, the true NRAs for these commodities become zero after
1994 because China has no policies holding their prices below world levels.

43

Figure 6. Rates of Assistance (including subsidy/taxes on inputs) for farmers that Produce
Importable Commodities, Exportable Commodities and for All of Agriculture (11
commodities) in China, 1981-2005
60
40
20
0
1981

1985

1989

1993

1997

2001

2005

-20
Importcompeting
total

-40
-60

Exportable
-80

Source: Authors’ spreadsheet using methodology from Anderson et al. (2006)

44

Figure 7. Agricultural and non-agricultural protection and the relative rate of assistance to
agriculture
60
NRA non-ag Tradable
NRAl ag Tradable

40

RRA

20

0
1981-84

1985-89

1990-94

-20

-40

-60

-80

45

1995-99

2000-05

Endnotes
1

While NRAs only measure differences in output prices, there may also be distortions on
the input side, our NRAf measures include a number of budget support and tax measures..
The assumption and methods that were used to generate our exchange rate series are in
Martin et al. (2006).

46

