NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PRODUCTIVITY GROWTH, KNOWLEDGE FLOWS, AND SPILLOVERS
Gustavo Crespi
Chiara Criscuolo
Jonathan E. Haskel
Matthew Slaughter
Working Paper 13959
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13959

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2008

Contact: Jonathan Haskel, Queen Mary, University of London, Economics Dept, London E1 4NS,
j.e.haskel@qmul.ac.uk. Financial support for this research comes from the ESRC/EPSRC Advanced
Institute of Management Research, grant number RES-331-25-0030 which is carried out at CeRiBA
at the Business Data Linking Branch at the ONS (www.ceriba.org.uk); we are grateful to all institutions
concerned for their support. This work contains statistical data from ONS which is Crown copyright
and reproduced with the permission of the controller of HMSO and Queen's Printer for Scotland. The
use of the ONS statistical data in this work does not imply the endorsement of the ONS in relation
to the interpretation or analysis of the statistical data. This work uses research datasets which may
not exactly reproduce National Statistics aggregates. We thank the BDL team at ONS as usual for
all their help with computing and facilitating research and Ray Lambert and Helen Simpson for help
with CIS3. We thank for comments Beata Smarzynska Javorcik, Lee Branstetter and seminar participants
at QMUL, Sussex and Kent. Errors are, of course, our own. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Gustavo Crespi, Chiara Criscuolo, Jonathan E. Haskel, and Matthew Slaughter. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Productivity Growth, Knowledge Flows, and Spillovers
Gustavo Crespi, Chiara Criscuolo, Jonathan E. Haskel, and Matthew Slaughter
NBER Working Paper No. 13959
April 2008
JEL No. F23,O47,O57
ABSTRACT
This paper explores the role of knowledge flows and productivity growth by linking direct survey
data on knowledge flows to firm-level data on TFP growth. Our data measure the information flows
often considered important, especially by policy-makers, such as from within the firm and from suppliers,
customers, and competitors. We examine (a) what are the empirically important sources of knowledge
flows? (b) to what extent do such flows contribute to TFP growth? (c) do such flows constitute a spillover
of free knowledge? (d) how do such flows correspond to suggested spillover sources, such as multinational
or R&D presence? We find that: (a) the main sources of knowledge are competitors; suppliers; and
plants that belong to the same business group ; (b) these three flows together account for about 50%
of TFP growth; (c) the main "free" information flow spillover is from competitors; and (d) multinational
presence contributes to this spillover.

Gustavo Crespi
The Freeman Centre
University of Sussex
Brighton, East Sussex
BN1 9QE
United Kingdom
g.a.crespi@sussex.ac.uk
Chiara Criscuolo
Centre for Economic Performance
London School of Economics
Houghton Street
London
WC2A 2AE
United Kingdom
c.criscuolo@lse.ac.uk

Jonathan E. Haskel
Economics Department
Queen Mary, University of London
Mile End Road,
London E1 4NS
j.e.haskel@qmul.ac.uk
Matthew Slaughter
Tuck School of Business
Dartmouth College
100 Tuck Hall
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
matthew.j.slaughter@dartmouth.edu

1

1

Introduction
Total factor productivity (TFP) growth is often modelled as increases in knowledge (Griliches,

1979). Increases in knowledge, in turn, are typically ascribed to three main sources: (i) investment in new
knowledge within the firm (e.g. R&D); (ii) use of existing knowledge from within the firm (e.g. from past
discoveries or knowledge-sharing with other divisions of the firm); and (iii) use of knowledge from
outside the firm.
There are three major questions concerning these outside knowledge flows. 1 First, what is their
source? A substantial literature in IO studies the extent to which citations to other patents are “local”, in
terms of geographic or technical distance (e.g., Branstetter, 1998, Jaffe and Trajtenberg, 2002). A
substantial literature in international economics studies the possibility that information might come from
nearby multinational enterprises (MNEs) or international trade (e.g., Smarzynska Javorcik, 2004, and
references therein). Second, to what extent do such flows contribute to productivity growth? Just as
growth accounting seeks to account for productivity growth due to physical inputs, how much do
knowledge flows raise productivity growth? Third, do such flows constitute a spillover flow of free
knowledge? This final question is central for the major public-policy question of setting subsidies for
R&D and multinational firms (Hanson, 2000).
Despite the importance of these three questions, it is well acknowledged that their answers are not
fully known. The main problem is that it is very hard to measure knowledge flows across firms. To
illustrate the problems surrounding knowledge flows and motivate what we do, consider the concrete
example of Southwest Airlines, widely regarded as having introduced many frontier innovations such as
ticketless boarding. In turn, many other airlines have copied them, including Europe’s Ryanair. McGinn
(2004) writes, “Ryanair CEO Michael O’Leary…visited Southwest’s headquarters in Dallas … At the
time, Southwest was already garnering accolades as the industry’s big innovator … Flying back to Ireland
after a few days with Southwest, O’Leary laid plans to replicate the strategy.” 2 As we now explain, many
conventional knowledge-flow measures would not capture this sort of innovation.
To measure knowledge flows, the two main methods in the literature are direct and indirect. The
main direct method is to use information in patent citations. This method has a number of advantages.
For patenting firms with a sufficient time series, one can generate a measure of knowledge stock. Using
citations, one can trace knowledge flows between patentees and identify their industry and geography.

1

Similar questions apply to internal flows, but these are perhaps generally less emphasised.
In turn, at key stages Southwest itself developed key innovations by learning from others: “To improve turnaround of its
aircraft at airports, Southwest sent observers to the Indianapolis 500 to watch pit crews fuel and service race cars. New ideas
about equipment fittings, materials management, teamwork, and speed subsequently contributed to a 50% reduction in the
airline’s turnaround time” (Frei, 2004, p. 2).
2

2
As is well-acknowledged, however, this method suffers from some difficulties. First, as for
frontier innovations, not all frontier innovations are patentable, neither are all frontier patentable
innovations chosen to be patented. 3 None of the innovations in the Southwest/Ryanair example above are
patented. Bloom and Van Reenen (2002) report that in their sample of 59,919 U.K. firms, just 12
companies accounted for 72% of all patents. Second, recent research has indicated that many patent
citations have been included by examining officers rather than inventors themselves: typical figures are
50% in the United States (Jaffe and Trajtenberg, 2002) and 91% in Europe (Criscuolo and Verspagen,
2005). This makes patent citations a noisy measure of information flows. Third, there is some interest in
knowledge flows that patent citations either cannot measure or can only do so with difficulty. For
example, policymakers are often interested in possible knowledge spillovers between MNEs (to whom
they often pay a subsidy) and their local suppliers or customers. Finally, it is likely that many innovations
in the economy are within, not on, the patentable frontier. In sum, knowledge flows as embodied in
patents are likely to be key information flows and contribute to understanding frontier innovations. But it
seems valuable to examine complementary data on knowledge flows in non-patenting firms, which
constitute the vast majority of companies, particularly in the light of such problems above.
The indirect method of measuring knowledge flows typically regresses TFP growth on factors
thought to be potentially causing information flows, such as the presence of multinational enterprises
(MNEs) or international-trade status. This method does have the advantage of implicitly looking at nonpatentable innovations and effects exemplified in case studies (such as information flows from suppliers)
and it does try to speak to a number of prominent policy issues, such as subsidies to MNEs. However
(quite apart of issues of measurement, simultaneity etc.) the problem with evidence based on TFP is that it
is indirect and thus is consistent not just with information flows but with other likely effects as well. 4
This paper brings new evidence to bear on these questions by linking direct data on knowledge
flows with data on TFP growth. The TFP growth data are derived from firm-level business surveys
conducted by the U.K. Office of National Statistics in compiling the national accounts. The data have a
high response rate, are collected annually, and give data on labour, materials and capital inputs and
relevant cost shares. These features minimize measurement problems of non-response and recall bias;
that said, we shall explore robustness issues extensively.
The knowledge-flow data come from the Community Innovation Survey (CIS), an official EUwide survey that asks business enterprises to report innovation outputs; innovation inputs; and, most
3
Jaffe and Trajtenberg (2002, p.3) say: “There are, of course, important limitations to the use of patent data, the most glaring
being the fact that not all inventions are patented ….”. Cohen, Nelson and Walsh (2000) report a survey of 1,478 R&D labs in
US manufacturing that found that other methods of protecting intellectual property, such as secrecy, lead time and marketing
were ranked higher than patents.

3
importantly for our paper, sources of knowledge for innovation efforts. We use the second and third
waves of the CIS. 5 For our purposes the major feature of the CIS is that it asks firms about their R&D
and also their knowledge flows. 6

Firms are asked to rate the importance of knowledge flows for

innovations from a number of sources such as suppliers, other firms in the firm group, customers, and
universities.

The major advantages of these data are that they (a) directly measure many of the

information flows that economists and policy-makers have identified as important, and they (b) cover all
firms, not just patenting firms.
A feature of these data is that they are qualitative. As such, they may be thought to be inferior to
hypothetical quantitative knowledge flow measures: e.g., the number of emails from suppliers, phone
calls from clients, or bytes of information from internal databases. Of course, such hypothetical data
would then have to be weighted by importance, which would introduce some qualitative element. 7
Following the patents literature, we shall try to correct for errors in measuring the “true” information
flows. Perhaps most importantly, for each firm we re-scale each knowledge-flow variable to be the
deviation from the average importance of all knowledge flows reported by the firm.

With this

transformation a firm that reports “very important” to all measures, simply because a respondent ticks all
boxes in a column (e.g., because of hubris or true technological fecundity), scores zero for all flows.
Thus we shall not correlate TFP growth with firms reporting high knowledge flows from suppliers.
Rather, we shall correlate TFP growth with firms reporting that knowledge flows from suppliers are more
important than the average of all their other knowledge flows.
In our analysis, we first posit a knowledge production function (Griliches, 1979) relating
increases in knowledge to investment in knowledge, which we measure by R&D, and knowledge flows.
Thus a first check on our data, which helps locate it in the literature, is to use patents as the measure of
increased knowledge and so regress it on R&D and our measures of knowledge flows. 8 We find sensible

4

Looking at the relation with TFP does have the advantage that one should be able to identify a spillover, provided of course the
conditions for TFP to measure all priced inputs hold. We discuss this more below.

6

We use too the data on patents applied for. We do not use the self-reported innovation question. A large number of papers
have used the CIS self-reported innovation output data, see e.g. Hall and Mairesse (2006) for a survey. For our purposes here it
is hard to interpret these data in terms of spillovers.
7
For example, data collected by social network analysis (SNA) in management studies attempt to show informal relationships:
who knows whom and who shares information and knowledge with whom. SNA typically gathers data about the relationships
between a defined group/network of people with using questionnaires and/or interviews or software that tracks directly e-mail
messages or repository logs. The responses are then processed to create a network map of the knowledge flows within the group
or network and to produce statistical analyses of the patterns in the data. Therefore even in SNA some qualitative information is
introduced through the surveys. In a recent paper on within-firm information flows, Cowgill, Wolfers and Zitzewitz (2008) use
the location of trader’s desks and a questionnaire on knowledge sources.
8
Due to confidentiality we do not have information on the company names and so cannot link the data to patent citations data.
Duguet and MacGarvie (2005) merge French CIS data with firms for whom they have patent citations and demonstrate a positive

4
results: patents are strongly associated with R&D (with a coefficient that is similar to other studies) and
also with information flows from universities. 9 To the extent that university knowledge flows contribute
to knowledge advances at the technological frontier, these seem sensible.
The heart of our analysis is to estimate the relation between TFP growth and both R&D and
knowledge flows. This measures knowledge creation more broadly than patents and, under certain
conditions, allows one to identify these information flows as spillovers. Our main result is a statistically
significant association between TFP growth and information flows from three sources: other firms in an
enterprise group, competitors, and suppliers. These effects are economically significant as well: taken
together, these three information flows account for nearly 50% of observed variation in TFP growth.
They are also robust to different measurement choices and different samples.
We then discuss if such knowledge flows are spillovers. We have no data on the prices that firms
pay, if any, for information flows. We reason that information flows from competitors are likely to be
uninternalised spillovers (Baldwin and Hamel, 2003, p.53 argue similarly); that information flows from
within the company group are likely internalised; and that information flows from suppliers may or may
not be spillovers.
Finally, we relate our direct measures of information flows with earlier indirect work.
Specifically, we correlate our firm-level knowledge-flow data with industry-level R&D, MNE presence,
competition, and TFP gaps. We think this is of interest since these proxies have often been related to TFP
growth in the absence of data on the underlying information flows they purport to represent. A widely
acknowledged potential problem of these indirect measures is that the relation between, say MNE
presence and TFP growth could be due not just to information flows but also underlying technological
factors that both boost TFP growth and cause MNEs to be present. 10 We find that our direct knowledgeflow measures from competitors have some correlation with MNE presence, but not with other indirect
measures commonly used in the literature. This lends further support to the value of our direct measures
of knowledge flows, and offers a general caveat to at least some earlier findings, which we discuss.
How does our paper relate to other work using CIS data? Of those that study productivity, few
link to production data as we do here and use TFP growth. 11 Of this work, most modelling uses the
Crepon, Duguet and Mairesse (CDM, 1998) model; see also Loof and Heshmati (2002) and Hall and

correlation between citations and reported knowledge flows. The knowledge flow “analyzing competing products” is correlated
with exporting and importing behaviour, see MacGarvie (2006).
9
Strictly, information flows from universities that were rated as more important than the average of all information flows.
10
Also note that increase in MNE presence is accompanied by an increase in competition. This might give an additional spur to
increasing the productivity of domestic plants.
11
The CIS questionnaire asks for sales and employment, but TFP growth cannot be computed. Thus many papers e.g. Mairesse
and Mohen (20002) use the fraction of sales reported to be innovative as their output measure.

5
Mairesse (2006) for a survey. That model consists of a three equation system linking (i) productivity
levels to self-reported innovation, (ii) self-reported innovations to inputs, such as R&D and information
flows (iii) R&D to its conjectured determinants (such as size). A substantial part of the research effort is
to account for the selection induced by the questionnaire design in many continental European countries,
whereby non-innovators do not respond to most questions. Our work differs in a number of regards.
First, U.K. questionnaire design means our U.K. data do not face this selection problem. Second, the
CDM (1998) paper does not look at information flows, but rather the importance of “demand pull” and
“technology push” (measured by asking firms to rate these factors’ importance, see also Klomp and Van
Leeuwen, 2001). 12 And third, we focus on TFP growth, not productivity levels.
To the best of our knowledge there are almost no papers that link TFP growth with information
flows (and none with the transformation that we use). 13 Loof and Heshmati (2002) find a positive
relation between labour productivity growth and self-reported innovation output and in turn self-reported
innovation output is correlated positively with information from within the firm and from competitors, but
negatively with information from customers. Loof and Heshmati (2006, Table VIII) find that, for
services, innovation output is positively correlated with information from conferences, suppliers and via
co-operation with others, but negatively correlated with within-firm sources. Van Leeuwen and Klomp
(2006) study information flows indirectly by collapsing information from various sources.

These

variables along with others determine whether a firm innovates, which is then a determinant of its
productivity growth (see their Appendix B). 14
The plan of the rest of the paper is as follows. In the next section we set out the basic framework
for analysis. Section three sets out the data and section four the equations to be estimated and the results.
Section four looks at whether these are spillovers or not, section five at the relations with multinational
status, R&D presence and other common proxies for information sources. Section six concludes.

12
Crepon et al (1998, p.142) use answers to the questions “Do you consider that in your firm innovation is determined through
the impetus given by the market (relationships with customers, competitors” and “Do you consider in your firm innovation is
determined by technology specific dynamics”. Klomp and van Leeuwen (2001) use a similar question, see also Beneavente
(2006) for Chile.
13
Cassiman and Veugelers (1999, 2002) look at aggregated knowledge flows on and make/buy innovation decisions and cooperation in R&D ventures.
14
Baldwin and Hanel (2003) also find information flows from competitors to be important self-reported sources of innovation,
but do not use TFP growth data. Levin, Klevorick, Nelson, and Winter (1987) find, using a questionnaire, competitors inventing
around patents to be an important reason for ineffectiveness of patents. This accords with our finding that learning from
competitors matters.

6

2
2.1

Theory and Data
Theory Outline
For firm i, measured total factor productivity growth, TFP is some combination of changes in

the knowledge stock at firms, A , demand shocks and other unobservables (ε1i) and so can be written

 = f ( A , ε )
TFP
i
i
1i

(1)

Following Griliches (1979) we may write changes in the firm knowledge stock, A i , as due to investment
in new knowledge, such as R&D, and flows from the existing knowledge, which may be inside the firm
(i) or outside (_i)) which we write as

Ai = f ( Ri , Ai′, A_′ i , ε 2i )

(2)

where a prime indicates a flow from the inside and outside knowledge stocks Ai and A_i and where ε2i are
the various other shocks, which might include elements of ε1i (e.g. if ε1i includes unmeasured changes in
managerial ability that also affects knowledge production). In this framework, (at least) three questions
arise. First, what are the relevant knowledge flows in (2) that determine productivity growth in (1)?
Second, to what extent are such flows spillovers? Third, can one distinguish such flows from other
influences on productivity growth (here, the εs)?
Very broadly, the patents literature offers direct evidence on knowledge flows in (2) by
measuring A as patents and using citations as measures of knowledge flows A′_i. Other work is more
indirect. The MNE-spillovers literature postulates that the proximity of MNEs is a possible source of A′_i

 on MNE presence. The distance-to-frontier literature (e.g.,
and so combines (1) and (2) to regress TFP
Griffith, Redding and van Reenen, 1996) postulates that A′_i can be measured by TFP levels in a
nominated frontier firm/set of firms, A′i can be measured by TFP levels in the firm itself and so regresses

 on the gap between frontier and own-firm TFP. The R&D literature (e.g., Jaffee, 1986) postulates
TFP
that A′_i can be measured by R&D or knowledge stocks outside the firm (e.g., in the industry) and so

 on own and outside R&D.
regresses TFP
Our contribution, we believe, is the following. First, we match survey data on R&D and learning
flows with production survey data on TFP growth. Second, with these data we begin by estimating (2)
with patents as a dependent variable (the CIS survey asks for the number of patents applied for) to see

7
what this measure of A shows and therefore locate our work in line with previous work using different

 and
knowledge flow measures. Third, combining (1) and (2), we estimate the relation between TFP
these knowledge flows. We find robust statistical relations between TFP and various knowledge flows
which, we argue, sheds light on what kind of knowledge flows are important for TFP growth in nonpatenting firms. Fourth, we then collect data on R&D, MNE presence, and distance-to-frontier measures
and see if they are related to learning to better understand the indirect evidence on TFP growth.
As mentioned above, we believe that this work goes beyond most work that has used the CIS.
Due to data availability, almost no papers have matched the CIS with TFP growth data, which means that
few papers can look at the spillovers issue. In addition, we are not aware of papers that have used our
transformation of information flows, or explored their relation with MNE presence and other variables
commonly used as indirect learning measures.

2.2

Data Description

We shall use two sets of data. To measure TFP growth we use production survey data from the official
U.K. Annual Respondents Database from the Annual Businesses Inquiry. Data on knowledge and
information flows come from the Community Innovations Survey.

2.2.1 ARD Data
We use the ARD (the Annual Respondents Database) which consist of successive cross-sections
of input and output data reported by firms in response to the official business survey, the Annual Business
Inquiry (ABI). The ABI is an annual inquiry covering production, construction and some service sectors,
but not public services, defence, and agriculture. 15
There are a number of points to be noted.

First, to reduce reporting burdens, multi-plant

businesses are allowed to report on plants jointly. Such an amalgamation of plants is called a reporting
unit and in practice most reporting units are firms. Reporting burdens are further reduced in some years
by requiring only reporting units above a certain employment threshold to complete an ABI form every
year (typically the threshold is 100 employees). So our data is best thought of as at the firm level, and
mostly covers larger firms.

Second, regarding data, firms report on turnover, employment (total

headcount), wage bill, materials, and material costs and investment (in plant and machinery, buildings,
and materials). To build capital stocks from investment we applied a perpetual-inventory method.

15

The ABI is based on the UK business register, the Inter-Departmental Business Register (IDBR), which contains the addresses
of businesses, some information about their structure (e.g. domestic and foreign ownership) and some employment or turnover
data (sometimes both), based on accounting and tax records. However, it does not contain enough data to calculate TFP since it
does not have materials use or investment/capital (and much employment data is interpolated from turnover data).

8

2.2.2 CIS Data
The U.K. CIS is part of an EU-wide internationally agreed survey of businesses on innovation
outputs; innovation inputs; and sources of knowledge for innovation efforts. There have been three waves
of U.K. CIS surveys: CIS1 (covering 1991-3), CIS2 (1994-6) and CIS3 (1998-2000). We use CIS2 and
CIS3 and the panel therein. 16 The CIS is an official survey of around 19,000 firms (CIS3) stratified using
the IDBR with a 46% response rate. See Criscuolo (2005) for a further discussion of non-response bias,
etc.

17

Matching the CIS and ARD is simplified by the fact that the two surveys are carried out on the

basis of the IDBR. Matching is thus by common survey identification number and not by address or
postcode, hopefully minimising matching induced measurement error.
We use the CIS data to measure a number of variables. First, for R&D, there are measures of
persons engaged in R&D and R&D expenditure. In the results below we used the reported persons
engaged in R&D (as a share of all employment) since this turns out to be the most reliably reported when
comparing it to other R&D surveys (Haskel, 2005; results are not sensitive to other measures). One
problem in using data for foreign firms is that they may undertake R&D elsewhere and so return zero
employment in the CIS. This should, however, be picked up in the data on information flows.
Second, the CIS data also asks firms to report the number of patents they have applied for. This
is not a measures of patents granted, but a measuring of patenting activity that has been used in other
studies, see ,e.g., Griliches, Hall and Hausmann (1984). Third is our key variable of interest: information
flows, for which the CIS question and form looks as follows.
“Please indicate the sources of knowledge or information used in your technological innovation
activities, and their importance during the period 1998-2000. (please tick one box in each row).”

N

L

M H

Internal
Within the enterprise
Other enterprises within the enterprise group
Market
Suppliers of equipment, materials, components or
software
Clients or customers
Competitors
Institutional
Universities or other higher education institutes
Government research organisations
16

CIS1 is largely unusable due to a response rate of barely 10%.
ONS selects survey recipients by creating a stratified sample of firms with more than 10 employees drawn from the IDBR
SIC92 two-digit classes and eight employment-size bands. Production includes manufacturing; mining; electricity, gas and
water; and construction. Services includes wholesale trade; transport, storage, and communication; and financial intermediation
and real estate. Note that the survey, although voluntary is an official one and has a series of reminders to try to boost response.
A response rate of 46% is very good compared with many voluntary (non-official) surveys. Response to the ABI is mandatory.
17

9
Other public sector e.g. business links, Government
Offices
Consultants
Commercial laboratories/ R&D enterprises
Private research institutes
Specialised
Technical standards
Environmental standards and regulations
Other
Professional conferences, meetings
Trade associations
Technical/trade press, computer databases
Fairs, exhibitions
Health and safety standards and regulations

Column headers are N (not used) and L, M, H for, respectively, low, medium and high.
Before reviewing the disadvantages of this measure, it is perhaps worth noting some of the more
favourable aspects of it. First, the information-flow variables correspond with some of those flows
identified as important in a number of studies: e.g., flows from suppliers, from within the firm, from
universities (see the discussion above or in Criscuolo, et al, 2005). Second, modern theories assume that
MNEs can better transfer knowledge within the enterprise than other like firms (Markusen, 2002). Thus a
direct check on the data would be to see if knowledge flows among MNE plants in an enterprise group to
be greater than flows among plants in a purely domestic enterprise group. This is indeed the case
(Criscuolo, et al, 2005). Third, these data have a very high response rate on the CIS surveys.
One broad objection to these measures is that they are qualitative. It might be that one would
prefer quantitative data on importance-weighted information flows. Thus, for example, if ideas flowed by
email or phone calls or videoconferencing, one might try to collect data on the number of emails, phone
calls or videoconferences. 18 As well as being a formidable task in of itself, such records would then have
to be weighted by their importance, since it is unlikely that every email and call are of equal importance.
In the absence of prices, such weighting would likely itself require qualitative surveys, too. Thus we
regard our measures as a noisy importance-weighted indicator. A second objection is that our survey data
does not record if the information flow is paid for (e.g., dues to a trade fair). We look at TFP rather than
labour productivity and then review the conditions under which this should capture paid-for inputs.
Given these measurement concerns, following Bertrand and Mullainathan (2001), it seems useful
to think about these data in a measurement error framework. Denote the true learning flow as Aj′it and our
measured flow from source j in time t for firm i as Ljit, we can write
18

One could try to collect employee time-use diaries to try to measure learning time from different sources. There are general
time-use surveys such as the American Time Use Survey, but these do not cover time use at work. As for time use at work, there
are some time use surveys of managers done by management researchers but on a small scale and not directed at learning. See
Mintzberg (1973) for the classic study (of nine managers).

10

L_j it = A_′ itj + Z it + vit

(3)

which says that measured information flows are related to true information flows, plus some firm/timevarying variables Z , plus an error term.
A first source of measurement error that might drive a wedge between Aj′it and Ljit is single-rater
bias: i.e., the questionnaire is answered by one respondent in the firm who may give unrepresentative or
inaccurate reports. To the extent that this is random, then this raises vit and so biasing against finding any
significant effect of learning and biasing down included coefficients via attenuation bias. To the extent
that it is fixed, we can control for this by using the two CIS cross-sections in a panel or by our firmspecific averaging we describe below. To the extent that it varies systematically with firm features (e.g.,
size), we can control for this with other observables.
Second, by questionnaire construction, respondents reply on the basis of a Likert-type scale.
Thus the scale has no meaningful cross-sectional variation due to the impossibility of comparing different
respondent’s replies to control for possible level differences in their opinions about what constitutes L, M,
and H. There may also be the related problem of respondents tending to give similar answers across
information flows: e.g., because of managerial hubris that a firm is an excellent learner.
In the empirical analysis we correct for this bias and for firm-specific effects using the following
approach. We start by calculating the average of each firm’s reported learning from all 17 information
sources, ⎯Lj it (converting the responses N, L, M, and H into 0, 1, 2, and 3). We then expressed each of
the learning variables as its deviation from the average of each firm’s learning. Finally, if that figure is
positive, then we allocate a one to that (deviation) learning variable and zero otherwise. That is, we
formed the following indicator function for source of knowledge j

I( Lj )it = 1 if

J

( Litj − Litj ) > 0, Litj = ∑ Litj
j =1

(4)

I( L )it = 0 otherwise
j

where the average of all replies to the j questions by firm i is ⎯Lj it. With equation (4), a firm that always
ticks the same box is allocated a zero on all information measures. A firm that ticks all box L, but on one
information source ticks H, would have a 1 for that source and a zero for all others.
With the data transformation in equation (4) we aim to control for any unobservable firm effect in

 and Lj_it
Zit (and we will use ⎯Ljit as a control as well). In sum, we do not study the relation between TFP

11

 and I(Ljit). Thus for there to be an omitted common variable that explained the
but rather between TFP
relation between TFP and I(Ljit), it would not be, e.g., that more aggressive managers both have better
TFP growth and also report more aggressively on the CIS. Rather, it would have to be that an omitted
variable causes managers to have better TFP growth and report more aggressively on a particular learning
variable relative to the others (and in the panel, that this over-reporting changed over time). We cannot
exclude this possibility, but it does seem unlikely to be a systematic feature of our data.

2.3

Summary Statistics and Sample Selection
The matched data set consists of 804 manufacturing observations that appear in the ARD and CIS2

or CIS3, and have complete TFP, R&D and information flow data and are UK firms (we have an extra
238 observations who are part of foreign MNEs, which we exclude initially). These 804 firms consist of
752 firms that appear in either CIS2 and CIS3, plus 26 observed twice. The reason for this small panel
element is that the CIS was not designed to be a panel across waves. In addition, to match to TFP growth
data on the ARD restricts the sample to manufacturing with full ARD data on inputs and outputs.
Table 1, top panel, describes our full data. 19 Let us concentrate on the innovative activity figures:
as in other data sets discussed earlier, the median firm in the sample does no R&D and no patenting.
Indeed, the top 12 firms in our data account for about 60% of all patenting activity; 92% of firms did not
apply for a patent. Turning to the learning data (transformations of the raw survey as in equation (4)), the
median firm also does no learning, from any source. However, learning is less skewed than R&D and
patents. 51% of our firms report learning from competitors more intensively than the average of learning
from all sources (a share that, per equation (4), is smaller than fraction that report any learning from
competitors). Learning from suppliers and clients, relative to the average, is reported more often than
learning from other enterprises in the enterprise group and from universities.
Finally, Table 1 divides the sample into low (middle panel) and high (lower panel) TFP growth
firms (with growth measured relative to median three-digit industry productivity growth). The high
productivity growth firms have similar R&D employment (with the median slightly higher) and apply for
slightly more patents (2.93 against 2.45). They also make slightly more use of information flows in all
cases. These split-sample differences suggest that TFP differences may indeed related to differences in
information flows.

19

We also analysed how the regression sample differs from the complete ARD and CIS samples. Relative to the ARD, our
sample is bigger in terms of gross output, employment and productivity levels (but the standard deviation of these numbers is
large). Relative to the CIS, our sample is again larger and but not more productive. It does more R&D and more patenting,
however, and learns from more sources than the whole CIS sample.

12
Before moving to econometric analysis, we discuss what consequences our particular sample
might have for inference about the marginal impact of these learning variables on TFP growth. 20 First, it
might be that marginal effects differ due to technology. If this is the case, then to the extent our sample is
of large firms we will overstate the average marginal effect. Second, the effects might differ due to
selection bias induced by our use of a matched sample. The obvious source of possible selection bias is
that we use surviving firms, either that survive within the three years of each cross-section so that we can
compute TFP numbers for them or that they survive between the three years of each cross-section. In
each case this introduces selection to the extent that if low productivity growth firms only survive if they
have had a positive shock, then the sample of surviving firms consists of high productivity growth firms
plus low productivity growth firms who have had a beneficial shock in the early period. This flattens any
positive relation between productivity growth and its drivers such as information flows, biasing coefficients downwards and so causing us to understate actual co-efficients. 21

3
3.1

Econometric Framework and Estimation Results
Using Patents to Estimate the Knowledge Production Function
Before turning to TFP growth at the heart of our analysis, we start by estimating the knowledge

production function in equation (2) using patents as a measure of A . Our purpose here is to (a) check our
data against other studies and (b) add in our information flow variables to locate our data alongside other
studies. If we regard patents as reflecting changes in “frontier” knowledge, then we might expect
information flows from universities, relative to other knowledge sources, to be important. Thus, we first
implement (2) as follows

PATENTSit = γ 1 Rit −1 + Σγ 2 j I ( Lj )it −1 + γ 3 Lit −1 + γ 4 ln SIZEit
+λR + λI + λi + λiSTATUS + ε it

(5)

where PATENTS are patents applied for over the past 3 years; R is R&D (measured as expenditure and
employment shares, see below); we add log size; and we include fixed effects for region, two-digit
industry, firm, and status (dummies measuring if they have recently merged and increased sales, merged
and decreased sales, or are a start-up). We include status in all results below, in case adjustment costs
might obscure the long-term relation between inputs and outputs. We show the L variables as lagged,

20

Of course, the absolute levels of learning will likely be larger in our sample, since the sample is of larger firms and such firms
do more learning. At issue here is however the marginal impact on productivity growth.
21
Information flows were more prevalent in hi-tech industries. Note however that all our econometric work controls for industry
dummies so that any unobserved factor that affects both industry TFP growth and industry-specific learning is controlled for.

13
since they refer to learning over the past two years. The dependent variable is a count of patents, and so
we used a negative binomial model with random effects (we rejected the Poisson model).
Table 2 reports our results.

We start by replicating the regression of Griliches, Hall, and

Hausman (1984), who on a sample of U.S firms performing R&D regressed patents applied for on (log)
R&D expenditure, size and industry dummies. They obtained an elasticity of R&D expenditure of 0.45
(see their column 4, row 6 of Table 6). As column 1 shows, we obtained an elasticity of 0.33. This, then,
seems like a good cross check on our data.
In column 2, we add the information-flow variables. We included information flows from other
enterprises in the group I(LiGROUP), suppliers I(LiSUPPLIERS), competitors I(LiCOMPET), clients I(LiCLIENTS), and
universities I(LiUNIV). Learning from universities is positive and significant; to the extent that patenting
reflects changes in frontier knowledge, this seems reasonable. Learning from other sources and the
average level of learning of the firm are not significant. In the third column we proxy for research
investment with log number of persons employed in R&D at the firm, which, as discussed below, is better
measured in our data. The elasticity of this is 0.546; again, amongst the information flow variables the
only significant coefficient is the one on university. Finally, column 4 expands the sample to all firms
besides those doing R&D. Note that the coefficients on log R&D employees and the learning variables
remain virtually unchanged.
In sum, these results are, we believe, interesting in themselves, suggesting a robust patents/R&D
relation and a relation between patents and learning flows from universities. They also suggest some
confidence in our data, and so we now turn to investigate A measured as TFP growth.

3.2

Using TFP Growth to Estimate the Knowledge Production Function
We next move to our TFP growth regressions, which form the core of our analysis. We start by

estimating a simple Cobb-Douglas equation

Δ ln Yit = α K Δ ln xitK + α M Δ ln xitM + α L Δ ln xitL + γ 1 Rit −1 + Σγ 2 j I ( Lij )it −1 + γ 3 Lit −1
+ λR + λI + λi + λiSTATUS + ε it

(6)

where xL, xM and xK are labour, material and capital inputs, R is measured here by the ratio of R&D
employment to total employment 22 , and I(L)j is the indicator function for the deviation from the mean of

22
As stated above, this variable is better measured than R&D expenditure. However, we found a few small firms that had
fractions of around 100% who we suspect are essentially R&D facilities. To guard against this we entered a dummy variable (not
reported) for firms reporting fewer than 20 employees overall. Note that, following Schankerman (1981), the interpretation of γ1
is complicated because R&D employees and their wage are included in xL. We would like to adjust these but we only have R&D
employment and expenditure measured at the end of each CIS period, whereas we calculate TFP over the whole CIS period (we
could adjust by assuming the same proportion of employment over the period but with logs this would not affect ΔxL. Finally, the

14
learning from the j’th information sources. The following points regarding measurement and causality
are worth noting. First on measurement, as is commonly the case we do not have firm-specific prices and
hence the revenues deflated by industry prices is on the left hand side, relegating the log difference
between firm and industry prices into ε (Klette and Griliches, 1996). We accordingly use product
innovation as a proxy for this. We also look at possible input-specific prices, see below. Second, the
specification in (6) implicitly constrains the αs to be the same, but we also experiment with TFP as a
dependent variable, which controls for this.
Regarding causality, the choice of inputs is of course endogenous and to the extent that firms
choose what sources to learn from, the effects of I(L) is potentially biased.

Again, our data

transformation in equation (4) reduces potential biases. The α coefficients could be biased too, but they
are not our focus; we do experiment with ΔlnTFP as our regressand, which potentially removes much of
this bias. 23
Table 3 sets out our estimation results for equation (6). For convenience, we do not report the
coefficients on the inputs or I(LCLIENTS) and I(LUNIV), as estimates for neither were significant in our data. 24
Looking at column 1, the R&D term is 0.13, in line with other studies, but not particularly precisely
estimated. Turning to the information terms, there are positive and statistically significant effects from
competitors I(LCOMPET), (significant at 10%), suppliers I(LSUPPLIERS) and the enterprise group I(LGROUP).
This is the central finding of our paper: information flows from these three sources are associated with
higher TFP growth.
We look at the economic significance of this finding below, but first we examine its robustness.
Column 2 adds foreign MNE presence measured as the share in the two digit industry of foreign
employment (recall our sample is only U.K. firms). This is positive and significant, at 0.13, without
affecting the significance or coefficients of the main learning variables. This could be consistent with
MNE presence having no impact on firm learning but simply being associated with the same unobserved
technological progressivity conditions that drive ΔlnTFP. Alternatively, it could be consistent with
leaning from MNEs that is not measured by our variables. We return to the meaning of this correlation
below.

correlation between R&D employment levels in both periods is 0.85, suggesting relatively small changes in employment and so
our results should not been too badly affected.
23
Because of just two cross-sections and a small panel element to our data, and because of the doubts summarised in
Gorodnichenko (2006), we do not report results from IV-type estimators.
24
The coefficients (t-statistics) on the ΔlnK, ΔlnM, ΔlnL, I(LCIENTS) and I(LUNIV) terms were, respectively, 0.40 (5.22), 0.44 (5.64)
and 0.11 (4.11), -0.007(0.87) and –0.011 (1.24). The t-statistics are clustered by firm to account for the (small number of) firms
that appear in the two cross-sections; the unclustered t-statistics are very similar.

15
Columns 3 to 7 show robustness checks that do not much affect the information flow terms.
Column 3 adds a pressure of competition measure, the change in market share, lagged two periods
(Nickell, 1996) to test whether the competitors regressor is capturing information flows or some other
pressure of competition. Change in market share is negative but insignificant, suggesting that falls in
market share are (statistically) weakly associated with increased ΔlnTFP two periods later. Importantly,
the I(LCOMPET) term is unaffected. Thus it would seem that I(LCOMPET) is not just proxying for firms facing
more competitive pressure. Column 4 adds the product innovation term, but this again does not affect the
learning terms. Column 5 adds a control for whether firms report joint ventures or other research
cooperation with their competitors. Again, this does not affect the I(LCOMPET) term, suggesting that it is
not just picking up research co-operation (which still might involve spillovers of information of course).
Column 6 expands the sample to include foreign MNEs (with a dummy for these MNEs). This adds
another 277 firms and the significance of the information-flow variables remains.
Column 7 uses ΔlnTFP as the dependent variable.

Whilst the I(LSUPPLIERS) effect remains

statistically significant, the I(LCOMPET) and I(LGROUP) effects become less significant, although the
magnitudes are hardly changed. Measurement error in firm-level cost shares , non-Dixit Stiglitz demand
functions, or imperfect competition could mean that measured ΔlnTFP is more noisy than estimated
output elasticities.
Table 4 splits our sample into firms who do and do not do the following: undertake R&D, apply
for patents, and export. The most general form of the estimates would be to have multiple interactions but
we have simply too small samples to have any precision here. Thus these results should be regarded as
suggestive. There is some suggestion that the I(LCOMPET) effect is strongest for R&D performing firms,
firm who do not patent, and firms who export: hinting that learning from competitors comes most from
firms with the absorptive capacity to do so. The most significant I(LSUPPLIERS) and I(LGROUP) effects come
from non-R&D and non-exporters. More-detailed exploration of these effects awaits more data.
We conclude from Tables 3 and 4 that there exists a significant correlation between TFP growth
and I(LCOMPET), I(LSUPPLIERS), and I(LGROUP). We cannot completely rule out endogeneity bias, but as
emphasised above, this bias would have to depend on some unobserved variable (e.g., management talent)
that affects productivity growth (not its level), that is not captured in other regressors, and that also affects
the deviation of learning from firm averages (not the average itself). We find this nature of bias unlikely,
but do point out that it would likely imply that the true learning impacts of interest are smaller than the
coefficient estimates in Tables 3 and 4.

3.3

Economic Significance of Our Key Estimates
Tables 3 and 4 have documented the statistical significance of knowledge flows on productivity

growth. What is the economic significance? The coefficients on our key learning variables enable us to

16
read directly the TFP-growth gains: approximately 1.5% from I(LCOMPET), 1.5% from I(LSUPPLIERS), and
1.7% I(LGROUP). This means that a firm learning from all these three sources (relative to the average)
enjoys TFP growth that is 4.7 percentage points faster than a firm without such learning, ceteris paribus.
A straightforward yardstick against which to judge this magnitude is the inter-quartile range of
ΔlnTFP in our sample. This range is 9.9%: the firm at the 75th percentile of the distribution of TFP
growth has annual TFP growth that is 9.9 percentage points higher than the firm at the 25th percentile of
this distribution. 25 The sum of our key learning effects, 4.7 percentage points, can thus account for nearly
50% of the observed raw variation in TFP growth. So if the ex ante measure of our ignorance about what
drives TFP growth is 9.9 percentage points, our key learning variables reduce this ignorance by nearly
half. In light of the long-standing effort in many literatures to explain TFP performance, we regard our
results here as potentially very important.

4

Are These Knowledge Flows Spillovers?
Can the information flows I(LGROUP), I(LSUPPLIERS), and I(LCOMPET)be considered knowledge

spillovers? If all is well-measured and competitive conditions hold, then the relation of these flows to
TFP would suggest they are spillovers. However, these conditions may not hold and we have no direct
data on whether the information has been paid for or not. But we can make some progress initially by a
priori reasoning.
Consider first I(LCOMPET). It seems highly unlikely that competitor information would be paid for.
Unless there is a joint venture occurring (which we have controlled for) it seems hard to think of a
mechanism by which companies would pay competitors for information. Thus it seems reasonable to
conclude that this is indeed a spillover of information. 26 For a similar argument, see Baldwin and Hanel
(2003).
Consider second I(LGROUP), knowledge flows from other enterprises in the enterprise group. That
such flows affect TFP growth is consistent with Klette (1996) for example, who finds that R&D
performed in other plants in a group of plants influences TFP growth over and above that performed at the
particular plant. He argues this is evidence consistent with within-firm spillovers. The question is then
whether such information flows are internalised by firms. Standard theory would assume so but there
may be imperfections in control within firms such that they constitute spillovers. Thus, it seems safest to

We run a regression of ΔlnY on ΔlnK, ΔlnL and ΔlnM, plus industry and other dummies (excluding the L variables) and
calculated the IQR of the residual. We feel that expressing the fraction in terms of the fraction of the IQR is more appropriate in
the context of our data which is essentially a cross-section all in terms of the deviation from the industry mean. Growth
accounting typically expresses the coefficient times the inputs as a fraction of total productivity growth, but our work here is in
terms of deviation from the industry mean and hence average ΔlnTFP in the sample is, aside from rounding error, zero.
26
Whether this is Pareto-improving in a general equilibrium sense depends upon the mechanism by which information from
competition affects, e.g., managerial effort (see, e.g., Vickers, 1996).
25

17
conclude that these spillovers are internalised within a firm (the individual plant has a return above its
plant-specific return to R&D because of information sharing across plants within the group), but the
extent of the excess returns to other firms depend on knowledge flows via other mechanisms (such as
knowledge sharing with competition or suppliers).
Third, consider I(LSUPPLIERS). This case is less amenable to a priori reasoning and so let us review
some of the other issues involved. First, in terms of supporting evidence, the case study evidence
provides evidence of both forward and backward linkages between MNEs and domestic firms suggestive
of learning from suppliers (and customers), see e.g. Rodriguez-Clare (1996), or the survey in Hanson
(2000). Second, econometric evidence typically has looked at presence of MNEs in the same industry,
which is consistent with information flows from suppliers depending how wide the industry is (the two
digit vehicles industry would include suppliers to the vehicle industry for example). Smarzynska (2004)
uses MNE presence in Lithuania weighted by an input/output table and finds a positive relation between
domestic firm productivity and the downstream presence of MNEs i.e. backward linkages. On our data,
we would look for domestic firms reporting learning from customers rather than suppliers. Forward
linkages are found to be important in Romania (Merlede and Schoors, 2006).
In terms of measurement we might wrongly infer the presence of spillovers if the conditions upon
which TFP measures spillovers do not hold. One condition would be where the efficiency units of the
mix of inputs in the firm are not measured by its nominal value. In turn, this is when the market power in
the purchasing of one input relative to the industry drives a wedge between the relative price of the input
and its relative marginal product, causing TFP to mismeasure the efficiency units of the input. 27 In turn
this wedge would have to be correlated with information flows. The sign of this correlation is hard to
determine. The other condition arises since we have no input-specific deflators and so our measured real
inputs of factor X, lnXMEAS it, is derived from the value WXi Xi, divided by an industry-wide input price
index, WXI giving lnXitMEAS=lnXit+ lnWitX- lnWItX. If then the information allows the particular firm to
obtain the good more cheaply than the industry, then such a firm has an apparent rise in measured TFP
growth due to the mismeasurement of firm-specific inputs. This is an analogous argument to the biases in
TFP with mismeasurement of firm-specific output prices (e.g., Klette and Griliches, 1996). Without
further data on company-specific input prices, which are almost never available in micro data like ours,
this has to remain a caveat over our (and perhaps others’) results.

27
To see this, suppose that Y=F(M*) where M* is effective materials, which is unobserved. In turn suppose that
M*=M1+(1+φ)M2 where M1 and M2 are different material volumes, which are also unobserved and ϕ is the relative marginal
product of M2 to M1 i.e. ϕ converts the quantity of M2 into efficiency units. ϕ is of course unobservable, but the first order
conditions for a firm give that φ=(P2M- P1M)/ P1M where the subscript is the price of the particular factor, so that we can write

18

5

Relating Our Direct Knowledge Measures to Indirect Alternatives
In this final section we try to relate our results to the indirect literature on spillovers. The regressions

above have used explicit measures of learning. Many studies do not have explicit learning measures and
hence use proxies such as industry R&D or MNE presence. This section explores whether there is a
relation between these proxies and our learning measures. We think this of interest since it is sometimes
argued that these proxies capture other effects besides knowledge flows. For example, it is argued that
MNEs are likely to situate in more technologically progressive industries, which would also have faster
growing firms such that a correlation between MNE presence and productivity growth is not driven by
knowledge. Thus, if there were no relation between our knowledge measures and these proxies this
would cast doubt on the TFP/MNE correlation being driven by learning (or on the learning measure of
course). Note that, of course, such correlations as we obtain may not shed light on many of the findings
that are based on data for other countries.
To do this we regress

I ( Lij )it = β j Z it + λR + λI + λi + λiSTATUS + ε it

(7)

where the left hand side is the indicator function for the j’th learning source and Z are a number of
candidate variables suggested by the indirect spillovers literature such as: MNE presence, R&D in the
industry, competition, and distance of the firm to the productivity frontier. This regression is estimated
by probit with marginal effects reported. Since many of the learning sources are measured at the threedigit industry level, e.g. R&D, foreign MNE employment share and industry price-cost margin, we enter
the industry dummies at a two-digit level. The distance to the frontier measure is the TFP of the firm at
the 90th percentile less the productivity of the firm under consideration and thus is positive, with a higher
measure corresponding to a greater distance from the frontier firm. 28 Finally, we can estimate (7) for all
firms for whom we have complete information flow and industry data and for our sample of 804 firms
only; we show both for completeness.
Table 5 reports our results. Column 1 and 2 reports results for I(LCOMPET), using 3,528 firms for
whom we have complete information and then our 804-firm sample above. R&D and MNE presence in
the three-digit industry are both positively correlated with learning from competitors, statistically
significant at 1% levels in the first column, but with only MNE presence significant at 10% in the second

M*= PMM/ P1 M. Hence, under these conditions, TFP measures the mix of different inputs acquired (and it would not, if, for
example, the M* equation functional form does not hold, or φ does not equal relative prices).

19
column. I(LCOMPET) is not however significantly correlated with the TFP gap or Price-cost margins in
either column.

All this suggests some support for the interpretation that MNE presence conveys

spillovers to domestic firms, via competition.
The next columns of Table 5 report results with I(LSUPPLIER) as regressand. In column 3, on the
full sample, there is a negative and statistically significant effect of our inverse competition measure on
this learning source, suggesting that more competition (lower PCMs) is correlated with more learning.
This seems to be the only effect of any statistical strength in these columns however. Given the interest in
vertical spillovers, columns 5 and 6 report results using MNE and R&D presence weighted by the
input/output table, in this case to measure learning via the supply chain. 29 Neither effect is significant,
suggesting either no statistically significant influence on these data over this time period, or perhaps poor
measurement of the vertical “distance” to these learning flows.
What can we conclude? First, the correlations here on the bigger sample at least support the idea
that MNE presence, both horizontally and vertically, are correlated with information flows from
competitors. Second, we also find support for the idea that R&D in the industry is correlated with more
information flows from competitors, at least in the larger sample. Third, both these results suggest
positive spillovers from industry R&D and MNE presence, via competition, to TFP growth. Fourth, the
path of possible spillovers via suppliers is not quite so clear. There is some suggestion of greater
competition in the industry raising learning from suppliers, but the statistical significance of this effect is
confined to the larger sample.
Finally whilst the general pattern of results supports the idea that MNE presence is statistically
significantly linked with more learning from competitors which in turn is linked with more productivity
growth, what is the economic magnitude? The implied magnitude of MNEs on ΔlnTFP is the coefficient
on learning in the ΔlnTFP equation, 0.015 times the coefficient on MNE presence in this equation, 0.359
which equals 0.0054. This magnitude is quite small in absolute terms, and also is smaller than the
indirect estimates in the literature (e.g., Haskel, Pereira, and Slaughter, 2007).

As earlier studies

acknowledged, this magnitude suggests that earlier studies with indirect knowledge-flow measures may
have mis-estimated learning effects because of unobserved factors (e.g., technological innovation) driving
both ΔlnTFP and the propensity of MNEs to situate in a particular industry. 30

28

We also included a dummy for firms with TFP above the 90th percentile.
That is, we calculated MNE presence by industry and weight it, for a firm in industry J, by the fraction of output in the industry
supplied from the other industries. That fraction is calculated using the input/output tables which are collapsed from product to
industries using the conversion concordance supplied with the tables. The tables are the 2000 tables, consistent with the 2005
Blue Book, downloaded from < http://www.statistics.gov.uk/about/methodology_by_theme/inputoutput/archive_data.asp>.
30
Strictly speaking, the Community Innovation Survey only reports on learning about technologies so our estimates might be a
lower bound to the true knowledge spillovers from MNEs if domestic firms also learn on management; organisation; marketing
29

20

6

Conclusions
This paper has tried relate TFP growth with knowledge flows, with our main innovation being

direct rather than indirect measures of these knowledge flows. Our analysis addressed
(a) which knowledge flows are the source of TFP growth;
(b) what is the impact on TFP growth;
(c) do such knowledge flows constitute spillovers;
(d) how do our direct measures relate to the many indirect measures in the literature?
One of the main contributions of the paper was to match census-of-production data on outputs and inputs
of firms with questionnaire data on knowledge flows. We have argued that the knowledge-flow data
extend the patenting literature by offering an important step towards understanding knowledge flows for
non-patenting firms, which in reality constitute nearly all firms.

We have transformed our raw

questionnaire responses to address respondent bias and measurement error.
Our main findings on the four questions above are as follows. First, we estimate a statistically
significant association between TFP growth and above-firm average information flows from three
sources: other firms in the enterprise group, competitors, and suppliers.

There is less effect from

universities and clients, though the patent results suggest universities are statistically significant sources
of information flows for patenting. Second, these information flows are economically significant: they
account for nearly 50% of TFP growth. The effects are robust to many different methods of measurement
and different samples. Third, we argued that flows from competitors are spillovers, whilst flows from
suppliers remain uncertain. Fourth, we found that of our direct knowledge-flow measures, competition is
most robustly correlated with one of the indirect measures commonly used in the literature, namely MNE
presence. This lends further support to the value of our direct measures of knowledge flows, and offers a
general caveat to at least some earlier findings.
Taken together, we think our results help illuminate productivity growth and the information
flows that are widely thought to help drive it. Future work will hopefully build on our results with more
and better data—e.g., on the absorptive capacity of firms.

etc. Note too, that the presence of MNEs has an independent effect on company TFP even when controlling for information
flows and if this is another spillover, perhaps via information flows on non-technological factors, then this would boost the
economic effect of MNEs.

21

References
Aghion, Philippe, Nick Bloom, Richard Blundell. Rachel Griffith and Peter Howitt, “Competition and
innovation: an inverted U relationship.” 2005. Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 120, No. 2, pp.
701-728.
Baldwin, John, and Peter Hanel. 2003. Innovation and Knowledge Creation in an Open Economy:
Canadian Industry and International Implications, Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.
Benavente, Jose Miguel. 2006. “The role of research and innovation in promoting productivity in Chile.”
Economics of Innovation and New Technology. 15(4), pp. 301-315.
Bertrand, Marianne, and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2001. “Do People Mean What They Say? Implications
for Subjective Survey Data. American Economic Review, 91(2), pp. 67-72.
Bloom, Nicholas and John M. Van Reenen. 2002. “Patents, Real Options, and Firm Performance.”
Economic Journal, 112, pp. C97-C116.
Branstetter, Lee. 1998. “Looking for International Knowledge Spillovers: A Review of the Literature
with Suggestions for New Approaches,” Annales d’Economie et de Statistique No. 49/50, 1998, pp.
517-540.
Cassiman, B., and Veugelers, R. 2002. “R&D Cooperation and Spillovers: Some Empirical Evidence
from Belgium,” American Economic Review, vol. 92(4), pp. 1169-1184.
Cohen, W., Nelson, R. and Walsh, J. 2000. “Protecting Their Intellectual Assets: Appropriabilty
Conditions and Why US Manufacturing Firms Patent (Or Not).” NBER Working Paper #7552.
Cowgill, B, Wolfers, J and E Zitzewitz. 2008. “Using Prediction Markets to Track Information Flows:
Evidence
from
Google,”
working
paper,
available
from
http://bocowgill.com/GooglePredictionMarketPaper.pdf.
Crépon, B., E. Duguet and J. Mairesse. 1998. “Research and Development, Innovation and Productivity:
An Econometric Analysis at the Firm Level”, Economics of Innovation and New Technology, 7(2),
115-158.
Criscuolo, Chiara, Haskel, Jonathan E., and Matthew J. Slaughter. 2005. “Global Engagement and the
Innovation Activities of Firms.” NBER Working Paper #11479.
Criscuolo, P. and Verspagen, B. 2005. “Does it matter where patent citations come from? Inventor
versus examiner citations in European patents.” Research Memoranda 017, Maastricht : MERIT,
Maastricht Economic Research Institute on Innovation and Technology.
Duguet, E., and M. MacGarvie. 2005. “How Well Do Patent Citations Measure Flows of Technology?”
Economics of Innovation and New Technology, vol. 14:5.
Frei, Frances X. 2004. Rapid Rewards at Southwest Airlines. Harvard Business School Case #9-602065.
Gorodnichenko, Y. 2006. “Using Firm Optimization to Evaluate and Estimate Returns to Scale.”
(previous title: “Estimating Returns to Scale: Critique of Popular Estimators and New Solutions to
Old Problems”), Working Paper available at http://www-personal.umich.edu/~ygorodni/
Griffith, Rachel; Redding, Stephen, and Van Reenen, John. 2004. “Mapping the two faces of R&D:
productivity growth in a panel of OECD industries.” Review of Economics and Statistics.
Griliches, Zvi. 1979. “Issues in Assessing the Contribution of Research and Development to Productivity
Growth.” The Bell Journal of Economics 10: 92-116.

22
Hall, Bronwyn H. and Mairesse, Jacques. 2006. “Empirical Studies of Innovation in the KnowledgeDriven Economy.” Economics of Innovation and New Technology. 15(4):289-299.
Haskel, Jonathan E. 2005. “Matching the CIS and BERD”, working paper.
Heskett, James L. 2003. Southwest Airlines 2002: An Industry Under Seige. Harvard Business School
Case #9-803-133.
Hanson, Gordon H. 2000. “Should Countries Promote Foreign Direct Investment?” G24 paper.
Haskel, Jonathan E., Sonia C. Pereira, and Matthew J. Slaughter. 2007. “Does Inward Foreign Direct
Investment Boost the Productivity of Domestic Firms?” Review of Economics and Statistics, 89(2),
2007, pp. 482-496.
Hausman, Jerry A., Bronwyn H. Hall, and Zvi Griliches. 1984. “Econometric Models for Count Data
with an Application to the R&D-Patent Relationship.” Econometrica, 52, pp. 909-938.
Jaffe, Adam. 1986. “Technological Opportunity and Spillovers of R&D: Evidence from Firms’ Patents,
Profits and Market Value.” American Economic Review, 76(5), pp. 984–1001.
Jaffe, Adam, and Manuel Trajtenberg. 2002. Patents, Citations, and Innovations: A Window on the
Knowledge Economy. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Klette, Tor Jakob and Zvi, Griliches. 1996. “The Inconsistency of Common Scale Estimators When
Output Prices Are Unobserved and Endogenous,” Journal of Applied Econometrics, 11(4), pp. 343-61.
Klette, Tor Jakob. 1996. “R&D, Scope Economies, and Plant Performance.”
Economics, 27(3), pp. 502-522.

RAND Journal of

Klomp, L., and van Leeuwen,G. 2001. “Linking Innovation and Firm Performance: A New Approach.”
International Journal of the Economics of Business, 8:343-364.
Levin, R.C., Klevorick A., Nelson, R.R., and Winter, S.G. 1987. “Appropriating the Returns from
Industrial R&D,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 3, pp.783-820.
Lööf, Hans and Almas Heshmati. 2002. “Knowledge Capital and Performance Heterogeneity: A Firm
Level Innovation Study.” International Journal of Production Economics, 76(1), 61-85.
Lööf, Hans and Almas Heshmati. 2006. “On the Relationship between Innovation and Performance: A
Sensitivity Analysis.” Economics of Innovation and New Technology. 15(4), pp. 317-344.
Markusen, James R. 2002. Multinational Firms and the Theory of International Trade. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
MacGarvie, Megan. 2006. “Do Firms Learn from International Trade?” The Review of Economics and
Statistics, 88(1).
McGinn, Daniel. 2004. “Is This Any Way To Run an Airline?” Newsweek, October 4 Issue.
Mintzberg, H. 1973. The Nature of Managerial Work, Harper and Row.
Merlede, B., and Schoors, K. 2006. “FDI and the Consequences”, University of Gent Working Paper
2006/372.
Rodriguez-Clare, Andres. 1996. “Multinationals, Linkages, and Economic Development.” American
Economic Review 86 (4), September, pp. 852-873.
Schankerman, Mark. 1981. “The Effects of Double-Counting and Expensing on the Measured Returns to
R&D”, The Review of Economics and Statistics, 63(3), pp. 454-458.

23
Smarzynska Javorcik, Beata. 2004. “Does Foreign Direct Investment Increase the Productivity of
Domestic Firms? In Search of Spillovers Through Backward Linkages.” American Economic Review,
94(3), pp. 605-627.
Van Leeuwen, George and Luuk Klomp. 2006. “On the Contribution of Innovation to Multi-Factor
Productivity Growth.” Economics of Innovation and New Technology, 15(4), pp. 367-390.
Veugelers, R., and Cassiman, B. 1999. “Make and Buy in Innovation Strategies: Evidence from Belgian
Manufacturing Firms,” Research Policy, Elsevier, 28(1), pp. 63-80.
Vickers, John. 1995. “Concepts of Competition.” Oxford Economic Papers, 47(1), pp. 1-23.

24

Table 1
Characteristics of Firms:
Total Sample, Above-Median TFP Growth, and Below-Median TFP Growth
Lgo

Lemp

YL_ard

rd_emp

patapply

I(LCOMPET)

I(LSUPPLIER)

Median

9.85

5.63

4.23

0.00

0.00

1.00

1.00

1.00

0.00

0.00

Mean

9.81

5.52

4.3

0.03

2.69

0.51

0.65

0.68

0.41

0.19

SD

1.4

1.14

0.7

0.06

17.92

0.50

0.48

0.47

0.49

0.40

N

804

804

804

804

804

804

804

804

804

804

Median

9.68

5.56

4.13

0.00

0.00

0.00

1.00

1.00

0.00

0.00

Mean

9.59

5.39

4.2

0.03

2.45

0.49

0.62

0.65

0.38

0.19

SD

1.46

1.17

0.77

0.06

21.72

0.50

0.49

0.48

0.49

0.39

N

409

409

409

409

409

409

409

409

409

409

Median

10.03

5.67

4.33

0.01

0.00

1.00

1.00

1.00

0.00

0.00

Mean

10.05

5.65

4.4

0.03

2.93

0.54

0.68

0.71

0.44

0.20

SD

1.29

1.1

0.61

0.06

12.87

0.50

0.47

0.45

0.50

0.40

N

395

395

395

395

395

395

395

395

395

395

Growth

Total

Below

Above

I(LCIENTS)

Notes: Firms are allocated to TFP growth below and above the median in their three-digit industry.

I(LGROUP)

I(LUNIV)

25

Table 2
Explaining Patents Applied For

Ln RD Exp

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

RD_exp>0

RD_exp>0

RD_pers>0

All

0.330

0.307

(4.83)***

(4.31)***
0.546

0.528

(7.43)***

(7.46)***

-0.142

-0.121

-0.097

(0.69)

(0.65)

(0.54)

0.009

0.224

0.204

(0.04)

(1.22)

(1.17)

0.080

-0.107

-0.119

(0.31)

(0.50)

(0.59)

0.135

-0.026

-0.064

(0.69)

(0.15)

(0.39)

0.599

0.581

0.626

(3.00)***

(3.36)***

(3.80)***

0.215

0.215

0.344

(1.05)

(1.21)

(2.09)***

Ln RD Emp
COMPET

I(L

)

I(LSUPPLIER)
CLIENTS

)

I(L

GROUP

I(L

UNIV

I(L

)

)

MEAN

Observations

355

355

467

804

Number of firms

344

344

445

752

Notes: This table reports estimates of equation (5), where the dependent variable is patents applied
for. Estimates are reported for negative binominal allowing for random effects. Equations include
(not reported): dummy for firms under 20 employees, log size, industry, regional and start-up
dummies. T statistics reported in brackets. * significant at 10%, ** significant at 5%; *** significant
at 1%.

26

Table 3
TFP Growth and Knowledge Flows,
Baseline Specifications

R&D/Emp
COMPET

I(L

)

SUPPLIER

I(L

)

I(LGROUP)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

basic

MNE share

competit

prod inn

co-op

MNE in sample

TFP

0.13

0.12

0.14

0.11

0.12

-0.01

0.17

(1.39)

(1.34)

(1.85)*

(1.25)

(1.36)

(0.16)

(1.66)*

0.01

0.01

0.01

0.01

0.01

0.01

0.01

(1.88)*

(1.93)*

(2.13)**

(1.83)*

(1.81)*

(1.69)*

(1.36)

0.02

0.02

0.01

0.02

0.02

0.02

0.02

(2.01)**

(2.02)**

(1.83)*

(2.01)**

(2.05)**

(2.37)**

(2.24)**

0.02

0.02

0.01

0.02

0.02

0.01

0.01

(1.97)**

(1.90)*

(1.83)*

(1.94)*

(2.02)**

(1.87)*

(1.48)

MNE share

0.13
(1.67)*

Competition

-0.40
(0.81)

Product innov

0.02
(1.15)

Co-operation

-0.00
(0.02)

MNE dummy

0.01
(1.44)

Observations

804

804

614

804

804

1081

804

R-squared

0.58

0.58

0.66

0.58

0.58

0.58

0.06

Notes: This table reports estimates of equation (6), where the dependent variable is change in log
output. Robust t statistics in parentheses, clustered. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; ***
significant at 1%. Regressions include, not reported, ΔlnK, ΔlnM, ΔlnL, I(LCLIENTS), year dummy,
a dummy for firms under 20 employees, the mean information response and a constant. The sample
excludes foreign MNEs, except for column 6. The specification in column (7) differs in that its
regressand is calculated TFP growth (see text for details).

27

Table 4
TFP Growth and Knowledge Flows,
Additional Specifications

R&D/Emp
COMPET

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

basic

R&D=0

R&D>0

Pat=0

Pat>0

EXP=0

EXP>0

0.13

0.11

0.04

0.18

-0.23

0.08

(1.39)

(1.15)

(0.35)

(1.02)

(0.63)

(0.78)

0.01

0.01

0.02

0.02

0.01

0.01

0.02

(1.88)*

(0.58)

(2.30)**

(1.87)*

(0.83)

(0.34)

(2.24)**

0.02

0.03

0.01

0.01

0.02

0.05

0.00

(2.01)**

(2.32)**

(0.66)

(1.54)

(0.97)

(2.96)***

(0.36)

0.02

0.03

0.01

0.01

0.01

0.05

0.01

(1.97)**

(2.24)**

(0.66)

(1.43)

(0.36)

(2.23)**

(0.69)

Observations

804

337

467

641

163

223

581

R-squared

0.58

0.71

0.55

0.61

0.53

0.61

0.64

I(L

)

(1)

I(LSUPPLIER)

I(LGROUP)

Notes: This table reports additional estimates of equation (6), where the dependent variable is change
in log output. Robust t statistics in parentheses, clustered. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%;
*** significant at 1%. Regressions include, not reported, ΔlnK, ΔlnM, ΔlnL, I(LCLIENTS), year
dummy, a dummy for firms under 20 employees, the mean information response and a constant.

28

Table 5
Correlates with Knowledge Flows

(R&D Inten)(I)

MNE share (I)

Gap (i)

Price-cost marg (I)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

COMPETITORS

COMPET.

SUPPLIERS

SUPPL.

SUPPLIERS

SUPPL.

0.25

0.56

-0.01

0.15

(2.77)***

(1.49)

(0.06)

(0.44)

0.31

0.36

0.10

-0.15

(3.10)***

(1.92)*

(0.98)

(0.91)

-0.01

-0.03

-0.03

-0.13

(0.22)

(0.30)

(1.01)

(1.02)

-0.15

-0.02

-0.37

-0.23

(0.98)

(0.05)

(2.06)**

(0.53)
-0.76

-0.04

(1.44)

(0.05)

4.50

-3.30

(1.48)

(0.73)

1,872

804

MNE vertical (I)

R&D/Emp vertical (I)

Observations

3,528

804

3,252

804

Notes: This table reports estimation results for equation (7), where the dependent variable is learning from the
source indicated in the column heading. Marginal effects are reported for probit estimates, with robust z-statistics in
parentheses. * significant at 10%, ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Regressions include two digit
industry dummies, year dummy, status change dummies. Estimation by probit, marginal effects reported. R&DI is
the ratio of R&D expenditure to turnover in the 3 digit industry calculated from the BERD survey. GAPi is the TFP
gap between firm i and the 90th percentile 4 digit firm zero using industry shares as cost shares (we also included a
dummy for firms above the 90th percentile, not reported). Price-costI is unweighted 3 digit industry price cost
margin. MNE share of employment in foreign MNEs in the three digit industry. Price-cost marg (I) is the industry
level unweighted price cost margin, an inverse measure of competition used by Aghion et al (2005). The “vertical”
terms are the industry measures of MNE shares and R&D intensity weighted by the input/output relation between
the industry the firm is in and MNE and R&D presence in all other industries, see text. All big sample regressions
were on 3,631 observations but some observations were unique to the industry and were absorbed, thus the number
of observations shown varies to reflect this, sample falls in column 5 since only manufacturing data available.
Column 1-4 all include two digit industry effects., columns 5 and 6 do not since the vertical terms are only available
at two digit level due to the difficulties of making the IO table compatible with three-digit industries and the severe
inaccuracies in the IO coefficients at the level of disaggregation.

