                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       CHINA'S LOCAL COMPARATIVE ADVANTAGE

                                           James Harrigan
                                            Haiyan Deng

                                        Working Paper 13963
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13963


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2008




This paper was prepared for presentation at the "Conference on China’s Growing Role in World Trade"
organized by Robert Feenstra and Shang-Jin Wei, August 3-4, 2007, Chatham, MA. We thank conference
participants and the organizers, especially Rob Feenstra and our discussant Chong Xiang, for helpful
comments. We also thank Jennifer Peck for able research assistance. The views expressed in this document
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the position of the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York, the Federal Reserve System, the Conference Board, or the NBER.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by James Harrigan and Haiyan Deng. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
China's Local Comparative Advantage
James Harrigan and Haiyan Deng
NBER Working Paper No. 13963
April 2008
JEL No. F1,F14

                                              ABSTRACT

China's trade pattern is influenced not just by its overall comparative advantage in labor intensive
goods but also by geography. We use two variants of the Eaton-Kortum (2002) model to study China's
local comparative advantage. The theory predicts that China's share of export markets should grow
most rapidly where China's share is initially large. A corollary is that exporters that have a big market
share where China's share is initially large should see the largest fall in their market shares. These
market share change predictions are strongly supported in the data from 1996 to 2006. We also show
theoretically that since trade costs are proportional to weight rather than value, relative distance affects
local comparative advantage as well as the overall volume of trade. The model predicts that China
has a comparative advantage in heavy goods in nearby markets, and lighter goods in more distant markets.
This theory motivates a simple empirical prediction: within a product, China's export unit values should
be increasing in distance. We find strong support for this effect in our empirical analysis on product-level
Chinese exports in 2006.


James Harrigan
International Research Department
Federal Reserve Bank-New York
33 Liberty Street
New York, NY 10045
and NBER
james.harrigan@ny.frb.org

Haiyan Deng
The Conference Board, Inc.
845 Third Ave
New York, New York 10022-6679
haiyand@gmail.com
1 Introduction
China’s trading pattern is often seen as an illustration of the power of the Heckscher-
Ohlin approach to explaining world trade: labor abundant China specializes in exporting
labor intensive goods. A broader Heckscher-Ohlin worldview is also perfectly consistent
with China’s role in performing the labor-intensive tasks in complex international supply
chains.
          In this paper, we draw attention to a different determinant of China’s comparative
advantage: her geographical location. We present theoretical models of global bilateral
trade that build on the work of Eaton and Kortum (2002) and Harrigan (2006) which
show how China’s location influences her competitiveness in different markets around
the globe, that is, China’s “local comparative advantage”. The model also shows how the
rise of China differentially affects the competitiveness of other low-wage economies.
          A key prediction of the theory is that relative transport costs by product and
export destination influence China’s export success. In particular, the model predicts that
China will tend to export “heavy” goods (those with a high transportation cost as a share
of value) to nearby export destinations, and will export “light” goods to more distant
markets. Furthermore, heavy goods will be sent by ship, while light goods may be
shipped by air. Our empirical analysis, which looks at highly detailed Chinese export data
in 2006, confirms this prediction of the model: the weight of China’s exports is strongly
related to distance.
          The gravity equation, a relationship between aggregate trade volumes, country
size, and distance, is extremely well established empirically and theoretically. Recent
research on the trade-distance nexus has started to move beyond the aggregate gravity
model, and looks at disaggregated trade in theory and in the data. Relevant papers include
Baldwin and Harrigan (2007), Deardorff (2004), Evans and Harrigan (2005), Harrigan
(2006), Harrigan and Venables (2006), Hummels (2001), Hummels and Skiba (2004),
and Limão and Venables (2002). This line of research has two related purposes: better
understanding the effects of distance and transport costs, and enriching our models of
comparative advantage. The current paper shares these purposes, along with the goal of
better understanding China’s comparative advantage in particular. In this it is, we hope,
complementary to the other papers in this volume.



                                               2
2 Theory
In this section we present a general equilibrium model of bilateral trade in a multilateral
world where relative distance is a key determinant of comparative advantage. Before
moving to an exposition of the model, we introduce the interaction between specific trade
costs and trade flows in partial equilibrium.
2.1 Partial equilibrium
The simplest explanation for a relation between export prices and distance is the so-called
“Washington apples” effect, which is the basis of the paper by Hummels and Skiba
(2004). The theory starts with the observation that per unit transport costs depend
primarily on physical characteristics rather than value; that is, they are specific rather
than ad valorem.
        Focusing on a single exporting country, the relationship between import and
export prices is given by
         picM = (1 + tic ) picX                                                          (1)

where picM is the c.i.f. import price of good i shipped to country c, picX is the f.o.b. export

price, and tic ≥ 0 is the cost of transport per dollar of value shipped.1 The usual “iceberg”

assumption is that tic is a function of distance only. This implies that per-unit transport
costs are proportional to value and independent of weight, but Hummels and Skiba (2004,
Table 1) show that the opposite assumption is closer to the truth. Thus a more realistic
assumption about transport costs per dollar of value shipped is that they are given by
                 t ( wi , d c )
         tic =                                                                           (2)
                      picX
where wi is weight per unit, dc is the distance between the exporter and country c, and the
function t is non-decreasing in both arguments. In the remainder of the paper, it is
appropriate to interpret w as any physical characteristic of the good (such as volume and
perishability, in addition to weight in kilos) that affects shipping costs. The specification
in (2) has the key implication that shipping costs as a share of f.o.b. price are smaller for
higher priced goods, controlling for weight.


1
 The constant returns to scale assumption that per-unit transport costs are independent of the number of
units shipped is inessential.


                                                     3
          Now consider a high-priced good H and a low-priced good L, and let
       pH
p =      denote the price of H in terms of L. Equations (1) and (2) imply that the relative
       pL
import price of the two goods in country c is
                                             ⎛ t ( wH , d c ) ⎞
                                             ⎜1 +             ⎟
          p cM = p X
                         (1 + tHc )   = p X ⎝      pHX       ⎠                                     (3)
                         (1 + tLc )          ⎛ t ( wL , d c ) ⎞
                                             ⎜1 +   pLX       ⎟
                                             ⎝                ⎠
If the two goods weigh the same then the high priced good has lower transport costs as a
share of f.o.b. price, and the ratio of transport factors in (3) will be less than one, so
p cM < p X . The law of demand then implies that relative consumption of H will be higher
in country c than at home. This is precisely the “shipping the good apples out” effect:
good apples and bad apples weigh the same, but it is cheaper as a share of value to ship
out the good apples.2
          The strength of the Washington Apples effect is increasing in distance.3 The
intuition is simple: as per-unit transport costs increase with distance, the importance of
any difference in f.o.b. prices shrinks.
          A similar comparison can be made by reinterpreting the subscripts in (3). Now let
H and L stand for “heavy” and “light” respectively. Then H will be relatively more
expensive in c than at home ( p cM > p X ) , with obvious effects on relative consumption.

          The effect of increasing distance on the strength of this weight effect is in general
ambiguous, and depends on details of the transport cost function t ( wi , d c ) 4. In the case


2
  The antique textbook by Silberberg (1978, Chapter 11) has a clear discussion of the Washington Apples
effect, including some caveats when there are more than two goods.
3
  To see this, note that

          ∂p M   p X − pHX ∂t
                = L              ≤0.
          ∂d c ( p X + t )2 ∂d c
                     L

In the limit as transport costs go to infinity, f.o.b prices are irrelevant and the c.i.f. relative price is unity.
4
  The relevant cross second derivative is
           ∂ 2 p M           −1          ⎡ ∂t ( wH , d c ) ∂t ( wL , d c ) ⎤        1           ∂ 2 t ( wH , d c )
                    =                     ⎢                                 ⎥ +                                     .
          ∂wH ∂d c ( p X + t ( w , d ) )2 ⎣ ∂wH                  ∂d c       ⎦ pL + t ( wL , d c ) ∂wH ∂d c
                                                                                X
                           L          L   c

The first term is negative and the second term is positive, so this derivative can not be signed.


                                                           4
where t ( wi , d c ) has constant elasticities with respect to distance and weight, the effect of

greater distance is to amplify the importance of any differences in weight for import
prices. Economic intuition suggests that this will be the normal case, unless t ( wi , d c )

increases more rapidly with distance when evaluated at wL than when evaluated at wH in
some relevant range.
        These results about the effect of transport costs on import prices can be restated in
terms that will be relevant to our empirical analysis, where we look at variation in export
prices from China to different destinations. In our analysis, we will consider narrowly
defined product categories that nonetheless may comprise many different goods with
differing unit values and different weights per unit.
        First, the Washington Apples effect implies a composition effect: since high-
quality goods will be relatively less expensive at greater distances, we should expect
higher average unit values across countries as a function of distance.
        Second, goods with the same value per unit that differ in weight are subject to the
weight-composition effect: distance raises the relative price of heavy goods, which will
cause the value-weight ratio to be increasing in distance. Clearly the Washington Apples
effect and the weight-composition effect are closely related. Indeed, if goods within a
category differ only in their value and not their weight, then unit values are proportional
to the value-weight ratio, and the two effects are identical.
        A final composition effect comes from differences in demand across importers. If
higher income countries demand proportionately more higher quality goods, and/or if
Chinese exporters price discriminate against high-income importers, then we would also
expect a positive association between importer per-capita income and average export unit
values from China. See Hallak (2006) for evidence on the relation between income per
capita and the demand for quality, and Feenstra and Hanson (2004) for some evidence on
price discrimination in Chinese exports.


2.2 General equilibrium
The Washington apples effect offers a useful starting point for thinking about the effect
of specific trade costs on trade patterns, but since it takes f.o.b. prices as given it can not
be considered a model of trade. Here we embed the partial equilibrium mechanism in a


                                                5
general equilibrium model to address the question: how does China’s position on the
globe influence its trade pattern?
        Our model has N countries, one factor of production (labor), and a continuum of
final goods produced under conditions of perfect competition. Goods are symmetric in
demand and in expected production cost. Physical geography is unrestricted, and
summarized by the matrix of bilateral distances with typical element dcb denoting the
distance between countries b and c. As in Eaton and Kortum (2002), firms located in
each country compete head-to-head in every market in the world, with the low-cost
supplier winning the entire market. A firm’s cost in a particular market depends on its’
f.o.b. price and on transport costs between the firm’s home and the market (this cost is
normalized to zero if the market in question is the home market). By perfect competition,
f.o.b. price equals the wage divided by unit labor productivity, which is stochastic. Firms
located in c have productivity distributed according to the Fréchet distribution with
parameters Tc > 0 and θ > 1.
        As in Harrigan (2006), consumers value goods which are delivered by air more
than goods delivered by ship. Some of the reasons for such a preference are analyzed by
Evans and Harrigan (2005) and Harrigan and Venables (2006), but for the purposes of
this model we will simply suppose that utility is higher for goods that arrive by air. Let
the set of goods shipped by air be A, with measure also given by A. Utility is

        U ( x( z )) =   ∫ a ln x( z )dz + ∫ ln x( z )dz
                        z∈A              z∉A
                                                                                    (4)

where a > 1 is the air-freight preference, x is consumption, and z ∈ [ 0,1] indexes goods.
An implication of (4) is that for a given good, the relative marginal utility if it arrives by
air versus ship is a.
        We now consider the problem of an exporter in c choosing the optimal shipping
mode for selling in b. Let τ cbA ( w ( z ) , d cb ) ≥ 1 be the iceberg shipping cost for air shipment

of good z from c to b, with τ cbS ( w ( z ) , d cb ) defined similarly for surface shipment. Given

the premium a that consumers are willing to pay for air shipment, the optimal shipping
mode is




                                                     6
                                                             τ cbA ( w ( z ) , d cb )
        τ cb ( z, d cb ) = τ cbA ( w ( z ) , d cb ) if                                  ≤ τ cbS ( w ( z ) , d cb )
                                                                         a
        τ cb ( z, d cb ) = τ cbS ( w ( z ) , d cb ) otherwise.                                                       (5)

       What are the properties of the transport cost functions? First, order goods by
weight, with z = 0 being the lightest and z = 1 the heaviest. We will make three
assumptions about the transport cost functions ∀b, c, z ∈ [ 0,1] :
       a. Air shipping is expensive
                   τ cbS ( w ( z ) , d cb ) ≤ τ cbA ( w ( z ) , d cb )                                               (6a)

       b. Air shipping is proportionately more expensive for heavier goods
                   ∂ ln τ cbS ∂ ln τ cbA
                             ≤                                                                                       (6b)
                    ∂ ln z     ∂ ln z
       c. The cost disadvantage of air shipment declines with distance
                   ∂ ln τ cbS   ∂ ln τ cbA
                              ≥                                                                                      (6c)
                   ∂ ln d cd ∂ ln d cd
The truth of the first assumption, that air shipment is always more expensive than surface
shipment, is obvious to anyone who has ever traveled or shipped a package. The second
assumption, that surface shipping costs increase more slowly with weight than air costs,
is also reasonable, and is consistent with light goods being much more likely to be
shipped by air (see Harrigan (2006),Table 10, for statistical confirmation of this
commonplace observation). The final assumption is consistent with the fact that air
shipment is almost never used on short distances. Assumption (6c) is also consistent with
a model of a demand for timely delivery: for short distances, timely delivery can be
assured by (cheap) surface shipment, while for longer distances only (costly) air shipment
can ensure timeliness.
       For any pair of countries, the optimal shipping mode will be a function of weight.
It is possible that even the lightest goods will be shipped by surface, and it is also
possible that even the heaviest goods will be shipped by air. But the normal case in world
trade is that some goods are shipped by each mode (for example, for US trade in 2005,
every exporter except Sudan sent some goods by air and some by surface). Let zcb denote

the dividing line between air shipped goods ( z ≤ zcb ) and goods shipped by surface


                                                                  7
( zcb < z )   in trade between c and b. By assumption (6c), the cutoff will be lower for

nearby countries than for faraway countries. These relationships are illustrated in Figure
1 for exports from China to two countries, one near and one far. In the figure, we
illustrate assumption (6b) by having surface transport costs unrelated to weight while air
transport costs are increasing in weight.
           As noted in the previous section, the iceberg assumption is not realistic and rules
out the important Washington Apples effect on relative c.i.f. prices. It was also noted that
the Washington Apples effect and the weight-composition effect are very closely related.
In the specification used in the current section, a Washington Apples-like effect appears
through the influence of weight on transport costs. Because of symmetry in supply and
demand, expected f.o.b. prices from a given exporter are the same for all goods, but c.i.f.
prices differ due to differences in weight.
           We now turn to a discussion of the trade equilibrium. As discussed in Harrigan
(2006), wages in each country c are endogenous, and will be determined by the aggregate
productivities Tc, labor supplies, and bilateral distances. In this paper we analyze a single
country’s exports across its trading partners, and thus can treat wages as fixed.
           In keeping with the focus of the paper, we will consider China’s probability of
successfully competing in different markets and in different goods. In the Eaton-Kortum
model, the probability that China will supply a given market b is the same for all goods
(their equation (8)). In the current model, the probability varies, and will depend on
τ cb ( z, d cb ) for all countries c. With this modification the Eaton-Kortum logic goes
through otherwise unchanged, so the probability that China will supply good z to country
b is
                                                           −θ                                           −θ
                          TC ⎡⎣ wCτ Cb ( z , d Cb ) ⎤⎦                   TC ⎡⎣ wCτ Cb ( z , d Cb ) ⎤⎦
           π Cb ( z ) =                                              =                                       (7)
                          N
                                                                −θ                 Φb ( z )
                          ∑T
                          c =1
                                 c   ⎡⎣ wcτ cb ( z, d cb ) ⎤⎦

The summation in the denominator Φ b ( z ) in (7) includes country b, which reflects the

fact that good z might be produced domestically rather than imported.5 The economics of
(7) is fairly simple. The probability that China successfully captures the market for good

5
    Here and in what follows we let C stand for China, while c is a generic index for any country.


                                                                            8
z in country b depends positively on China’s absolute advantage TC and negatively on
China’s wage and transport cost to b, relative to an average of world technology levels
and wages weighted by transport costs to the same market.


2.3 Implications of Chinese growth for China’s competitors
       A great virtue of the Eaton-Kortum model is that it is a fully competitive general
equilibrium model. Alvarez and Lucas (2007) point out that this implies that all the
properties that are known about such models in general can be applied to Eaton and
Kortum’s model. However, the Eaton-Kortum model has no general analytical solution
for equilibrium wages, which makes comparative static analysis problematic. In this
section, we show that despite its analytical complexity the model can be used to answer
some important questions about how the rise of China affects the trade performance of
China’s competitors.
       We begin by assuming costless trade. In this case, Alvarez and Lucas show that
equilibrium wages are
                       1 1+θ
             ⎛T ⎞
        wc = ⎜ c ⎟
             ⎝ Lc ⎠
where Lc is country c’s labor force. National income is
                                              1 1+θ
                                   −θ    ⎛T ⎞
        Yc = wc Lc = Tc w          c    =⎜ c ⎟        Lc = Tc1 1+θ Lθc 1+θ     (8)
                                         ⎝ Lc ⎠
Thus, national income is a geometric average of a country’s technology level and its
labor supply. Setting all transport factors = 1, substitution of (8) into (7) implies
                        YC
        π Cb ( z ) =   N

                       ∑Y
                       c =1
                               c



Thus we have that in the frictionless case, the probability that China supplies a given
good z to any country is simply China’s share in global GDP.
       Now re-introduce transport costs, adopting for the purposes of this section the
Eaton-Kortum assumption that transport costs do not differ across goods. For small
transport costs this will not affect national income much, so we can replace Tc wc−θ by Yc
in (7). This gives the following approximation to (7),


                                                                9
                             −θ
                         YCτ Cb           −θ
                                      YCτ Cb
            π Cb                                                                                   (9)
                       N
                                       Φb
                     ∑Y τ
                      c =1
                               −θ
                             c cb



Since equation (9) is independent of z, we can integrate over z and reinterpret (9) as
giving China’s market share in country b. This result is useful because it links China’s
market share to observables. Because a change of subscripts makes (9) applicable to
every country’s sales in every other country, it also allows us to analyze how
international competition is affected by Chinese growth.
            By the same reasoning used to derive (9), we have the approximation
                     N
            Φ b  ∑ Ycτ cb−θ
                     c =1

This term is very similar to the country price indexes derived by Anderson and van
Wincoop (2003). It is also close to what Harrigan (2003) defines as a country’s
“centrality” index, which is a GDP-weighted average of a country’s inverse bilateral
trade costs. It is larger the closer b is to big countries: Belgium will have a large value of
Φb, while New Zealand will have a small value.
            A natural way to consider the impact of China’s growth on its neighbors in this
model is to ask how an improvement in China’s technical capability TC affects China’s
export market share. The full general equilibrium effects on global wages and trading
patterns of an increase in TC can not be found analytically, but we can get an approximate
answer by treating China as a small country and by using the approximations above.
Substituting (8) into (9), we have
                 ∂π Cb   1
            TC            π Cb (1 − π Cb )                                                          (10)
                 ∂TC 1 + θ
This expression says that a one percent improvement in TC raises China’s market share in
all markets, but the largest gain comes where China’s share is already large.6 The effect
on some other country k’s market share in b when China grows is given by
                 ∂π kb     1
            TC         −     π Cbπ kb                                                                         (11)
                 ∂TC      1+θ



6
    To see this, note that π Cb (1 − π Cb ) is increasing in π Cb for π Cb < 0.5 , a condition that holds in the data ∀b.


                                                            10
Equation (11) states that the biggest market share losses are felt by countries that have
large market share where China also has large market share.
       Equations (10) and (11) show the impact effect of an increase in TC before
equilibrium adjustments in world wages and trade flows. As noted above, analytical
solutions for these general equilibrium effects are not available, but we can conjecture
some effects. Since the impact effect of Chinese growth is largest in markets where
China already has a substantial presence, the increased competition from China will be
felt most keenly in precisely these markets. By (7), these locations will be markets that
are close to China and far from the rest of the world, such as East and Southeast Asia.
With China’s market share rising in these markets, other countries that sell there will
suffer loss of market share given by (11), with consequent reductions in factor demand.
These negative factor demand effects in export markets are of course balanced by the
consumption gains from cheap Chinese imports at home, plus increased sales of home
produced products in the Chinese market, with the net effect on real income uncertain.
This is an application of an old but sometimes neglected point from trade theory: in a
multi-country trade model, technological progress in one country may lower real income
in some other countries even as it raises global real income.


2.4 Testable predictions for Chinese export data
       The theory developed in the previous two sections generates testable predictions
about Chinese export data. The simplest are given by equations (10) and (11), which
predict how aggregate bilateral trade patterns will change with rapid growth in China.
The predictions given by (10) and (11) are made holding transport costs and other
countries’ technology fixed, so even if the model were literally true the change in trade
patterns would be more complex than given by these partial derivatives. However, as we
will see below, these simple equations turn out to be remarkably useful predictors of
changing bilateral trade patterns in markets where China already had a foothold in the
mid-1990s.
       Turning to product-level data, we can use (7) to generate testable predictions
about China’s export unit values. For a given good z, increases in distance reduce the




                                             11
probability of export success. This is simply the usual gravity effect operating through the
extensive margin.
        Now consider some set of goods Z ⊆ [ 0,1] . For every good z ∈ Z , the extensive
margin effect of distance is operative. However, given our characterization of trade costs
in (6), it is clear that the extensive margin effect is stronger for heavier goods. That is, as
distance increases, the probability that a heavy good will be successfully exported
decreases faster than the same probability for a lightweight good.
        Next consider a heavy good and a light good z H , z L ∈ Z . If both goods are
exported from China to some group of markets, the weight-composition effect discussed
in Section 2.1 is operative: the more distant the market from China, the greater the
relative c.i.f. price of zH, and thus the greater the share of zL in local consumption. If
goods weigh the same ∀z ∈ Z , the (very similar) Washington Apples logic will apply:
high-quality goods will be “light” in the sense of having low shipping costs as a share of
f.o.b. value, and thus their relative c.i.f. price will be lower, and consumption higher, in
more distant markets. These are intensive margin effects, since they describe how relative
consumption of goods actually exported changes with distance.
        With an understanding of how the extensive and intensive margins for goods
z ∈ Z operate as a function of distance, we can now answer the following question: how
does the average unit value of exports vary with distance? From what we have just
elucidated in the previous two paragraphs, the answer is clear, and we highlight it as the
key empirical prediction that we will test when we look at disaggregated export data:
        Prediction: For a given set of goods, the average unit value of Chinese exports
        will be non-decreasing in distance, controlling for other determinants of the
        demand for quality.




                                              12
3 Data Analysis
We use two different data sources. Testing the aggregate predictions of equations (10)
and (11) requires data on all bilateral trade flows in the world, and our source for this
data is the IMF Direction of Trade Statistics. The IMF does not report data on Taiwan,
so we supplement the IMF data from Taiwanese government sources.
       To test the predictions about export unit values, we used highly disaggregated
Chinese export data from 2006 (China Customs Statistics 1997-2007). Exports are
reported by 8-digit Harmonized System (HS) code, importing country, province of origin,
type of exporting firm (seven categories that we aggregate as state or collective owned
and private), type of trade (18 categories that we aggregate as ordinary, processing, and
other), and transport mode (air and sea). Export destinations are classified by the location
of the final consumer.
3.1 Market share changes
Our aggregate data includes bilateral trade among 212 countries, for potentially 212×211
= 44,732 bilateral relationships, many of which are tiny to the point of insignificance.
Since our focus is on the rise of China, we restrict most of our attention to the 20 largest
markets for Chinese exports, listed in Table 1.
       The model underlying equations (10) and (11) is a static, long run model, so it is
appropriate to test it using long-run changes in trade patterns. We look at changes
between 1996 and 2006. The initial date was chosen because it is after the major changes
in China’s foreign trade regime that were implemented in 1993-1994, and before the
1997 Asia crisis that temporarily disrupted trade patterns. This ten year period covers the
era when China continued to liberalize trade, joined the WTO, grew at a fantastically
rapid rate, and became a major factor in global trade.
       The most effective way to evaluate the predictions of equations (10) and (11) is
with a series of bivariate scatter plots. Charts 2 and 3 compare the actual change in
China’s share of export markets between 1996 and 2006 with the level predicted by
China’s market share in 1996. We calculate this predicted level neglecting the constant of

proportionality (1 + θ ) since we have no data on θ. An implication is that the horizontal
                         −1



scale and magnitude of the slope in these charts is not meaningful.



                                             13
       Chart 2 shows that the simple model does a startlingly good job of predicting
China’s export expansion in her top 20 markets, with most of China’s big markets lining
up on almost a straight line through the origin. The simple correlation in this chart is
0.48, and the correlation weighted by 2006 export value is 0.77. The two biggest negative
outliers are Hong Kong and Russia, where China had small falls in market share. A group
of three large East Asian markets (Malaysia, Taiwan, and Thailand) are large positive
outliers, probably reflecting their participation in processing trade that boosts gross trade
far above the levels predicted by models of trade in final goods such as Eaton-Kortum.
       Chart 3 includes all of China’s export destinations, and the basic message is the
same as the that of Chart 2. The un-weighted and value weighted correlations between
predicted and actual are 0.35 and 0.46 respectively. The two northeast outliers are Yemen
and Mongolia respectively.
       Equation (11) in principle gives predictions for how every bilateral relationship in
the world responds to the rise of China. According to the equation, the effect is increasing
in China’s market share, so we restrict our attention to changes that occur in China’s top
20 markets. Charts 4 through 6 show how the other big East Asian exporters (Korea,
Taiwan, and Japan) saw their export shares change in China’s top 20 markets between
1996 and 2006. In each case the correlation between predicted and actual is positive, but
the relationship is weaker than when looking at China’s trade directly.
       Chart 4 shows that Korea lost market share in Europe, Japan, Australia and the
U.S, but had a big increase in trade with Taiwan and the United Arab Emirates. Chart 5
shows that Taiwan lost market share everywhere except Italy, but Taiwan’s market share
losses were much smaller than predicted with respect to Korea and Singapore and, to a
lesser extent, Japan. As with Chart 2, the Korea and Taiwan results are suggestive of the
growing importance of processing trade among the middle-income East Asian countries.
       Chart 6 shows that Japan lost market share in all of China’s big export markets,
with only trade with Australia holding up substantially better than predicted.
       On the whole, the results illustrated in these charts show that the Eaton-Kortum
model is a useful tool for organizing our thinking about changes in bilateral trade
patterns. China’s rise has had effects on its own market shares, and the market shares of
its principal competitors, that are broadly consistent with the predictions of the model.



                                             14
The notable exceptions to this good fit are countries where China is involved in
processing trade, where trade shares rose by more, or fell by less, than the Eaton-Kortum
model would predict.


3.2 Specification of the unit value-distance relationship
        As discussed in section 2.4, we are primarily interested in variation in Chinese
export unit values across importing countries. The theory is silent about the appropriate
degree of aggregation across products, and we would expect the composition effects to
work across broad product categories: China should export heavy products to nearby
markets and lighter goods to more distant markets. Nonetheless, there are two compelling
reasons to analyze the predictions of the model using the most disaggregated data
possible. The first reason is simply that different HS8 categories are measured using
different units, and it is literally meaningless to compare unit values measured as (for
example) dollars/kilo and dollars/(number of shirts). The second reason is related, which
is that there are systematic differences in unit values and per-unit transport costs even
among goods measured in common physical units (for example, dollars/(kilos of
diamonds) and dollars/(kilo of coal)). Thus, in all specifications we will include product
fixed effects that remove product specific means and identify remaining parameters using
solely cross-country variation.
        Province of origin, transport mode, firm type and trade type are characteristics of
exports that are quite likely to be jointly determined with unit value, and so can not be
considered exogenous to an equation that explains unit values. Feenstra and Spencer
(2005) provide a model and analysis of Chinese export data that support this supposition ,
although they focus on geographical variation within China rather than across China’s
export markets. These concerns motivate the following specification, where we pool
across all characteristics of exports except product and destination
        vic = αi + β d d c + β y yc + error                            (12)

where
        vic = log unit value of exports of product i from China to country c
        αi = fixed effect for 8-digit HS code i
        dc = distance of c from Beijing.


                                              15
           yc = log real GDP per capita of c in 2004.
The fixed effect αi will remove any average differences in unit values across products, so
that the estimated distance elasticity is meaningful. Note that export values are measured
f.o.b, so they do not include transport charges. The model predicts βd > 0: across
importers within an 8-digit commodity category, China will sell higher unit value goods
to more distant importers.
           Notwithstanding the comments above about the endogeneity of customs regimes
and firm types, preliminary data mining reveals large differences in unit values associated
with these categories. This suggests that pooling across all such categories as done in (12)
may cause aggregation bias. To address this issue, we estimate a model which has
separate intercepts and slopes for different customs regimes and firm types. Letting these
categories be indexed by j, this model is
           vijc = α i + α j + ∑ ( β jd d c ) + β y yc + error                (13)
                              j


We do not specify interactions on the GDP per capita variable because this effect is not
our primary focus. Because of the endogeneity of the firm and trade type classifications,
interpretation of the βjd’s in (13) will be more reduced form than the interpretation of βd’s
in (12).
           We measure distance in two ways. The first is simply log kilometers from Beijing
to the capital of the importing country, using “great circle” distance. The second breaks
distance down into two categories:
           1-2500km                   Korea, Taiwan, Hong Kong, Japan
           2500+ km                   Rest of world
The motivation for this split can be seen in Chart 1, which compactly illustrates a number
of patterns in China’s exports. Because of the Pacific Ocean, there is a natural break in
distance at 2500 kilometers, with four large trading partners (Korea, Taiwan, Japan, and
Hong Kong) being less than this distance from Beijing and most other important trading
partners, in particular the US and Western Europe, being at least 5000km away. Note that
the limitations of our great circle distance data makes Western Europe seem much closer
than it would be for an ocean going freighter. This caveat is not relevant in regressions
where we use the binary distance indicator.



                                                        16
       As noted above, interpretability of regression coefficients is problematic in (12)
and (13) as we are pooling across such disparate goods. To address this, we split the
sample in a number of ways:
   1. All observations
   2. Observations where unit is a count, and where the count is at least 2.
   3. Observations where unit is kilos.
   4. All of the above cuts restricted to manufactured goods.
In addition, for each regression we drop trade flows below $10,000, to dampen the
measurement error that always plagues unit values.
       Appropriate estimation of (12) and (13) requires careful attention to the structure
of the data, which is an unbalanced panel with many (at least 1500) products and
relatively few (92) countries. The country-specific data are repeated many times in the
sample, but the data does not have the structure of a “cluster sample”, since each unit i
has observations across many countries c. As discussed by Moulton (1990) and
Wooldridge (2006), the appropriate estimator in such a model is random effects GLS,
where the random effects are country-specific. A refinement to GLS suggested by
Wooldridge is to use a fully robust covariance matrix rather than assume spherical
residuals, and we implement this below. Because we also have product fixed effects, our
equations are estimated in a four-step procedure as follows:
   1. Remove product-specific means from all the data using the within transformation.
   2. Run pooled OLS on the transformed data.
   3. Quasi-difference the transformed data with respect to country-specific means,
       where the random effects quasi-differencing parameter φ ∈ [ 0,1) is a function of

       the OLS residuals from step 2.
   4. Estimate the model on the quasi-differenced data by OLS, and calculate a robust
       covariance matrix.
Hansen (2007) shows theoretically that the robust covariance matrix for this mixed fixed
effects-random effects model is consistent regardless of the relative size of the two
dimensions of the panel. Hansen’s Monte Carlo simulations confirm that the asymptotic
formula is quite accurate for data dimensions substantially smaller than in our
application.


                                             17
       In applying the above estimator to equation (13), we found that in every case the
estimated GLS quasi-differencing parameter φ was zero. Thus for equation (13) the
estimation technique is simply OLS with product fixed effects and a robust covariance
matrix. We also estimated this equation using a different GLS procedure that allows for
the error variance to differ by country. The GLS results were very close to the results of
OLS with product fixed effects, so we do not report the GLS results to save space.


3.3 Estimation results
       Table 1 reports China’s top twenty export destinations in 2006. While only 16
percent of Chinese exports are sent by air, there is wide variation across markets. The
largest share of exports by air, 35 percent, goes to Malaysia and Singapore, a result that is
suggestive of China’s role in time-sensitive international production networks. A
surprisingly (and suspiciously) high share of exports also goes to Hong Kong by air. See
Feenstra et al (1999) for a discussion of the difficulties of separating Chinese exports to
Hong Kong and exports through Hong Kong. As always with aggregate international
trade data, the importance of gravity (distance and country size) is clearly visible in Table
1. We return to an analysis of the share of China’s exports that are shipped by air in
section 4 below.
       Table 2 reports results of estimating various versions of equation (12). Focusing
first on the full sample, the distance elasticity is 0.074, which is economically significant
given the large variation in distance. But this effect is fragile across specifications
ranging from 0.044 and statistically insignificant to 0.077. The indicator variable for
distance greater than 2500 km is more consistent: in the full sample the effect is to raise
export unit values by 14.8%, and the effect ranges between 9.2% and 15.6% depending
on the sample. This effect is economically important but somewhat smaller than the
distance effect on U.S. import unit values found by Harrigan (2006) and on U.S. export
unit values by Baldwin and Harrigan (2007).
       While it is not our main focus here, the small size and fragility of the effect of
importer GDP per capita on unit values is striking, although consistent with the results of
Baldwin and Harrigan (2007) on U.S. data. The overall effect of 0.04 to 0.06 is driven by




                                              18
a fairly large effect of 0.12 on goods measured in kilos, and a near-zero effect for goods
measured as a count.
        Table 3 reports results of estimating two versions of equation (13). In the top
panel we show results with firm type interacted with the dummy “far”, which is distance
> 2500 kilometers (the excluded dummy is near × state and collective firms). The second
panel show results with customs regime interacted with far (the excluded dummy is near
× other trade). The effect of importer real GDP per capita on export unit values is
consistent with Table 2.
        The coefficients on the interactions in Table 3 are somewhat hard to interpret, so
we turn immediately to Table 4, which reports the linear combinations of interest and
associated test statistics from Table 3. The top panel shows that the distance effect is
positive and statistically significant for both types of firms, with the effect a bit larger for
state/collective firms than for foreign/private firms. The second panel shows a relatively
large and robust effect for ordinary trade of around 0.10. The effect for processing trade
is small and positive for goods measured as a count, and zero for goods measured in
kilos. There is a large negative effect of distance for the trade regime category “other”,
which accounts for just 4% of total exports.
        Summarizing the results of this section, we conclude that there is a small but
robust positive relationship between distance and export unit values. The relationship
only disappears for processing trade where the units are kilos. We hesitate to over-
interpret the results of Tables 3 and 4 since customs regime, trade type, and export unit
value are jointly determined.


4 Air shipment and Chinese exports
The model developed in sections 2.1 and 2.2 highlighted the importance of shipping
mode choice in determining bilateral trade patterns. The keys to the mechanism are the
assumptions on the transport cost functions given by equations (6). Our empirical
analysis of export unit values in the previous section does not control for shipping mode
because the core message of the model is that shipping mode and export unit value are
jointly determined. Nonetheless, it is instructive to see how the air shipment choice is
correlated with firm characteristics, which we do in Table 5.


                                               19
           Table 5a is a cross-tab of firm type and customs regime, and reports the share of
exports in each cell which is shipped by air. Table 5b shows the share of total air
shipments accounted for by each cell. The overall share of Chinese exports sent by air is
fairly small at 16 percent, but this number masks a stark pattern: over 80 percent of air
shipment is processing trade by private and foreign firms. Over a quarter of the value of
trade in this cell is sent by air, while the air share in other cells is negligible. Clearly
timely delivery is very important for this type of trade. We conjecture that the reason for
this revealed preference for timely delivery is that with a multi-stage production process,
the cost of delay increases very rapidly in the number of stages and the complexity of
production7.


5 Conclusion
           There is little doubt that China has an overall comparative advantage in labor
intensive goods. In this paper, we have argued that understanding Chinese trade also
requires accounting for local comparative advantage: products where China has a
competitive advantage in some locations but not others.
           In our formulation of Deardorff’s (2004) concept of local comparative advantage,
we focus on cost differences due to differences in transport costs and the transport-
intensity (weight) of goods. In the theory section, we showed that China could be
expected to have a comparative advantage in heavy goods in nearby markets, and lighter
goods in more distant markets. This theory motivates a simple empirical prediction:
within a product, China’s export unit values should be increasing in distance. We find
strong evidence for this effect in our empirical analysis. Splitting up China’s export
markets into two groups, one nearby (Korea, Taiwan, Hong Kong, and Japan) and one
further away, we find that the average unit value of exports sent beyond the nearby group
is about 15% higher8.
           We also showed that the Eaton-Kortum (2002) model implies that as China grows
it will gain market share most quickly in markets where it is already competitive, a
prediction strongly supported by looking at the growth in China’s aggregate bilateral


7
    Harrigan and Venables (2006) model this effect in detail.
8
    We refer here to the coefficients in the top panel of Table 2.


                                                        20
export market shares between 1996 and 2006. A corollary is that China’s competitors in
export markets will be most squeezed where China starts out with a high market share, a
prediction which finds some support in our analysis of how Korea, Taiwan, and Japan
export performance has fared in the face of the China’s expansion.
       Beyond its relevance to Chinese trade, we believe this paper makes the broader
point that trade economists should strive to escape the powerful field exerted by the
gravity model. Understanding the effect of distance on economic activity is an important
intellectual and policy issue, and much can be accomplished outside the simple gravity
framework.




                                            21
                                 Figure 1 - Optimal transport mode choice for Chinese exporters




                                                                                                     τ uA
                                                                                                          a



                                                                                                                                τ uS
                                                                                                   τ kA
                                                                                                    a

                                                                                                                                  τ kS




     z=0                                                  zk                            zu                                    z=1
Notes to Figure 1: Vertical axis is iceberg transport cost factor, horizontal axis indexes weight from lightest (z = 0) to heaviest (z = 1). Country k
(“Korea”) is relatively close to China, while country u (“United States”) is further away. The horizontal lines are surface transport costs, and the
upward sloping lines are air transport costs relative to the air preference parameter a. The vertical lines show the division between optimal mode
choices for the two destinations. See text for further discussion.

                                                                            22
                                       Chart 1 - China’s export markets, 2006

      40000

                    MAC
                                                                USA
                                              NOR
      30000




                        HKG      SGP                CHE
                                                      IRL
                                               DNK
                                                 AUT AUS CAN
                                             SWE NLDGBR
                                                    FRA
                                                   BEL
                                                  GER
                        JPN                 FIN
                                                     ITA      NZL
   rgdpch
   20000




                    TWN                         ISR       ESP
                  KOR
                                                        PRT
                                                GRC
                                               CZE
                                               HUN
                                                                                      CHL
      10000




                                                                                       ARG
                                             POL                        ZAF
                                               BGR                    MEX
                                              ROM                             VEN
                                             TUR
                          PHL         IDN
                                PAK
                                                                NGA
      0




              0                   5000                  10000                 15000    20000
                                                       distance



Notes to Chart 1: Vertical axis is real GDP per capita, horizontal axis is distance in kilometers
from Beijing. Size of circles is proportional to China’s exports to indicated country. All markets
where China sold at least $1 billion in 2006 are depicted.




                                                           23
                               Chart 2 - Change in China’s export market shares,
                               1996 to 2006, actual vs. predicted, top 20 markets

         .15                                                                                      KOR




                                                                          JPN
         .1




                                       MAL THA
                                             TWN               AUS
actual




                               IND
         .05




                                                  SNG


                                      USA
                   UAE
                             GER
                        FRA
                      SPN
                        UK CAN
                            ITA
                      NTH
         0




                                                                    RUS                     HK

               0               .02                .04               .06               .08             .1
                                                        predicted



                                Chart 3 Change in China’s export market shares,
                                 1996 to 2006, actual vs. predicted, all markets
         .6
         .4
actual
  .2




                                                         KOR

                            MAL
                              THA
                               TWN       AUSJPN
                         IND    SNG
                   UAE  G  USA
                          ER
                     FRA
                    SPN
                     UK
                      C
                    NTHITA
                        AN
         0




                                          RUS           HK
         -.2




               0                   .05                    .1                    .15              .2
                                                        predicted




                                                               24
                       Chart 4 Change in Korea’s export market shares, 1996 to 2006,
                            actual vs. predicted, China’s top 20 export markets

     .03
     .02
       .01                                                              TWN                UAE
actual




                                                                         HK
                                                                                 SNG THA
0




                                                                                  MAL IND     NTH
                             JPN                                                             FRA
                                                                                              SPN
                                                                                           GER
                                                                                             UK
                                                                                            CAN
                                                                                           ITA
                                                                          RUS
     -.01




                                                                              USA
     -.02




                 AUS

             -.006                  -.004                   -.002                           0
                                              predicted



                     Chart 5 Change in Taiwan’s export market shares, 1996 to 2006,
                actual vs. predicted, China’s top 20 export markets [excluding Hong Kong]

                                                                                            ITA
     0




                                                                                     IND
                                     SNG                                                  FRA
                     KOR                                                                 CAN
                                                                                         UK
                                                                                        GER
     -.005




                           JPN
                                                                USA
                                                                  MAL
actual




                                      AUS
-.01




                                                                                        NTH
     -.015




                                             THA


                                                                                            UAE
     -.02




         -.0025            -.002        -.0015          -.001           -.0005              0
                                              predicted




                                                     25
                             Chart 6. Change in Japan’s export market shares, 1996 to 2006,
                                   actual vs. predicted, China’s top 20 export markets

            0                                                                               FRA
                                                                                             NTH
                                                                                            SPN
                                                                                          GER
                                                                                          ITA
                                                                                           UK
                                 AUS                                        HK
                                                                             RUS          CAN

                                                                             SNG    IND
            -.05




                                                                             USA
                                                                  THA      MAL
                           KOR
   actual




                                             TWN
            -.1




                                                                                     UAE
            -.15




                   -.015                     -.01                -.005                     0
                                                    predicted



Notes to Charts 2 through 6 Data is total bilateral trade, from IMF Direction of Trade Statistics
(Taiwan data from Taiwan Government sources). Export market share is defined as the exporters
share of the importer’s aggregate imports. Size of circles is proportional to bilateral trade volume
in 2006. Predicted values computed from 1996 trade shares, as given by equations 10 (Charts 2
and 3) and 11 (Charts 4 through 6) in the text. Country abbreviations are

               USA         United States
                UK         United Kingdom
               BEL         Belgium
               FRA         France
               GER         Germany
               ITA         Italy
               NTH         Netherlands
               CAN         Canada
               JPN         Japan
               SPN         Spain
               AUS         Australia
               UAE         United Arab Emirates
               TWN         Taiwan
                HK         Hong Kong
               IND         India
               KOR         Korea
               MAL         Malaysia
               SNG         Singapore
               THA         Thailand
               RUS         Russia




                                                           26
 Table 1 - China’s top 20 export markets, 2006
                  distance
                    from      Exports       % exports
                   Beijing   ($ billions)   sent by air
United States      11,154       203            19
Hong Kong           1,979       155            12
Japan               2,102        92            15
Korea                956         45            14
Germany             7,829        40            33
Netherlands         7,827        31            22
United Kingdom      8,146        24            15
Singapore           4,485        23            35
Taiwan              1,723        21            26
Italy               8,132        16              9
Russia              5,799        16              7
Canada             10,458        16            12
India               3,781        15            17
France              8,222        14            26
Australia           9,025        14            14
Malaysia            4,351        14            35
Spain               9,229        12              9
United Arab Em.     5,967        11              7
Belgium             7,969        10            14
Thailand            3,301        10            16




                      27
               Table 2 - China Export Unit Value Regressions, 2006

                                                        all products

                               all units              unit = count, >1        unit = kilos
    log importer           0.059      0.061           -0.038     -0.033     0.122      0.126
    GDP/capita             5.82        6.08            -1.88      -1.65      12.3       12.6
                           0.074                       0.050                0.077
    log distance
                           6.09                         1.39                 6.54
    distance >                        0.148                      0.144                 0.156
    2500km                             6.61                       2.14                  6.91
    Random effects φ       0.92        0.92           0.88        0.88      0.89       0.88
    HS 8 fixed effects          6,820                      1,951                 4,334
    N                          155,419                    55,280                87,868
                                             manufacturing products only

                               all units              unit = count, >1        unit = kilos
    log importer           0.040      0.043           -0.045     -0.040     0.117      0.120
    GDP/capita              2.81       3.03            -2.00      -1.78      7.86       8.03
                           .0058                       0.044                0.039
    log distance
                            2.94                        1.02                 2.08
                                      0.135                      0.143                 0.092
    2500+ km
                                       3.52                       1.75                  2.43
    Random effects φ       0.91           0.91        0.89           0.89   0.86           0.86

    HS 8 fixed effects            3,608                      1,538                 1,644

    N                           95,534                    43,477                41,497

Notes to Table 2: Independent variable is log Chinese bilateral export unit value by HS8 and
importer. The statistical model controls for fixed product effects and random country effects.
The median partial differencing parameter for the random effects transformation is φ . Robust
t-statistics are in italics. Observations with export value less than $10,000 excluded from
sample.




                                                 28
                   Table 3 - China Export Unit Value Regressions, 2006
                           with trade type and firm type controls

                                all observations            manufacturing observations
                          all        count         kilos      all     count     kilos

 log importer            0.067       -0.010        0.117     0.048    -0.023    0.113
 GDP/capita               27.3         -1.9         49.8      14.8       -3.9    34.0
Far × state and          0.095       0.087         0.101     0.066     0.082    0.049
collective firms          12.1          4.8         12.0        6.2       4.0      3.9
Far × private and        0.103       0.100         0.118     0.065     0.066    0.083
foreign firms             13.2          5.6         14.0        6.1       3.2      6.6
Near × private and       0.029       0.068         0.024     0.029     0.029    0.059
foreign firms               3.0         3.0           2.3       2.1      1.1       3.7
 HS 8 fixed effects       6,817       1,946         4,332     3,576    1,508     1,643

 N                      240,473      87,262    134,285      148,637   68,078    64,247



 log importer            0.053       -0.028        0.111     0.033    -0.037    0.103
 GDP/capita               19.3          -4.8     42.1           9.0      -5.6     27.1
Far × ordinary trade    -0.498       -0.480    -0.506       -0.542    -0.392    -0.690
                         -30.2        -15.7     -26.2        -25.5     -11.9     -24.1
Near × ordinary         -0.615       -0.570    -0.641       -0.627    -0.491    -0.760
trade                    -35.4        -17.1     -31.8        -27.8     -13.5     -25.4
Far × processing        -0.267       -0.195    -0.334       -0.273    -0.158    -0.392
trade                    -15.9          -6.4    -16.9        -12.6       -4.7    -13.3
Near × processing       -0.315       -0.304    -0.321       -0.331    -0.258    -0.402
trade                    -16.8          -8.6    -14.8        -13.5       -6.6    -12.4
Far × other trade       -0.217       -0.226    -0.215       -0.227    -0.149    -0.311
                          -12.2        -7.0        -10.3     -10.0      -4.3     -10.2
 HS 8 fixed effects       6,817       1,949         4,331     3,575    1,511     1,642

 N                      230,937      88,823    125,089      144,104   68,714    61,013


Notes to Table 3: This table reports results from 12 regressions. Independent variable is log
Chinese bilateral export unit value by HS8 and importing country. Regressions in regressions in
first panel separate by type of firm (state-collective and private-foreign), second panel separate
by type of customs regime (ordinary, processing, and other). All regressions have product fixed
effects and importer random effects. Robust t-statistics are in italics. Observations with export
value less than $10,000 are excluded from sample.




                                                    29
            Table 4 - Effects of Distance on China Export Unit Value, 2006

                                  all observations               manufacturing observations
                            all        count         kilos         all      count           kilos
Far × state and            0.095       0.087         0.101        0.066      0.082          0.049
collective firms            12.1          4.8         12.0           6.2        4.0            3.9
(Far - Near) ×             0.075       0.033         0.094        0.036      0.037          0.024
private foreign               4.2          2.0        12.1           3.7          2.0          2.0
firms
(Far - Near) ×             0.116       0.089         0.135        0.085      0.099          0.070
ordinary trade              16.9          5.7      18.1              9.1        5.6            6.4
(Far - Near) ×             0.048       0.109     -0.014           0.058      0.101          0.010
processing trade              4.4          5.3       1.1             4.0        4.3            0.5
Far × other trade         -0.217       -0.226    -0.215          -0.227     -0.149         -0.311
                            -12.2         -7.0       -10.3         -10.0          -4.3       -10.2

Notes to Table 4: This table is based on Table 3. Each cell represents the point estimate of a
linear combination, and the test statistic (square root of a χ2 test statistic) for the null that the
linear combination equals zero.


                      Table 5 - Shipment mode for Chinese exports, 2006

5a share of exports shipped by air
                                   all firms               state & collective            private & foreign
    all trade types                 0.16                          0.05                         0.20
    Ordinary                        0.06                          0.05                         0.07
    Processing                      0.24                          0.03                         0.27
    other                           0.14                          0.11                         0.17


5b share of total air shipments
                                     all firms               state & collective          private & foreign
    all trade types                   1.00                         0.07                        0.93
    Ordinary                          0.16                         0.05                        0.12
    Processing                        0.80                         0.01                        0.79
    other                             0.04                         0.01                        0.03




                                                      30
References
Alvarez, Fernando, and Robert E. Lucas Jr., 2007, “General Equilibrium Analysis of the Eaton-
       Kortum Model of International Trade”, Journal of Monetary Economics 54: 1726-1768.
Anderson, James E., and Eric van Wincoop, 2003, "Gravity with Gravitas: A Solution to the
       Border Puzzle", American Economic Review 93(1): 170-192.
Baldwin, Richard E., and James Harrigan, 2007, “Zeros, quality, and space: trade theory and
       trade evidence”, NBER Working Paper 13214 (July).
China Customs Statistics, 1997-2007. [Dataset]. Beijing, China: Customs General
       Administration, Statistics Dept. [producer]; Hong Kong, China: CCS (China Customs
       Statistics) Information Center [distributor], 1998-2008.
Deardorff, Alan, 2004, "Local Comparative Advantage: Trade Costs and the Pattern of Trade",
       University of Michigan RSIE Working paper no. 500.
Eaton, Jonathan and Samuel Kortum, 2002, “Technology, Geography, and Trade”, Econometrica
       70(5): 1741-1779 (September).
Evans, Carolyn E., and James Harrigan, 2005, “Distance, Time, and Specialization: Lean
       Retailing in General Equilibrium” American Economic Review 95(1): 292-313 (March).
Feenstra, Robert C., Wen Hai, Wing T. Woo, and Shunli Yao, 1999, “Discrepancies in
       International Data: An Application to China-Hong Kong Entrepôt Trade,” American
       Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 89 (2): 338-343.
Feenstra, Robert C., and Gordon Hanson, 2004, “Intermediaries in Entrepôt Trade: Hong Kong
       Re-Exports of Chinese Goods,” Journal of Economics & Management Strategy 13 (1): 3-
       35.
Feenstra, Robert C., and Barbara J. Spencer, 2005, “Contractual Versus Generic Outsourcing:
       The Role of Proximity”, NBER WP 11885 (December).
Hallak, Juan Carlos, 2006, “Product Quality and the Direction of Trade”, Journal of
       International Economics 68 (1), pp. 238-265.
Harrigan, James, 2003, “Specialization and the Volume of Trade: Do the Data Obey the Laws?",
       chapter in The Handbook of International Trade, Basil Blackwell, edited by James
       Harrigan and Kwan Choi.
Harrigan, James, 2006, “Airplanes and comparative advantage”, NBER Working Paper 11688
       (revised June 2006).



                                               31
Harrigan, James, and A.J. Venables, 2006, “Timeliness and Agglomeration”, Journal of Urban
       Economics 59: 300-316 (March).
Hansen, Christian B., 2007, “Asymptotic properties of a robust variance matrix estimator for
       panel data when T is large”, Journal of Econometrics 141: 597-620.
Hummels, David, 2001, “Time as a Trade Barrier”,
       http://www.mgmt.purdue.edu/faculty/hummelsd/
Hummels, David, and Peter Klenow, 2005, “The Variety and Quality of a Nation’s Exports”,
       American Economic Review 95(3): 704-723 (June).
Hummels, David, and Alexandre Skiba, 2004, “Shipping the Good Apples Out? An Empirical
       Confirmation of the Alchian-Allen Conjecture”, Journal of Political Economy 112(6):
       1384-1402 (December).
Limão, Nuno, and A.J. Venables, 2002, “Geographical Disadvantage: a Hecksher-Ohlin-Von
       Thunen Model of International Specialisation,” Journal of International Economics
       58(2): 239-63 (December).
Moulton, Brent R., (1990), “An Illustration of a Pitfall in Estimating the Effects of Aggregate
       Variables on Micro Units” Review of Economics and Statistics 72(1): 334-338.
Schott, Peter K., 2004, “Across-product versus within-product specialization in international
       trade”, Quarterly Journal of Economics119(2):647-678 (May).
Silberberg, Eugene, 1978, The Structure of Economics: A Mathematical Analysis, New York:
       McGraw Hill.
Wooldridge, Jeffrey W., 2006, “Cluster sample methods in applied econometrics: an extended
       analysis”, http://www.msu.edu/~ec/faculty/wooldridge/current%20research.htm.




                                                   32
