NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DERIVATIVES MARKETS FOR HOME PRICES
Robert J. Shiller
Working Paper 13962
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13962

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2008

An earlier version of this paper was presented at the Lincoln Institute of Land Policy conference "Housing
and the Built Environment: Access, Finance, Policy," Cambridge MA, December 7 and 8, 2007. This
paper will appear in a Lincoln Institute volume edited by Edward Glaeser and Jonathan Quigley. The
author thanks David Blitzer, John Hartigan, Terry Loebs, Jonathan Reiss, Steve Rive, Aniket Ullal
and Ronit Walny for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Robert J. Shiller. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Derivatives Markets for Home Prices
Robert J. Shiller
NBER Working Paper No. 13962
April 2008
JEL No. G13,R31
ABSTRACT
The establishment recently of risk management vehicles for home prices is described. The potential
value of such vehicles, once they become established, is seen in consideration of the inefficiency of
the market for single family homes. Institutional changes that might derive from the establishment
of these new markets are described. An important reason for these beginnings of real estate derivative
markets is the advance in home price index construction methods, notably the repeat sales method,
that have appeared over the last twenty years. Psychological barriers to the full success of such markets
are discussed.

Robert J. Shiller
Yale University, Cowles Foundation
Box 208281
30 Hillhouse Avenue, Room 11a
New Haven, CT 06520-8281
and NBER
robert.shiller@yale.edu

Derivatives Markets for Home Prices

The near absence of derivatives markets for real estate, particularly single family
homes, is a striking anomaly that cries out for explanation and for actions to change the
situation. In the U.S. alone, the value of real estate held by households is about $20
trillion, which rivals the stock market. And yet the kinds of derivative instruments
available for real estate are miniscule compared to those of stocks.
The proper hedging of real estate risks is of the utmost importance. Risk
management theory never said that only stock and bond risks should be managed. All
economic risks should be managed. There are many kinds of economic risks that are not
managed, and real estate risk is high on the list. The recent “subprime crisis” might be
described as the result of failure to mange risks properly. Recent research by Karl Case
and John Quigley [2007] shows that repercussions of recent and projected home price
falls through the financial markets are far more important than the direct wealth effects
on the economy. If any factor will push the U.S. economy into recession in 2008, it will
be the financial repercussions of the housing decline. The repercussions of major changes
in real estate prices go far beyond the risk of recession, since they impinge on the well
being of hundreds of millions of people who are often locked into highly-mortgageleveraged positions in their individual homes.

3

Beginnings of Derivative Markets
Case and I have been working and thinking about real estate risk and how it might
better managed for nearly twenty years. We effectively began our public advocacy for
real estate futures markets in our 1989 paper on the efficiency of the market for single
family homes. In that paper, we showed that well-constructed repeat-sales home price
can accurately capture trends in the real estate market (more on this in the next section).
The paper also found that these repeat-sales indices, which are not subject to the noise
caused by change in mix of sales that previous indices were, are very autocorrelated and
forecastable, with a forecast R-squared at a one-year horizon of about a half. We
attributed this forecastability to the profound illiquidity of the market. Much subsequent
research, for example Glaeser and Gyourko [2006], or Gyourko Mayer and Sinai [2006],
confirms the inefficiency of the market for homes.
Professional investors find it very costly to trade in this market, and very costly to
maintain an inventory of homes as investments. Thus, they cannot take advantage of the
forecastability of home prices and cannot take actions that would enforce the efficiency
of the market. The problem has been the total absence of derivative markets for real
estate prices. Mortgages have extensive derivative markets, but there have been, until
very recently, no derivative markets at all tied to real estate prices. If such markets could
be created, they might ultimately lead towards more liquidity in the cash markets. Thus
began our mission to create just such markets.
We thought that if a liquid futures market (or another kind of derivative market)
could be established for single family homes, it might provide the financial infrastructure
to bring forth a number of new financial instruments. I later described some of these in

4

my 1993 book Macro Markets: home equity insurance, down payment insurance on
home mortgages, or price warranties on new homes, and it might allow the rationalization
of a number of businesses. Some of these institutions have since been put in place (see
for example William Goetzmann et al. 2007), but their success has been limited by the
absence of hedging markets
Karl Case, Allan Weiss and I began our campaign to launch futures markets on
single family homes in 1990. We named ourselves the “Index Research Group,” but by
June we were “Case Shiller Weiss Research Group.” We presented our idea at the Coffee
Sugar and Cocoa Exchange (which had previously launched the innovative, but
ultimately unsuccessful consumer price index futures market) in August 1990, the
Chicago Board of Trade in November 1990. In November 1991, we, along with partner
Charles Longfield, created Case Shiller Weiss, Inc, a firm whose sole purpose then was
to produce home price indices designed expressly to settle financial contracts. The
discussions with the Chicago Board of Trade led to an alliance of our firm with the
Chicago Board of Trade to study the possibility of launching home price futures.
The Board did a telephone survey in 1993 of potential traders. They concluded
that they found people willing to sell real estate futures, but no one willing to buy. So,
they became reluctant to try to launch the products then. We tried to argue with them that
it is probably easier to discover short interest than long interest in a prospective new
market, for the short interest are those people who own real estate and have a hedging
need, while for the long interest it is those people who want merely to add real estate to
their investment portfolios, and they cannot feel any particular interest in investing in the
contracts until they know what the price is and how it relates to other investment returns.

5

However, despite our arguments, ultimately the Board decided not to try launching the
market.
The London Futures and Options Exchange, London Fox, beat us to the market,
though not as competitors since they launched in a different country. They launched their
property futures market in 1991. They attempted to create futures markets for both singlefamily homes and also commercial real estate. However, in the few months over which
these markets were open, there was little trade. The rapid demise of these markets was
not due directly to the low volume, but to efforts to pad the volume. Traders were doing
wash trades to pad the volume numbers, and when this fact was discovered, the markets
were shut down in a scandal. People I spoke to in London in 1991 expressed
disappointment that this wash trading scandal had shut down the market before it had
been open long enough to be given a real test. Indeed, the failure of this market did not
prove anything about the ultimate viability of such markets, though it created a bad
precedent, and slowed down the launch of our own markets by many years.
The beginnings of a worldwide boom in home prices in the late 1990s led to
renewed interest in markets for home values. In the U.K., City Index launched a spread
betting market in single family homes in 2001, and this was quickly followed by another
spread betting market launched by IG Index in 2002. However, both these markets were
shut down by 2004. Attempts have been made to reopen property spread betting markets
in the United Kingdom. Cantor Index has launched spread betting on U.K. home prices
(www.spreadfair.com).
Goldman Sachs opened a market in 2003 for covered warrants on UK home price
indices on the London Stock Exchange that were settled in terms of the Halifax home

6

price indices. However, as of 2004, the open interest was very small, roughly the amount
that one would expect if only 100 houses were hedged. It has seemed hard to get hedging
markets started for real estate.
Hedgestreet.com created markets for single family homes, among other markets,
in 2004, on a dedicated web site aimed at consumers. The site allowed trading in
“hedgelets” which were in effect $10 bets on the direction of home prices, bets which
could be used (if very many such bets were made by one homeowner) to hedge
movements in home prices. It was thought by the founder, John Nafeh, that people would
use these hedgelets to help insulate them from economic risks. However, the site was not
a success, and trading has been shut down and replaced with mock trading only.
In May 2006 the Chicago Mercantile Exchange (now the CME Group, after the
2007 merger with the Chicago Board of Trade), in collaboration with the firm
MacroMarkets LLC that Allan Weiss, Sam Mauscci and I founded, launched futures and
options markets on the home price indices that Case and I pioneered, now called the
Standard and Poor’s/Case-Shiller Home Price Indices. These indices are produced by
Fiserv, Inc., the company that purchased Case Shiller Weiss, Inc. in 2002 and continues
to produce the thousands of Case-Shiller home price indices by county, zip code, and
price tier. Futures contracts, with a February quarterly cycle of expiration dates and
settled at $250 times the index were launched for ten U.S. cities and an aggregate index.
This market has been much more successful and credible than its predecessors. The total
notional value of futures and options traded since inception is $612 million through
November 21, 2007. There continue to be substantial trades, for example, in the week
November 5-9, 2007, a notional value of $2,782,600 was traded. However, the futures

7

open interest in the ten contracts together, which peaked at $109 million in February
2007, has fallen with each contract expiration, and stood at $49 million as of November
21, 2007. Between contract expirations the open interest has been growing at a good rate:
open interest grew at a steady rate, cumulating to a 39% increase in the three months
since the August 31 2007 expiration, so there are some signs of hope for growth of these
contracts. The longer maturities (from one year to five years) that were added in
September 2007 may enhance the product’s utility.
There have also been new markets for commercial real estate. In London, the
Investment Property Databank (IPD) has begun to be used for derivative products, for
which the global notional outstanding value of property derivatives trades has reached
£11.5 billion. 2 A swaps market for real estate has begun to develop in the United States.
A company called Radar Logic in the United States has found some success in creating
home price derivatives for single family homes with its RPX index, based on the median
of a maximum likelihood estimate of the distribution of all home prices sold in the time
period per square foot of floor space, existing, new, condominium.
On November 2, 2007 the Chicago Mercantile Exchange announced that it was
expanding its suite of real estate indices to include the S&P/GRA Commercial Real
Estate Indices, which are a joint venture of Standard & Poor’s and Global Real
Analytics/Charles Schwab Investment Management, the indices spearheaded by Robert
Edelstein. The S&P/GRA index is not a repeat sales index, since the authors conclude
that there are too few sales of commercial real estate for such a method. 3 Their method

2

“Property Derivatives Market Ready to Explode,” Dow Jones Financial News Online, 23 November 2007.
However, David Geltner and Henry Pollakowski of MIT and the company REAL have recently partnered
with Moody’s to produce commercial real estate indices, announced in October 2007, see Geltner and
Pollakowski [2007].

3

8

uses weighted average transaction prices per square foot, and indices are traded for five
major U. S. regions: Northeast, Mid-Atlantic South, Midwest, Desert Mountain and
Pacific West and four property sectors, apartments, office, retail and warehouse. Listings
for futures contracts for all nine of these contracts and for horizons out as far as five years
were posted on October 29, 2007, but trade of these indices has not yet begun.

Repeat Sales Indices
The most important innovation to make real estate derivatives markets possible
has been advances in index technology, notably the advance of electronic technology for
recording home sales prices and the invention and development of repeat sales home
price indices. The repeat sales indices are the natural extension of existing stock price
indices, like the S&P 500. The changes through time in the S&P 500 index are based on
changes in the price of individual stocks. If individual stock prices don’t change, then the
index does not change.
The S&P500 index level does not go up if there is a higher volume of sales in
higher-priced stocks, it is expressly designed so that volume of sales of the individual
stocks does not affect the index, only the changes in their prices do. However, for real
estate, the nontrading problem (the problem that a property of share is not traded at all for
some time) is much more severe, and requires explicit attention.
Karl Case had an important insight in his 1986 paper: the repeat sales method
allows us to construct home price indices that controlled for quality change in an
objective and systematic way. He independently rediscovered the repeat sales (or
repeated measures) price index method, which was previously described by Wyngarten

9

[1927], Wenzlick [1952], and Bailey Muth and Nourse [1963]. The repeat sales method
was not received with any enthusiasm when proposed by these authors. As far as we
know, no ongoing effort to produce repeat sales home price effort was ever launched
before we did that. But Case convinced me that the repeat sales method was essential,
and thus the natural method for index number construction, as we I will expand on here.
The repeat sales method was criticized by Mark and Goldberg [1984] as throwing
away too much data, since only homes for which sales prices at two different dates can be
used. With hedonic methods, in contrast, every single sales observation can be used as an
input to the index. It may sound from this that hedonic methods have an advantage, but,
with the exception of cases where data are very sparse or there is a reason to think that
repeat sales are highly unrepresentative, that is not the case.
I remember Case convincing me that for the purpose of creating indexes for
settlement of financial contracts, the repeat sales method is the only way to go. He
maintained that he could make a price index do anything you might want by choosing
hedonic variables to that end. The problem is that there are too many possible hedonic
variables that might be included, and if there are n possible hedonic variables, then there
are n-factorial possible lists of independent variables in a hedonic regression, often a very
large number. One could strategically vary the list of included variables until one found
the results one wanted. Looking at different hedonic indices for the same city, I
remember seeing substantial differences, which must be due to choices the constructors
made. Thus, the indices have the appearance of hypotheses rather than objective facts.
One is reminded of Ed Leamer’s paper, “Let’s Take the Con out of Econometrics,” when

10

he remarked on the multitude of tricks that econometricians use to get the results they
want, and what they sometimes seem to want is just to come up with a different result. .
Hedonic variables can come into significance in a regression for spurious reasons.
For example, it has been reported that a dummy for air conditioning in hedonic
regressions explaining home prices sometimes has the wrong sign, allegedly in at least
one instance because houses on the shore where there are cool breezes were less likely to
have air conditioning, and also be more valuable since they are on the shore. Thus, if air
conditioning becomes more common over the years, a price index based on hedonic
regression that includes the air conditioning dummy but excludes a variable representing
proximity to shore could show a spurious downtrend in price. If an econometrician
wanted to score points by contradicting earlier indices, a search over the set of all
possible hedonic regressors for the right combination of regressors might well achieve
this. This can leave the public confidence in the indices in disarray, by creating an
impression that no one knows what home prices are doing.
As I argued in my book Macro Markets [1993], one may think of the repeat sales
home price index method as a hedonic regression where there is one dummy hedonic
variable for each house, and no other hedonic variables. That is, we can think of the
repeat sales regression method as taking each sales price as an observation for the
dependent variable (so that the number of observations equals the number of all single
sales, whether in pairs or not) and using as independent variables as complete set of time
dummies (one for each time period) and a complete set of house dummies (one for each
house, the ith dummy being 1 only if the sale represents the ith house). Any house that is
sold only once is in effect “dummied out” in such a regression and has no effect on the

11

results. In that sense, we are not throwing away data by using repeat sales methods; we
are using all the data with a very complete set of hedonic variables that is defined in a
systematic way that eliminates all possible discretion in choosing hedonic variables.
Square foot of property is just an example of one hedonic variable, and taking
some as an index some indicator of price per square foot is in effect running a hedonic
regression and constraining the coefficient of this variable to be one and the constant term
to be zero, so that no regression need be calculated at all. There are so many other
hedonic variables, including for example square foot of lot, quality of neighborhood, etc.,
that the price per square foot alone is only one of very many quality measures. The
constant term in a hedonic regression of price on square feet of floor space will certainly
have a nonzero constant term, which differs across neighborhoods and property types.
It is very important to get the index number construction method right when one
starts trading real estate derivatives. One anomalous reading from an index that has
inadequate controls for quality mix could cost traders millions of dollars and could create
bad feeling for the entire concept of real estate derivatives.
As an exercise, to add some perspective on the potential importance of repeat
sales, I computed a monthly volume-weighted median price of the 500 stocks that
comprise the S&P 500 index, January 2003 to December 2007. I used twelve-month
average volume of sales for each stock as the weight of its price in calculating the
median. This is doing something analogous to what the National Association of Realtors
does when it computes the median price of existing homes. In contrast, S&P takes careful
account of the changing number of shares outstanding for each stock, and, when stocks
are added or removed from the index, the divisor is adjusted appropriately so that there is

12

no sudden spurious jump in the index. But for this exercise, I dispensed with a divisor
altogether, and let the sales volume for each stock determine the weight it got in the
index. The National Association of Realtors of course has no divisor since it takes no
account of changes in the mix of homes, and makes no other adjustments for possible
jumps in the index caused by sudden changes in the mix of sales. The resultant stock
price index that I got looks quite different from the S&P 500. The correlation coefficient
between the monthly changes in the volume-weighted median and the change in the S&P
500 was only 0.38. Moreover, the standard deviation of the monthly percentage change in
the volume-weighted median was over twice as high as that of the S&P 500.
This exercise with the 500 stocks in the S&P 500 index has, to my knowledge, not
been tried before. Apparently no one would choose a volume-weighted stock price index
if they had their a choice, so no one does it, and all stock price indices are repeat-sales
indices. (Volume weighted indices have been used for special purposes, for example, in
constructing measures of the mispricing of options, volume-weighting has been used so
that mispricing of insignificantly-traded options does not overly affect the measure of
mispricing. The volume-weighted stock price has also been used in studies of transaction
costs.)
Repeat sales methods thus do not use new home prices. This is a potentially
important advantage when compared with other indices that incorporate both new and
existing home prices. A problem with including new home prices could at some times be
severe: the median price of a new home in nature of the supply of new homes on the
market changes through time, as market conditions change. If high quality houses in
wealthy neighborhoods and with lots of land are selling well in good school districts at

13

some times, then new home prices will at those times be higher than usual, even if there
is no change at all in the price of individual homes.
Between May 2006 and December 2007, the monthly ratio of new sales to
existing sales (the former from U.S. Census, the latter from the National Association of
Realtors) ranged between 10.4% to 18.2%, a significant variation. But, the fraction of
sales constituting new sales is relatively low, and the difference in price (the median new
home sales price only 10.5% higher on average) so that the weighting anomalies have not
been large. The presence of new sales along with existing sales could, however, become
an important problem in the future, if either the fraction of sales or the relative price of
new homes varies a lot.
The problem with raw new home sales prices is that they are a virtually
meaningless series, for they represent a price of a constantly changing thing. New homes
are built in times and places where the market is strong, and hence are highly
unrepresentative of home prices, even of newer home prices. Certainly, new homes will
not be built at all in areas where home prices have declined far enough that price is below
construction cost. Looking at median new home prices as an indicator of the market is
like looking at the median price of a piece of fruit sold as an indicator of the fruit market,
without regard for the fact that the varieties of fruit sold changes over time.
We can see other important changes in the mix of homes sold. According to the
Massachusetts Association of Realtors, the fraction of Boston-area home sales that were
condos rose from 26.3% in 1998 to 49.5% in 2005, a near-doubling of the fraction
condos. Condos are very different from single-family homes, and if price is corrected for

14

square feet of floor space, may have a very different relation to square feet than do
single-family homes, for, indeed, the latter has substantial land as well.
We of course do not have data on all dimensions of change in mix. But the data
we do have suggests that change in mix can be very important, and should be dealt with
carefully. The best method we have today to take account of change in mix is to use
repeat sales indices, and we have also been producing repeat sales method separately for
price tier (low, medium or high-priced homes) and property type (single-family or condo)
and anyone who wants a specific mix of these types had best use a weighted average of
such repeat-sales indices.

Other Indices
Because of these problems, the Census Department has produced since 1964 a
“Constant Quality (LaSpeyres) Price Index of New One-Family Homes Under
Construction.” The correlation between the monthly change in their median new home
price and the monthly change in their Constant Quality Index May 2006-December 2007
has been only 0.11. This figure is surprisingly low, and indicates the sharp changes in
mix that occur month to month. It is remarkable that the news media seem to accept the
latest median new home price number, and largely ignore the Constant Quality Index,
when the former is so heavily driven by what must be just noise.
In the current (2005) incarnation of the Constant Quality index, Census uses, in
addition to the average square feet of floor area of the house, also the log of square feet,
and 49 other variables that indicate quality and geographical location. They use census
region, construction method, exterior wall material, heating system and air conditioning

15

form, parking facilities, finished basement, number of bathrooms, number of fireplaces,
etc. It is unlikely, however, that even with all these variables, that they can really get a
price of a constant quality new house, because change is the essence of new houses, as
they are built in the precise micro-geographical- area and with precise features that
represent current buyer interests.
A repeat-sales index such as the Case-Shiller index solves all these problems by
following individual homes through time. We could also add to a repeat sales regression
additional hedonic variables, so long as these variables change over time for individual
houses, otherwise there would be multicollinearity. I called such a regression a hedonicrepeated-measures regression, 1993. 4 However, any such method is inherently tied to
taking account of important hedonic variables that change through time for an individual
house, and we do not have good candidates for such variables at the present time.
There are other directions toward which repeat sales indices could be improved.
Childs, Ott and Riddiough [2002] have shown a method that deals with noise in asset
prices that creates a time-filtered value that takes account of autocorrelation. Genesove
and Mayer have shown a regression method that corrects equilibrium home prices for
bias from homeowners holding out for a better price. Bradford Case and John Quigley
[1991] have shown a different way of combining hedonic and repeat sales methodology.
The index methodology is something that may be changed somewhat in the future to
reflect better methodology, though we need to be conservative in our adjustment of
methods if we are to maintain trust of the market, and wary of any methods that might
involvement judgment or the possibility of manipulation.

4

Bradford Case and John Quigley proposed a different way of combining repeat sales and hedonic
methods.

16

Of course we have to throw away data if we want to measure some theoretical
quantity accurately. That is what futures markets in fact systematically do when they
narrowly define the kind of commodity that may be delivered in fulfillment of a futures
contract. In wheat futures, for example, one may be required to deliver hard winter wheat,
of a certain kind and quality, and cannot substitute soft summer wheat for delivery. The
futures exchanges make these rules for they know that if they did otherwise the price of
the wheat delivered would be erratic, for at some times one kind of wheat would be
delivered and at other times another grade would be.

A Regret Theory Approach to Understanding Obstacles to Hedging Real Estate Prices
The UK spread betting markets were shut down just at the time that home prices
in the United Kingdom had begun to fall in 2004 after a huge boom. In December 2004 I
talked to John Austin, who was manager of the property spread betting at IG Index, and
inquired why they had shut down the market. He said “We’re only getting one-way
sentiment.” He said that the volume of trade was rapidly falling off, and that it was as if
everyone had the same opinion about the UK housing market, that it would decline, and
hence there was no basis for trade. This view would be rather ironic, for in fact the UK
property market had a remarkable turn of fortune and prices began to increase rapidly
again starting in 2005.
But it seems that Austin was trying to say to me that people who might have
traded were of two views, there were people who hoped to take short positions in a nonbackwardated market, and people who hoped to take long positions in a backwardated
market. But there were few crossings of orders, so little trade.

17

I also asked him why he thought there was relatively little volume in these bets
even before the drop in home prices, for, when they launched these contracts, the market
in the U.K. was rising. Wouldn’t one think that in a time of such attention to housing
market conditions that a substantial number of people would want to hedge their homes?
He said that they had never promoted spread betting as a hedging device, and that
virtually all of their customers were in it for sport or amusement, not hedging.
Note that the theory he presented for the relatively low volume of the IG Index
property spread betting market is analogous to that which is often used to describe the
tendency of volume of sales on the housing market itself to decline in times of falling
prices. The oft-cited theory is that home owners are reluctant to realize a loss on their
house, and so hold out trying to wait until the market provides them with the profit that
they want. They simply regret having bought at a high price, and wish to avoid the pain
of regret by avoiding selling. Regret theory [Loomis and Sugden, 1982] can model this
behavior, and the Prospect Theory of Kahneman and Tversky [1979] yields similar
implications.
Genesove and Mayer showed, with data on Boston condominium sales, that
indeed those home owners who bought when home prices were higher than currently held
out longer than did home owners who bought when prices were lower. It appears that
there is a pain of regret at selling at a loss, and so people take steps to avoid this pain
even if it means not selling the property for a long time. Psychologists have documented
that pain of regret is actively avoided, even if the means to do so represent deliberate self
deception.

18

Case and I have been doing surveys of recent home buyers and sellers and asked
those who had had trouble selling their house, why they did not lower their price:
23n. If your property did not sell, presumably it might have if you had
lowered the asking price more. If you considered doing so but decided
not to, can you say why?
1. My house is worth more than people seem to be willing to pay right
now
2. I can't afford to sell at a lower price
3. By holding out, I will be able to get more later
4. I didn’t want to pay off my low rate mortgage
5. Other:________________________________________________

In our 2007 survey, only 27 of our 300 respondents reported having had trouble selling
their prior house and chose to answer this question. But, for what this is worth, a third of
them picked 1, and a third of them picked 2, 11% picked 3, 0% picked 4 and 22% picked
5. Two thirds of them picked 1 and 2, answers which would appear to be consistent with
the regret theory, and only 11% picked three, which would be a purely rational economic
motivation.
Psychologists say that the pain of regret is something that people like to avoid. If
they have made a mistake that has lost them money, they don’t want to think about it.
In a down market, such as in London in 2004, it is now clear that owners of real
estate are going to lose substantially, because of the inertial nature of housing markets.
One has already lost the expected amount of the loss, in effect, if one is not going to sell
the property, and it will be painful to watch. Therefore, the natural hedgers would like to
tune out and just forget about it.
Suppose the London market is expected to lose 10% over the next year. That is
already a given. A hedger, however, is supposed to be wanting to hedge against the risk
that it will go down 20%. So, the hedger sells a futures contract. If the price of the house
goes down 20%, he is rewarded by the futures contract, so that his total loss (on his

19

house) is only 10%. But, on the other side, if home prices don’t go down at all, then he
still loses 10%.
Maybe that is what John Austin was discovering. If he lowers the price so far that
it would mean that a hedger would lose if prices drop only 5%, they just don’t want to
think about that.
Kahneman and Tversky, the authors of prospect theory, say that people are risk
lovers for losses, that they willing to take big risks to try to get off scot-free, with no loss.
If you take a short futures contract on real estate in a down market, you eliminate the
possibility of getting off scot-free. So, perhaps that is why people don’t want to do it.
They don’t want to face up to the fact that they have lost money.
The reason property is so different from other markets is that it must sometimes
take deep discounts because there are expectations of big price change. Other markets for
liquid assets are nearly random walks. Oil is an example of an existing futures market
that may more closely resemble the futures market for housing. The Nymex futures
market for light sweet crude oil has been in backwardation about half the time.

A Lack of Hedging Demand Theory for the Slowness of Real Estate Derivatives to
Develop
Another theory has been proposed to explain the relative lack of success of
hedging markets for real estate: that owner occupants, if not other investors, are self
hedged, and hence do not need to hedge their risks. In its simplest form, the argument is
that people generally expect to live in a house forever, and so if they will never sell their
property, the price it attains in the market is irrelevant to them. If that is the case, then

20

hedging their home price risks might actually create problems, rather than solve them, for
should home prices rise, then a homeowner who had shorted the market would have to
come up with money to pay on the risk-management contract.
Sinai and Souleles argued that for owner occupants, purchasing a home may be a
way of hedging volatility of rent risk. They showed evidence that in cities with more
volatile rent, homeownership rates are slightly higher. It is indeed plausible that one
motive for owning a home could be to hedge rent risk.
Even if there is a self-hedging aspect to holding real estate, it is certainly not the
case that every owner occupant is at the optimal exposure to real estate risk. There are
lots of special situations. Some people are nearing retirement and planning to leave the
housing market, and may be worried about the amount of resources that will be available
to them in retirement. Some are counting on reverse mortgages to sustain them in
retirement, and are worried about the amount that they can get. Some people are living in
a volatile geographic area and contemplating moving to another area. Some are
contemplating moving to a volatile area. Some are renting and hoping to buy soon. Some
are owning and planning to trade up soon. Some are owning second or third homes that
they are fixing up, and they are wishing to use their skills in fixing up homes, not their
skills in predicting the real estate market. Some work in the construction industry, and see
their exposure to the housing market increased beyond that of the exposure through their
home. Some are concerned about a possible fall in the real estate market wiping out their
home equity and making it impossible for them to sell and move, and making it
impossible to borrow against their home.

21

And, of course, owner occupants are hardly the only players in the single-family
home market. There are professionals in real estate: builders, electricians, plumbers,
whose fortunes depend on real estate. And there are the portfolio managers, including
hedge funds, who have in effect leveraged positions in housing because of their strategy
in the market for RMBS or CDOs. And there are the mortgage insurers and the GSEs
who guarantee mortgages, who are vulnerable to changes in home prices. Defaults on
mortgages may be thought of as exercises on options, and these options become in the
money when home prices fall. Home prices thus explain a substantial portion of mortgage
defaults (Deng, Quigley and Van Order 2000, Case and Shiller 1996].

The Prospects for Real Estate Derivatives
I do not believe that either of these theories, the regret theory or the lack of
hedging need theory, are the primary reason for the slowness of growth of the derivative
markets for real estate.
The regret theory just does not seem powerful enough to be a long-term obstacle
to hedging of housing market risk. In a time of a housing downturn, the decline in volume
of sales in the cash market for homes is typically no more than 40%. If we applied that
ratio to the volume of trade in single-family home derivatives in the present market, it
would suggest that there still should be a huge market.
Moreover, the lack of hedging need theory also does not seem powerful enough.
Given all the special reasons discussed in the preceding section that different people have
different feelings that they are over- or under-exposed to real estate risk, it is
inconceivable that there would be no interest in hedging real estate risk. This is especially

22

so at the present time, when talk about the real estate market is everywhere, when a
“subprime crisis” related fundamentally to the real estate market is described as the
biggest risk facing the national economy. I think that the problem is rather more the
problems that are inherent in getting any new markets started, problems that are
heightened when the new market is very unusual.
The principal problem, as I see it, in the CME futures market is that it just does
not have enough liquidity. I spoke to institutional investors who considered placing
substantial orders on our CME futures contracts. But, these people reported to me that
they saw relatively large bid-asked spreads and only small positions offered. One of them
told me that, upon looking at the book, he decided to wait a year and look again. The
greatest problem here is the dearth of market makers committed to the CME futures, and
capital market hiccups this year have not been exactly conducive to institutions assuming
and trading new exposures.
Starting a new market is like opening a nightclub. Lots of people will want to
come if lots of people are there. But, if few people are there, few people want to come.
Somehow, nightclubs do get started. So too, do real estate futures markets, but it will take
time. The liquidity of the futures and options markets may be enhanced as other
derivatives, such as index-linked notes, forwards and swaps take hold.
Given the current lack of liquidity in the backwardated futures markets, the regret
theory explanation of low volume of trade effect may be amplified at the present time.
With little liquidity, the prices in these markets are not regarded as authoritative; they do
not form a standard of value that is widely cited. Hence, people do not see the loss
predicted in these market as a sunk cost, they do not view these as givens. They may

23

think at the present time that they can avoid the pain of regret by choosing to ignore
them.
The lack of liquidity in the current markets may also amplify the willingness of
people to neglect their hedging demands, and to imagine that they are doing enough to
hedge their real estate risks. If one can do nothing to hedge one’s real estate risks, then
one spends very little time developing one’s thinking about these risks. After the risks
become hedgeable, only then will thinking about the need for hedging develop, and only
then will expertise on how to hedge these risks be promulgated.
Once liquidity develops further in the real estate hedging markets, we might
expect to see less of a problem from regret, and more of a willingness of investors to
think hard about how they should be hedging their real estate risks. At that point, we may
hope to see derivative markets for real estate to come into their full flower.

24

References
Bailey, Martin J., Richard F. Muth, and Hugh O. Nourse, "A Regression Method for
Real Estate Price Index Construction," Journal of the American Statistical
Association, pp. 933-42, December, 1963.
Case, Bradford, and John Quigley, “The Dynamics of Real Estate Prices,” Review of
Economics and Statistics, 73(1):50-58, February 1991.
Case, Karl E., “The Market for Single-Family Homes in Boston, 1979-1985,” New
England Economic Review, May/June 1986.
Case, Karl E., and John M. Quigley, “How Housing Booms Unwind: Income Effects,
Wealth Effects, and Feedbacks through Financial Markets,” unpublished paper,
Wellesley college, October 2007.
Case, Karl E., and Robert J. Shiller, "The Efficiency of the Market for Single Family
Homes," American Economic Review, 79:1, 125-37, March, 1989.
__________,"A Decade of Boom and Bust in Single Family Home Prices: Boston and
Los Angeles, 1983-1993," Revue D'Economie Financiere, pp. 389-407,
December 1993. Reprinted in New England Economic Review, pp. 40-51,
March/April 1994.
__________, “Forecasting Prices and Excess Returns in the Housing Market,” AREUEA
Journal, 18:3, 253-73, 1990.
__________,"Mortgage Default Risk and Real Estate Prices: The Use of Index Based
Futures and Options in Real Estate," Journal of Housing Research, 7:2, 243-58,
1996.
__________, “Prices of Single Family Homes Since 1970: The Experience of Four
Cities,” New England Economic Review, 1988
Case, Karl E., John M. Quigley, and Robert J. Shiller, “Home-Buyers, Housing, and the
Macroeconomy,” in Anthony Richards and Tim Robinson, editors, Asset Prices
and Monetary Policy, Reserve Bank of Australia, 2004, pp. 149-88.
Case, Karl E., Robert J. Shiller and Allan N. Weiss, "Index-Based Futures and Options
Trading in Real Estate, Journal of Portfolio Management, Winter 1993.
Childs, Paul D., Steven H. Ott, and Timothy J. Riddiough, “Optimal Valuation of Noisy
Real Assets,” Real Estate Economics, 30(3):385-414, 2002.

25

Deng, Yongheng, John M. Quigley, and Robert van Order, “Mortgage Terminations,
Heterogeneity, and the Exercise of Mortgage Options,” Econometrica, 68(2):275301, March 2000.
Geltner, David, and Henry Pollakowski, “A Set of Indices for Trading Commercial Real
Estate Based on the Real Capital Analytics Transaction Prices Database,” MIT
Center for Real Estate, September 26, 2007.
Genesove, David, and Christopher Mayer, “Equity and Time to Sale in the Real Estate
Market,” American Economic Review, 87(3):255-69, June, 1997.
Goetzmann, William, Andrew Caplin, Eric Hangen, Elizabeth Prentice, John Rodkin,
Matthew Spiegel, and Tom Skinner, “Home Equity Insurance: A Pilot Project,”
paper presented at the Lincoln Institute of Land Policy Conference “Housing, the
Built Environment: Access, Finance, Policy,” December 2007.
Gyourko, Joseph, Christopher Mayer, and Todd Sinai, “Superstar Cities,” NBER
Working Paper No. 12355, July 2006.
Glaeser, Edward L., and Joseph Gyourko, “Housing Dynamics,” NBER Working Paper
No. 12787, December 2006.
Kahneman, Daniel, and Amos Tversky, “Prospect Theory,” Econometrica, 1979.
Leamer, Edward, “Let’s Take the Con out of Econometrics,” American Economic Review
73(1):31-43, March 1983.
Loomis, Graham, and Robert Sugden, “Regret Theory: An Alternative Theory of
Rational Choice under Uncertainty,” Economic Journal, 92:805-824, December
1982.
Mark, Jonathan H., and Michael A. Goldberg, "Alternative Housing Price Indices: An
Evaluation," Journal of the American Real Estate and Urban Economics
Association (AREUEA Journal) 12(1):30-49, Spring 1984.
Palmquist, Raymond B., "Alternative Techniques for Developing Real Estate Price
Indexes," Review of Economics and Statistics, 62: 442-80, August, 1980.
Shiller, Robert J., Macro Markets: Creating Institutions for Managing Society’s largest
Economic Risks, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1993.
Shiller, Robert J., "Measuring Asset Value for Cash Settlement in Derivative Markets:
Hedonic Repeated Measures Indices and Perpetual Futures," Journal of Finance,
68:911-31, July 1993.
Shiller, Robert J., New Financial Order: Risk in the 21st Century, Princeton NJ: Princeton
University Press, 2003.

26

Sinai, Todd, “The Risk of Home Ownership,” unpublished paper, University of
Pennsylvania, 2007.
Sinai, Todd, and Nicholas Soulelis, “Owner-Occupied Housing as a Hedge against Rent
Risk,” unpublished paper University of Pennsylvania, December 2004.
Wenzlick, Roy, "As I See the Fluctuations in the Selling Prices of Single-Family
Residences," The Real Estate Analyst, 21:541-8, December 24, 1952.
Wyngarden, Herman, "An Index of Local Real Estate Prices," Michigan Business
Studies, Vol. 1, No. 2, Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, 1927.

27

