                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     PANEL DATA ESTIMATES OF THE PRODUCTION FUNCTION AND PRODUCT
                   AND LABOR MARKET IMPERFECTIONS

                                          Sabien Dobbelaere
                                           Jacques Mairesse

                                        Working Paper 13975
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13975


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2008




We are grateful for helpful comments and suggestions to Susantu Basu, Stéphane Bonhomme, Michael
Burda, Bronwyn Hall, Benoit Mulkay, Franz Palm, Mark Rogers, Chad Syversson, Philip Vermeulen,
and other participants at the ZEW Conference on the Economics of Innovation and Patenting (Mannheim,
2005), the International Industrial Organization Conference (Boston, MA, 2006), the NBER Productivity
Seminar (Cambridge, MA, 2006), the ECB/CEPR 2006 Labour Market Workshop on Wage and Labour
Cost Dynamics (Frankfurt, 2006), the ZEW Workshop on Institutions and the Labour Market (Mannheim,
2007), the Far Eastern Meeting of the Econometric Society (Taipei, 2007), the International Conference
on Panel Data (Xiamen, 2007), the European Meeting of the Econometric Society (Budapest, 2007),
the European Association for Research in Industrial Economics Conference (Toulouse, 2008) and
seminars at CREST-INSEE, Maastricht University, l'Université de Rennes 1, Centre for European
Economic Research (ZEW), l'Université de Namur (FUNDP) and Tinbergen Institute (TI). The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Sabien Dobbelaere and Jacques Mairesse. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Panel Data Estimates Of The Production Function And Product And Labor Market Imperfections
Sabien Dobbelaere and Jacques Mairesse
NBER Working Paper No. 13975
May 2008
JEL No. C23,D21,J51,L13

                                                ABSTRACT

Consistent with two models of imperfect competition in the labor market, the efficient bargaining model
and the monopsony model, we provide two extensions of a microeconomic version of Hall's framework
for estimating price-cost margins. We show that both product and labor market imperfections generate
a wedge between factor elasticities in the production function and their corresponding shares in revenue,
that can be characterized by a "joint market imperfections parameter". Using an unbalanced panel
of 10646 French firms in 38 manufacturing industries over the period 1978-2001, we can classify these
industries into six different regimes depending on the type of competition in the product and the labor
market. By far the most predominant regime is one of imperfect competition in the product market
and efficient bargaining in the labor market (IC-EB), followed by a regime of imperfect competition
in the product market and perfect competition or right-to-manage bargaining in the labor market (IC-PR),
and by a regime of perfect competition in the product market and monopsony in the labor market (PC-
MO). For each of these three predominant regimes, we assess within-regime firm differences in the
estimated average price-cost mark-up and rent-sharing or labor supply elasticity parameters, following
the Swamy methodology to determine the degree of true firm dispersion. As a way to assess the plausibility
of our findings in the case of the dominant regime (IC-EB), we also relate our industry and firm-level
estimates of price-cost mark-up and relative extent of rent sharing to industry characteristics and firm-specific
variables respectively.


Sabien Dobbelaere
Faculty of Economics and Business Administration
VU University Amsterdam
De Boelelaan 1105
1081 HV AMSTERDAM
THE NETHERLANDS
sdobbelaere@feweb.vu.nl

Jacques Mairesse
CREST-INSEE
15, Boulevard Gabriel PERI
92245 MALAKOFF CEDEX
FRANCE
and NBER
mairesse@ensae.fr
1       Introduction
In a world of perfect competition, the output contribution of individual production factors
equals their respective revenue shares. In numerous markets, however, market imperfections
and distortions are prevalent. The most common sources for market power in product markets
are product di¤erentiation, barriers to entry and imperfect information. The sources of market
power are similar in labor markets. The labor economics literature is currently dominated by
rent-sharing models where, for example, costs of hiring, …ring and training can be exploited by
employees to gain market power. Those models generate wage di¤erentials that are unrelated to
productivity di¤erentials and hinder the competitive market mechanism. Recently, however, the
monopsony model has regained considerable attention. In this model, contrary to the standard
rent-sharing models, search frictions or heterogeneous worker preferences for job characteristics
generate upward sloping labor supply curves to individual …rms, thus giving some market power
to employers.

Since the 1970s, models of imperfect competition have separately permeated many …elds of
economics ranging from industrial organization (see Bresnahan, 1989; Schmalensee, 1989 for
surveys) to international trade (e.g. Krugman, 1979; Brander and Spencer, 1985) to labor eco-
nomics (see Booth, 1995; Manning, 2003 for surveys). In recent years, there has been a small
number of studies that simultaneously consider imperfections in the product and the labor mar-
kets (Bughin, 1996; Crépon et al., 1999, 2005; Dobbelaere, 2004; Dumont et al., 2006; Neven et
al., 2006; Abraham et al., 2009; Boulhol et al., 2010).1 By estimating jointly price-cost mark-
ups in the product market and the extent of rent sharing in the labor market, these studies
contribute to bridging the gap between the econometric literature on product market imperfec-
tions and the one on labor market imperfections. They basically follow two closely related but
distinct approaches: one which entails estimating a structural model including the full set of
explicitly speci…ed factor share equations and the production function (Bughin, 1996; Dumont
et al. 2006 and Neven et al., 2006); the other extending Hall’s (1988) framework which relies
on estimating a reduced form equation. Following this second approach and using a large panel
data sample of French manufacturing …rms, this paper on the one hand extends the framework
of our previous work and on the other hand provides a detailed analysis of product and labor
market imperfections as two major sources of discrepancies between input factor prices and
marginal productivities. Thus it also contributes to the econometric literature on estimating
    1 For   theoretical contributions on this issue, we refer to Nickell (1999) and Blanchard and Giavazzi (2003).




                                                           2
microeconomic production functions with …rm panel data.2

We consider two extensions of a microeconomic version of Hall’s (1988) framework, respectively
consistent with a standard labor bargaining model and a model of …rm monopsony in the labor
market. The …rst extension follows Crépon et al. (1999, 2005) and presumes that employees
possess a degree of market power when negotiating with the …rm over wages and employment
(e¢ cient bargaining model; McDonald and Solow, 1981). The second extension abstains from
the assumption that the labor supply curve facing an individual employer is perfectly elastic
(monopsony model; Manning, 2003). By comparing the factor elasticities for labor and materials
as directly estimated in …rm production functions with their revenue shares, we obtain an
estimate of a parameter           of joint market imperfections, capturing (im)perfect competition in
both the product and the labor market. Depending on the sign and statistical signi…cance of
this estimate, we can assess if the labor bargaining model or the monopsony model prevails, and
hence derive estimates of the price-cost mark-up and extent of rent-sharing parameters                     and
  in the …rst case, or the price-cost mark-up and labor supply elasticity parameters                    and "N
                                                                                                             w

in the second case.

We use an unbalanced panel of 10646 French …rms in 38 manufacturing industries over the
period 1978-2001 to estimate a standard Cobb-Douglas production function for each of these
38 industries. From the estimated industry-speci…c output elasticities for labor and materials
and from their average revenue shares, we derive the industry-speci…c joint market imperfections
parameter       j.   Depending on its sign and statistical signi…cance, we classify industries in distinct
regimes that di¤er in terms of the type of competition prevailing in both markets. We thus
distinguish 6 regimes:

 (1) Perfect competition in the product market and perfect competition or right-to-manage
      bargaining in the labor market, noted P C-P R

 (2) Imperfect competition in the product market and perfect competition or right-to-manage
      bargaining in the labor market, noted IC-P R

 (3) Perfect competition in the product market and e¢ cient bargaining in the labor market,
      noted P C-EB

 (4) Perfect competition in the product market and monopsony in the labor market, noted
      P C-M O
  2 For   a survey of this literature, see Griliches and Mairesse (1998) and Ackerberg et al. (2006).



                                                         3
  (5) Imperfect competition in the product market and e¢ cient bargaining in the labor market,
      noted IC-EB

  (6) Imperfect competition in the product market and monopsony in the labor market, noted
      IC-M O

IC-EB is by far the most predominant regime, followed by IC-P R and P C-M O. For each of
these regimes separately, we do not only consider industry di¤erences in the estimated labor
and materials output elasticities and shares and in the estimated product and labor market
imperfection parameters, but we also investigate the underlying …rm-level di¤erences in these
various parameters. Following Mairesse and Griliches (1990), we adopt a random coe¢ cient
framework and use the Swamy (1970) variance decomposition approach to determine the degree
of true …rm dispersion. Finally, as a way to assess the plausibility of our …ndings in the case of
the dominant regime (IC-EB), we also relate our industry and …rm-level estimates of price-cost
mark-up and relative extent of rent sharing to industry characteristics and …rm-speci…c variables
respectively.3

We proceed as follows. Section 2 explains our theoretical framework and identi…cation strategy.
Section 3 presents the data and shows for illustration the estimates of average output elasticities
and average market imperfection parameters that we …nd for manufacturing industries as a
   3 Our   analysis is most closely related to Mairesse and Griliches (1990), Crépon et al. (1999, 2005) and Dobbe-
laere (2004). Using a sample of about 450 manufacturing …rms in France, 450 manufacturing …rms in the US
and 850 manufacturing …rms in Japan over the period 1967-1979, Mairesse and Griliches (1990) estimate the
degree of true dispersion in the output-capital coe¢ cient of a production function in the three countries. Using
a sample of 1000 French manufacturing …rms over the period 1986-1992, Crépon et al. (1999, 2005) estimate a
Solow residual equation that gives estimates of average price-cost mark-up and average rent-sharing parameters
at the manufacturing level. Using a sample of 7086 Belgian …rms in 18 manufacturing industries over the pe-
riod 1988-1995, Dobbelaere (2004) also uses the Solow residual normalization to analyze industry di¤erences in
estimated average price-cost mark-up and rent-sharing parameters. However, we believe that our article con-
tributes to the current state of research in distinct respects. Our analysis goes one step further than Mairesse and
Griliches (1990). From the estimated output-labor and output-materials coe¢ cients of a production function,
we derive estimates of product and labor market imperfection parameters and determine the degree of true dis-
persion in these parameters. Three important aspects distinguish our work from Crépon et al. (1999, 2005) and
Dobbelaere (2004). First, instead of using the Solow residual normalization, we follow the productivity literature
and estimate a production function to derive product and labor market imperfection parameters. Second, we
do not impose a priori the e¢ cient bargaining framework upon the data but we classify industries based on
the type of competition prevailing in the product and the labor market. Third, we quantify industry as well as
within-regime …rm di¤erences in our market imperfection parameters and investigate how the industry and …rm
estimates correlate with industry-speci…c and …rm-speci…c variables respectively.


                                                         4
whole. In Section 4 we …rst classify the 38 manufacturing industries in regimes di¤ering in
terms of the type of competition that is prevalent in the product and the labor market; we
then investigate industry di¤erences in the estimated parameters of interest within the three
predominant regimes; and in the case of the dominant regime we …nally look at the plausibility
of such di¤erences in light of a few possibly related industry characteristics. In Section 5 we
brie‡y recall the Swamy methodology to decompose an estimated …rm parameter variance in a
sampling variance and a true variance, and then apply it to assess within-regime …rm di¤erences
in the market imperfection parameters for the three predominant regimes; last, in the case
of the dominant regime similarly to what we do to con…rm the plausibility of the industry
average estimates, we relate the …rm-level market imperfection parameter estimates to a few
…rm individual characteristics.



2    Theoretical and econometric framework
Hall’s (1988) approach for evaluating price-cost mark-ups hinges on one crucial assumption,
that is, …rms consider input prices as given prior to deciding their level of inputs. In other
words, there is no imperfect competition in the labor market. Consistent with two models of
imperfect competition in the labor market that are widespread in the literature, the e¢ cient
bargaining model and the monopsony model, we re‡ect on two extensions of Hall’s framework.
First, following Crépon et al. (1999, 2005), we presume that, for example, costs of …ring, hiring
and training can be exploited by employees to gain market power when negotiating with the
…rm over wages and employment (e¢ cient bargaining). In this framework, the …rm price-cost
mark-up and the extent of rent sharing generate a wedge between output elasticities and factor
shares. Second, we abstain from the assumption that the labor supply curve facing an individual
employer is perfectly elastic (monopsony model). In this setting, the …rm price-cost mark-up and
the …rm wage elasticity of the labor supply curve elicit deviations between marginal products
of input factors and input prices. One point should be clari…ed from the outset. We do not
envisage a labor market where there is monopsony sensu stricto, i.e. where the employer is the
sole employer in the labor market. Instead, the labor market that we have in mind is more
accurately described in terms of oligopsony or monopsonistic competition. The former refers
to a situation where employer market power persists despite competition with other employers.
The latter is equivalent to oligopsony with free entry, driving employer’s pro…ts to zero. Both
extensions of Hall’s framework entail estimating a reduced-form equation that allows us to



                                               5
identify the key parameters –measures of product and labor market imperfections–derived from
theory.


2.1       Perfect competition in the product and the labor market

We start from a production function Qit =                                     it F (Nit ;     Mit ; Kit ), where i is a …rm index, t
a time index, N is labor, M is material input, K is capital.                                                     = Ae      i +ut + it   , with       an
                                                                                                           it                                    i

unobserved …rm-speci…c e¤ect, ut a year-speci…c intercept and                                                   it    a random component, is
an index of technical change or “true” total factor productivity. Denoting the logarithm of
Qit ; Nit ; Mit ; Kit and           it   by qit ; nit ; mit ; kit and             it   respectively, the logarithmic speci…cation
of the production function gives:

                                     qit = ("Q             Q             Q
                                             N )it nit + ("M )it mit + ("K )it kit +                             it                                  (1)

where ("Q
        J )it (J = N; M; K) is the elasticity of output with respect to input factor J.


Following Solow (1957), …rms act as price takers in product and input markets. In a competitive
                                                                                                         Pit
environment, the …rm prices at marginal cost (CQ )it such that                                         (CQ )it        = 1. Assuming that labor
and material are variable input factors, short run pro…t maximization implies the following two
…rst-order conditions:
                                                             ("Q
                                                               N )it = (          N )it                                                              (2)

                                                             ("Q
                                                               M )it = (          M )it                                                              (3)
                         wit Nit                            jit Mit
where (    N )it   =     Pit Qit   and (     M )it      =   Pit Qit      are the share of labor costs and material costs in
total revenue respectively.

Assuming that the elasticity of scale,                         it    = ("Q         Q         Q
                                                                         N )it + ("M )it + ("K )it , is known, the capital

elasticity can be expressed as:

                                                 ("Q
                                                   K )it =          it    (    N )it      (    M )it                                                 (4)

Inserting Eqs. (2), (3) and (4) in Eq. (1) and rearranging terms gives the following expression:


                   qit      kit = (      N )it   [nit       kit ] + (     M )it   [mit         kit ] + [    it         1] kit +   it                 (5)




                                                                          6
2.2        Imperfect competition in the product market

2.2.1      Perfectly competitive labor market / Right-to-manage bargaining

Perfectly competitive labor market

As in the original Hall approach, …rms operate under imperfect competition in the product
market and act as price takers in the input markets. Short-run pro…t maximization implies the
following two …rst-order conditions:

                                                             ("Q
                                                               N )it =          it   (   N )it                                          (6)

                                                             ("Q
                                                               M )it =          it   (   M )it                                          (7)
                      Pit
where      it   =   (CQ )it   refers to the mark-up of output price Pit over marginal cost (CQ )it .4

Assuming that the elasticity of scale (                       it )   is known, the capital elasticity can be expressed as:

                                              ("Q
                                                K )it =       it       it   (   N )it            it   (   M )it                         (8)

Inserting Eqs. (6), (7) and (8) in Eq. (1) and rearranging terms gives the following expression:


                qit         kit =   it   [(   N )it   [nit     kit ] + (        M )it    [mit         kit ]] + [   it   1] kit +   it   (9)

Estimating Eq. (9) allows the identi…cation of the mark-up of price over marginal cost.

Right-to-manage bargaining

Let us abstain from the assumption that labor is priced competitively. We assume that the
workers and the …rm bargain over wages (w) but that the …rm retains the right to set employment
(N ) unilaterally (right-to-manage bargaining; Nickell and Andrews, 1983). Since, as in the
perfectly competitive labor market case, labor and material input are unilaterally determined
by the …rm from pro…t maximization [see Eqs. (6) and (7) respectively], the mark-up of price
over marginal cost that follows from Eq. (9) is not only consistent with the assumption that
the labor market is perfectly competitive but also with the less restrictive right-to-manage
bargaining assumption.
   4 The  short-run pro…t function of an imperfectly competitive …rm i at time t is given by: it = Pit Qit wit Nit
                                                                                          h           i 1
jit Mit . Pro…t maximization with respect to labor and materials implies: ("Q                  sit it
                                                                                 N )it = 1 + ! it         ( N )it and
            h           i 1
  Q              sit it
("M )it = 1 + !             ( M )it respectively, with sit market share, it the conjectural variations parameter
                       it
(= 1 if …rms play Nash in quantities and = 0 if they play Nash in prices) and ! it the price elasticity of demand.
                                                           h             i 1
Pro…t maximization with respect to output levels implies: 1 + sit ! it
                                                                      it
                                                                             = Pit = it with Pit the output
                                                                              (CQ )it
price and CQ it the marginal cost (see Levinsohn, 1993 for details). Substitution leads to Eqs. (6) and (7).


                                                                            7
2.2.2         E¢ cient bargaining

Each …rm operates under imperfect competition in the product market. Following Crépon et
al. (1999, 2005), we assume that the workers and the …rm are involved in an e¢ cient bargaining
procedure with both wages (w) and labor (N ) being the subject of an agreement (McDonald
and Solow, 1981). It is the objective of the workers to maximize U (wit ; Nit ) = Nit wit + (N it
Nit )wit , where N it is the competitive employment level (0 < Nit                                   N it ) and wit        wit is the
reservation wage. Consistent with capital quasi-…xity, it is the …rm’s objective to maximize
its short-run pro…t function:               it   = Rit    wit Nit          jit Mit , where Rit = Pit Qit stands for total
revenue. The outcome of the bargaining is the asymmetric generalized Nash solution to:

                                                                               it                               1
               max             Nit wit + N it     Nit wit          N it wit         fRit    wit Nit     jit Mit g     it
                                                                                                                                (10)
         wit ; Nit ; Mit


where         it   2 [0; 1] represents the bargaining power of the workers.

Material input is unilaterally determined by the …rm from pro…t maximization: (RM )it = jit
with (RM )it the marginal revenue of material input, which directly leads to Eq. (7).

Maximization with respect to the wage rate and labor respectively gives the following …rst-order
conditions:


                                                         it         Rit       wit Nit      jit Mit
                                      wit = wit +                                                                               (11)
                                                    1         it                 Nit

                                                               Rit        (RN )it Nit       jit Mit
                                    wit = (RN )it +      it                                                                     (12)
                                                                               Nit
with (RN )it the marginal revenue of labor.

Solving simultaneously Eqs. (11) and (12) leads to the following expression for the contract
curve:
                                                         (RN )it = wit                                                          (13)

Eq. (13) shows that under risk neutrality, the …rm’s decision about employment equals the one
of a (non-bargaining) neoclassical …rm that maximizes its short-run pro…t at the reservation
wage.

We denote the marginal revenue by (RQ )it and the marginal product of labor by (QN )it . Given
                       Pit
that     it    =     (RQ )it   in equilibrium, we can express the marginal revenue of labor as (RN )it =




                                                                    8
                                                             Pit (QN )it
(RQ )it (QN )it = (RQ )it ("Q
                            N )it
                                              Qit
                                              Nit       =                            . Using this expression together with Eq. (13),
                                                                      it

the elasticity of output with respect to labor can be written as:

                                                                           wit Nit
                                          ("Q
                                            N )it =             it                                   =           it   (       N )it                                                      (14)
                                                                           Pit Qit

Given that we can rewrite Eq. (11) as (                              N )it       =(             N )it        +        1
                                                                                                                              it
                                                                                                                                        [1        (   N )it          (    M )it ],   Eq. (14)
                                                                                                                               it

is equivalent to:
                            ("Q
                              N )it =         it   (    N )it              it
                                                                                          it
                                                                                                    [1           (        N )it               (   M )it ]                                (15)
                                                                                1              it

In the remainder of the article, we denote                       1
                                                                         it
                                                                                     by         it .     Note that Eq. (15) discriminates between
                                                                            it

the right-to-manage bargaining setting and the e¢ cient bargaining setting. In the right-to-
manage model, employment is highly endogenous with respect to wages. As in the perfectly
competitive labor market case, the marginal revenue of labor is equal to the wage whereas in
the e¢ cient bargaining model, employment does not directly depend on the bargained wage.
Hence, as discussed in Section 2.2.1, the null hypothesis of                                                                       it   = 0 in Eq. (15) does not only
correspond to the assumption that the labor market is competitive but also to the less restrictive
right-to-manage bargaining assumption.

Assuming that the elasticity of scale,                           it      = ("Q         Q         Q
                                                                             N )it + ("M )it + ("K )it , is known, the capital

elasticity can be expressed as:

              ("Q
                K )it =      it      it   (   N )it      +      it
                                                                                it
                                                                                          [1             (   N )it                  (    M )it ]            it   (       M )it           (16)
                                                                     1               it

Estimating the production function:


                 qit   kit = ("Q
                               N )it [nit                   kit ] + ("Q
                                                                      M )it [mit                                  kit ] + [                  it       1] kit +           it              (17)

allows us to obtain estimates of (1) the mark-up of price over marginal cost and (2) the extent
of rent sharing. Indeed, from Eq. (17) it follows that:

                                  ("Q
                                    M )it              ("Q
                                                         N )it                                 it            1            (        N )it          (    M )it
                       it   =                                  =                it                                                                                                       (18)
                                  ( M )it              ( N )it                       1              it                             (     N )it

to which we refer as the parameter of joint market imperfections in the remainder of the article.5
  5 From   Eq. (18), it is clear that to accommodate two imperfectly competitive markets, we need at least two
variable input factors to identify the model. Going beyond Hall (1988) is hence not possible when starting from
a value added speci…cation.




                                                                                     9
2.2.3   Monopsony

The model of Hall (1988) is based on the assumption that there is a potentially in…nite supply of
employees having a free and costless choice of a large number of employers for whom they might
work. Competition among these employers then results in a single market wage. A small wage
cut by the employer will result in the immediate resignation of all existing workers. In contrast,
the wage elasticity of the labor supply curve facing an individual employer is not in…nite when
the labor market is characterized by monopsony. There are a number of reasons why labor
supply might be less than perfectly elastic, creating rents to jobs. Paramount among these
are the absence of perfect information on alternative possible jobs (Burdett and Mortensen,
1998), moving costs (Boal and Ransom, 1997) and heterogeneous worker preferences for job
characteristics (Bhaskar and To, 1999; Bhaskar et al., 2002) on the supply side, and e¢ ciency
wages with diseconomies of scale in monitoring (Boal and Ransom, 1997) and entry costs on
the part of competing …rms on the demand side. All these factors give employers nonnegligible
market power over their workers.

Consider a …rm that operates under imperfect competition in the product market and faces a
labor supply Nit (wit ), which is an increasing function of the wage wit . Both Nit (wit ) and the
inverse of this relationship wit (Nit ) are referred to as the labor supply curve of the individual
…rm. The monopsonist …rm’s objective is to maximize its short-run pro…t function, taking the
labor supply curve as given:

                 max        (wit ; Nit ; Mit ) = Rit (Nit ; Mit )      wit (Nit ) Nit   jit Mit                 (19)
                Nit ; Mit


Maximization with respect to material input gives (RM )it = jit , which is equivalent to Eq. (7).

Maximization with respect to labor gives the following …rst-order condition:

                                                        ("N
                                                          w )it
                                              wit =               (RN )it                                       (20)
                                                      1 + ("N
                                                            w )it

where ("N
        w )it 2 <+ represents the wage elasticity of the labor supply. In the remainder of the
                      ("N
                        w )it
article, we denote   1+("N
                                 by   it .   From Eq. (20), it follows that the degree of monopsony power,
                         w )it
              (RN )it
measured by     wit ,   depends negatively on ("N
                                                w )it . The more inelastic the labor supply curve

to the individual …rm, the wider the gap between the marginal revenue of labor and the wage.
                                                                              (RN )it wit         1
In the tradition of Pigou (1924) and Hicks (1932), this wedge                     wit       =   ("N
                                                                                                          is referred
                                                                                                  w )it

to in the literature as the rate of exploitation. Rewriting Eq. (20) gives the following expression
for the elasticity of output with respect to labor:


                                                          10
                                                                           1
                                    ("Q
                                      N )it =      it   (   N )it   1+                                    (21)
                                                                         ("N
                                                                           w )it



Assuming again that the elasticity of scale, it = ("Q          Q          Q
                                                     N )it + ("M )it + ("K )it , is known, estimation
                          h                                                                          i
of the production function qit kit = ("Q  N )it [nit kit ] + ("Q
                                                               M )it [mit   kit ] + [ it 1] kit + it
allows the identi…cation of (1) the mark-up of price over marginal cost and (2) the labor supply
elasticity of the …rm. Indeed, in a monopsony labor market, the parameter of joint market
imperfections (   it )   is expressed as:

                                             ("Q
                                               M )it        ("Q
                                                              N )it               1
                                    it   =                          =      it                             (22)
                                             ( M )it        ( N )it             ("N
                                                                                  w )it


2.3    Econometric identi…cation and estimation

The data features that are key to empirical identi…cation of the product and labor market
imperfection parameters are the di¤erences between the estimated output elasticities of labor
and materials and their revenue shares. Depending on the labor market setting, it follows from
the parameter of joint market imperfections that these di¤erences can be mapped into either the
…rm price-cost mark-up and the extent of rent sharing [Eq. (18)] or the …rm price-cost mark-up
and the …rm labor supply elasticity [Eq. (22)].

Since our study aims at assessing industry and within-industry (or more precisely within-regime)
…rm di¤erences in product and labor market imperfection parameters, we estimate average
parameters. There are many sources of variation in input shares. Some of them are related
to variation in hours of work, machinery, capacity utilization (variation in the business cycle).
When deriving our parameters of interest, we want to abstract from such sources of variation.
Therefore, we assume average input shares. More precisely, we derive average product and
labor market imperfection parameters by comparing the estimated average production function
coe¢ cients, i.e. the estimated average output elasticities of labor and materials, with their
average input shares. The empirical speci…cation that acts as the bedrock for the regressions in
this article is hence given by:

                     qit     kit = "Q
                                    N [nit       kit ] + "Q
                                                          M [mit        kit ] + [         1] kit +   it   (23)

The estimated joint market imperfections parameter b determines the regime characterizing
the type of competition prevailing in the product and the labor market. A priori, 6 distinct
regimes are possible: (1) perfect competition in the product market and perfect competition

                                                             11
or right-to-manage bargaining in the labor market, (2) imperfect competition in the product
market and perfect competition or right-to-manage bargaining in the labor market, (3) perfect
competition in the product market and e¢ cient bargaining in the labor market, (4) perfect com-
petition in the product market and monopsony in the labor market, (5) imperfect competition in
the product market and e¢ cient bargaining in the labor market and (6) imperfect competition
in the product market and monopsony in the labor market. In the remaining of the article,
we denote the 6 possible regimes by R 2 < = fP C-P R; IC-P R; P C-EB; P C-M O; IC-EB; IC-
M Og, where the …rst part re‡ects the type of competition in the product market and the second
part re‡ects the type of competition in the labor market. Once the regime is determined, we
derive the product and labor market imperfection parameters from the estimated joint market
imperfections parameter.

Our study considers product and labor market imperfections as two major sources of discrepan-
cies between the output elasticities of labor and materials and their revenue shares. However,
we are well aware of the fact that there are other forces –that are not included in our model-
ing framework– which might impact our estimated elasticity-revenue share ratios. Possibilities
range from economic factors like distortions in the intermediate materials market, variable factor
utilization and factor adjustment costs to measurement issues. We consider adressing/testing
empirically these possible sources of discrepancies as a worthy subject for future research but
beyond the scope of this article.



3      Data description and manufacturing-level results
In this section, we discuss the data. For illustrative purposes, we also present the results of
estimating the production function at the manufacturing level.


3.1      Data description

We use an unbalanced panel of French manufacturing …rms over the period 1978-2001, based
mainly on …rm accounting information from EAE (“Enquête Annuelle d’Entreprise”, “Service
des Etudes et Statistiques Industrielles”(SESSI)). We only keep …rms for which we have at least
12 years of observations, ending up with an unbalanced panel of 10646 …rms with the number of
observations for each …rm varying between 12 and 24.6 We use real current production de‡ated
    6 Putting   the number of …rms between brackets and the number of observations between square brackets, the
structure of the data is given by: (1398) [12], (1369) [13], (1403) [14], (1315) [15], (3414) [16], (226) [17], (215)



                                                         12
by the two-digit producer price index of the French industrial classi…cation as a proxy for out-
put (Q). Labor (N ) refers to the average number of employees in each …rm for each year and
material input (M ) refers to intermediate consumption de‡ated by the two-digit intermediate
consumption price index. The capital stock (K) is measured by the gross bookvalue of …xed
assets.7 The shares of labor (       N)   and material input (      M)   are constructed by dividing respec-
tively the …rm total labor cost and unde‡ated intermediate consumption by the …rm unde‡ated
production and by taking the average of these ratios over adjacent years. Table 1 reports the
means, standard deviations and quartile values of our main variables. The average growth rate
of real …rm output for the overall sample is 2.1% per year over the period 1978-2001. Capital has
decreased at an average annual growth rate of 0.1%, while materials and labor have increased
at an average annual growth rate of 4% and 0.6% respectively. The Solow residual or the con-
ventional measure of total factor productivity (T F P ) is stable over the period. As expected for
…rm-level data, the dispersion of all these variables is considerably large. For example, TFP
growth is lower than -5.6% for the …rst quartile of …rms and higher than 5.4% for the upper
quartile.

                                        <Insert Table 1 about here>


3.2     Manufacturing-level results

For illustrative purposes, we estimate the standard production function (Eq. (23)) at the man-
ufacturing level over the period 1978-2001 with and without imposing constant returns to scale.

Part 1 of Table 2 shows the results of estimating Eq. (23) under the assumption of constant
returns to scale ( = 1), while Part 2 allows for non constant returns to scale. We present both
set of results for a range of estimators. Columns 1 and 2 report the levels OLS results and
the …rst-di¤erenced OLS estimates, respectively. From column 3 onwards, we take into account
[18], (200) [19], (164) [20], (153) [21], (180) [22], (136) [23], (473) [24]. The average number of observations per
…rm is 15.5 and the total number of observations is 165009.
  7 The capital stock measure used in this article is the gross book value of tangible assets as reported in

the …rm balance sheets at the beginning of the year (or the end of the previous year), adjusted for in‡ation.
This is a standard measure in microeconometric studies of the production function based on …rm accounting
information. It has the advantage of relying on direct information provided by the …rm and does not make the
strong assumptions underlying the capital stock measures obtained by the perpetual inventory method, mainly
a constant rate of depreciation or a …xed service life. In practice, however, panel data estimates of capital
elasticities appear to be very robust to the use of the two types of measures. See for example Atkinson and
Mairesse (1978) and Mairesse and Pescheux (1980).



                                                        13
endogeneity problems. Columns 3 and 5 display the results of estimating the model in …rst
di¤erences to eliminate unobserved …rm-speci…c e¤ects and using appropriate lags of internal
variables in levels (n, m and k) as instruments for the di¤erenced regressors to correct for
simultaneity (standard panel …rst-di¤erenced GMM). As argued by, for example, Blundell and
Bond (2000), the …rst-di¤erenced GMM estimator might be subject to large …nite sample biases
due to the time series persistence properties of some of the variables. In columns 4 and 6, we
therefore adopt a more e¢ cient GMM estimator which includes level moments (system GMM).8
The last two columns report the results of estimating a dynamic speci…cation of Eq. (23),
allowing for an autoregressive component in the productivity shock.9

The …rst section of each part of Table 2 gives the estimated output elasticities. The second
section presents our key parameters which are derived from the average production function
coe¢ cient estimates: the estimated joint market imperfections parameter                                                                     b       from which we
infer that the IC-EB-regime applies at the manufacturing level, and the corresponding estimates
of the average price-cost mark-up (b) and the average extent of rent sharing b . The standard
errors ( ) of b and b are computed using the Delta method (Woolridge, 2002).10 We also report
the pro…t ratio parameter, which can be expressed as the estimated price-cost mark-up divided
                                                        b
by the estimated scale elasticity                       b   . This ratio shows that the source of pro…t lies either in
imperfect competition or decreasing returns to scale. As a benchmark, we present the average
price-cost mark-up that would apply if …rms were to consider input prices as given prior to
deciding their level of inputs as in the original Hall (1988) setting (b only).

Focusing on our preferred estimator, the …rst-di¤erenced OLS estimator under the assumption of
constant returns to scale, "Q    Q      Q
                            N , "M and "K are estimated at 0.298, 0.587 and 0.115 respectively.
                                                                                                11

      8 The    GMM estimation is carried out in Stata 9.2 (Roodman, 2005). We report results for the one -step
estimator for which inference based on the asymptotic variance matrix is shown to be more reliable than for the
asymptotically more e¢ cient two-step estimator (Arellano and Bond, 1991).
   9 The productivity term is modeled as:
                                            it = i + ut + it , with   it =                                              it 1    + eit where j j < 1, and
eit     M A(0).      i   is an unobserved …rm-speci…c e¤ect, ut a year-speci…c intercept and                                        it   is an AR(1) error term.
                                                                                                       Q                                                      Q     Q   N
                                                                                                   b
                                                                                                   "M               b                                     b
                                                                                                                                                          "N       b
                                                                                                                                                                   "M
  1 0 More       speci…cally, b and b are derived as follows:                        b       =              ;           b       =        b       =          Q
                                                                                                                                                                        M
                                                                                                       M        1                                         b
                                                                                                                                                          "
                                                                                                                                                            M     ( N+ M    1)
                                                                                                                                                            M
                                                                                                                                                                            2
                     b                                                                                                               2
and b          =    1+b
                        .       Their respective standard errors are computed as:                                               b            =        ( M )2
                                                                                                                                                              1
                                                                                                                                                                     b
                                                                                                                                                                     "M
                                                                                                                                                                        Q       ;
                                                   !2                         !                        !2
                                    Q    2                  Q   Q                   Q    2
                                    b
                                    "M         Q        2b
                                                         "N b
                                                            "M          Q Q       + b
                                                                                    "N             Q
       2             M
                                2            b
                                             "
                                               N
                                                                       b ;b
                                                                       "  "
                                                                        N M
                                                                                                 b
                                                                                                 "
                                                                                                   M
                                                                                                                                2            (   b   )2
  b        =                                                         Q 4
                                                                                                            and             b        =       (1+b )4
                                                                                                                                                          .
                   N+ M     1
                                                                    b
                                                                    "M
  1 1 We       prefer the …rst-di¤erenced OLS estimator under the assumption of constant returns to scale as this
estimator allows a consistent comparison of our results at the manufacturing, the industry and the …rm level.
Since the number of observations for each …rm varies between 12 and 24, taking into account endogeneity problems



                                                                         14
The joint market imperfections parameter estimate is 0.186. The derived price-cost mark-
up is found to be 1.167 and the corresponding extent of rent sharing 0.440. Ignoring e¢ cient
bargaining in the labor market brings the price-cost mark-up estimate down to 1.112. Intuitively,
this underestimation corresponds to the omission of the part of product rents captured by the
workers. Note that for all the GMM results, none of the speci…cation tests is passed.12 Since,
contrary to this …nding, the speci…cation tests are passed nearly everywhere in the estimates at
the industry level (see infra), we conclude that the rejection of the tests at the manufacturing
level is due to imposing common slopes for the industries. Apart from being interested in
industry di¤erences per se, this …nding motivates our analysis at the industry level. Note that
in the dynamic speci…cation results, the test of common factor restrictions is never passed.13

Comparing the results allowing for non constant returns to scale (Part 2 of Table 2) with those
imposing constant returns to scale (Part 1 of Table 2) leads to the following insights. The
returns to scale assumption evidently a¤ects the estimated output elasticities of factor inputs.
In general, the production function coe¢ cients are estimated to be lower when allowing for
non constant returns to scale. However, our product and labor market imperfection parameter
estimates b and b appear to be relatively stable when allowing for non constant returns to
scale.14 Due to the …nding of decreasing returns to scale, the average pro…t ratio parameter is
estimated to be higher when allowing for non constant returns to scale. Besides our objective to
compare consistently estimates of product and labor market imperfections at the manufacturing,
the industry and the …rm level, we put forward a twofold motivation to maintain the constant
returns to scale assumption in the remainder of the article. First, since the …rst-order conditions
with respect to the variable input factors –Eq. (15) for labor and Eq. (7) for materials–do not
in the …rm estimations would lead to too much imprecision.
  1 2 Results not reported but available upon request. The validity of the instruments in the …rst-di¤erenced

equations is rejected by the Sargan test of overidentifying restrictions but the Di¤erence Sargan test does not
reject the validity of the additional instruments in di¤erences in the levels equations.
  1 3 Using
             it = i + ut + it , with   it =  it 1 + eit and eit    M A(0), and assuming constant returns to scale
( = 1), we can transform Eq. (23) through substitution to obtain qit                                     kit =   1 (qit 1     kit   1) +      2 (nit    kit ) +
 3 (nit 1      kit     1)   +    4 (mit      kit ) +       5 (mit 1       kit   1)   +    i   + ut + eit , where    1   = ,     2   =   "Q
                                                                                                                                         N,     3   =       "Q
                                                                                                                                                             N,

 4   =   "Q
          M,   5   =        "Q
                             M,       i    = (1        )    i   and ut = ut              ut   1.   Given consistent estimates of the unrestricted
parameter vector                = (   1,    2,    3,       4,   5 ),   the two non-linear common factor restrictions                    3   =       1   2   and
                                                                                           Q    Q
 5 =      1 4 can be tested using minimum distance to get the restricted parameter vector "N , "M ,  .
  1 4 Except for the estimated price-cost mark-up (b ) using the …rst-di¤erenced GMM estimator, which is esti-

mated to be much lower when allowing for non constant returns to scale (see Part 2 of Table 2). This result is
                                                                                 "Q
due to the considerable decrease in the estimated output elasticity of materials bM                                         when abstaining from the
constant returns to scale assumption.



                                                                                15
depend on the returns to scale assumption, our key parameters are robust to this assumption.
Second, there is a problem of estimating simultaneously and precisely the price-cost mark-up
and the elasticity of scale parameters (see Crépon et al., 2005).

                                         <Insert Table 2 about here>

By way of sensitivity test, we restricted the total sample to those …rms for which we have 24
years of observations and estimated Eq. (23) imposing constant returns to scale. On average,
the price-cost mark-up parameters are estimated to be higher and the corresponding extent of
rent-sharing parameters are estimated to be lower than those of the total (unbalanced) sample
across the di¤erent estimators.15



4      Industry analysis
From Section 2, it follows that the joint market imperfections parameter captures (im)perfect
competition in both the product and the labor market and as such determines the prevalent
regime. In this section, we …rst classify our 38 manufacturing industries in distinct product and
labor market regimes. Once the regime is determined, we derive the average industry-speci…c
product and labor market imperfection parameters from the estimated average industry-speci…c
joint market imperfections parameter. Within the predominant regimes, we then provide a
detailed analysis of industry di¤erences in the estimated average parameters of interest, i.e. the
output elasticities of the production function, the joint market imperfections parameter, and
–depending on the regime– the price-cost mark-up and the extent of rent sharing or the labor
supply elasticity parameters. To assess the plausibility of the estimated industry-speci…c product
and labor market imperfection parameters, we tie these estimates to industry-speci…c observables
(pro…tability, unionization, import penetration and technology intensity) within the dominant
regime.
  1 5 More   speci…cally, the price-cost mark-up is estimated at 1.319 (OLS LEV), 1.197 (OLS DIF), 1.357 (GMM
DIF) and 1.359 (GMM SYS). The extent of rent sharing is estimated at 0.345 (OLS LEV), 0.182 (OLS DIF),
0.481 (GMM DIF) and 0.374 (GMM SYS). In contrast to the total sample results, the Sargan test does not reject
the joint validity of the lagged levels of n, m and k dated (t   2) and earlier as instruments in the …rst-di¤erenced
equations. However, the validity of the additional …rst-di¤erenced variables as instruments in the levels equations
is rejected by the Di¤erence Sargan test. Results not reported but available upon request.




                                                         16
4.1       Classi…cation of industries

We consider 38 manufacturing industries, which are based on the French industrial classi…cation
(“Nomenclature économique de synthèse - Niveau 3” [NES 114]), making up our sample. This
decomposition is detailed enough for our purposes and ensures that each industry contains a
su¢ cient number of …rms (minimum: 104 …rms, maximum: 1000 …rms). Table 3 presents the
industry repartition of the sample and the number of …rms and the number of observations for
each industry j 2 f1; : : : ; 38g.

                                                      <Insert Table 3 about here>

We apply the following classi…cation procedure on which we comment below.

   Classi…cation procedure:                                                         Statistical         Null hypothesis

   Hypothesis test                                                                  signi…cance level   not rejected

   PART 1: F -test of the joint hypothesis (explicit joint test):
                        ("Q
                          M)                            ("Q
                                                          M )j   ("Q
                                                                   N )j
                                                                                          10%           R = P C -P R
   H0 :     j       1 = ( M )j 1 =                j= (    M )j   (   N )j
                                                                            =0
                                 j


   PART 2: Two separate t-tests (implicit joint test):
                        ("Q
                          M)
   H10 :        j   1 = ( M )j 1 > 0 and                                                  10%            R = IC -P R
                                     j

                     ("Q
                       M )j          ("Q
                                       N )j
   H20 :        j= (                             =0                                       10%
                         M )j        (    N )j

                        ("Q
                          M)
   H10 :        j   1 = ( M )j 1 = 0 and                                                  10%
                                     j
                                                                                                        R = P C -EB
                     ("Q
                       M )j          ("Q
                                       N )j
   H20 :        j= (                             >0                                       10%
                         M )j        (    N )j

                          ("Q
                            M )j
   H10 :        j   1 =(        M )j
                                           1 = 0 and                                      10%
                       "Q                "Q
                                                                                                        R = P C -M O
                     (    )          (     )
   H20 :        j= (
                        M j               N j
                                                 <0                                       10%
                         M )j        (    N )j

                          ("Q
                            M )j
   H10 :        j   1 =(        M )j
                                           1 > 0 and                                      10%
                       "Q                "Q
                                                                                                        R = IC -M O
                     (    )          (     )
   H20 :        j= (
                        M j               N j
                                                 <0                                       10%
                         M )j        (    N )j

                          ("Q
                            M)       j
   H10 :        j   1 =(        M )j
                                           1 > 0 and                                      10%
                                                                                                         R = IC -EB
                     ("Q
                       M)            ("Q
                                       N)
   H20 :        j= (
                            j                j
                                                 >0                                       10%
                         M )j        (    N )j




For each industry j, we estimate the production function assuming constant returns to scale
[Eq. (23) with           = 1] using the …rst-di¤erenced OLS estimator. In the …rst part of the classi…ca-
tion procedure, we perform an F -test (explicit joint test) of the joint hypothesis H0 :                 j   1 =


                                                                      17
 j   = 0, where the alternative is that at least one of the parameters (the industry-speci…c price-
cost mark-up     j   minus 1 or the industry-speci…c joint market imperfections parameter                 j)   does
not equal zero. In other words, if H0 is not rejected, that particular industry is character-
ized by perfect competition in the product market and perfect competition or right-to-manage
bargaining in the labor market. If H0 is rejected, the prevalent regime R 2 <nfP C-P Rg.

Having selected the industries typi…ed by the P C-P R-regime, we test a 2-dimensional hypothesis
by conducting two separate t-tests to classify the remaining industries in one of the 5 other
regimes in the second part of the classi…cation procedure. For example, if our null hypothesis is
that imperfect competition in the product market and e¢ cient bargaining in the labor market
feature the industry, we perform the following implicit joint test (or induced test) (Savin, 1984):
H10 :     j   1 > 0 and H20 :            j   > 0. The separate t-tests reject that the IC-EB-regime applies
if either H10 or H20 is rejected.

Since we believe that it is more likely that an industry is characterized by imperfections in either
the product market or the labor market, we put a priori less weight on the P C-P R-regime by
using the 10% statistical signi…cance level instead of the conventional 5% level. More speci…cally,
when testing H0 :            j     1 =       j   = 0 in the …rst part of the classi…cation procedure, we reject
H0 at the 10% level if the two-tailed p-value is less than 0.10. When testing H10 :                   j   1 =0
against H1a :        j   1 > 0 in the second part of the classi…cation procedure, we reject H10 at
the 10% level if         j       1 > 0 and the two-tailed p-value is less than 0.20. Likewise, for the
two-tailed test of       j,      we reject H20 :       j   = 0 at the 10% level if the two-tailed p-value is less
than 0.10. We conducted two robustness checks which we discuss below.

In such classi…cation procedure, there might be a potential for a con‡ict between the explicit
joint test in the …rst part and the implicit joint test in the second part since the rejection regions
for both tests di¤er. W do not …nd any inconsistencies, except for 1 industry (see infra).

We performed two robustness checks. First, we investigated how robust the industry classi…ca-
                                        (QM )j
tion is to imposing the constraint j = ( M)        1. As discussed in Section 2.3, this article
                                                               j

focuses on di¤erences in product and labor market imperfection parameters and hence estimates
average parameters. One could argue, however, that it is not reasonable to assume that –on
average– prices fall below marginal costs over a period of 24 years. Therefore, we estimated
the following non-linear speci…cation for each industry j 2 f1; : : : ; 38g using the …rst-di¤erenced




                                                               18
OLS estimator:

  SRit       = qit           N nit             M mit         [1      N        M ] kit                                                  (24)
               "                #2                                                         "             #
                 "QM                                                                           "Q
                                                                                                M   "Q
                                                                                                     N
             =                1       [    N       [nit    kit ] +   M   [mit     kit ]]                     [   N   [nit   kit ]] +   it
                     M                                                                         M     N

Second, we tested the sensitivity of the industry classi…cation by increasing the rejection regions

in both parts of the classi…cation procedure. In the …rst part of the procedure, H0 :                                           j      1 =

 j   = 0 is rejected if           j       1;       j    falls outside an elliptical probability contour. To check robust-
ness, we rejected H0 at the 40% level instead of at the 10% level. Likewise, we increased the
rejection region in the second part of the procedure by decreasing the critical values of the two
separate test statistics, corresponding to the 40% statistical signi…cance level.

Table 4 summarizes the industry classi…cation. For details on the speci…c industries belonging to
each regime, we refer to column 5 of Table 3. Focusing on the main classi…cation, it follows that
the dominant regime is IC-EB, 17 out of the 38 industries (45%) belong to this regime. This
is consistent with the …nding that manufacturing as a whole is characterized by IC-EB. The
second predominant regime is IC-P R, 10 out of the 38 industries (26%) belong to this regime.
The third predominant regime is P C-M O, 8 out of the 38 industries (21%) belong to this regime.
The IC-M O-regime only holds for 2 out of the 38 industries (5%). Only 1 industry (3%) belongs
to the P C-P R-regime. Note that initially, we rejected the P C-P R-regime for that particular
industry (industry j = 21) due to a type I error in the …rst part of the classi…cation procedure.
Based on the two separate t-tests, however, we decided to classify this industry in the P C-P R-
regime.16 As expected, none of the industries is characterized by perfect competition in the
product market and e¢ cient bargaining in the labor market (P C-EB). On the product market
side, 76% of the industries are typi…ed by imperfect competition. On the labor market side, 45%
of the industries are characterized by e¢ cient bargaining, 26% of the industries by monopsony
and perfect competition or right-to-manage bargaining features 29% of the industries.

Focusing on the …rst robustness check, six industries switch from P C-M O to IC-M O. These
                                               ?
industries are indicated by                            in column 5 of Table 3. As a result, the proportion of industries
characterized by imperfect competition in the product market increases from 76% to 92%.
Evidently, the classi…cation of industries in one of the three labor market settings is not a¤ected.

Focusing on the second robustness check, eight industries switch from one regime to another.
These industries are indicated by (O ) in column 5 of Table 3. Consequently, 82% of the industries
 1 6 Note   that H20 :       = 0 is not rejected at the borderline (p-value of 0.13).
                         j



                                                                         19
are typi…ed by imperfect competition on the product market side. On the labor market side, 53%
of the industries are characterized by e¢ cient bargaining, 34% of the industries by monopsony
and perfect competition or right-to-manage bargaining features 13% of the industries.

                                                      <Insert Table 4 about here>


4.2              Industry-level estimates of product and labor market imperfec-
                 tions

The predominant regimes are IC-EB (17 industries), IC-P R (10 industries) and P C-M O (8
industries). Within each of these regimes, we investigate industry di¤erences in the computed
industry-speci…c factor shares (                       J )j     (J = N; M; K), the estimated industry-speci…c output
elasticities           "Q
                       bJ          (J = N; M; K), joint market imperfections parameter b j , and corresponding
                              j
price-cost mark-up bj (only) and extent of rent sharing bj or labor supply elasticity b
                                                                                      "N
                                                                                       w                                                       .
                                                                                                                                           j

Table 5 presents the industry mean and the industry quartile values of the …rst-di¤erenced
OLS results within the predominant regimes. The system GMM results are reported in Table
A.1 in Appendix. For reasons of comparability, we use the same classi…cation of industries
within regimes (see main classi…cation in Table 4) for both estimators. All the industry-speci…c
estimates (OLS DIF and GMM SYS) are presented in Table A.2 in Appendix.17 Tables 5, A.1
and A.2 have the same format: the left part reports the computed factor shares, the middle
part reports the output elasticity estimates and the right part reports the estimated price-cost
mark-up that would apply if …rms were to consider input prices as given prior to deciding their
level of inputs, the estimated joint market imperfections parameter and the derived product
and labor market imperfections parameters, i.e. the price-cost mark-up taking into account
labor market imperfections and the extent of rent sharing for industries within IC-EB, and
the price-cost mark-up taking into account labor market imperfections and the labor supply
elasticity for industries within P C-M O and IC-M O.18 In Table A.2, the industries within the
    1 7 For      reasons of completeness, Table A.2 also provides detailed information on the …rst-di¤erenced OLS and
the system GMM estimates of the industries which are classi…ed in the IC-M O-regime (2 industries) and the
P C-P R-regime (1 industry).
                                                                                                                                Q
                                                                                                          "N
                                                                                                          b                    b
                                                                                                                               "M
    1 8 Dropping           subscript j, b and b
                                              "N
                                               w are derived as follows:
                                                                                                b   =      w
                                                                                                         1+b"N
                                                                                                                      =    N
                                                                                                                                Q       "N
                                                                                                                                    and bw         =
                                                                                                             w             M   b
                                                                                                                               "N
    b                                                                                                                                      2
1       b.       Their respective standard errors are computed using the Delta method as follows:                                      b           =
                                   !2                      !                    !2
                   Q   2                 Q   Q                   Q    2
                  b
                  "M           Q        2b
                                         "N b
                                            "M       Q Q       + b
                                                                 "N         Q                                    2
             2               b
                             "                      b ;b
                                                    "  "                  b
                                                                          "                     2            b
        N                      N                     N M                    M
                                                  Q 4
                                                                                     and   "N
                                                                                           b        =        b )4 .   For the derivation of the
        M                                        b
                                                 "N                                         w           (1

market imperfection parameters b, b and b, and their respective standard errors, we refer to footnote 10.


                                                                           20
IC-EB-regime are ranked according to bj . Within the IC-P R-regime, the table is drawn up in
increasing order of bj . Within the P C-M O-regime and the IC-M O-regime, we rank industries
                              (b"N
                                 w)
in order of increasing b j = 1+ b"Nj .
                                ( w )j
From Table 5, it follows that industry di¤erences in the estimated market imperfection para-
meters and in the underlying estimated factor elasticities and shares are quite sizable, as could
be expected. Let us focus the discussion on the primary parameters within the predominant
regimes.

     Within regime R = IC-EB, b j is lower than 0.191 for industries in the …rst quartile and
     higher than 0.426 for industries in the third quartile. The corresponding bj is lower than
     1.162 for the …rst quartile of industries and higher than 1.235 for the top quartile. The
     corresponding bj is lower than 0.264 for the …rst quartile of industries and higher than
     0.398 for the top quartile. The median values of bj and bj are estimated at 1.188 and
     0.363 respectively. Ignoring the occurrence of rent sharing reduces the estimated median
     price-cost mark-up to 1.099 bj only .

     Within regime R = IC-P R, b is lower than 1.081 for industries in the …rst quartile and
     higher than 1.163 for industries in the upper quartile. The median value is estimated at
     1.123.

     Within R = P C-M O, we observe the highest dispersion in b j compared to the two other
     predominant regimes. This parameter is estimated to be lower than -0.701 for industries in
     the …rst quartile and higher than -0.342 for industries in the third quartile. Consequently,
                            "N
     industry di¤erences in bw        are also large. This elasticity is estimated to be lower than
                                  j
     1.408 for industries in the …rst quartile and higher than 2.973 for industries in the upper
                                   "N
     quartile. The median value of bw           is estimated at 1.711.
                                            j

                                 <Insert Table 5 about here>

Taking into account endogeneity problems reveals the following patterns in the estimates (see
Table A.1 in Appendix). Compared to the …rst-di¤erenced OLS results, we observe a comparable
degree of dispersion in the estimated joint market imperfections parameter across the three
predominant regimes. However, across these three regimes we clearly discern an increase in this
parameter estimate. Resolving the simultaneity bias, this increase translates into a considerably
higher price-cost mark-up estimate across the three regimes, as expected.



                                                  21
         Within IC-EB, the estimate of the extent of rent sharing remains unchanged. The median
         values of bj and bj are estimated at 1.296 and 0.335 respectively (compared to 1.188 and
         0.363 using the …rst-di¤erenced OLS estimator).

         Within IC-P R, the median value of bj increases from 1.123 (OLS DIF) to 1.260.

                                                                                     (b"N
                                                                                        w )j
         Within P C-M O, the increase in b j translates into a higher estimate of b j =
                                                                                    1+(b w )j
                                                                                        "N
         as well. The median value of bj increases from 0.984 to 1.132 and the median value
         of b j increases from 0.629 to 0.883. Besides an increase in both market imperfection
         parameters, we also observe a higher degree of dispersion in both parameters. The value
         of the interquartile range of bj increases from 0.055 to 0.082. For b j , we identify an
         increase from 0.164 to 0.230.


How do our estimates of product and labor market imperfections match up with other studies?
Imposing IC-EB on the data, Dobbelaere (2004) and Boulhol et al. (2010) examine industry
di¤erences in price-cost mark-ups and extent of rent sharing. Using a panel of 7086 Belgian
…rms in 18 manufacturing industries over the period 1988-1995, Dobbelaere (2004) …nds that
the price-cost mark-up is lower than 1.354 for the …rst quartile of industries and higher than
1.500 for the upper quartile. The corresponding extent of rent sharing is lower than 0.161 for
the …rst quartile of industries and higher than 0.263 for the third quartile. Using a panel of
11799 British …rms in 20 manufacturing industries, Boulhol et al. (2010) estimate the price-cost
mark-up to be lower than 1.212 for the bottom quartile of industries and higher than 1.292 for
the top quartile. The corresponding extent of rent sharing is estimated to be lower than 0.189
for the …rst quartile of industries and higher than 0.544 for the upper quartile. Whereas there
is an abundant literature on estimating the extent of product market power (see Bresnahan,
1989 for a survey), there is little direct evidence of employer market power over its workers. For
studies estimating the wage elasticity of the labor supply curve facing an individual employer,
we refer to Reynolds (1946), Nelson (1973), Sullivan (1989), Boal (1995), Staiger et al. (1999),
Falch (2001) and Manning (2003). These studies point to an elasticity in the [1-5]-range.19
  1 9 For   example, employing regional data, Nelson (1973) uses a population density measure to identify labor
supply and reports large elasticities for most US states. Sullivan (1989) estimates the supply elasticity of nurses
directed toward individual hospitals to be in the [1:3-3:8]-range. Using data from US coal mining, Boal (1995)
…nds the labor supply elasticity to be in the [1:9-6:8]-range in the short run and in…nite in the long run. Staiger
et al. (1999) point to an elasticity estimate of around 0.10, implying considerable monopsonistic wage-setting
power.




                                                        22
4.3         Di¤erent dimensions across industries within the IC-EB-regime

Having quanti…ed industry di¤erences in product and labor market imperfection parameters in
the previous section, this section aims at assessing the plausibility of the industry estimates
within the dominant regime (IC-EB). To this end, we tie these estimates to industry observ-
ables. We classify the 17 industries according to pro…tability, unionization, import penetration
and technology intensity. For the …rst three dimensions, we consider three types (low, medium
and high). For the technology dimension, we consider two types (low and medium). Columns 4-7
in Table A.3 in Appendix indicate for each dimension the type to which each industry belongs.

Graphs 1-4 aim at discerning a pattern in the …rst-di¤erenced OLS estimates of bj and bj within
IC-EB. Each graph corresponds to one of the four dimensions (pro…tability, unionization,
import penetration and technology intensity). Within each dimension, di¤erent symbols refer to
di¤erent types (low, medium and high). The dashed lines denote the median values (bj;med =
1:188, bj;med = 0:363). Observing a positive correlation between bj and bj of 0.332, most
industries are situated either in the upper right part or the lower left part of the graphs.

As to the pro…tability dimension, we calculate the average industry-speci…c price-cost margin
(PCM) and determine the di¤erent types based on the percentile values (low = [1-33]-percentiles,
medium = [34-66]-percentiles and high = [67-100]-percentiles).20 Following Bain (1941), many
analytical and empirical studies have provided evidence of a positive relationship between market
structure and performance (pro…tability) (see Martin, 1993 for a survey). Therefore, we expect
a positive correlation between PCMs and price-cost mark-ups.

       Considering the low- and high-type industries (11 out of the 17 industries), the rank
       correlation coe¢ cient is 0.47 (p-value of 0.14) for bj and -0.27 (p-value of 0.43) for bj .

       Graph 1 shows that for 4 out of the 6 most pro…table industries, bj > bj;med . For 4 out of
       the 5 least pro…table industries, bj < bj;med . As to bj , no clear pattern can be detected.


To construct our measure of the degree of unionization, we merge our original dataset consisting
of …rms from EAE (SESSI) with the REPONSE 1998 (“Relations Professionnelles et Négocia-
tions d’Entreprises”) database collected by the French Ministry of Labor. Having 911 …rms left,
we compute the average industry-speci…c union density.21 Similar to the pro…tability dimension,
  2 0 The   price-cost margin is de…ned as the di¤erence between revenue and variable cost over revenue (see
Schmalensee, 1989, p. 960).
  2 1 Since we use a small non-representative subsample (only 911 …rms) to de…ne the degree of industry-speci…c

unionization, the resulting classi…cation has to be interpreted with caution.


                                                       23
the percentile values de…ne the three types. According to the standard rent-sharing literature,
unions are most likely created in …rms where rents can be extracted. Since this is most likely
to happen if there is imperfect competition in the product market, we expect a positive correla-
tion between union density and price-cost mark-ups. Union density is expected to be positively
related to the extent of rent sharing, as shown by Karier (1985) and Conyon and Machin (1991).

     Considering the low- and high-type industries (11 out of the 17 industries), the rank
     correlation coe¢ cient is 0.26 (p-value of 0.43) for bj and 0.10 (p-value of 0.76) for bj .

     Graph 2 shows that for 3 out of the 5 industries with a high degree of unionization,
     b >b
      j   j;med . For 5 out of the 6 weakly unionized industries, b j < b j;med . For 3 out of the

     6 weakly unionized industries, bj < bj;med .


As to the openness dimension, we compute the average industry-speci…c import penetration ratio
as the ratio of industry product imports to the sum of these imports plus the value of domestic
production in the industry using the input-output tables de…ned at the three-digit level (National
Institute for Statistics and Economic Studies (INSEE)). The di¤erent types are also identi…ed
through the percentile values. Firms under intensifying pressure from foreign competition are
induced to reduce their price-cost margins because of the increase in the perceived elasticity of
the demand they are facing. Following Levinsohn (1993), many studies have shown evidence of
the imports-as-market-discipline hypothesis (see Boulhol et al., 2010 for references). Following
Rodrik’s (1997) argument that the closer substitutes domestic and foreign workers are –due to
e.g. international trade– the lower the enterprise surplus ending up with workers, we expect
a negative correlation between import penetration and the extent of rent sharing (see also
Brock and Dobbelaere, 2006 and Dumont et al., 2006). Using Belgian and UK …rm-level data
respectively, Abraham et al. (2009) and Boulhol et al. (2010) provide support for the imports-
as-product-and-labor-market discipline hypothesis, i.e. they provide evidence of international
competition curtailing domestic market power in the product market as well as in the labor
market.

     Considering the low- and high-type industries (10 out of the 17 industries), the rank
     correlation coe¢ cient is -0.41 (p-value of 0.24) for bj and -0.22 (p-value of 0.54) for bj .

     Graph 3 shows that for 4 out of the 5 industries with high import penetration rates, bj <
     bj;med while for 3 out of the 5 industries shielded from import competition, bj > bj;med .



                                                24
The identi…cation of the two technology types relies on the OECD classi…cation. This method-
ology uses two indicators of technology intensity, R&D expenditures divided by value added and
R&D expenditures divided by production (OECD, 2005). When competition intensi…es, …rms’
reaction is not limited to pricing behavior. Sutton (1991, 1998) insists on the endogeneity of
market structure. An increase in the competitive environment may trigger an endogenous reac-
tion of …rms through an increase in R&D spending for instance. This might force out …rms that
are unable to keep the pace. R&D expenditures could hence be positively related to mark-ups.
The correlation between technology intensity and rent sharing is a priori unclear. As discussed
in Betcherman (1991), it depends on the importance of labor costs in the …rm’s total costs and
on the workers’substitutability in the production process. Horn and Wolinsky (1988) follow the
same argument.

       The rank correlation coe¢ cient is -0.06 (p-value of 0.83) for bj and -0.29 (p-value of 0.25)
       for bj .

       Graph 4 shows that for 5 out of the 8 medium-technology industries, bj < bj;med whereas
       for 6 out of the 9 low-technology industries, bj > bj;med .


                                       <Insert Graphs 1-4 about here>



5      Firm analysis
Our …rm analysis essentially aims at gaining insight into the production behavior of …rms within
industries. Indeed, production behavior is likely to vary even within industries, because input
combinations di¤er, labor markets are not homogeneous and demand might be more elastic or
inelastic in one …rm compared to another. Since production is primarily a¤ected by input factors
and only secondarily by –for example– demand conditions, we assume that the relationships
among variables are proper but that the production function coe¢ cients di¤er across …rms.
Therefore, we estimate the production function assuming constant returns to scale [Eq. (23)
with      = 1] for each …rm i using the …rst-di¤erenced OLS estimator and retrieve our market
imperfection parameters from the estimated …rm output elasticities                      "Q
                                                                                        bJ       (J = N; M; K) .22
                                                                                             i
  2 2 Besides   allowing for di¤erences across …rms, we could also focus on the stability of the parameters over
time. However, relaxing the constancy of the joint market imperfections parameter b i , and the corresponding
price-cost mark-up bi and extent of rent sharing bi or labor supply elasticity b
                                                                               "N
                                                                                w       in the time dimension would
                                                                                    i
overload our already overextended computational framework.



                                                        25
                                "Q
We only consider …rms for which bN                     "Q
                                                   and bM                 are estimated to be positive, ending up with
                                               i                      i
9032 …rms.23 To guarantee consistency between the industry analysis and the …rm analysis,
we investigate …rm di¤erences in product and labor market imperfections conditional on the
industry classi…cation.

We start with a brief discussion of the Swamy (1970) methodology. We then apply this method-
ology to analyze whether there is real …rm-level dispersion in the estimated average factor
elasticities and average shares, and the derived imperfection parameters within the three pre-
dominant regimes to which the industries belong (IC-EB; IC-P R and P C-M O). To assess the
plausibility of the estimated …rm-level product and labor market imperfection parameters, we
tie these …rm-level estimates to …rm-speci…c observables within the dominant regime (IC-EB).


5.1        Swamy (1970) methodology

To determine the degree of true dispersion in the production function coe¢ cients and market
imperfection parameters, we adopt the Swamy (1970) methodology as a variance decomposition
approach.24 This method allows us to estimate the variance components in the estimated …rm
output elasticities        "Q
                           bJ       (J = N; M; K), the joint market imperfections parameter b i , and
                                i
the corresponding price-cost mark-up bi and extent of rent sharing bi or labor supply elasticity
 "N
 bw        . In particular, the Swamy methodology enables to disentangle the pure sampling variance
       i
from the true variance.

Considering random production function coe¢ cients that vary across …rms and assuming con-
stant returns to scale, we rewrite the production function as follows:25


                                                   qi = Xi "i +             i                                                     (25)
                                                                                                              0
"i is assumed to be randomly distributed with "i = e
                                                   "+                                 i.   e    "1 , ..., e
                                                                                           " = (e         "K ) represents the
                                                                              0
common-mean coe¢ cient vector and              i   =(   1i ,   ...,       Ki )    the individual deviation from the com-
mon mean e
         ". Following Swamy (1970), we assume that the errors for …rm i are uncorre-
  2 3 Starting   from the 10646 …rm estimates, we …nd that            "Q
                                                                      bN          is estimated to be negative in 1481 …rms and
                                                                             i
 "Q
 bM        is estimated to be negative in 136 …rms. Only 32% of the negatively estimated                       "Q
                                                                                                               bN       is statistically
       i                                                                                                            i
signi…cant at the 20% level. Only 21% of the negatively estimated                   "Q
                                                                                    bM         is statistically signi…cant at the 20%
                                                                                           i
level.
  2 4 For a more general treatment, we refer to Arellano and Bonhomme (2010).
  2 5 For the sake of parsimony, we denote the explanatory variables by X (letting x                         1) and the …rm output
                                                                         i           1it

elasticities by "i .



                                                           26
                                                                                                             2
lated across …rms and allow for heteroskedasticity across …rms,                                i      N 0,   iI   . E ( i ) = 0,
          0                                0
E       i j   =        if i = j, E       i j   = 0 otherwise. Swamy suggests …rst estimating Eq. (25) for
each …rm i by OLS giving:

                                                                             1
                                                   b
                                                   "i   =     (X0i Xi )          X0i qi                                    (26)
                                                   b    = qi             Xi b
                                                                            "i                                             (27)
                                                    i

                                                                                                   b0 b
Using Eqs. (26) and (27), we obtain unbiased estimators of 2i (b2i = T i Ki ) and (see Eq. (28)).
                                           P
                                           N
Indeed, de…ning the mean of b "i as " = N1   b
                                             "i , their variance can be estimated as:
                                                            i=1


                               b               1        P
                                                        N
                                                                                    0      1 P
                                                                                             N
                                     =                      (b
                                                             "i     ") (b
                                                                        "i        ")            V ar (b
                                                                                                      "i )
                                           N
                                          1 i=1                                           N i=1
                                         1 P N
                                                                                    0      1 P
                                                                                             N
                                                                                                             1
                                     =           "i ") (b
                                                (b      "i                        ")            b2 (X0i Xi )               (28)
                                       N 1 i=1                                            N i=1 i
                                       |          {z                                }     |       {z         }
                                                              (1)                                  (2)


The logic behind the de…nition of b , the Swamy estimate of true variance of the coe¢ cients,
                                "i ), much of the variation in b
is that due to noisy estimates (b                              "i is not caused by real parameter
variability but purely by sampling error. Swamy (1970) suggests to correct for this sampling
variability by subtracting it o¤.

Two major advantages of the Swamy methodology are that these estimates are the most straight-
forward to obtain among the di¤erent estimators of coe¢ cient dispersion and that they are
robust to the possibility of correlated e¤ects between the …rm intercept and slope parameters
and the other variables in the equation since they are based on individual regression estimates
(see Mairesse and Griliches, 1990).26


5.2        Firm heterogeneity in product and labor market imperfections

Do we observe sizeable heterogeneity in the production behavior of …rms within regimes? To
gain insight into that issue, we focus on …rm heterogeneity within the predominant regimes to
    2 6 Besides   the Swamy methodology, the random coe¢ cient model literature suggests two other variance de-
composition approaches. One approach uses the maximum likelihood (ML) estimator and the other is a more
‡exible approach that amounts to regressing the squares and the cross-products of residuals on comparable
squares and cross-products of the independent variables (Hildreth and Houck, 1968; Amemiya, 1977; MaCurdy,
1985). Contrary to the Swamy estimates, the ML estimates and those based on the regression of the squares
and cross-products of the residuals assume either independence of the …rm slope parameters or independence
between both the …rm intercept and slope parameters and the other variables in the equation, i.e. the absence of
correlated e¤ects (for a comparison of the three di¤erent approaches, we refer to Mairesse and Griliches, 1990).


                                                                    27
which the industries belong (IC-EB, IC-P R and P C-M O). We only consider …rms for which
 "Q
 bN             "Q
            and bM        are estimated to be positive, ending up 9032 …rms. 8459 out of these 9032
       i              i
…rms belong to industries for which IC-EB, IC-P R or P C-M O holds.

Table 6 summarizes the …rst-di¤erenced OLS results of estimating Eq. (25) for each …rm i. The
…rst part of Table 6 presents the estimates of …rms belonging to industries for which regime
R = IC-EB holds (5715 …rms). The second part presents the estimates of …rms belonging
to industries for which regime R = IC-P R holds (1845 …rms). The third part presents the
estimates of …rms belonging to industries for which regime R = P C-M O holds (899 …rms).
Within each regime, we focus on the …rm input shares, the estimated …rm output elasticities,
the estimated …rm joint market imperfections parameter and the relevant product and labor
market imperfection parameters.

The number of observations for each …rm varies between 12 and 24. Hence, some …rm-level
regression estimates might be imprecise. This could lead to the conclusion that all the observed
variability in the …rm parameter estimates would be attributable to sampling variability and that
the true variability would thus be zero. Such conclusion, however, seems to be clearly an artefact
due to outliers. Therefore, we consider two “variants” of the original Swamy methodology:
one based on weighted estimates of true dispersion and one based on robust estimates of true
dispersion. As such, each part of Table 6 is divided into three sections. The …rst section reports
the simple mean and the corresponding observed dispersion (bo ) and (original) Swamy estimate
of true dispersion [btrue ]. The second section reports the weighted mean and the corresponding
weighted observed dispersion (bo ) and Swamy estimate of weighted true dispersion [btrue ]. The
third section reports the median and the corresponding interquartile observed dispersion (bo )
and Swamy estimate of robust true dispersion [btrue ].27 Since the second variant of the original
Swamy methodology is more intuitive, we focus on the robust estimates when discussing Table
6 (see infra).

Table A.4 in Appendix –which is structured like Table 6– provides some technical details on
the Swamy estimates of true dispersion. Within each regime, the …rst section of Table A.4
presents the original Swamy estimate of true variance [b2true , corresponding to b in Eq. (28)],
which is computed as the di¤erence between the observed variance of the individually estimated
  2 7 The   term interquartile observed dispersion indicates that the observed dispersion is computed from the
interquartile range of the …rm input shares and …rm estimates. When focusing on the Swamy estimate of robust
true dispersion, we assume that the individually estimated parameters are normally distributed and the sampling
variance is distributed as   2.




                                                       28
…rm coe¢ cients [b2o , corresponding to term (1) in Eq. (28)] and the mean of the corresponding
sampling variance [b2s , corresponding to term (2) in Eq. (28)].28 The Swamy estimate of the
weighted true variance, which is calculated as the weighted observed variance minus the weighted
sampling variances, is reported in the second section within each regime of Table A.4.29 The
weight is de…ned as the inverse of the sampling variance. In the third section within each regime
of Table A.4, we report the Swamy estimate of the robust true variance, which is computed by
subtracting the median of the individually estimated sampling variances from the interquartile
observed variance. Each section presents a F -statistic, testing the hypothesis of equality of the
estimates.30

                                                                 <Insert Table 6 about here>

How can we interpret the results reported in Table 6? Let us focus the discussion on the
median values. Across the three predominant regimes, the median values of the …rm-level
output elasticities and the price-cost mark-up that would apply if …rms were to consider input
prices as given prior to deciding their level of inputs are quite comparable. The median value of
    "Q
    bN                                                              "Q
               lies in the [0:298-0:322]-range, the median value of bM                                                    lies in the [0:557-0:587]-range,
           i                                                                                                          i
the median value of                        "Q
                                           bK          lies in the [0:058-0:077]-range and the median value of bi only lies
                                                   i
in the [1:085-1:105]-range. The Swamy corresponding robust estimates of true dispersion are
                                   "Q
within the [0:175-0:208]-range for bN                                                                                 "Q
                                                                                 , within the [0:194-0:254]-range for bM                                , within the
                                                                             i                                                                      i
                        "Q
[0:106-0:127]-range for bK                                 and within the [0:179-0:185]-range for bi only.
                                                       i

Focusing on the relevant market imperfection parameters within each regime leads to the fol-
lowing insights.
    2 8 Taking into account the unbalanced nature of the sample, the equivalent of Eq. (28) for the input shares
                                                          P
                                                          N
                                                                         2                        P
                                                                                                  24    Nnt
    J   (J = N; M; K) can be expressed as: e2true = N 1 1   ( J )i     J
                                                                              1 2
                                                                                es , where T =           N
                                                                                                            nt ,
                                                                                                                          T
                                                                                          i=1                                                      nt =12
                   P
                   nt                              P
                                                   N                                             P
                                                                                                 N P
                                                                                                   nt
                                                                                                                                     2
(   J )i   =   1
                         (   J )it ,   J   =   1
                                               N
                                                           (   J )i   and   e2s   =        1
                                                                                                          (   J )it       (   J )i       . nt denotes the number of
               T                                                                      N ( T 1)
                   t=1                             i=1                                           i=1t=1
years within …rm i and Nnt refers to the number of …rms for which we observe nt years of observations.
                                                                     P
                                                                     N
  2 9 In practice, the weighted sampling variance is calculated as N   b2i .
                                                                                                          i=1
    3 0 Except     for bi and bi within IC-EB and bi and                                 "N
                                                                                         bw         within P C-M O, all the F -statistics are signi…cant
                                                                                                i
at conventional signi…cance levels since the critical value barely exceeds 1 for our sample size. One can question,
however, the validity of these F -statistics in such large samples. A more symmetric treatment of the inference
problem, advocated by Leamer (1978), would necessitate using a critical value which increases with the number
of degrees of freedom. This would decrease the likelihood of rejecting the hypothesis of homogeneity (Mairesse
and Griliches, 1990).




                                                                                        29
           Within R = IC-EB, the median joint market imperfections parameter b i is estimated
           at 0.297 which is close to the median value at the industry level (0.315, see Table 5). The
           Swamy robust estimate of true dispersion amounts to 0.795, providing evidence of very
           sizeable within-regime …rm dispersion for IC-EB. From b i , we retrieve that the median
           of the estimated price-cost mark-up (bi ) is 1.204 and the median of the estimated extent of
           rent sharing bi is 0.582. The Swamy corresponding robust estimates of true dispersion
           of 0.335 and 0.319 respectively are good indicators of a credible amount of dispersion.31
           The corresponding industry-speci…c median values are 1.188 for bj and 0.363 for bj .

           Within R = IC-P R, the median of b i is -0.008 which clearly deviates from the median
           value of 0.048 at the industry level. Indeed, the Swamy robust estimate of true dispersion
           of 0.954 points to large within-regime …rm di¤erences. The median of bi is 1.122 with
           a Swamy corresponding robust estimate of true dispersion of 0.303. This …rm median is
           equivalent to the industry median (1.123).

           Within R = P C-M O, the median of b i is -0.462 (compared to -0.563 at the industry
           level). The Swamy corresponding robust estimate of true dispersion of 1.374 illustrates
           the considerable amount of …rm dispersion. From b i , we infer that the median of bi is
                                   "N
           1.015 and the median of bw               is 0.194. The Swamy corresponding robust estimates of
                                                i
           true dispersion of 0.317 and 1.440 respectively give evidence of substantial within-regime
           …rm dispersion for P C-M O. The industry-speci…c median values are 0.984 for bj and
                     "N
           1.711 for bw         .
                            j


Going back to the more technical details of the Swamy estimates (see Table A.4 in Appendix) and
focusing on the original Swamy estimates, it follows that the observed variance b2o illustrates
the sizeable dispersion in the estimated …rm output elasticities and the derived parameters. As
referred to above, the dispersion at the …rm level is largely magni…ed by large sampling errors
arising from the rather short time series available. Due to the large sampling variance                       b2s ,
we even …nd zero estimates of true variance in the individually estimated relative and absolute
extents of rent sharing bi and bi within regime R = IC-EB and in the individually estimated b i
                            "N
and labor supply elasticity bw                within regime R = P C-M O. In contrast, we …nd persistent
                                          i
individual …rm di¤erences in both the …rm input shares, the …rm estimated elasticities and the
  3 1 At   the …rm level, the correlation between bi only and bi amounts to 0.45. For 61.7% of the …rms, the lack of
explicit consideration of labor market imperfections results in an underestimation of the …rm-speci…c price-cost
mark-up.



                                                           30
derived parameters within each regime when focusing on the Swamy estimate of the weighted
true variance and the Swamy estimate of the robust true variance. For all the …rm estimates, the
weighted (interquartile) observed variance and –even more so– the weighted (robust) sampling
variance are considerably smaller than the corresponding simple observed and simple sampling
variance. As such, the Swamy estimate of the weighted (robust) true variance exceeds the
corresponding Swamy estimate of the simple true variance within the three regimes.

Summing up, we observe quite sizeable within-regime …rm dispersion in the joint market imper-
fections parameter and the corresponding product and labor market imperfection parameters
for the three predominant regimes to which the industries belong. This statement holds even
if we focus on true dispersion. This main …nding can be interpreted in two ways. First, pro-
duction behavior of …rms within industries that are classi…ed in the same regime is indeed truly
heterogeneous. Following this interpretation, we investigate in the next section which …rm-
speci…c factors correlate with the market imperfection parameters within the dominant regime
(IC-EB). Second, from the true dispersion of the joint market imperfections parameter, we
derive that for …rms within R = IC-EB and R = P C-M O, there is room to move to another
regime. Although we might expect that a majority of …rms within an industry belong to the
same regime as that particular industry, this presumption might be rebutted. Indeed, given that
we condition the …rm analysis on the industry classi…cation, the substantial true …rm dispersion
might indicate that although the representative …rm is characterized by the same regime as the
industry to which it belongs, regime di¤erences across …rms within a given industry could be
important. This calls for an extension of our analysis which we consider as a topic for future
research.


5.3    Di¤erent dimensions across …rms within the IC-EB-regime

Similarly to what we do for the industry-level estimates to assess their plausibility (see Section
4.3), we investigate how the market imperfection parameters of …rms within R = IC-EB corre-
late with …rm-speci…c variables like size, capital intensity, being an R&D …rm and distance to
the industry technology frontier.

We concentrate on the joint market imperfections parameter and the corresponding price-cost
mark-up and the relative extent of rent-sharing parameters of the 5715 …rms within R = IC-EB.
More speci…cally, the dependent variable is either the vector of ln b i , the vector of ln(bi   1)
or the vector of ln(bi ). For each of these dependent variables, we have four di¤erent matrices of



                                               31
regressors. Each set consists of a …rm-speci…c variable (size, capital intensity, the R&D identi…er,
distance to the industry technology frontier) and industry dummies. All variables are centered
around the industry mean.

                                  <Insert Table 7 about here>

Being resistant to the in‡uence of outliers, we focus the discussion on the median regressions.
For reasons of completeness, we also present the OLS and the WLS –where the weight is de…ned
as the inverse of the sampling variance–regression coe¢ cients of the set of regressors explaining
the vector of ln b i , the vector of ln(bi      1) or the vector of ln(bi ) in Table 7. The 0:50
quantile regression can be interpreted as a robust equivalent of OLS. The regression coe¢ cients
result from regressions with one …rm-speci…c variable (including industry dummies), except for
the regression including the R&D identi…er which includes two …rm-speci…c variables (mixentri
and rdentri ) and industry dummies.

Size (ni ) is measured by the logarithm of the average number of employees in each …rm. To the
extent that large …rms are typically multi-product …rms, we might expect a positive correlation
between …rm size and price-cost mark-ups (Sutton, 1998). Based on the standard rent-sharing
literature, …rm size and the relative rent-sharing parameter are expected to be positively corre-
lated. However, we …nd a negative correlation between size and both bi and bi .

Capital intensity is usually included in structure-performance models to capture the di¤erence
between capital-intensive and non-capital-intensive …rms. We measure this variable (capinti ) by
the logarithm of the gross book-value of …xed assets divided by sales. Since capital equipment
usually constitutes sunk costs and the latter may necessitate mark-up pricing, we expect a
positive correlation between capital intensity and price-cost mark-ups (see e.g. Odagiri and
Yamashita, 1987). Likewise, capital intensity is expected to be positively correlated with the
relative extent of rent sharing. The intuition is that if a bargaining partner receives extra
income in case of a disagreement, this partner is more willing to tolerate disagreement and
hence bargains for a larger share of the rents. In some studies (see e.g. Doiron, 1992), these
costs are interpreted as strike costs in case the negotiating parties use strikes as a dispute
resolution mechanism. Among other things, higher capital intensity is shown to increase a
…rm’s strike costs and hence to decrease its extent of rent sharing (see e.g. Clark 1991, 1993;
Doiron, 1992). From Table 7, it follows that capital-intensive …rms are characterized by a higher
bi . In contrast, bi appears to be negatively correlated with capital intensity although this result



                                                32
is not sensitive to running a multivariate speci…cation.32

We capture technological change by an R&D variable and a measure of the distance of a …rm to
its industry technology frontier. To construct the R&D variable, we merge accounting informa-
tion of the considered …rms from EAE (SESSI) with data of Research & Development collected
by DEP (“Ministère de l’Education et de la Recherche”). The R&D surveys (DEP) provide two
R&D variables: a dichotomous R&D indicator and total R&D expenditure. We assume that
the sample is exhaustive, i.e. a …rm that does not report any R&D expenditure is considered to
be a non-R&D …rm. Based on this criterion, we de…ne three subsamples: the pure non-R&D
…rms, the mixed R&D …rms for which we have data on R&D expenditure for less than 12 years
(mixentri ) and the pure R&D …rms for which we have data on R&D expenditure for at least
12 years (rdentri ).33 Our measure of the average distance of a …rm to its industry technology
                                                               VA            VA
frontier is constructed as follows: disti = p95 ln             N j      ln   N ij ,   where i is a …rm index, j
                               VA
an industry index and          N    real value added per employee. To drop outliers, we use the 95th
percentile instead of the maximum. As suggested by Sutton (1991, 1998), an increase in the
competitive environment might elicit an endogeneous reaction of …rms through an increase in
R&D spending, inducing less technology-intensive …rms to exit the market. Hence, we might
expect a positive correlation between R&D expenditures and price-cost mark-ups. Technolog-
ical change might exert an e¤ect on the relative extent of rent sharing by a¤ecting the nature
of the production process. However, this e¤ect is a priori unclear. As discussed in Horn and
Wolinsky (1988) and Betcherman (1991), it depends on the importance of labor costs in the
…rm’s total costs and on the workers’substitutability in the production process. From Table 7,
it follows that …rms which are further from the industry technology frontier are characterized by
a higher bi . bi appears to be negatively correlated with one of our technology variables (disti ).
The latter result is consistent with the industry analysis that also reveals that low-technology
industries seem to be typi…ed by a higher extent of rent sharing.



6         Conclusion
This study starts from the belief that product and labor markets are intrinsically characterized
by distortions and imperfections and from the …nding that variable input factors’ estimated
 3 2 In   particular, we ran multivariate speci…cations for each set of regressors where we included all …rm-speci…c
variables and industry dummies. Results not reported but available upon request.
  3 3 Among the 5715 …rms within R = IC-EB, 121 …rms are identi…ed as pure R&D …rms, 476 as mixed R&D

…rms and –the complement– 5118 as pure non-R&D …rms.



                                                          33
marginal products are often larger than their measured payments. We provide two extensions of
Hall’s (1988) productivity econometric framework for estimating price-cost margins. The …rst
one embeds a standard labor (e¢ cient) bargaining model between the …rm and its employees into
this framework, while the second extension abstains from the assumption that the labor supply
curve facing the …rm is perfectly elastic and integrates the monopsony model as an alternative to
the e¢ cient bargaining model. Both extensions identify product and labor market imperfections
as two sources of discrepancies between the output contributions of individual production factors
and their respective revenue shares, and they can be tested on the basis of the sign of a parameter
of joint product and labor market imperfections.

Using an unbalanced panel of 10646 French …rms in 38 manufacturing industries over the period
1978-2001, we are able to classify these industries into 6 regimes depending on the type of
competition in the product and the labor market. By far the most predominant regime is one
of imperfect competition in the product market and e¢ cient bargaining in the labor market
(IC-EB), followed by a regime of imperfect competition in the product market and perfect
competition, or right-to-manage bargaining, in the labor market (IC-P R), and by a regime of
perfect competition in the product market and monopsony in the labor market (P C-M O). The
median price-cost mark-up and rent-sharing parameters in the IC-EB-industries are of about
1.20 and 0.55 respectively, while the median price-cost mark-up in the IC-P R-industries is of
about 1.10 and the median of the wage labor supply elasticity in the P C-M O-industries is of
about 1.70. The random coe¢ cient regression analyses that we perform at the …rm individual
level in these three predominant regimes basically con…rm well these average orders of magnitude
with large, yet not unreasonable, robust estimates of true dispersion (i.e. corrected for sampling
dispersion). Finally, we …nd quite encouraging results in the two exploratory investigations of
the plausibility of our …ndings that we could do in the case of the dominant regime (IC-EB)
by relating our industry and …rm-level estimates of price-cost mark-ups and rent sharing to
industry characteristics and …rm-speci…c variables respectively.

Our analysis can be pursued in several directions, either to address some of its current limitations
and investigate some new developments, or to adopt a more ambitious approach. We will
conclude by very brie‡y suggesting six such directions that are worth following but encounter
data di¢ culties and/or intrinsic identi…cation problems. The …rst three relate to limitations
which also potentially a¤ect many, and for the last one most, microeconometric studies of …rm
productivity: the fact (i) that we have mostly assumed in our analysis constant returns to scale,
(ii) that we have not taken into account explicitly the potential consequences of labor adjustment

                                                34
costs on our estimates of labor and product market imperfections, and (iii) that we are actually
estimating a revenue production function rather than an output production function for lack of
…rm-level output price indices. As we have explained, it is intrinsically di¢ cult to separately
identify and estimate an average elasticity of scale and an average price-cost mark-up; and
this di¢ culty is magni…ed when in order to control for unobserved …rm individual e¤ects the
estimation is only or mainly based on the time dimension variability of the data. As we also
pointed out, labor adjustment costs resulting from employment protection legislation and other
institutional factors may account for part of the estimated wedge between labor output share
and elasticity, with the e¤ect that our estimates of rent sharing (which are indeed on the high
side) could be biased upwardly. We tend to think that this e¤ect should be limited, but this will
need further analysis both to use …rm capacity utilization and hours of work variables, which are
unavailable for our dataset, and to resort to a dynamic speci…cation of …rm productivity changes.
Not estimating sensu stricto a production function for lack of …rm output price information can
also be a cause of biases in our estimates, that has been addressed with mixed results in Crépon
et al. (2005) following a solution suggested by Klette and Griliches (1996). The unavailability
of …rm-level price data is a major drawback in microeconometric studies of …rm behavior, and
is clearly an important avenue for current and future research.34

The …rst of the other three promising directions of research is the use of matched employer-
employee data both to take into account worker (and …rm) characteristics that can be observed
(such as skills in particular) and to control for unobserved ones.35 The second one is more
technical; it would be to investigate further the …rm heterogeneity of product and labor market
imperfections within industry and regime by using latent class models versus random coe¢ cient
models, following the line of research initiated by Windmeijer (2010). Finally, the third would
be to go back to the tradition of structural modeling of …rm behavior pioneered some seventy
years ago by Marschak and Andrews (1944) and address frontally the formidable problems it has
been continuously raising since in spite of the formidable advances in econometrics methodology
  3 4 For   a recent discussion and work related to this issue, see Griliches and Mairesse (1998), Melitz (2000),
Mairesse and Jaumandreu (2005), Foster et al. (2005), Levinsohn and Melitz (2006), Katayama et al. (2009) and
Syverson (2010).
  3 5 This is what we have started in Dobbelaere and Mairesse (2010) where we compare industry di¤erences

in average rent-sharing parameters based on three di¤erent approaches: the present one based on estimating a
productivity equation on …rm-level data, the usual one in labor econometrics based on estimating a wage equation
on worker-level data, and a pure accounting approach based on measuring the …rm user cost of capital and an
average worker external reservation wage.




                                                         35
and practices.



References
 [1] Abraham, F., J. Konings and S. Vanormelingen, 2009, The e¤ect of globalization on union
    bargaining and price-cost margins of …rms, Review of World Economics, 145(1), 13-36.

 [2] Ackerberg, J., L. Benkard, S. Berry and A. Pakes, 2006, Econometric tools for analyzing
    market outcomes, in: Heckman, J.J. (Ed.), Handbook of Econometrics, vol. 6, Amsterdam:
    Elsevier.

 [3] Amemiya, T., 1977, A note on a heteroskedastic model, Journal of Econometrics, 6, 365-370.

 [4] Arellano, M. and S. Bond, 1991, Some tests of speci…cation for panel data: Monte Carlo
    evidence and an application to employment equations, Review of Economic Studies, 58(2),
    277-297.

 [5] Arellano, M. and S. Bonhomme, 2010, Identifying distributional characteristics in random
    coe¢ cients panel data models, unpublished manuscript.

 [6] Atkinson, M. and J. Mairesse, 1978, Length of life of equipment in French manufacturing
    industries, Annales de l’INSEE, 30-31, 28-48.

 [7] Bain, J.S., 1941, The pro…t rate as a measure of monopoly power, Quarterly Journal of
    Economics, 55(1), 272-292.

 [8] Betcherman, G., 1991, Does technological change a¤ect union bargaining power? British
    Journal of Industrial Relations, 29(3), 447-462.

 [9] Bhaskar, V., A. Manning and T. To, 2002, Oligopsony and monopsonistic competition in
    labor markets, Journal of Economic Perspectives, 16(2), 155-174.

[10] Bhaskar, V. and T. To, 1999, Minimum wages for Ronald McDonald monopsonies: A theory
    of monopsonistic competition, Economic Journal, 109(455), 190-203.

[11] Blanchard, O. and F. Giavazzi, 2003, Macroeconomic e¤ects of regulation and deregulation
    in goods and labor markets, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 18(3), 879-907.

[12] Blundell, R. and S. Bond, 2000, GMM estimation with persistent panel data: An application
    to production functions, Econometric Review, 19(3), 321-340.

                                              36
[13] Boal, W.M., 1995, Testing for employer monopsony in turn-of-the-century coal mining,
    RAND Journal of Economics, 26(3), 519-536.

[14] Boal W.M. and M.R. Ransom, 1997, Monopsony in the labor market, Journal of Economic
    Literature, 35(1), 86-112.

[15] Booth, A., 1995, The economics of the trade union, Cambridge: Cambridge University
    Press.

[16] Boulhol, H., S. Dobbelaere and S. Maioli, 2010, Imports as product and labour market
    discipline, British Journal of Industrial Relations, forthcoming.

[17] Brander, J. A. and B. J. Spencer, 1985, Export subsidies and international market share
    rivalry, Journal of International Economics, 18(1-2), 83-100.

[18] Bresnahan, T., 1989, Empirical studies of industries with market power, in: Schmalensee,
    R., Willig, R. (Eds.), Handbook of Industrial Organization, vol. 2, Amsterdam: North-
    Holland.

[19] Brock, E. and S. Dobbelaere, 2006, Has international trade a¤ected workers’ bargaining
    power?, Review of World Economics, 142(6), 233-266.

[20] Bughin, J., 1996, Trade unions and …rms’ product market power, Journal of Industrial
    Economics, 44(3), 289-307.

[21] Burdett K. and D. Mortensen, 1998, Wage di¤erentials, employer size and unemployment,
    International Economic Review, 39(2), 257-273.

[22] Clark, S.J., 1991, Inventory accumulation, wages and employment, Economic Journal,
    101(405), 230-238.

[23] Clark, S.J, 1993, The strategic use of inventories in an in…nite horizon model of wage and
    employment bargaining, Scottish Journal of Political Economy, 40(2), 165-183.

[24] Conyon, M. and S. Machin, 1991, The determination of pro…t margins in UK manufacturing,
    Journal of Industrial Economics, 39(4), 369-382.

[25] Crépon, B., R. Desplatz and J. Mairesse, 1999, Estimating price-cost margins, scale
    economies and workers’bargaining power at the …rm level, CREST Working Paper G9917,
    Centre de Recherche en Economie et Statistique.


                                              37
[26] Crépon, B., R. Desplatz and J. Mairesse, 2005, Price-cost margins and rent sharing: Evi-
    dence from a panel of French manufacturing …rms, Annales d’Economie et de Statistique,
    Special issue in memory of Zvi Griliches, 79/80, 585-611.

[27] Dobbelaere, S., 2004, Estimation of price-cost margins and union bargaining power for
    Belgian manufacturing, International Journal of Industrial Organization, 22(10), 1381-1398.

[28] Dobbelaere, S. and J. Mairesse, 2010, Micro-evidence on rent sharing from di¤erent per-
    spectives, IZA Discussion Paper 4871, Institute for the Study of Labor.

[29] Doiron, D.J., 1992, Bargaining power and wage-employment contracts in a unionized in-
    dustry, International Economic Review, 33(3), 583-606.

[30] Dumont, M., G. Rayp and P. Willemé, 2006, Does internationalization a¤ect union bar-
    gaining power? An empirical study for …ve EU countries, Oxford Economic Papers, 58(1),
    77-102.

[31] Falch, T., 2001, Decentralized public sector wage determination: Wage curve and wage
    comparison for Norwegian teachers in the pre-WW2 period, Labour, 15(3), 343-369.

[32] Foster, L., J. Haltiwanger and C. Syverson, 2005, Reallocation, …rm turnover, and e¢ ciency:
    Selection on productivity or pro…tability?, NBER Working Paper 11555.

[33] Griliches, Z. and J. Mairesse, 1998, Production functions: The search for identi…cation,
    in: Strom, S. (Ed.), Essays in honour of Ragnar Frisch, Econometric Society Monograph
    Series, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

[34] Hall, R.E., 1988, The relationship between price and marginal cost in US industry, Journal
    of Political Economy, 96(5), 921-947.

[35] Hicks, J.R., 1932, The theory of wages, London: Macmillan.

[36] Hildreth, C. and H. Houck, 1968, Some estimates for a linear model with random coe¢ -
    cients, Journal of the American Association, 63(322), 584-595.

[37] Horn, H. and A. Wolinsky, 1988, Worker substitutability and patterns of unionisation,
    Economic Journal, 98(391), 484-497.

[38] Karier, T., 1985, Unions and monopoly pro…ts, Review of Economics and Statistics, 67(1),
    34-42.


                                               38
[39] Katayama H., Lu S. and J.R. Tybout, 2009, Firm-level productivity studies: Illusions and
    a solution, International Journal of Industrial Organization, 27(3), 403-413.

[40] Klette, T.J. and Z. Griliches, 1996, The inconsistency of common scale estimators when
    output prices are unobserved and endogenous, Journal of Applied Econometrics, 11(4),
    343-361.

[41] Krugman, P., 1979, Increasing returns, monopolistic competition and international trade,
    Journal of International Economics, 9(4), 469-479.

[42] Leamer, E.E., 1978, Speci…cation searches: Ad hoc inference with nonexperimental data,
    New York: John Wiley and Sons.

[43] Levinsohn, J., 1993, Testing the imports-as-market-discipline hypothesis, Journal of Inter-
    national Economics, 35(1-2), 1-22.

[44] Levinsohn, J. and M.J. Melitz, 2006, Productivity in a di¤erentiated products market
    equilibrium, unpublished manuscript.

[45] MaCurdy, T., 1985, A guide to applying time series models to panel data, Stanford, CA:
    Stanford University.

[46] Mairesse, J. and Z. Griliches, 1990, Heterogeneity in panel data: Are there stable production
    functions?, in: Champsaur, P., Deleau, M., Grandmont, J.M., Laroque, G., Guesnerie, R.,
    Henry, C., La¤ont, J.J., Mairesse, J., Monfort, A., Younes, Y. (Eds.), Essays in honor of
    Edmond Malinvaud, vol. 3, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

[47] Mairesse, J. and J. Jaumandreu, 1995, Panel-data estimates of the production function and
    the revenue function: What di¤erence does it make?, Scandinavian Journal of Economics,
    107(4), 651-672.

[48] Mairesse, J. and J.M. Pescheux, 1980, Fonction de production et mesure du capital: La
    robustesse des estimations, Annales de l’INSEE, 38-39, 63-75.

[49] Manning, A., 2003, Monopsony in motion: Imperfect competition in labor markets, Prince-
    ton: Princeton University Press.

[50] Marschak, J. and W.H. Andrews, 1944, Random simultaneous equations and the theory of
    production, Econometrica, 12(3-4), 143-205.



                                               39
[51] Martin, S., 1993, Advanced industrial economics, Cambridge, MA: Blackwell Publishers.

[52] McDonald, I.M. and R.M. Solow, 1981, Wage bargaining and employment, American Eco-
    nomic Review, 71(5), 896-908.

[53] Melitz, M.J, 2000, Estimating productivity in di¤erentiated product industries, Harvard
    University, unpublished manuscript.

[54] Nelson, P., 1973, The elasticity of labor supply to the individual …rm, Econometrica, 41(5),
    853-866.

[55] Neven, D.J., L. Röller and Z. Zhang, 2006, Endogenous costs and price-costs margins:
    An application to the European airline industry, Journal of Industrial Economics, 54(3),
    351-368.

[56] Nickell, S.J. and M. Andrews, 1983, Unions, real wages and employment in Britain 1951-79,
    Oxford Economic Papers, 35(supplement), 183-205.

[57] Nickell, S., 1999, Product markets and labour markets, Labour Economics, 6(1), 1-20.

[58] Odagiri, H. and T. Yamashita, 1987, Price mark-ups, market structure, and business ‡uc-
    tuation in Japanese manufacturing industries, Journal of Industrial Economics, 35(3), 317-
    331.

[59] OECD, 2005, OECD Science, Technology and industry scoreboard 2005, Organisation for
    Economic Co-operation and Development, www.oecd.org/sti/scoreboard.

[60] Pigou A.C., 1924, The economics of welfare, London: Macmillan.

[61] Reynolds, L., 1946, The supply of labor to the …rm, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 60(2),
    390-411.

[62] Rodrik, D., 1997, Has globalization gone too far?, Washington, DC: Institute for Interna-
    tional Economics.

[63] Roodman, D., 2005, xtabond2: Stata module to extend xtabond dynamic panel data esti-
    mator. Center for Global Development, Washington.

[64] Savin, N.E., 1984, Multiple hypothesis testing, in: Griliches, Z., Intrilligator, M.D. (Eds.),
    Handbook of Econometrics, vol. 2, Amsterdam: North-Holland.



                                                40
[65] Schmalensee, R., 1989, Inter-industry studies of structure and performance, in:
    Schmalensee, R., Willig, R. (Eds.), Handbook of Industrial Organization, vol. 2, Ams-
    terdam: North-Holland.

[66] Solow, R.M., 1957, Technical change and the aggregate production function, Review of
    Economics and Statistics, 39(3), 312-320.

[67] Staiger, D., J. Spetz and C. Phibbs, 1999, Is there monopsony in the labor market? Evi-
    dence from a natural experiment, NBER Working Paper 7258.

[68] Sullivan, D., 1989, Monopsony power in the market for nurses, Journal of Law and Eco-
    nomics, 32(2), S135-S178.

[69] Sutton, J., 1991, Sunk costs and market structure, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

[70] Sutton, J., 1998, Technology and market structure, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

[71] Swamy, P.A.V.B., 1970, E¢ cient inference in a random coe¢ cient model, Econometrica,
    38(2), 311-323.

[72] Syverson, C., 2010, What determines productivity?, NBER Working Paper 15712.

[73] Windmeijer, F., 2010, What’s the point of class. Random coe¢ cients versus latent class
    models, 2010 International Conference on Panel Data.

[74] Woolridge, J., 2002, Econometric analysis of cross sections and panel data, Cambridge,
    MA: MIT Press.




                                                41
Table 1
Summary statistics
 Variables                                                          1978-2001
                                              Mean           Sd.       Q1        Q2       Q3
    Real …rm output growth rate q             0.021         0.152     -0.061     0.019   0.103
    Labor growth rate n                       0.006         0.123     -0.043     0.000   0.054
    Capital growth rate k                    -0.001         0.151     -0.072    -0.020   0.060
    Materials growth rate m                   0.040         0.192     -0.060     0.038   0.139
    Labor share in nominal output N           0.307         0.136      0.208     0.291   0.387
    Materials share in nominal output   M     0.503         0.159      0.399     0.510   0.614
    1    N     M                              0.185         0.143      0.092     0.158   0.248
      q    k                                  0.022         0.188     -0.081     0.024   0.126
      n     k                                 0.007         0.166     -0.073     0.014   0.088
      m      k                                0.041         0.220     -0.079     0.041   0.160
    SRa                                       0.000         0.100     -0.056     0.000   0.054
Number of observations: 154363, except for   N   and    M    (165009).
a
    SR =   q    N   n    M   m    (1    N        M)    k.




                                                       42
Table 2
                                 "JQ (J = N; M; K), joint market imperfections parameter b ,
Estimates of output elasticities b
price-cost mark-up b (only) and extent of rent sharing b :
Full sample: 10646 …rms, each …rm between 12 and 24 years of observations - period 1978-2001
                                              Q
Part 1: Imposing constant returns to scale: b
                                            "K  =1      "NQ
                                                        b       b
                                                                "MQ

                                   STATIC SPECIFICATION                               DYNAMIC SPECIFICATION
                        OLS         OLS      GMM DIF     GMM SYS                       GMM DIF    GMM SYS
                      LEVELS        DIF     (t 2)(t 3)  (t 2)(t 3)                    (t    2)(t     3)   (t    2)(t     3)
                        0.331       0.298       0.138       0.298                           0.134               0.201
       "NQ
       b
                       (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.020)     (0.008)                         (0.032)             (0.015)
         Q              0.592       0.587       0.726       0.675                           0.595               0.541
       b
       "M
                       (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.017)     (0.007)                         (0.022)             (0.019)
         Q
       b
       "K               0.077       0.115       0.137       0.027                           0.271               0.258
                          1           1           1           1                               1                   1
             b only     1.144       1.112           1.129                    1.211          1.041               0.934
 b only =
                       (0.003)     (0.002)         (0.013)                  (0.007)        (0.032)             (0.020)
        b               0.096       0.186           0.993                    0.370          0.745               0.421
                       (0.017)     (0.013)         (0.095)                  (0.036)        (0.128)             (0.071)
             b          1.177       1.167           1.443                    1.342          1.184               1.076
     b=
                       (0.007)     (0.005)         (0.033)                  (0.015)        (0.043)             (0.039)
                        0.647       0.785           1.628                    0.962          1.532               1.146
        b
                       (0.017)     (0.013)         (0.063)                  (0.030)        (0.116)             (0.069)
        b               0.393       0.440           0.619                    0.490          0.605               0.534
                       (0.006)     (0.004)         (0.009)                  (0.008)        (0.018)             (0.015)
                                                                                            0.713               0.619
        b
                                                                                           (0.023)             (0.018)
Part 2: Not imposing constant returns to scale: b
                                                "KQ
                                                    =b        "NQ
                                                              b       b
                                                                      "MQ

                                   STATIC SPECIFICATION                               DYNAMIC SPECIFICATION
                         OLS        OLS      GMM DIF     GMM SYS                       GMM DIF    GMM SYS
                      LEVELS        DIF     (t 2)(t 3)  (t 2)(t 3)                    (t    2)(t     3)   (t    2)(t     3)
                         0.331      0.189        0.149      0.240                           0.111               0.057
       "NQ
       b
                        (0.001)    (0.002)     (0.022)     (0.011)                         (0.031)             (0.025)
         Q               0.592      0.554        0.566      0.696                           0.554               0.562
       b
       "M
                        (0.001)    (0.002)     (0.020)     (0.008)                         (0.023)             (0.020)
         Q               0.077      0.049       -0.027      0.033                           0.033               0.241
       b
       "K
                        (0.002)    (0.003)     (0.038)     (0.017)                         (0.057)             (0.027)
        b                  1        0.792        0.688      0.969                           0.803               0.860
                       (0.0006)    (0.003)     (0.020)     (0.004)                         (0.052)             (0.025)
                        1.153       1.011           0.890                    1.219          1.011               0.916
     b only
                       (0.004)     (0.004)         (0.022)                  (0.008)        (0.035)             (0.033)
      b only            1.145       1.189           1.398                    1.212          1.074               0.897
         b             (0.003)     (0.003)         (0.035)                  (0.007)        (0.054)             (0.022)
        b               0.100       0.488           0.639                    0.602           0.729              0.582
                       (0.019)     (0.012)         (0.101)                  (0.047)         (0.128)           (0.077)
                        1.177       1.102           1.126                    1.383           1.100              1.117
        b
                       (0.002)     (0.004)         (0.039)                  (0.016)         (0.046)           (0.041)
                        0.652       1.231           1.433                    1.219           1.598              1.864
        b
                       (0.006)     (0.010)         (0.091)                  (0.037)         (0.118)           (0.091)
        b               0.395       0.552           0.589                    0.549           0.615              0.651
                       (0.002)     (0.002)         (0.015)                  (0.007)         (0.017)           (0.011)
        b               1.178       1.392           1.637                    1.427           1.371              1.299
        b              (0.002)     (0.006)         (0.055)                  (0.020)         (0.088)           (0.057)
                                                                                             0.723              0.609
        b
                                                                                            (0.023)           (0.020)
Robust standard errors and …rst-step robust standard errors in columns 1-2 and columns 3-6 respectively.
Time dummies are included but not reported.
(1) Input shares: N = 0:307, M = 0:503, K = 0:190.
(2) GM M DIF : the set of instruments includes the lagged levels of n, m and k dated (t 2) and (t 3).
(3) GM M SY S : the set of instruments includes the lagged levels of n, m and k dated (t 2) and (t 3) in the …rst-di¤erenced
    equations and correspondingly the lagged …rst-di¤erences of n, m and k dated (t 1) in the levels equations.
                                                              43
Table 3
Industry repartition
                                                                                         # Firms
    Industry j   Code              Name                                                                  Regime R
                                                                                         (# Obs.)
        1        B01              Meat preparations                                     324 (4881)       IC -M O
        2        B02              Milk products                                         122 (1981)      P C -M O ?
        3        B03              Beverages                                             106 (1705)      P C -M O ?
        4        B04              Food production for animals                           126 (1942)      P C -M O ?
        5        B05-B06          Other food products                                   518 (7835)       IC -EB
        6        C11              Clothing and skin goods                               453 (6938)       IC -EB
        7        C12              Leather goods and footwear                            213 (3400)       IC -EB
        8        C20              Publishing, (re)printing                             724 (10919)       IC -EB
        9        C31              Pharmaceutical products                               130 (2153)      P C -M O ?
        10       C32              Soap, perfume and maintenance products                114 (1877)      P C -M O
        11       C41              Furniture                                             322 (5043)       IC -EB
        12       C42, C44-C46     Accommodation equipment                               179 (2871)      IC -P RO
        13       C43              Sport articles, games and other products              156 (2390)      IC -P RO
        14       D01              Motor vehicles                                        133 (2064)       IC -P R
        15       D02              Transport equipment                                   129 (2177)      IC -P RO
        16       E11-E14          Ship building, aircraft and railway construction      110 (1834)       IC -P R
        17       E21              Metal products for construction                       171 (2590)       IC -EB
        18       E22              Ferruginous and steam boilers                         294 (4461)       IC -EB
        19       E23              Mechanical equipment                                  182 (3020)     P C -M O?;O
        20       E24              Machinery for general usage                           268 (4151)       IC -P R
        21       E25-E26          Agriculture machinery                                 154 (2391)      P C -P RO
        22       E27-E28          Other machinery for speci…c usage                     286 (4355)       IC -EB
        23       E31-E35          Electric and electronic machinery                     203 (2934)       IC -EB
        24       F11-F12          Mineral products                                      205 (3099)       IC -EB
        25       F13              Glass products                                        104 (1681)      P C -M O O
        26       F14              Earthenware products and construction material        391 (6109)       IC -EB
        27       F21              Textile art                                           270 (4338)       IC -EB
        28       F22-F23          Textile products and clothing                         310 (4858)       IC -EB
        29       F31              Wooden products                                       475 (7170)      IC -P RO
        30       F32-F33          Paper and printing products                           330 (5312)       IC -P R
        31       F41-F42          Mineral and organic chemical products                 192 (3026)       IC -M O
        32       F43-F45          Parachemical and rubber products                      171 (2759)      P C -M O ?
        33       F46              Transformation of plastic products                    600 (9037)       IC -EB
        34       F51-F52          Steel products, non-ferrous metals                    125 (2024)      IC -P RO
        35       F53              Ironware                                              138 (2247)       IC -EB
        36       F54              Industrial service to metal products                 1000 (14930)      IC -EB
        37       F55-F56          Metal products, recuperation                          599 (9314)       IC -EB
        38       F61-F62          Electrical goods and components                       319 (5193)       IC -P R
                        Q
?                   (    )
                        M j
    Imposing     j= (   M )j
                               1 and estimating a non-lineair speci…cation switches industry j = 2; 3; 4; 9; 19 and 32
    from P C -M O to IC -M O .
O
    Increasing the rejection region in both parts of the classi…cation procedure by using the 40% statistical signi…cance level,
    switches industry j = 21 from P C -P R to P C -M O , industry j = 19 and 25 from P C -M O to IC -M O ,
    industry j = 12; 13 and 15 from IC -P R to IC -EB and industry j = 29 and 34 from IC -P R to IC -M O .




                                                                   44
Table 4
Classi…cation of industry j 2 f1; : : : ; 38g in
regime R 2 < = fP C-P R; IC-P R; P C-EB; P C-M O; IC-EB; IC-M Og
                                       MAIN CLASSIFICATION PROCEDURE
  # ind.
                                                                  LABOR MARKET
  prop. of ind. (%)
                                         Perfect competition
                                                                      E¢ cient
  PRODUCT MARKET                         or right-to-manage                             Monopsony (M O)
                                                                      bargaining (EB)
                                         bargaining (P R)
                                                    1                             0             8           9
  Perfect competition (P C)
                                                  2:6%                          0%           21:1%        23:7%
                                                   10                            17             2           29
  Imperfect competition (IC)
                                                 26:3%                         44:7%          5:3%        76:3%
                                                   11                            17            10           38
                                                  29%                          44:7%         26:3%        100%
                                                 ROBUSTNESS CHECK 1
  # ind.
                                                                  LABOR MARKET
  prop. of ind. (%)
                                         Perfect competition
                                                                      E¢ cient
  PRODUCT MARKET                         or right-to-manage                             Monopsony (M O)
                                                                      bargaining (EB)
                                         bargaining (P R)
                                                    1                             0             2            3
  Perfect competition (P C)
                                                  2:6%                          0%            5:3%         7:9%
                                                   10                            17             8           35
  Imperfect competition (IC)
                                                 26:3%                         44:7%         21:1%        92:1%
                                                   11                            17            10           38
                                                  29%                          44:7%         26:3%        100%
                                                 ROBUSTNESS CHECK 2
  # ind.
                                                                  LABOR MARKET
  prop. of ind. (%)
                                         Perfect competition
                                                                      E¢ cient
  PRODUCT MARKET                         or right-to-manage                             Monopsony (M O)
                                                                      bargaining (EB)
                                         bargaining (P R)
                                                   0                              0             7           7
  Perfect competition (P C)
                                                  0%                            0%           18:4%        18:4%
                                                   5                             20             6           31
  Imperfect competition (IC)
                                                 13:2%                         52:6%         15:8%        81:6%
                                                   5                             20            13           38
                                                 13:2%                         52:6%         34:2%        100%
For details on the speci…c industries belonging to each regime: see Table 3.




                                                           45
Table 5                                                         ³ ´
                                                                 
Summary industry analysis: Industry-specific output elasticities b                                                        b ,
                                                                      ( =   ), joint market imperfections parameter 
                                                                                                                           
                                                                    
                                                                                                      ³ ´
                                                                          b or labor supply elasticity b
                                     b () and extent of rent sharing 
and corresponding price-cost mark-up                                                                  
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                                               

                                                                                                                                                              OLS DIF
     Regime  =  -
                                                                                          ³ ´                 ³ ´                 ³ ´
                                           ( )           ( )       ( )            
                                                                                           b                   
                                                                                                               b                   
                                                                                                                                   b                b 
                                                                                                                                                                        b
                                                                                                                                                                                              b
                                                                                                                                                                                                                b
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   b
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
     [17 industries]                                                                                                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                                         
     Industry   mean                       0.334            0.488        0.178         0.295   (0.012)     0.586     (0.010)    0.119   (0.010)   1.106   (0.012)   0.319    (0.053)   1.204   (0.022)   0.526    (0.079)   0.328    (0.036)
            1
     Industry                              0.294            0.470        0.165         0.264   (0.010)     0.566     (0.008)    0.103   (0.008)   1.078   (0.011)   0.191    (0.040)   1.162   (0.019)   0.359    (0.054)   0.264    (0.029)
            2
     Industry                              0.333            0.482        0.177         0.286   (0.012)     0.585     (0.011)    0.118   (0.010)   1.099   (0.012)   0.315    (0.054)   1.188   (0.022)   0.569    (0.073)   0.363    (0.033)
            3
     Industry                              0.379            0.513        0.187         0.316   (0.015)     0.634     (0.012)    0.137   (0.013)   1.138   (0.014)   0.426    (0.065)   1.235   (0.024)   0.661    (0.093)   0.398    (0.036)
     Regime  =  - 
                                                                                          ³ ´                 ³ ´                 ³ ´
                                           ( )           ( )       ( )            
                                                                                           b                   
                                                                                                               b                   
                                                                                                                                   b                b 
                                                                                                                                                                        b
                                                                                                                                                                                              b
                                                                                                                                                                                               
     [10 industries]                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                         
     Industry   mean                       0.287            0.520        0.193         0.314   (0.017)     0.588     (0.014)    0.098   (0.013)   1.121   (0.015)    0.024   (0.080)   1.129   (0.027)
            1
     Industry                              0.257            0.496        0.170         0.287   (0.013)     0.550     (0.012)    0.083   (0.010)   1.081   (0.011)   -0.007   (0.065)   1.081   (0.022)
            2
     Industry                              0.286            0.531        0.197         0.309   (0.017)     0.577     (0.014)    0.088   (0.013)   1.116   (0.015)    0.048   (0.077)   1.123   (0.028)
            3
     Industry                              0.330            0.538        0.213         0.351   (0.020)     0.642     (0.017)    0.112   (0.017)   1.155   (0.019)    0.074   (0.085)   1.163   (0.031)
     Regime  =   - 
                                                                                          ³ ´                 ³ ´                 ³ ´                                                                                         ³ ´
                                           ( )           ( )       ( )            
                                                                                           b                   
                                                                                                               b                   
                                                                                                                                   b                b 
                                                                                                                                                                        b
                                                                                                                                                                                              b
                                                                                                                                                                                                                b
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               b
     [8 industries]                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
   Industry mean                0.223    0.565      0.211                              0.328   (0.022)     0.557     (0.021)    0.115   (0.017)   1.074   (0.023)   -0.556   (0.140)   0.987   (0.038)   0.659   (0.064)    2.574   (1.099)
   Industry 1                  0.160    0.508      0.195                              0.264   (0.020)     0.515     (0.019)    0.098   (0.015)   1.053   (0.020)   -0.701   (0.113)   0.960   (0.035)   0.584   (0.059)    1.408   (0.370)
   Industry 2                  0.231    0.548      0.212                              0.338   (0.022)     0.536     (0.021)    0.111   (0.016)   1.065   (0.024)   -0.563   (0.129)   0.984   (0.036)   0.629   (0.062)    1.711   (0.442)
   Industry 3                  0.281    0.630      0.234                              0.383   (0.023)     0.603     (0.024)    0.126   (0.019)   1.101   (0.026)   -0.342   (0.166)   1.015   (0.040)   0.748   (0.069)    2.973   (1.127)
Robust standard errors in parentheses.

  Detailed information on the industry-specific estimates is                           presented in Table A.2 [Part 1] in Appendix.


                                                                            
                                                                (
                                                                   )
            (
                )       (
                              )
                                            (       
                                                ) − ( ) ( )                                              (
                                                                                      = (  ) =                     )
                                                                                                        ( )
     =
                     −              =
                                                                        
                                                                                     
                                                                                     
            ( )        ( )           (
                                              )
                                               
                                                                                         1+(  )
                                                                                                       ( )   (
                                                                                                                      )
                                           ( )   [
                                                  ( ) +( ) −1              ]
            (
               )                           
                                                                                            
                                                                                                
      =
                                   =
                                                                                     
                                                                                        =      
            ( )                        1+                                                 
                                                                                               1− 




                                                                                                                                                  46
Table 6                                                                  ³ ´
                                                                          
Summary firm analysis: Heterogeneity in firm-specific output elasticities b                                                    b,
                                                                                 ( =   ), joint market imperf. parameter 
                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                      ³ ´
                                     b () and extent of rent sharing 
and corresponding price-cost mark-up                                      b or labor supply elasticity b 
                                                                                                         
                                                                             
                                                                                                            
Diﬀerent indicators and first-diﬀerenced OLS estimates
  Regime  =  -
                                                                                 ³ ´         ³ ´         ³ ´
                                              ( )      ( )      ( )      
                                                                                  b           
                                                                                              b           
                                                                                                          b         b 
                                                                                                                                    b
                                                                                                                                            b
                                                                                                                                                      b
                                                                                                                                                                 b
                                                                                                                                                                  
  [5715 firms]                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                              
  Simple mean                                  0.341       0.478      0.181       0.346       0.572       0.082       1.116       0.099     1.260      -2.298     0.439
  Observed dispersion   b                   (0.130)     (0.135)    (0.097)     (0.243)     (0.223)     (0.215)     (0.302)     (1.391)   (0.586)   (72.662)   (21.013)
  True dispersion b                      [0.122]     [0.126]      [0]       [0.102]     [0.154]     [0.092]     [0.210]     [0.875]   [0.387]       [0]       [0]
  Weighted mean                                0.378       0.534      0.272       0.269       0.600       0.061       1.114       0.506     1.182      1.017      0.803
  Weighted observed dispersion    b         (0.139)     (0.128)    (0.141)     (0.196)     (0.211)     (0.149)     (0.199)     (0.920)   (0.354)    (1.160)    (0.136)
  Weighted true dispersion   b           [0.137]     [0.126]    [0.121]     [0.155]     [0.188]     [0.112]     [0.166]     [0.755]   [0.301]    [1.040]    [0.126]
  Median                                       0.330       0.482      0.156       0.298       0.587       0.077       1.108       0.297     1.204      0.431      0.582
  Interquartile observed dispersion  b      (0.128)     (0.134)    (0.089)     (0.242)     (0.232)     (0.182)     (0.239)     (1.097)   (0.435)    (1.757)    (0.440)
  Robust true dispersion   b             [0.124]     [0.130]      [0]       [0.175]     [0.194]     [0.115]     [0.181]     [0.795]   [0.335]    [1.320]    [0.319]
  Regime  =  - 
                                                                                 ³ ´         ³ ´         ³ ´
                                              ( )      ( )      ( )      
                                                                                  b           
                                                                                              b           
                                                                                                          b         b 
                                                                                                                                    b
                                                                                                                                            b
                                                                                                                                             
  [1845 firms]                                                                                                                      
                                                                                                              
  Simple mean                                  0.287       0.519      0.194       0.368       0.574       0.058       1.128       -0.338    1.135
  Observed dispersion   b                   (0.106)     (0.119)    (0.100)     (0.252)     (0.229)     (0.221)     (0.294)     (1.580)   (0.465)
  True dispersion b                      [0.097]     [0.108]      [0]       [0.060]     [0.146]     [0.066]     [0.191]     [0.934]   [0.271]
  Weighted mean                                0.299       0.578      0.276       0.294       0.610       0.051       1.122       0.220     1.116
  Weighted observed dispersion    b         (0.110)     (0.118)    (0.134)     (0.221)     (0.215)     (0.158)     (0.194)     (1.101)   (0.342)
  Weighted true dispersion   b           [0.107]     [0.116]    [0.113]     [0.172]     [0.190]     [0.117]     [0.159]     [0.889]   [0.289]
  Median                                       0.271       0.526      0.174       0.324       0.580       0.058       1.117       -0.008    1.122
  Interquartile observed dispersion  b      (0.105)     (0.121)    (0.091)     (0.264)     (0.243)     (0.197)     (0.242)     (1.318)   (0.407)
  Robust true dispersion   b             [0.099]     [0.117]      [0]       [0.186]     [0.199]     [0.127]     [0.179]     [0.954]   [0.303]




                                                                                                 47
Table 6 (ctd)                                                            ³ ´
                                                                          
Summary firm analysis: Heterogeneity in firm-specific output elasticities b                                                   b,
                                                                                ( =   ), joint market imperf. parameter 
                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                              ³ ´
                                     b () and extent of rent of rent sharing 
and corresponding price-cost mark-up                                              b or labor supply elasticity b
                                                                                                                
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                              
Diﬀerent indicators and first-diﬀerenced OLS estimates
  Regime  =   - 
                                                                                            ³ ´           ³ ´       ³ ´                                                    ³ ´
                                              ( )      ( )             ( )          
                                                                                             b             
                                                                                                           b         
                                                                                                                     b            b 
                                                                                                                                             b
                                                                                                                                                       b
                                                                                                                                                                 b
                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                            b
     [899 firms]                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                              
     Simple mean                                     0.230        0.559        0.211          0.368        0.554     0.078         1.085     -0.984    1.004     6.786     -20.307
     Observed dispersion     b                   (0.108)      (0.143)       (0.112)       (0.260)       (0.247)   (0.211)       (0.312)   (2.325)   (0.436)   (79.36)   (583.099)
     True dispersion   b                       [0.098]      [0.132]        [0]          [0.092]      [0.182]   [0.053]       [0.226]   [1.427]   [0.264]     [0]        [0]
     Weighted mean                                   0.261        0.650        0.300          0.264        0.615     0.044         1.116     -0.059    1.052     0.108      0.041
     Weighted observed dispersion      b         (0.108)      (0.128)       (0.136)       (0.219)       (0.259)   (0.143)       (0.190)   (1.218)   (0.319)   (0.163)    (0.208)
     Weighted true dispersion     b            [0.105]      [0.127]      [0.120]        [0.183]      [0.241]   [0.111]       [0.162]   [1.011]   [0.278]   [0.108]    [0.151]
     Median                                          0.219        0.563        0.185          0.322        0.557     0.059         1.085     -0.462    1.015     0.694      0.194
     Interquartile observed dispersion    b      (0.116)      (0.154)       (0.109)       (0.267)       (0.287)   (0.172)       (0.247)   (1.705)   (0.401)   (0.976)    (1.786)
     Robust true dispersion     b              [0.111]      [0.151]      [0.035]        [0.208]      [0.254]   [0.106]       [0.185]   [1.374]   [0.317]   [0.865]    [1.440]

    Technical details on the Swamy estimates of true variance are presented in Table A.4   in Appendix.

    Formulas of the market imperfection parameter estimates are given in footnote (b) of   Table 5.




                                                                                                              48
Table 7
Correlations between the joint market imperfections parameter ln b i ,
the corresponding price-cost mark-up taking into account labor market imperfections ln(bi           1)
and relative extent of rent sharing ln(bi ), and …rm-speci…c observables
OLS, WLS and median regression coe¢ cients
  Regime R = IC -EB
                                  ni           capinti       mixentri        rdentri        disti
  [5715 …rms]
   ^ OLS
                               -0.081         -0.013         -0.094        -0.100         0.123
   ln b i
                               (0.021)        (0.028)        (0.074)       (0.155)        (0.064)
                               -0.108         0.075          -0.208        -0.070         0.304
   ln(bi     1)
                               (0.020)        (0.029)        (0.072)       (0.138)        (0.061)
                               -0.290         -0.138         0.361         -0.413         1.208
   ln(bi )
                               (0.022)        (0.032)        (0.081)       (0.159)        (0.067)
   ^ W LS
                                -0.033        -0.024          0.219        -0.064         -0.248
   ln b i
                               (0.043)        (0.058)        (0.117)       (0.203)        (0.174)
                               -0.080         0.127          -0.119        -0.316         0.309
   ln(bi     1)
                               (0.027)        (0.037)        (0.115)       (0.122)        (0.068)
                               -0.213         -0.229         -0.607        -0.846         0.947
   ln(bi )
                               (0.044)        (0.046)        (0.063)       (0.098)        (0.108)
   ^ (0:50)
                               -0.084         0.002           -0.066       -0.038         0.089
   ln b i
                               (0.018)        (0.028)        (0.070)       (0.146)        (0.059)
                               -0.093         0.098          -0.118        0.035          0.248
   ln(bi     1)
                               (0.017)        (0.025)        (0.066)       (0.137)        (0.073)
                               -0.316         -0.153         -0.336        -0.352         1.181
   ln(bi )
                               (0.021)        (0.032)        (0.092)       (0.191)        (0.064)
   Signi…cant at 1%,    Signi…cant at 5%,   Signi…cant at 10%. Robust standard errors in parentheses.
(1) The dependent and the explanatory variables are centered around the industry mean.
(2) The coe¢ cients are for single …rm-speci…c variable regressions (including industry dummies), except for the regression
    including the R&D identi…er which includes two …rm-speci…c variables (mixentr i and rdentr i ) and industry dummies.




                                                               49
            Graph 1 Profitability differences across industries within R=IC-EB
        1.30                                                                                        35              36
                                                                                                   8

                                                                                              7
        1.25

                                                                         27
                                                                                             5
        1.20              26                                                                  11
                                 37
       j
                            24                            33            28                                      22
      µ1.15
       j
                                                      23                                       6                          18


        1.10
                                                     17

               0.10                      0.20                      0.30                                 0.40                  0.50
                                                                                    j

                                                           low            medium
                                                           high


                   Source: Table A.2 [Part 1, R=IC-EB] estimates




        Graph 2 Unionization differences across industries within R=IC-EB
     1.30                                                                                          35
                                                                                                                36
                                                                                               8

                                                                                          7
     1.25

                                                                    27
                                                                                         5
     1.20            26                                                                   11
                            37

                       24                            33            28                                          22
j   1.15
                                                                                                                         18
                                                23                                       6


     1.10
                                                17

            0.10                      0.20                       0.30          j                  0.40                       0.50


                                                     low                medium
                                                     high

            Source: Table A.2 [Part 1, R=IC-EB] estimates




                                                                        
        Graph 3 Openness differences across industries within R=IC-EB

      1.30                                                                             35              36
                                                                                   8

     1.25                                                                      7

                                                           27
                                                                           5
      1.20           26        37                                          11
j
                          24                 33           28                                       22
      1.15
                                            23                             6                                      18


      1.10
                                           17
              0.10                  0.20                0.30                           0.40                            0.50
                                                                     j

                                                 low           medium
                                                 high

              Source: Table A.2 [Part 1, R=IC-EB] estimates




        Graph 4 Technology differences across industries within R=IC-EB
     1.30                                                                                   35
                                                                                                             36
                                                                                            8
                                                                                   7
     1.25

                                                                27
                                                                                   5
                     26                                                             11
     1.20                      37
j
                      24                          33           28                                           22
     1.15
                                             23                                                                         18
                                                                                   6


     1.10
                                            17

             0.10                   0.20                 0.30                                   0.40                          0.50
                                                                      j

                                                  low           medium

             Source: Table A.2 [Part 1, R=IC-EB] estimates




                                                        
Appendix: Detailed results



Table A.1                                                       ³ ´
                                                                 
Summary industry analysis: Industry-specific output elasticities b                                                        b ,
                                                                      ( =   ), joint market imperfections parameter 
                                                                                                                           
                                                                    
                                                                                                      ³ ´
                                                                          b or labor supply elasticity b
                                     b () and extent of rent sharing 
and corresponding price-cost mark-up                                                                  
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                              

                                                                                                                   GMM SYS ( − 2)( − 3)
  Regime  =  -
                                                              ³ ´              ³ ´                ³ ´
                               ( )   ( )    ( )       
                                                               b                
                                                                                b                  
                                                                                                   b                b 
                                                                                                                                        b
                                                                                                                                                              b
                                                                                                                                                                                b
                                                                                                                                                                                                   b
                                                                                                                                                                                                    
  [17 industries]                                                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                         
   Industry   mean             0.334     0.488     0.178   0.316   (0.034)   0.632   (0.028)   0.052    (0.025)   1.174   (0.029)   0.350    (0.150)   1.301   (0.058)   0.501    (0.211)   0.295    (0.136)
         1
   Industry                    0.294     0.470     0.165   0.264   (0.030)   0.606   (0.023)   0.022    (0.020)   1.142   (0.024)   0.221    (0.115)   1.253   (0.044)   0.311    (0.132)   0.237    (0.055)
         2
   Industry                    0.333     0.482     0.177   0.314   (0.035)   0.636   (0.030)   0.047    (0.024)   1.173   (0.026)   0.354    (0.165)   1.296   (0.060)   0.503    (0.214)   0.335    (0.084)
         3
   Industry                    0.379     0.513     0.187   0.359   (0.039)   0.674   (0.033)   0.075    (0.029)   1.219   (0.033)   0.443    (0.183)   1.348   (0.065)   0.685    (0.239)   0.407    (0.142)
  Regime  =  - 
                                                              ³ ´              ³ ´                ³ ´
                               ( )   ( )    ( )       
                                                               b                
                                                                                b                  
                                                                                                   b                b 
                                                                                                                                        b
                                                                                                                                                              b
                                                                                                                                                               
  [10 industries]                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                         
   Industry   mean             0.287     0.520     0.193   0.342   (0.036)   0.642   (0.034)    0.016   (0.029)   1.223   (0.035)   0.035    (0.176)   1.237   (0.065)
         1
   Industry                    0.257     0.496     0.170   0.301   (0.033)   0.600   (0.028)   -0.006   (0.025)   1.174   (0.030)   0.027    (0.137)   1.133   (0.053)
         2
   Industry                    0.286     0.531     0.197   0.339   (0.037)   0.649   (0.033)    0.019   (0.027)   1.234   (0.034)   0.050    (0.180)   1.260   (0.063)
         3
   Industry                    0.330     0.538     0.213   0.364   (0.042)   0.687   (0.040)    0.034   (0.034)   1.281   (0.037)   0.083    (0.207)   1.290   (0.075)
  Regime  =   - 
                                                              ³ ´              ³ ´                ³ ´                                                                                         ³ ´
                               ( )   ( )    ( )       
                                                               b                
                                                                                b                  
                                                                                                   b                b 
                                                                                                                                        b
                                                                                                                                                              b
                                                                                                                                                                                b
                                                                                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                                                                                               b
  [8 industries]                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                                       
   Industry mean                0.223     0.565     0.211    0.309 (0.041) 0.650 (0.036) 0.041 (0.038)            1.204   (0.045)   -0.273   (0.236)   1.152   (0.065)   0.835   (0.149)    4.681   (60.01)
   Industry 1                  0.160     0.508     0.195    0.264 (0.034) 0.585 (0.030) 0.008 (0.029)            1.154   (0.036)   -0.486   (0.199)   1.107   (0.055)   0.706   (0.107)    1.514   (1.796)
   Industry 2                  0.231     0.548     0.212    0.331 (0.041) 0.646 (0.037) 0.028 (0.037)            1.199   (0.040)   -0.158   (0.247)   1.132   (0.067)   0.883   (0.146)    5.308   (12.11)
   Industry 3                  0.281     0.630     0.234    0.349 (0.045) 0.715 (0.041) 0.064 (0.048)            1.247   (0.060)   -0.085   (0.268)   1.189   (0.077)   0.936   (0.170)    8.852   (116.4)
First-step robust standard errors in parentheses.

  Detailed information on the industry-specific estimates is presented in Table A.2 [Part 2] in Appendix.

  Formulas of the market imperfection parameter estimates are given in footnote (b) of Table 5.




                                                                                                                   52
Table A.2                                               ³ ´
                                                         
Industry analysis: Industry-specific output elasticities b                                                        b ,
                                                              ( =   ), joint market imperfections parameter 
                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                       ³ ´
and corresponding price-cost mark-up                                       b or labor supply elasticity b
                                       b () and extent of rent sharing                             
                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                           


 Part 1: OLS DIF
 Regime  =  - [17 industries]                                                                                  OLS DIF
                                                     ³ ´               ³ ´               ³ ´
 Industry    # Firms   ( )   ( )   ( )      
                                                      b                 
                                                                        b                 
                                                                                          b                b 
                                                                                                                              b
                                                                                                                                                    b
                                                                                                                                                                      b
                                                                                                                                                                                        b
                                                                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                
    37         599      0.322    0.442    0.236    0.337   (0.010)   0.526   (0.009)   0.137   (0.008)   1.144   (0.011)   0.141   (0.045)   1.188   (0.019)   0.162   (0.049)   0.140   (0.037)
    26         391      0.294    0.471    0.236    0.309   (0.012)   0.571   (0.011)   0.120   (0.010)   1.068   (0.013)   0.162   (0.061)   1.214   (0.024)   0.166   (0.060)   0.143   (0.044)
    24         205      0.265    0.497    0.238    0.261   (0.016)   0.585   (0.012)   0.154   (0.014)   1.135   (0.015)   0.191   (0.075)   1.177   (0.024)   0.180   (0.068)   0.153   (0.049)
    17         171      0.286    0.594    0.120    0.265   (0.016)   0.645   (0.013)   0.090   (0.014)   1.054   (0.016)   0.160   (0.072)   1.085   (0.022)   0.352   (0.153)   0.261   (0.084)
    23         203      0.385    0.450    0.165    0.375   (0.018)   0.518   (0.014)   0.107   (0.016)   1.090   (0.018)   0.177   (0.069)   1.150   (0.032)   0.360   (0.132)   0.264   (0.072)
    33         600      0.282    0.552    0.166    0.256   (0.008)   0.641   (0.008)   0.103   (0.007)   1.099   (0.009)   0.254   (0.040)   1.162   (0.014)   0.370   (0.054)   0.270   (0.029)
    28         310      0.334    0.483    0.183    0.289   (0.012)   0.566   (0.011)   0.145   (0.010)   1.078   (0.012)   0.308   (0.054)   1.173   (0.023)   0.478   (0.075)   0.324   (0.035)
    27         1270     0.309    0.514    0.178    0.274   (0.013)   0.634   (0.011)   0.091   (0.011)   1.143   (0.012)   0.347   (0.060)   1.235   (0.022)   0.489   (0.078)   0.328   (0.035)
     7         213      0.334    0.470    0.197    0.281   (0.015)   0.596   (0.013)   0.123   (0.012)   1.138   (0.015)   0.426   (0.065)   1.269   (0.027)   0.569   (0.076)   0.363   (0.031)
     6         453      0.424    0.398    0.178    0.370   (0.011)   0.457   (0.008)   0.173   (0.009)   1.037   (0.011)   0.277   (0.039)   1.150   (0.020)   0.573   (0.073)   0.364   (0.029)
     5         518      0.285    0.528    0.187    0.207   (0.009)   0.646   (0.011)   0.148   (0.008)   1.079   (0.011)   0.499   (0.046)   1.223   (0.020)   0.621   (0.049)   0.383   (0.018)
    11         322      0.317    0.518    0.165    0.254   (0.011)   0.628   (0.011)   0.118   (0.010)   1.095   (0.012)   0.408   (0.052)   1.211   (0.022)   0.645   (0.073)   0.392   (0.027)
     8         724      0.341    0.478    0.181    0.286   (0.008)   0.615   (0.008)   0.099   (0.005)   1.126   (0.007)   0.451   (0.037)   1.288   (0.016)   0.661   (0.047)   0.398   (0.017)
    35         138      0.333    0.491    0.177    0.276   (0.017)   0.640   (0.016)   0.093   (0.015)   1.161   (0.018)   0.475   (0.075)   1.306   (0.033)   0.685   (0.093)   0.406   (0.033)
    22         286      0.379    0.482    0.139    0.313   (0.015)   0.566   (0.011)   0.121   (0.013)   1.073   (0.014)   0.347   (0.054)   1.174   (0.022)   0.808   (0.115)   0.447   (0.035)
    36         1000     0.385    0.443    0.172    0.317   (0.007)   0.577   (0.005)   0.106   (0.005)   1.129   (0.006)   0.481   (0.027)   1.303   (0.012)   0.925   (0.039)   0.452   (0.012)
    18         294      0.406    0.482    0.112    0.341   (0.011)   0.556   (0.008)   0.103   (0.010)   1.053   (0.011)   0.315   (0.040)   1.153   (0.017)   0.992   (0.114)   0.498   (0.029)
   Total       6697     0.335    0.480    0.185    0.294   (0.003)   0.584   (0.003)   0.122             1.106   (0.003)   0.341   (0.070)   1.217   (0.007)   1.123   (0.016)   0.529   (0.003)




                                                                                                           53
Table A.2 (ctd)                                         ³ ´
                                                         
Industry analysis: Industry-specific output elasticities b                                                        b ,
                                                              ( =   ), joint market imperfections parameter 
                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                       ³ ´
and corresponding price-cost mark-up                                       b or labor supply elasticity b
                                       b () and extent of rent sharing                              
                                                                                                         
                                                                             
                                                                                                                           


 Part 1: OLS DIF (ctd)
 Regime  =  -  [10 industries]                                                                                   OLS DIF
                                                     ³ ´               ³ ´               ³ ´
 Industry    # Firms   ( )   ( )   ( )      
                                                      b                 
                                                                        b                 
                                                                                          b                b 
                                                                                                                               b
                                                                                                                                                     b
                                                                                                                                                      
                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                
    20          268      0.313   0.535    0.152    0.322   (0.015)   0.574   (0.012)   0.103   (0.012)   1.063   (0.013)    0.043   (0.065)   1.073 (0.022)
    29          475      0.257   0.538    0.205    0.292   (0.010)   0.579   (0.010)   0.128   (0.008)   1.090   (0.010)   -0.063   (0.053)   1.076 (0.019)
    16          110      0.245   0.496    0.159    0.352   (0.021)   0.536   (0.015)   0.112   (0.018)   1.066   (0.019)    0.061   (0.082)   1.081(0.030)
    38          319      0.230   0.500    0.170    0.365   (0.013)   0.550   (0.010)   0.085   (0.010)   1.102   (0.011)   -0.007   (0.055)   1.100 (0.021)
    13          156      0.322   0.465    0.213    0.323   (0.018)   0.519   (0.017)   0.158   (0.017)   1.081   (0.021)    0.111   (0.081)   1.115 (0.037)
    34          125      0.218   0.569    0.213    0.279   (0.024)   0.643   (0.019)   0.078   (0.017)   1.153   (0.020)   -0.150   (0.135)   1.131 (0.033)
    14          133      0.258   0.558    0.185    0.296   (0.020)   0.646   (0.017)   0.059   (0.014)   1.155   (0.017)    0.011   (0.101)   1.157 (0.031)
    12          179      0.331   0.480    0.188    0.351   (0.016)   0.559   (0.014)   0.091   (0.012)   1.131   (0.015)    0.105   (0.073)   1.163 (0.029)
    15          129      0.259   0.533    0.108    0.287   (0.017)   0.630   (0.014)   0.083   (0.014)   1.167   (0.016)    0.074   (0.085)   1.182 (0.026)
    30          330      0.237   0.529    0.234    0.275   (0.012)   0.642   (0.012)   0.084   (0.008)   1.200   (0.011)    0.053   (0.070)   1.212 (0.022)
   Total       2224      0.282   0.520    0.198    0.309   (0.006)   0.595   (0.006)   0.096             1.136   (0.006)    0.050   (0.031)   1.144 (0.011)
 Regime  =   -  [8 industries]                                                                                   OLS DIF
                                                     ³ ´               ³ ´               ³ ´                                                                                         ³ ´
 Industry    # Firms   ( )   ( )   ( )      
                                                      b                 
                                                                        b                 
                                                                                          b                b 
                                                                                                                               b
                                                                                                                                                     b
                                                                                                                                                                       b
                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                      b
                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                                                         
     4          126      0.116   0.681    0.202    0.240   (0.022)   0.656   (0.027)   0.104   (0.017)   1.061   (0.027)   -1.099   (0.225)   0.963   (0.039)   0.457   (0.060)   0.876   (0.210)
     2          122      0.137   0.693    0.170    0.234   (0.022)   0.675   (0.026)   0.092   (0.016)   1.049   (0.014)   -0.734   (0.192)   0.974   (0.037)   0.570   (0.072)   1.326   (0.391)
     9          130      0.232   0.530    0.238    0.385   (0.024)   0.527   (0.022)   0.088   (0.018)   1.122   (0.025)   -0.668   (0.135)   0.994   (0.041)   0.598   (0.057)   1.489   (0.354)
     3          106      0.183   0.579    0.238    0.288   (0.022)   0.549   (0.021)   0.163   (0.021)   1.027   (0.028)   -0.621   (0.140)   0.949   (0.036)   0.604   (0.060)   1.528   (0.385)
    32          171      0.230   0.565    0.205    0.337   (0.021)   0.541   (0.019)   0.123   (0.015)   1.058   (0.020)   -0.505   (0.116)   0.957   (0.034)   0.654   (0.059)   1.894   (0.495)
    10          114      0.250   0.531    0.219    0.339   (0.021)   0.532   (0.019)   0.129   (0.015)   1.080   (0.021)   -0.356   (0.111)   1.002   (0.036)   0.738   (0.066)   2.811   (0.959)
    25          104      0.312   0.459    0.229    0.423   (0.016)   0.472   (0.022)   0.105   (0.019)   1.126   (0.025)   -0.328   (0.122)   1.028   (0.048)   0.758   (0.076)   3.136   (1.296)
    19          182      0.326   0.486    0.188    0.381   (0.019)   0.502   (0.015)   0.117   (0.014)   1.070   (0.017)   -0.137   (0.082)   1.032   (0.031)   0.883   (0.065)   7.533   (4.702)
   Total       1055      0.228   0.561    0.211    0.332   (0.010)   0.553   (0.010)   0.115             1.095   (0.010)   -0.471   (0.059)   0.986   (0.018)   0.677   (0.031)   2.092   (0.297)
 Regime  =  -  [2 industries]                                                                                    OLS DIF
                                                     ³ ´               ³ ´               ³ ´                                                                                         ³ ´
 Industry    # Firms   ( )   ( )   ( )      
                                                      b                 
                                                                        b                 
                                                                                          b                b 
                                                                                                                               b
                                                                                                                                                     b
                                                                                                                                                                       b
                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                      b
                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                                                         
    31          192      0.260   0.544    0.196    0.339 (0.016)     0.566 (0.015)     0.094 (0.013)     1.100 (0.016)     -0.265 (0.085)     1.041 (0.028)     0.797 (0.055)      3.935 (1.351)
     1          324      0.201   0.606    0.192    0.255 (0.012)     0.638 (0.013)     0.106 (0.009)     1.090 (0.012)     -0.214 (0.080)     1.053 (0.022)     0.831 (0.055)      4.927 (1.943)
   Total        516      0.221   0.585    0.194    0.285 (0.013)     0.605 (0.015)     0.110             1.122 (0.012)      0.275 (0.067)     1.203 (0.029)     1.296 (0.085)     -4.374 (0.973)
 Regime  =   -  [1 industry]                                                                                     OLS DIF
                                                     ³ ´               ³ ´               ³ ´
 Industry    # Firms   ( )   ( )   ( )      
                                                      b                 
                                                                        b                 
                                                                                          b                b 
                                                                                                                               b
                                                                                                                                                     b
                                                                                                                                                      
                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                
    21          154       0.300    0.553    0.147  0.344 (0.021) 0.556 (0.016) 0.099 (0.016)             1.037 (0.018)     -0.139 (0.093)     1.006 (0.030)
Robust standard errors in parentheses. Time dummies are included but not reported.

                                                                                                                 54
Table A.2 (ctd)                                         ³ ´
                                                         
Industry analysis: Industry-specific output elasticities b                                                        b ,
                                                              ( =   ), joint market imperfections parameter 
                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                       ³ ´
and corresponding price-cost mark-up                                       b or labor supply elasticity b
                                       b () and extent of rent sharing                             
                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                

 Part 2: GMM SYS
 Regime  =  - [17 industries]                                                                           GMM SYS (t-2) (t-3)
                                ³ ´               ³ ´              ³ ´
 Industry     # Firms           
                                 b                 
                                                   b                
                                                                    b              b 
                                                                                                      b
                                                                                                                          b
                                                                                                                                         b
                                                                                                                                                            b
                                                                                                                                                                               1     2
                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                       
      37          599     0.238 (0.040)      0.692 (0.032)  0.070 (0.024) 1.243 (0.029) 0.021           (0.182)    1.564   (0.072)    0.719   (0.132)    0.418   (0.045)    0.000   -11.94   -2.24
      26          391     0.252 (0.032)      0.659 (0.030)  0.088 (0.028) 1.189 (0.038) 0.066           (0.210)    1.401   (0.064)    0.482   (0.120)    0.325   (0.055)    0.015    -9.16   -2.00
      24          205     0.264 (0.038)      0.623 (0.030)  0.113 (0.020) 1.174 (0.024) 0.755           (0.260)    1.253   (0.061)    0.227   (0.167)    0.185   (0.111)    1.000    -6.16    0.52
      17          171     0.331 (0.049)      0.626 (0.036)  0.043 (0.029) 1.081 (0.026) 0.355           (0.337)    1.053   (0.060)   -0.238   (0.520)   -0.312   (0.894)    1.000    -6.24    0.27
      23          203     0.409 (0.040)      0.563 (0.041)  0.028 (0.041) 1.162 (0.050) 0.238           (0.208)    1.249   (0.092)    0.348   (0.292)    0.258   (0.161)    1.000    -8.18   -2.72
      33          600     0.298 (0.034)      0.654 (0.027)  0.047 (0.019) 1.147 (0.021) 0.875           (0.187)    1.185   (0.048)    0.180   (0.229)    0.152   (0.164)    0.000   -12.15   -2.98
      28          310     0.359 (0.042)      0.626 (0.034)  0.015 (0.027) 1.227 (0.031) 0.256           (0.189)    1.296   (0.070)    0.311   (0.244)    0.237   (0.142)    0.435    -8.87   -2.96
      27         1270     0.280 (0.039)      0.674 (0.030)  0.046 (0.023) 1.193 (0.024) 0.190           (0.242)    1.312   (0.058)    0.536   (0.214)    0.349   (0.091)    0.692    -7.98   -1.73
       7          213     0.359 (0.039)      0.566 (0.035)  0.075 (0.037) 1.164 (0.045) 0.286           (0.216)    1.206   (0.075)    0.183   (0.228)    0.155   (0.163)    0.999    -6.25    0.30
       6          453     0.399 (0.030)      0.526 (0.017)  0.075 (0.029) 1.213 (0.033) 0.332           (0.174)    1.323   (0.043)    0.685   (0.157)    0.407   (0.055)    0.004    -9.91   -2.40
       5          518     0.239 (0.016)      0.677 (0.023)  0.084 (0.022) 1.117 (0.028) 0.818           (0.175)    1.281   (0.043)    0.527   (0.086)    0.345   (0.037)    0.006    -9.15   -2.24
      11          322     0.314 (0.042)      0.698 (0.034) -0.012 (0.030) 1.247 (0.033) 0.542           (0.202)    1.348   (0.065)    0.503   (0.239)    0.335   (0.106)    0.676    -9.46   -2.81
       8          724     0.295 (0.024)      0.682 (0.021)  0.023 (0.014) 1.219 (0.018) 1.079           (0.143)    1.429   (0.045)    0.746   (0.121)    0.427   (0.040)    1.000   -10.59   -0.33
      35          138     0.335 (0.028)      0.668 (0.021) -0.003 (0.022) 1.244 (0.025) 0.752           (0.246)    1.362   (0.044)    0.490   (0.147)    0.329   (0.066)    1.000    -7.18   -0.58
      22          286     0.261 (0.035)      0.636 (0.025)  0.103 (0.026) 1.100 (0.027) 0.880           (0.215)    1.320   (0.052)    1.306   (0.230)    0.566   (0.043)    0.995    -9.91    2.41
      36         1000     0.372 (0.020)      0.563 (0.017)  0.065 (0.023) 1.142 (0.016) 1.051           (0.125)    1.272   (0.038)    0.537   (0.132)    0.349   (0.056)    0.000   -16.96   -3.45
      18          294     0.373 (0.030)      0.606 (0.030)  0.021 (0.016) 1.104 (0.018) 0.881           (0.180)    1.258   (0.061)    0.982   (0.332)    0.495   (0.084)    0.998    -8.24    0.59
    Total        6697     0.287 (0.010)      0.676 (0.009)  0.037          1.198 (0.009) 0.551          (0.046)    1.409   (0.020)    1.326   (0.038)    0.570   (0.007)    0.000   -31.89   -3.12
First-step robust standard errors in parentheses. Time dummies are included but not reported.
(1) Input shares: see Part 1 of this table.
(2) Instruments used: the lagged levels of ,  and  dated ( − 2) and ( − 3) in the first-diﬀerenced equations and
    the lagged first-diﬀerences of ,  and  dated ( − 1) in the levels equations.
(3) : test of overidentifying restrictions, asymptotically distributed as 2 . -values are reported.
(4) 1 and 2 : tests for first-order and second-order serial correlation in the first-diﬀerenced residuals, asymptotically distributed as  (0 1).




                                                                                                              55
Table A.2 (ctd)                                         ³ ´
                                                         
Industry analysis: Industry-specific output elasticities b                                                        b ,
                                                              ( =   ), joint market imperfections parameter 
                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                       ³ ´
and corresponding price-cost mark-up                                       b or labor supply elasticity b
                                       b () and extent of rent sharing                              
                                                                                                         
                                                                             
                                                                                                                                 

 Part 2: GMM SYS (ctd)
 Regime  =  -  [10 industries]                                                                                 GMM SYS (t-2) (t-3)
                           ³ ´              ³ ´                ³ ´
 Industry    # Firms       
                            b                
                                             b                  
                                                                b                b 
                                                                                                     b
                                                                                                                           b
                                                                                                                                                                               1     2
                                                                                                     
                                                                     
    20          268     0.447   (0.039)   0.606   (0.040)   -0.053 (0.027)     1.222 (0.033)      0.635   (0.293)   1.133   (0.074)                                         0.983    -8.95   -1.79
    29          475     0.301   (0.023)   0.665   (0.027)    0.034 (0.020)     1.220 (0.027)     -0.053   (0.202)   1.236   (0.050)                                         0.619   -11.45   -2.05
    16          110     0.342   (0.042)   0.632   (0.030)    0.026 (0.034)     1.174 (0.037)      0.014   (0.246)   1.276   (0.061)                                         1.000    -5.89   -1.79
    38          319     0.356   (0.035)   0.558   (0.038)    0.086 (0.025)     1.102 (0.031)     -0.217   (0.232)   1.116   (0.075)                                         0.172    -8.07   -1.86
    13          156     0.406   (0.041)   0.600   (0.040)   -0.006 (0.035)     1.281 (0.046)     -0.604   (0.246)   1.290   (0.086)                                         1.000    -7.38    0.90
    34          125     0.267   (0.034)   0.714   (0.045)    0.019 (0.037)     1.249 (0.049)     -0.198   (0.421)   1.255   (0.080)                                         1.000    -6.16    0.52
    14          133     0.364   (0.042)   0.581   (0.037)    0.055 (0.026)     1.157 (0.030)      0.005   (0.263)   1.042   (0.066)                                         1.000    -6.57   -0.34
    12          179     0.337   (0.033)   0.688   (0.025)   -0.025 (0.027)     1.285 (0.032)     -0.441   (0.242)   1.431   (0.052)                                         1.000    -7.58   -2.44
    15          129     0.307   (0.043)   0.674   (0.029)    0.019 (0.033)     1.245(0.034)      -0.072   (0.280)   1.265   (0.054)                                         1.000    -5.42   -1.98
    30          330     0.295   (0.024)   0.703   (0.028)    0.002 (0.025)     1.295 (0.035)      0.119   (0.228)   1.328   (0.053)                                         0.100    -8.52   -3.32
   Total       2224     0.272   (0.015)   0.732   (0.015)   -0.004             1.253 (0.014)      0.443   (0.078)   1.408   (0.001)                                         0.000   -20.73   -4.68
 Regime  =   -  [8 industries]                                                                                 GMM SYS (t-2) (t-3)
                           ³ ´              ³ ´                ³ ´                                                                                         ³ ´
 Industry    # Firms       
                            b                
                                             b                  
                                                                b                b 
                                                                                                     b
                                                                                                                           b
                                                                                                                                             b
                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                            b                   1     2
                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                
     4          126     0.217   (0.029)   0.754   (0.046)    0.028   (0.049)   1.186   (0.064)   -1.378   (0.525)   1.107   (0.067)   0.592   (0.093)    1.453   (0.562)    1.000    -2.07   -2.45
     2          122     0.152   (0.035)   0.797   (0.024)    0.051   (0.027)   1.147   (0.025)   -1.307   (0.600)   1.151   (0.035)   1.034   (0.255)   -30.22   (218.1)    1.000    -4.03   -0.68
     9          130     0.329   (0.046)   0.677   (0.027)   -0.005   (0.037)   1.309   (0.040)   -1.371   (0.478)   1.276   (0.051)   0.899   (0.150)    8.937   (14.78)    1.000    -4.37   -1.24
     3          106     0.331   (0.044)   0.640   (0.038)    0.028   (0.052)   1.228   (0.058)   -1.033   (0.408)   1.107   (0.036)   0.612   (0.096)    1.574   (0.637)    1.000    -4.39   -1.42
    32          171     0.311   (0.033)   0.611   (0.033)    0.078   (0.028)   1.162   (0.037)   -0.833   (0.315)   1.081   (0.059)   0.800   (0.118)    4.012   (2.955)    1.000    -5.28   -1.67
    10          114     0.341   (0.039)   0.652   (0.037)    0.006   (0.030)   1.266   (0.036)   -0.986   (0.300)   1.228   (0.069)   0.898   (0.143)    8.768   (13.69)    1.000    -5.30    0.43
    25          104     0.357   (0.053)   0.512   (0.039)    0.131   (0.048)   1.128   (0.062)   -0.509   (0.242)   1.115   (0.086)   0.973   (0.157)    36.32   (218.8)    1.000    -3.74   -1.36
    19          182     0.431   (0.062)   0.559   (0.042)    0.010   (0.037)   1.211   (0.039)   -0.249   (0.259)   1.149   (0.087)   0.869   (0.182)    7.533   (10.53)    1.000    -7.77   -0.34
   Total       1055     0.224   (0.024)   0.733   (0.022)    0.043             1.223   (0.024)    0.325   (0.133)   1.307   (0.039)   1.332   (0.171)   -4.011   (1.549)    0.000   -11.58   -1.90
 Regime  =  -  [2 industries]                                                                                  GMM SYS (t-2) (t-3)
                           ³ ´              ³ ´                ³ ´                                                                                         ³ ´
 Industry    # Firms       
                            b                
                                             b                  
                                                                b                b 
                                                                                                     b
                                                                                                                           b
                                                                                                                                             b
                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                            b                   1     2
                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                
     1          324     0.415 (0.046)     0.576 (0.040)      0.009 (0.040)     1.014 (0.054)     -0.070 (0.263)     0.949 (0.067)     0.460 (0.074)      0.853 (0.256)      1.000    -6.84   -1.18
     31         192     0.298 (0.043)     0.625 (0.053)      0.077 (0.028)     1.149 (0.036)     -0.771 (0.328)     1.149 (0.097)     1.002 (0.220)     -590.9 (76746)      0.972    -5.66   -1.08
   Total        516     0.370 (0.036)     0.688 (0.031)     -0.058             1.314 (0.036)      0.275 (0.067)     1.369 (0.061)     1.135 (0.148)     -8.422 (8.168)      0.966    -7.77    0.75
 Regime  =   -  [1 industry]                                                                                   GMM SYS (t-2) (t-3)
                           ³ ´              ³ ´                ³ ´
 Industry    # Firms       
                            b                
                                             b                  
                                                                b                b 
                                                                                                     b
                                                                                                                           b
                                                                                                                                                                               1     2
                                                                                                     
                                                                     
      21          154     0.356 (0.047) 0.647 (0.042) -0.003 (0.030) 1.175 (0.035) -0.632 (0.333)                   1.170 (0.076)                                           1.000    -6.88   -0.27
First-step robust standard errors in parentheses. Time dummies are included but not reported.

  Formulas of the market imperfection parameter estimates are given in footnote (b) of Table 5.

                                                                                                                    56
Table A.3
Di¤erent dimensions across industries within R = IC-EB
                                                                            Pro…t.a      Union.b     Imp.c      Tech.d
 Industry j   Code       Name
                                                                             type        type         type       type
     5        B05-B06    Other food products                                   H           M           M           L
     6        C11        Clothing and skin goods                               M           L           H           L
     7        C12        Leather goods and footwear                            H           M           H           L
     8        C20        Publishing, (re)printing                              M           H           L           L
     11       C41        Furniture                                             L           M           M           L
     17       E21        Metal products for construction                       L           L           L           L
     18       E22        Ferruginous and steam boilers                         L           L           L           L
     22       E27-E28    Other machinery for speci…c usage                     L           H           H          M
     23       E31-E35    Electric and electronic machinery                     M           L           H          M
     24       F11-F12    Mineral products                                      H           H           M          M
     26       F14        Earthenware products and construction material        H           M           M          M
     27       F21        Textile art                                           M           M           M          M
     28       F22-F23    Textile products and clothing                         H           H           H           L
     33       F46        Transformation of plastic products                    L           L           H          M
     35       F53        Ironware                                              M           H           L          M
     36       F54        Industrial service to metal products                  M           L           L          M
     37       F55-F56    Metal products, recuperation                          H           M           M           L
L: low-type, M: medium-type, H: high-type.
a
  L: PCM < 16.8% (5 industries), M: 16.8% PCM < 17.7% (6 industries), H: PCM 17.7% (6 industries).
b
  L: union density < 8.8% (6 industries), M: 8.8% union density < 12.1% (6 industries), H: union density 12.1% (5 industries).
c
  L: import penetration < 0.19 (5 ind.), M: 0.19 import penetration < 0.34 (7 ind.), H: import penetration 0.34 (5 ind.).
d
  L (9 industries), M (8 industries).




                                                             57
Table A.4                                                        ³ ´
                                                                  
Firm analysis: Heterogeneity in firm-specific output elasticities b                                                 b,
                                                                       ( =   ), joint market imper. parameter 
                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                       ³ ´
and corresponding price-cost mark-up                                      b
                                      b () and extent of rent sharing  or labor supply elasticity b
                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                         
Diﬀerent indicators and first-diﬀerenced OLS estimates
  Regime  =  -
                                                                              ³ ´     ³ ´         ³ ´
                                           ( )     ( )         ( )    
                                                                               b       
                                                                                       b           
                                                                                                   b           b 
                                                                                                                             b
                                                                                                                                     b
                                                                                                                                               b
                                                                                                                                                           b
                                                                                                                                                            
  [5715 firms]                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                        
  SIMPLE
  Observed variance   b2                     0.017       0.018     0.009    0.059   0.050       0.046         0.091        1.936   0.343      5279       441.53
  Sampling variance  b2                      0.002       0.002     0.029    0.049   0.026       0.038         0.047        1.169   0.193    1.57 109    2.83 109
                  2
  True variance b                        0.015       0.016       0      0.010   0.024       0.008         0.044        0.766   0.150        0           0
         
  F-test                                       9.039       7.523     0.331    1.212   1.907       1.225         1.941        1.655   1.774   3.37 10−6   1.56 10−7
  WEIGHTED
  Observed variance   b2                     0.019       0.016     0.020    0.038   0.044       0.022         0.039        0.847   0.125     1.347       0.018
  Sampling variance  b2                    5.80 10−4   5.10 10−4   0.005    0.014   0.009       0.010         0.012        0.277   0.035     0.264       0.003
                  2
  True variance b                        0.019       0.016     0.015    0.024   0.035       0.013         0.027        0.570   0.090     1.083       0.016
         
  F-test                                       33.27       32.11      3.75    2.656   4.800       2.314         3.276        3.059   3.593     5.103       6.648
  MEDIAN
  Interquartile observed variance   b2       0.016       0.018     0.008    0.058   0.054       0.033         0.057        1.203   0.189     3.089       0.194
  Robust sampling variance      b2           0.001       0.001     0.013    0.028   0.016       0.020         0.024        0.571   0.077     1.347       0.092
                            2    
  Robust true variance    b               0.015       0.017       0      0.031   0.038       0.013         0.033        0.631   0.112     1.742       0.101
  F-test                                      16.28       18.17     0.606    2.106   3.288       1.665         2.330        2.105   2.456     2.293       2.104
  Regime  =  - 
                                                                              ³ ´     ³ ´         ³ ´
                                              ( )      ( )     ( )    
                                                                               b       
                                                                                       b           
                                                                                                   b           b 
                                                                                                                             b
                                                                                                                                     b
                                                                                                                                      
  [1845 firms]                                                                                                               
                                                                                                        
  SIMPLE
  Observed variance    b2                    0.011       0.014     0.010    0.064   0.052       0.049         0.086        2.497   0.216
  Sampling variance   b2                     0.002       0.003     0.025    0.060   0.031       0.044         0.050        1.625   0.143
  True variance b2                       0.009       0.012       0      0.003   0.021       0.004         0.036        0.873   0.073
         
  F-test                                       6.184       5.262     0.394    1.059   1.695       1.098         1.729        1.537   1.512
  WEIGHTED
  Observed variance    b2                    0.012       0.014     0.018    0.049   0.046       0.025         0.038        1.212   0.117
  Sampling variance   b2                   6.40 10−4   4.97 10−4   0.005    0.019   0.010       0.011         0.012        0.421   0.033
                   2
  True variance b                        0.011       0.013     0.013    0.030   0.036       0.014         0.025        0.791   0.084
         
  F-test                                       18.76       27.92     3.444    2.554   4.514       2.231         3.032        2.879   3.509
  MEDIAN
  Interquartile observed variance     b2     0.011       0.015     0.008    0.069   0.059       0.039         0.058        1.736   0.166
                                     2
  Robust sampling variance        b          0.001     9.38 10−4   0.012    0.035   0.019       0.023         0.026        0.825   0.074
  Robust true variance     b2            0.010       0.014       0      0.035   0.039       0.016         0.032        0.911   0.092
  F-test                                      9.696       15.65     0.685    1.996   3.045       1.699         2.206        2.104   2.240



                                                                                                          58
Table A.4 (ctd)                                                  ³ ´
                                                                  
Firm analysis: Heterogeneity in firm-specific output elasticities b                                                  b,
                                                                       ( =   ), joint market imperf. parameter 
                                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      ³ ´
and corresponding price-cost mark-up                                      b or labor supply elasticity b
                                      b () and extent of rent sharing                              
                                                                                                        
                                                                            
                                                                                                                                  
Diﬀerent indicators and first-diﬀerenced OLS estimates
  Regime  =   - 
                                                                                         ³ ´       ³ ´        ³ ´                                                ³ ´
                                           ( )     ( )                    ( )    
                                                                                          b         
                                                                                                    b          
                                                                                                               b        b 
                                                                                                                                     b
                                                                                                                                            b
                                                                                                                                                      b
                                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                                                  b
     [899 firms]                                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                                                                   
     SIMPLE
     Observed variance     b2                  0.012       0.020     0.012     0.067     0.061     0.045      0.097     5.405             0.190      6299       34 104
                              2
     Sampling variance    b                    0.002       0.003     0.019     0.059     0.028     0.042      0.046     3.369             0.120   4.74 1010   5.89 1013
     True variance  b2                     0.010       0.017        0      0.008     0.033     0.003      0.051     2.036             0.069       0           0
     F-test                                     5.716       6.974     0.655     1.145     2.192     1.066      2.114     1.604             1.578   1.33 10−7   5.77 10−9
     WEIGHTED
     Observed variance     b2                  0.012       0.016     0.018     0.048     0.067     0.020      0.036     1.483             0.102     0.027       0.043
     Sampling variance    b2                 6.30 10−4 3.79 10−4     0.004     0.014     0.009     0.008      0.010     0.461             0.025     0.015       0.020
                       2    
     True variance  b                       0.011       0.016     0.014     0.033     0.058     0.012      0.026     1.022             0.077     0.012       0.023
     F-test                                     18.63       43.42     4.582     3.294     7.367     2.487      3.737     3.215             4.117     1.793       2.125
     MEDIAN
     Interquartile observed variance      b2   0.013       0.024     0.012     0.071     0.082     0.029      0.061     2.907             0.161     0.952       3.191
                                         2
     Robust sampling variance         b        0.001    9.36 10−4    0.011     0.028     0.017     0.018      0.026     1.019             0.060     0.204       1.116
     Robust true variance      b2          0.012       0.023     0.001     0.043     0.065     0.011      0.034     1.887             0.100     0.748       2.074
     F-test                                     12.31       25.38     1.116     2.526     4.691     1.609      2.294     2.852             2.669     4.668       2.857

    Formulas of the market imperfection parameter estimates are given in footnote (b) of Table 5.

                                                                                                             b2 = 
    The estimated true variance is computed by adjusting the observed variance for the sampling variability:         b2 − b2 .
              2
               
    F-test =   2
               
                   :   F-statistic for the hypothesis of equality of the estimates (or the computed variables) across firms.




                                                                                                                 59
