                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      THE AMERICAN INVASION OF EUROPE:
                THE LONG TERM RISE IN OVERSEAS TRAVEL, 1820-2000

                                          Brandon Dupont
                                           Alka Gandhi
                                          Thomas J. Weiss

                                       Working Paper 13977
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w13977


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2008




We wish to thank the Center for Economic Studies at the University of Munich for providing Weiss
with uninterrupted time in which to work on this research. Versions of this paper were presented at
the Social Science History Association annual meeting, as the Robert Gallman Lecture at the University
of North Carolina, at the National Bureau of Economic Research Summer Institute, in seminars at
Seoul National University, Dongguk University, and Sogang University, and at the First Conference
of the International Association of Tourism Economics. We also thank Ernest Berkhout, Lou Cain,
Kyongwook Choi, Stan Engerman, Price Fishback, Aliza Fleischer, Drew Keeling, Michael McAleer,
Ed Perkins, Joshua Rosenbloom and Vic Valcarcel for helpful comments. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Brandon Dupont, Alka Gandhi, and Thomas J. Weiss. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The American Invasion of Europe: The Long Term Rise in Overseas Travel, 1820-2000
Brandon Dupont, Alka Gandhi, and Thomas J. Weiss
NBER Working Paper No. 13977
April 2008
JEL No. N7,N71,N72

                                            ABSTRACT

Tourism today is an activity of substantial economic importance worldwide, and has been for some
time. Tourism is also of substantial economic importance in the United States, sufficient to warrant
the Bureau of Economic Analysis's establishing special accounts on travel and tourism. In this paper
we investigate the long term rise in overseas travel by Americans. Over the course of the nineteenth
and twentieth centuries the number of Americans going abroad rose from less than 2,000 travelers
to over 26 million. The industry went from one confined to the elite of American society to what some
have described as mass tourism. We document this rise by compiling a long term series on overseas
travel, and describe the changes in the composition of the travelers, their destinations, and their mode
of travel. We use an Error Correction Model to explain how the increase came about.


Brandon Dupont                                     Thomas J. Weiss
Department of Economics                            3128 Campfire Ct
Western Washington University                      Lawrence, KS 66049
Parks Hall 206B                                    and NBER
516 High Street                                    t-weiss@ku.edu
Bellingham, WA 98225
brandon.dupont@wwu.edu

Alka Gandhi
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
College Park, MD
Gandhi@econ.umd.edu
                                                                      American Invasion of Europe.doc


       In early 19th century America, the term tourist seemed to refer primarily to someone who

was going to Europe.1 Thomas Jefferson, who traveled through the South of France in 1787,

may not have been labeled as such, but he was nevertheless one of the earliest and more famous

American tourists.2 He was not alone, but given the costs of travel and average incomes, as well

as the difficulties of crossing the Atlantic, foreign travel could not have been of much importance

to Americans at the time.3 Without doubt foreign travel was an experience restricted to wealthy

Americans, and even they must have been few in number. Although we do not know how many

other Americans were traveling in Europe when Jefferson was there, it could not have been much

more than 1,000. That meager start, however, was the beachhead for the invasion that was to

come as international travel by Americans rose enormously to where now well over 25 million

travel overseas annually.4 Expenditures on travel abroad and passenger fares paid to foreign flag

carriers now amount to 30 percent of all service imports in the U.S. International Accounts.5




1
  It was also used to refer to those who visited the natural scenic wonders in America, but it does
not seem to have been applied to those who were doing a variety of other things which we now
think of as tourism. See Cocks, Doing the Town, p. 10. Dona Brown, (Inventing New England,
p.18) considers travelers such as Alexis de Tocqueville and Harriet Martineau as tourists in the
mode of those who followed the grand tour that had been established in Europe.
2
  Jefferson’s trip is described in Roy and Alma Moore, Thomas Jefferson's Journey to the South
of France.
3
  Although small, the numbers were large enough to have called forth a traveler’s handbook in
1757 and by 1838 the first guidebook to Europe for Americans. Levenstein, Seductive Journey,
pp. 4 and 33. For a description of the difficulties one might encounter on the journey, see
Levenstein, Seductive Journey, pp. 15-21. Conditions improved in 1818 when new packet ships
provided greater comfort, and perhaps esp., fresh food. See also Twain, The Innocents Abroad,
for a discussion of the difficulties of the crossing even later in the century.
4
  The sources are described in the notes to Table 1. The number traveling to all foreign
destinations (i.e. overseas, as well as to Canada and Mexico) exceeds 60 million a year.
5
  This is down somewhat from the 40 percent shares that prevailed in the 1980s and 1990s.
Bureau of Economic Analysis, “U.S. International Transactions Accounts Data,” www.bea.gov,
March 14, 2006, Table 1. Such expenditures amount to 5 percent of all goods and service
imports.

                                                 2
                                                                       American Invasion of Europe.doc


       Despite the fact that international tourism has long been a growing part of the U.S.

economy, and has experienced numerous fluctuations and several substantial upsurges to new

levels of travel, not much has been written about its economic history. How, and even when, did

what Daniel Boorstin has called the “great tourist invasion of Europe” come about?6 Although a

few writers have tried to characterize the rise in travel, their descriptions were almost exclusively

narrative with colorful opinions and very little quantitative evidence. In his interpretive essay,

Boorstin wrote that soon after American Express sent out its first tour in 1919, “the great

backwash had begun,” with American tourists invading Europe in great numbers.7 Writing about

the same time, Foster Rhea Dulles also put the upsurge in American travel in the post-World

War I period, but did not describe it in such pejorative terms.8 In his view, throngs of Americans

began traveling to Europe between the two world wars for a carefree vacation, not for culture

and education that had motivated earlier travelers. William Stowe pushes the boom farther back

in time writing of a tourist boom in the 19th century in which “the tide of early nineteenth century

became a torrent and the American tourist in Europe became a commonplace.”9 More recently,

Lynne Withey supports this view, arguing that package tours made travel more accessible to

middle income Americans in the late 19th century, decades before American Express entered the

business.10 In contrast, those in the travel business have seen it differently. Glenn Cramer,

President of Trans International Airlines, in testimony before the Senate aviation committee



6
   Boorstin, The Image, p. 90. The title of our paper is a rephrasing of his colorful text.
7
   Boorstin, The Image: p. 90.
8
   Dulles, Americans Abroad. Although he does not present statistics in a systematic, formal
way, he does blend them judiciously, if sparingly, with anecdotes, memoirs, and reasoned
judgment about the tourist trade. He labeled travel in the early 18th century as “A First
Invasion.” (Ibid, p. 26).
9
   Stowe, Going Abroad p. 8.
10
   Withey, Grand Tours and Cook’s Tours, chap. 6.

                                                  3
                                                                         American Invasion of Europe.doc


claimed in 1968 that “only six out of every 100 Americans had ever been abroad,” the reason

being that the costs had limited such travel to ”’the affluent, the privileged few.’”11

       With the exception of the last claim, few if any statistics were provided to document the

size and timing of the tourist tide. This is our attempt to fill in the gap. The data are as yet too

sparse to permit thorough analysis and explanation of the industry’s history, so here we must be

content with describing the major developments and speculating on the forces explaining the

industry’s growth over the 180 year period 1820 to 2000, as well as over the two major

subperiods: the pre-World War I period (1820 to 1914) and the post-World War I period (1920 to

2000) which was marked by another world war and the Great Depression. In summary, overseas

travel by Americans rose at an average annual rate of around 5.0 percent per year from 1820 to

2000, a rate that exceeded the growth of population or GDP by a noticeable amount.12 Despite

their slower growth, those two variables helped to propel international tourism upward to a large

extent. The history of overseas travel, however, is not only that of a robust, quantitative upsurge.

Over time there were notable changes in the composition of the tourists and in the nature of

travel, as well as improvements in transportation, especially the advent of air transportation.13




11
   “Charter Airlines Push for Tours,” New York Times, June 13, 1968
12
   The number of overseas travelers rose faster than real exports which grew around 4.3 percent
per year over this same period. Nominal exports rose at 5.4 percent per year between 1820 and
1999, while export prices rose around 1.1 percent. Carter, et al, Historical Statistics of the
United States, Vol. 5, Series Ee366 for nominal exports of US merchandise, and Series Ee434-
443 for export prices.
13
   There were also substantial fluctuations and several noticeable upsurges in the numbers of
travelers, especially before World War II. These variations are summarized below, and
examined more fully in Gandhi and Weiss, “Fluctuations in Overseas Travel by Americans,
1820 to 2000.” Mimeo, University of Kansas, 2007.

                                                  4
                                                                        American Invasion of Europe.doc


The Data

       The statistics that describe the historical record of overseas travel come from official

government reports. Despite that official status, they do not provide a precise and consistent

count of the number of Americans traveling abroad in any year, and the uncertainties are greater

for the nineteenth century. The long term series shown in Figure 1 and Table 1 is made up of

statistics that are titled “Ocean-bound Tourists” for the period before 1900, “Arrivals of U.S.

Citizens” for the period 1901-1918, and “Overseas Travelers” for the period 1919 to 2000.

Although each series was intended to measure the same thing, there are differences. Each series

was an attempt to measure the number of Americans who had been overseas at any time that year

in order to estimate the amount of money spent abroad for purposes of calculating the Balance of

Payments. For the nineteenth century, the estimated number of “ocean bound tourists” equals

the reported numbers of American citizens arriving in the United States by sea that year inflated

by three percent to account for those who remained abroad.14 For the period 1900-70, figures are

available on “Arrivals of U. S. Citizens,” a series that is similar in concept and coverage to that

for the nineteenth century in that it “excludes travel over international land borders.” 15 With

adjustment to account for those who may have remained abroad, these data provide an extension

of the ocean-bound tourist series well into the twentieth century.16 For the period since 1919, the

U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis (formerly the Office of Business Economics) has compiled a


14
   North, “Balance of Payments,” p. 618; Simon, “Balance of Payments,” p. 664. These authors
used arrival data because departure data were not collected until 1908.
15
   Historical Statistics of the United States, Series C: 297 for 1908 to 1970, and U.S Department
of Commerce, “Oversea Travel and Travel Expenditures” for 1900 to 1908. The latter was
reprinted in part in Survey of International Travel, 1956, Appendix, pp. 44-45, Tables XII and
XIII. Although these series were to count American citizens, it appears from the returns for the
mid-1880s that resident aliens were included as well.
16
   We inflated these arrival data by 3 percent in order to be consistent with the estimates for the
nineteenth century.

                                                  5
                                                                        American Invasion of Europe.doc


series on “overseas travelers.” 17 This series is comparable to the ocean-bound tourist series in

that it excludes travel to Canada and Mexico. It is, however, based on departures rather than

arrivals, takes into account the travel of resident aliens as well as citizens, and excludes cruise

travel.18 Nevertheless, as can be seen in Figures 2 and 3, the various series move in close

correspondence in the periods in which they overlap.19

       Moreover, the statistics do not distinguish tourists from those traveling for other reasons.

Today, while the Bureau of Economic Analysis measures tourism demand, it does not use the

term tourist to describe those who demand the service. Although tourist is the term used in

more common parlance to describe someone engaged in tourism, the BEA and other official

government agencies use the term “visitor” because it better describes the travel activities

included in the Travel and Tourism Satellite Accounts than does the term tourist, “which

connotes a person who travels for leisure only.”20 According to the BEA, “travel and tourism

[is] the economic activity generated inside the United States by ‘visitors’ of all types – for

business and pleasure, by residents and nonresidents alike -- and outside the United States by




17
   See Historical Statistics of the United States, series H:921 and Statistical Abstract of the
United States, various issues, for 1955 to 2000.
18
   Cruise travel appears to have been relatively unimportant before 1930. The Immigration and
Naturalization Service of the Department of Labor began collecting statistics on cruise travel in
1932, in which year it was estimated that 68,973 citizens and 2,942 alien residents took cruises.
Maffry, “Overseas Travel and Travel Expenditures,” p.40. Estimates of cruise arrivals made by
The United States Shipping Board estimated that the number of residents returning from cruises
was approximately 4,000 to 5,000 per year in the period 1919-25, 9,000 in 1926, 11,000 in 1927,
15,000 in 1928, 18,000 in 1929, 29,000 in 1930 and 62,000 in 1931. Ibid, p. 94.
19
    Figures for departures of U.S. citizens are available for the period 1908 to 1970. See
Historical Statistics of the United States, Series C:300. We have included the departure series in
Figures 2 and 3 for comparison with that for arrivals and overseas travelers. As can be seen
there is a very close correspondence between the series in both levels and movements.
20
   Okubo and Planting, “U.S. Travel and Tourism Satellite Accounts for 1992," fn 4.

                                                  6
                                                                         American Invasion of Europe.doc


U.S. residents.”21   A visitor is simply someone who “either travels outside of his or her usual

environment for a period of less than one year or who stays overnight in a hotel or motel.”22

       Clearly, people travel for many different reasons such as leisure, business, government

service, education, and for many varied personal activities. The latter could include travel for

reasons related to one’s health or for family matters, which could include the simple act of

visiting family or a more serious task such as an immigrant returning to his or her native country

to retrieve family members. There are reasons why one would want to delineate these different

types of travelers. If one were interested in the demand for leisure activities or in the

development of policies to attract tourists, then a narrow measure of travelers that excluded those

traveling for business, personal reasons, and so on, would be preferred. If, on the other hand,

one were interested in the balance of payments, or in understanding the provision of the supply

of tourist-related services, such as hotels and restaurants, then a broader measure would be

appropriate.

       It is, however, difficult to know the motivation behind some travel or what people

actually did on their travels. Trips are often multipurpose. While it might seem straightforward

to distinguish business from leisure travel, in practice it is not always clear what the visitor

actually did.23 The boundary between travel for leisure and that for personal or family reasons is

even more vague.



21
    This definition and the measurement of tourism follow guidelines developed by the World
Tourism Organization and the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development.
Okubo and Planting, “U.S. Travel and Tourism Satellite Accounts for 1992," p. 8.
22
    Ibid, p. 11.
23
    The IRS in effect has sanctioned this ambiguity. The IRS guidelines to determine whether a
trip abroad was business or not, and to allocate travel expenses to business or non-business
activities, rest on the percentage of the trip that was business, measured by the share of the total
travel days that can be counted as business days. The rules, however, leave great leeway for

                                                  7
                                                                        American Invasion of Europe.doc


        If the proportion of visitors who were strictly tourists did not change over time, there

would be little need to be concerned about motivation. That was not the case, however, as the

composition did change over time. But, while the composition may have fluctuated from time to

time, perhaps even year to year, the evidence indicates that non-business travel was quite large at

least by the mid-nineteenth century and increased in relative importance over time. 24 Thus the

trend in overseas travel for all visitors, understates the rise in the number of non-business

travelers.

        In the mid-nineteenth century, those traveling abroad for tourism and for the dual purpose

of business and tourism comprised the bulk of the passengers. Raymond Cohn’s analysis of

passengers arriving on sailing ships between 1836 and 1853 puts the share of those traveling for

tourism and business-tourism combined around 63 percent, while those traveling for only

business comprised 25 percent.25 A newspaper columnist writing in 1866 confirms the

importance of tourism. “Scientific and literary researches call a few away from home, but the

majority of those who have recently made up the bulk of English steamer passengers are pure

pleasure seekers.”26 Passport data provide evidence for much of the twentieth century. Although



engaging in leisure activities on a day that counts as business. So long as one’s presence is
required at a particular place for business reasons, a day can be counted as a business day “even
if you spend most of the day on nonbusiness activities.” See “Travel, Entertainment, Gift and Car
Expenses” Department of the Treasury, Internal Revenue Service, Publication 463, 2006, p. 7.
24
    Among non-business travelers in U.S. history were many immigrants who made return trips to
Europe, repeatedly in some cases, to visit family and retrieve family members. Such travel could
lead to substantial variation over time in the reasons for travel, and may help explain some of the
upsurges in travel, especially after 1880. See Drew Keeling, "Repeat Migration between Europe
and the United States, 1870-1914" (July 7, 2006). Institute of European Studies. Paper 050411.
http://repositories.cdlib.org/ies/050411.
25
    Those traveling for other reasons, namely for government business and retrieving one’s
family, made up the rest. The latter group would qualify as visitors under current definitions.
Cohn, “Transatlantic U.S. Passenger Travel,” Table 5.
26
    “Americans Abroad,” New York Times, April 29, 1866.

                                                  8
                                                                        American Invasion of Europe.doc


the figures must be used with caution, they suggest that business travel declined in relative

importance from the mid-twentieth century on. Conversely, tourism would have been growing

faster than shown in Figure 1.27

       In 1948 when the government began to compile passport data by characteristic of travel,

only 19 percent of travelers reported business as the reason they were applying for a passport.28

Only 14 percent specified they were traveling for pleasure, but more than half (55 percent) listed

personal reasons, and while this may have included some business travel, it would appear most

were traveling for pleasure.29 The percentage reporting “personal reasons” declined through the

mid-fifties and as it did so, the shift appears to have been entirely into the pleasure category.

Those traveling for business declined almost continuously from that high share of 19 percent in

1948 to as low as 1.5 percent in 1969.30 And, it seems likely that the business share in 1948 was

unusually high, perhaps reflecting special circumstances surrounding the immediate post-World

War II years. In a special study on overseas travel covering the period 1929 through 1938, the

reasons for travel resemble closely the lower business shares found for the years after 1954.31



27
    The figures refer to passports issued, not travelers; and a single passport may cover more than
one trip and even more than one person. Moreover, the travelers’ plans may have deviated from
that listed in the passport application.
28
    Historical Statistics, Series H: 899-908. The detailed returns on characteristics of travel for
that year covered only 9 months, but the percentages were close to those for 1949, the first full
year of coverage. In that latter year, 55 percent again said personal reasons, whereas 25 percent
listed pleasure and only 10 percent listed business.
29
    Another 8 percent listed educational reasons and 5 percent specified religion and health, both
of which may be taken as forms of tourism. Pilgrims were among the earliest of tourists in
Europe, and visitors to health spas were the initial tourists in the United States. .
30
    Beginning in 1956, the number of those whose passport was issued for the purpose of
traveling on governmental business was reported, and equaled about 20 percent of those
traveling for nongovernmental reasons, or 15 percent of the total number of passports issued.
That share remained at roughly that same level for a decade and then declined slowly reaching 7
percent in 1970.
31
    Maffry, “Overseas Travel and Travel Expenditures,” pp. 47-48, Table 24.

                                                  9
                                                                       American Invasion of Europe.doc


That study indicates that travel for business was listed in only 7 to 11 percent of the passport

applications. Over 80 percent of the applications in every year between 1929 and 1938 stated

either ‘pleasure’ or ‘family reasons’ as the purpose of travel.

       Despite the shortcomings and ambiguities of the definition of tourist and of the evidence

measuring their number, we shall proceed as though these series describe the numbers of persons

engaged in tourism as defined in the official Travel and Tourism Satellite Accounts. And while

these visitors traveled for many different reasons, we shall refer to them for the most part as

tourists. After all, that is how they were labeled by those who produced the estimates for the

nineteenth century, and, the bulk of those traveling and applying for passports appear to have

been doing just that.



Who Went and Where Did They Go

       The early travelers were predominantly male, and remained so for quite some time.

Although we do not have a continuous series on the sex composition of travelers, three separate

series make clear that women became an increasingly larger part of the market over time (see

Figure 4). Before the Civil War, women made up 10 to 20 percent of the overseas travelers,

while afterwards their share ranged between 30 to 40 percent, up until World War I. Between

the World Wars, their share fluctuated substantially, and exceeded 40 percent by the end of the

period. It was only after the Second World War that women came to account for 50 percent or

more of Americans traveling overseas.

       This rise in overseas travel by women merits further examination and explanation, but a

rough outline can be suggested here. Prior to the Civil War only wives of a few wealthy men

went abroad. After that War there must have been some increase in the number of wives



                                                 10
                                                                     American Invasion of Europe.doc


accompanying their husbands, but a few adventuresome, single women may have joined them.

The increase after World War I may reflect in part the effort made by shipping companies to

attract women passengers. The Aquitania was advertised as “A Ladies Ship,” and an on-board

newsletter provided tips for single women travelers. Some ships, perhaps the Aquitania among

them, employed stewardesses to tend to single female passengers.32 After World War II, airlines

made a similar effort.33 But the efficacy of these efforts has not been examined, and it may be

that the rise in women was due more to rising incomes and reduced fares, as appears to be the

case for the rise in overseas travel in general. Moreover, women’s experiences during the wars,

especially World War II, may have made them more interested in travel.34

       Americans traveling abroad in the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries had to have

been the elite of society who joined British visitors on the Grand Tour of the Continent.35 By the

middle of the eighteenth century thousands of English, predominantly men and especially the

sons of the well-to-do, were making the tour.36 Although the British toured France, Switzerland,

the Netherlands and Germany, many were to a large extent traveling through those places in

order to get to Italy.37 Americans probably did likewise. Even Thomas Jefferson whose travels

were primarily in France, perhaps in large part because he was stationed there as Minister to

France, made an incursion into Italy. Whether the early American tourists made it to Italy or not,




32
    Coons and Varias, Tourist Third Cabin, p. 112.
33
    See for example the TWA brochure “Show Me.”
34
    Litoff, “Enforced Tourists.”
35
    Some successful Quaker merchants from Philadelphia sent their sons on the Grand Tour in the
   th
19 century, even though they may have been fearful that the experience would alter their
attitudes towards Quaker ideals. Tolles, Meeting House and Counting House, p. 139.
36
   Withey, Grand Tours and Cook’s Tours, chap. 1. The British aristocracy had begun traveling
to the continent as early as the sixteenth century.
37
    Withey, Grand Tours, p. 7

                                                11
                                                                       American Invasion of Europe.doc


there is no question that their primary destination was Europe. Although wars disrupted travel to

Europe for short periods of time, the Old World continued its hold on American tourists until

World War II, and even today still attracts around half of the overseas travelers.

       Although we do not have statistics that pertain to destinations for the earliest part of the

nineteenth century, beginning in 1856 we do have data on the number of U.S. citizens arriving at

various ports.38 Assuming that those who arrived at the East coast ports of New York,

Philadelphia and Boston were returning from Europe, then 90 percent or more of U.S. citizens

traveling abroad in the mid-nineteenth century had gone to Europe.39 See Figure 5A. New York

dominated the arrivals with its share of all returning U.S. citizens running between 75 and 90

percent between 1856 and 1868.

       There were only a handful of other ports identified for the nineteenth century. These

included Baltimore, New Orleans and Key West, Florida, each of which may have received some

citizens returning from Europe, but for the most part must have served the West Indies, other

Caribbean destinations, as well as Central and South America. In any case, the numbers arriving

at Baltimore were not large, running around 100 to 200 through 1866, rising thereafter, but not

exceeding 1,000 until 1887. The figures for Key West were even smaller throughout the period,

only 54 people in the first year and running around one percent of all arrivals for the entire

period. The number of those arriving at New Orleans was quite a bit larger than that for either

Baltimore or Key West in almost every year. In 1858, the first year for which figures were



38
   Statistical Abstract of the United States, 1890, Table 153 and 1909, Table 50. Bear in mind
that these statistics do not include those arriving by land from Canada and Mexico, and arrivals
from British North American Possessions and Mexico were not included in the port arrivals after
July 1, 1885.
39
   The figure for Boston included the port of Charlestown, and we have included as well the
figures reported for Portland and Falmouth, Maine.

                                                 12
                                                                       American Invasion of Europe.doc


reported for New Orleans, arrivals of U.S. citizens totaled 2,029 or 9 percent of all those

arriving. The figure remained at that level and relative importance for a few years, but then

dipped considerably and ran around one to two percent in most years. In each year up through

1868 there was another 10 percent or less who arrived at “all other ports” in the country, so it

would seem that 80 percent or more of American travelers were going to Europe. 40

        The importance of Europe began to change somewhat after the Civil War, and more

precisely after 1868, the first year in which substantial numbers of Americans arrived at two

West coast ports: San Francisco and Puget Sound.41 In that year the two ports reported 1,270

arrivals or roughly 3 percent of the total, with the share rising to around 15 percent in most years

up to 1884. From 1884 to 1889 the number and share of arrivals swelled even further with the

return of large numbers of Chinese.42 Beyond the increase in arrivals to these two West coast

ports, suggesting an increase in travel to Asia, there was an increase in the number of passengers

arriving at a set of unspecified ports between 1869 and 1888, and especially in the period 1871 to

1874. In those three years these ‘all other ports’ accounted for 30 percent, 30 percent and 17

percent of all arrivals.

        Despite those temporary bursts in the number of Americans returning to ports outside the

northeast, ports in the latter region remained dominant up through the opening decade of the



40
    Ibid
41
    There were no reports of arrivals at these two ports before 1868 except for one returning
citizen reported at San Francisco in 1859. Ibid.
42
    The return of large numbers of Chinese was specified for 1886 through 1889, but not for 1884
and 1885. Given the large jump in the numbers of arrivals at these West Coast ports from 8,398
in 1883 to 19,987 in 1884 and 25,902 in 1885, there must have been a large number of Chinese
returning in those years as well. Ibid. It is possible that these Chinese were not U.S. Citizens,
but resident aliens. Although published reports list the category as ‘U.S. citizens returning,’ in
the original documents it is titled “Country to which they belong.’ See August Maffry,
“Overseas Travel,” p.4..

                                                 13
                                                                      American Invasion of Europe.doc


twentieth century. In 1909 eighty five percent of arriving U.S. citizens landed at East coast

ports, reflecting no doubt that Europe was still the major tourist destination. That share declined

in subsequent years, but remained around two-thirds on the eve of World War I. The share of

course declined during the War and in the immediate post war period, but by 1921 was back to

two-thirds of the total.

        From 1919 onward the data on the destinations of overseas travelers that underlie the

international balance of payments are available, as well as data on arrivals and departures by area

of embarkation, and passport data showing the intended area of travel. These figures are

compared in Figure 5B, all of which, except the passport data, show approximately the same

picture as regards the importance of Europe as a travel destination. Europe’s share of American

travelers ran around 65 percent once normalcy returned after World War I until 1934. Thereafter

the share began to decline, sharply so during World War II. Travelers returned to Europe slowly

after the War because the continent was in no position to accommodate large numbers of them

immediately after the War, but Europe’s share has never returned to its pre-War levels. Since

World War II, Europe’s share has hovered between 45 and 55 percent in most years.43

        In the Cold War era, it has been argued that travel to Asia, Africa and Latin America

increased in importance as the Kennedy Administration promoted the Peace Corps, and the idea

that these volunteers would go “’where no American has ever lived or even traveled.’”44 If so,

this is barely evident in the data (Figure 5C). The share going to Asia, Africa and Oceania

(labeled as ‘Other’ in Figure 5C) did increase after World War II, but did so slowly until the




43
   Passport data tell a different story, showing Europe as the destination listed by around 80
percent of those who applied for passports after the War.
44
   Endy, Cold War Holidays, p. 148.

                                                14
                                                                       American Invasion of Europe.doc


1980s, and most of the increase, including a sharp jump in 1985, came at the expense of Central

America and the Caribbean, not Europe.45



How Did They Get There

       For most of the period, tourists traveled to and from their destinations by sea.46 The

evidence we have goes back in time only to 1931, in which year 98.5 percent traveled by sea.

See Table 2. Prior to that the share must have been that high, and for most of the period it had to

have been 100 percent.47 Lindbergh, after all, had not completed his non-stop transatlantic flight

until 1927. The first regular international commercial passenger flights began in 1920 with

service between Key West, Fl and Havana, Cuba, but transatlantic passenger service did not start

until 1939.48

       World War II marked a turning point in the mode of travel used by travelers.49 In 1940

and earlier, the percentage of travelers arriving by sea was 90 percent or greater. During World

War II, and the years immediately preceding it, travel fell off considerably, and a larger

percentage of the much reduced number of travelers went by air. This no doubt reflected the


45
   The share of Americans traveling to Africa, Asia, the Middle East and Oceania jumped from
16 percent in 1984 to 23 percent in 1985, while the share going to the Caribbean and Central
America dropped from 30 to 22 percent. See Table 6.
46
   The evidence we have is on arrivals, so we are assuming they departed by the same mode.
47
   According to Asif Siddiqi, “The Beginnings of Commercial Transatlantic Services” there were
“hundreds of transatlantic crossings with passengers made by zeppelins during the late 1920s and
1930s.” However, the most famous of these, the Hindenburg, carried only 36 passengers. Since
overseas travelers were well passed 100,000, the few thousand that traveled via zeppelin could
not have characterized the transportation methods
48
   The first transatlantic commercial flights was that of the Graf Zeppelin in 1928. Transpacific
passenger service began in 1936 with flights between San Francisco and Manila. Civil
Aeronautics Board, “Milestones and Landmarks in U.S. Air Transport: 1903-72,” Handbook of
Airline Statistics, 1971, pp. 470-501.
49
   Pan Am’s first passenger flight was June 28, 1939 so there was some commercial activity
before WWII but wartime measures disrupted this.

                                                 15
                                                                          American Invasion of Europe.doc


dangers of sailing the Atlantic during war time, and probably the need for ships to be employed

in war-related activities. In 1946, when travel resumed at a more normal level, the share that

went by sea rose from the war time lows. Nevertheless, sea travel was a thing of the past. The

share reached its post war peak of 51 percent in 1950 and declined steadily thereafter, reaching

8.6 percent in 1970.50

        The airlines did not see their rise to dominance as a sure thing at the time. In December

of 1945, Pan American Airways cut the one-way fare from New York to London from $572 to

$275, putting them “on a par with first-class steamer rates.”51 And, airlines offered lower fares

for the off-season as early as 1949.52 The 1950s witnessed three developments that sealed the

fate of transatlantic travel by sea. The first was the introduction of tourist-class airline tickets in

1952. Before then, the International Air Transport Association, an organization of airlines that

regulated international air travel, had refused to allow Pan Am to offer tourist class tickets. In

1952, Pan Am threatened to offer the fare anyway and the association succumbed. Tourist-class

travel was initiated on May 1 with a lot of fanfare and one-way fares to Europe below $300.53 A

second fare cut took place in 1958 when economy class tickets, priced 20 percent below tourist

class, were introduced. That same year passenger jet planes made their debut.54 As a result, the




50
   Presumably the share continued to fall thereafter.
51
   “Declaration of War,” Time, Dec. 3 1945.
52
   “Rate War,” Time, Oct. 4, 1948 and “Aviation: Lowest Fares,” New York Times, Dec. 18.
1949.
53
   Civil Aeronautics Board, “Milestones and Landmarks in U.S. Air Transport: 1903-72,”
Handbook of Airline Statistics, 1971, p. 485. The one-way fare from New York to London was
$270, and roundtrip was $486. “New York-London Fare History, 1945 to 1970,” Pan American
Airways Collection, University of Miami, September 1, 1970, and New York Times, Feb. 24,
1952.
54
   Civil Aeronautics Board, “Milestones and Landmarks in U.S. Air Transport: 1903-72,”
Handbook of Airline Statistics, 1971, p. 490.

                                                   16
                                                                       American Invasion of Europe.doc


share of passengers departing the United States by air rose from 60 percent in 1952 to 71 percent

in 1957 and to 76 percent by the end of the decade.



The Long Term Trend

       The rise in travel to all overseas destinations has been quite rapid for a very long time.

Over the long term from 1820 to 2000, the number of Americans traveling overseas rose at an

average annual rate of 5.0 percent per year. See Table 1. To be sure, there were ups and downs

in this flow, but the sustained nature of this upward movement of people from a very modest

beginning is impressive.

       In the late eighteenth century and the early decades of the nineteenth century, the number

of overseas travelers was likely less than 2,000 in any year, and perhaps closer to 1,000. From

1820 to the mid 1830s, the earliest years for which we have some reliable aggregate statistics, the

number of Americans going abroad ran between 1,000 and 3,000.55 And, judging by the number

of Americans who were arriving in France before 1820, about that same number of Americans

was likely going abroad in the opening decades of the century.56 The number of Americans

going abroad roughly doubled in the late 1830s, receded somewhat during the 1840s, and then

spiked upward again after 1849. The annual average number of travelers going overseas in the



55
   Americans were so few that they were often mistaken for being British, who at the time were
often seen as being loud and ill-mannered. In the late 19th century when Americans became
more prominent participants on the Grand Tour of Europe, they too had come to be seen as loud,
boorish and rich. Lynne Withey, Grand Tours and Cook’s Tours, pp. 93-95, 191.
56
   The number arriving in France may have run around 1,000 per year between 1806 and 1811,
was checked severely by the War of 1812, but rose afterwards. In some years, such as 1817,
there was only a trickle of about 100 tourists. See Levenstein, Seductive Journey, pp. 23-27,
who believes that most arrivals were tourists. The figures were collected originally by the
Ministere de l’Interieur, Police Generale. See also Gerbod, “Les Touristes etrangers a Paris,” p.
245, and de Sauvigny, La France et les Francais vus, 17-19.

                                                17
                                                                        American Invasion of Europe.doc


decade before the Civil War was 5 to 6 times the average for the 1830s and 1840s, and ten times

the size that had gone over in the 1820s and earlier. The volume of tourism did not rise during

the Civil War period, but neither did it give much ground, and soon thereafter rose again. In the

early 1880s the numbers rose sharply once again, surpassing the 100,000 mark for the first time

in 1885. Except for a slump in 1894, Americans continued to go abroad in what some would

think were fairly large numbers through the end of the century. Over the course of the eighty

years from 1820 to 1900 the number of overseas travelers rose at an annual rate of 5.3 percent

per year; somewhat faster before the Civil War (6.7 percent per year) than after (4.3 percent).

         The rate of increase in travel picked up slightly in the opening years of the twentieth

century and by the start of World War I nearly a quarter of a million Americans were traveling

abroad. The War cut into those numbers, but at the same time introduced larger numbers of

Americans to the attractions of Europe, many of whom returned in subsequent years. The 1920s

saw a continued increase in the number going abroad, and perhaps a rise in the number of

women.57 The Depression had its expected consequences, with the number of Americans

traveling abroad cut in half, but the decline was short-lived. There was a resurgence after 1933,

with the 1938 volume approaching the levels of 1929, but the events leading up to World War II

cut short the recovery. The War itself reduced travel even further, so that by the last years of the

War the number going abroad had fallen to levels that had been reached in the 1880s and 1890s.

As in the case of World War I, recovery was quick to come. By 1948 the volume had just about

returned to the 1929 level, and by the early 1950s any effect of the War was no longer evident.

         In the years after World War II the industry took off. From 1950 through 1970 the

number of Americans going abroad rose by 700 %, or at an annual rate of 10.8 percent per year.


57
     Levenstein, Seductive Journey,, p. 245.

                                                  18
                                                                       American Invasion of Europe.doc


The industry recorded double digit percentage increases in all but a handful of years, and the

climb continued after 1970, albeit at a somewhat slower rate of 5.6 percent per year. Even with

that slowdown, the number of Americans traveling abroad rose at a remarkable 7.6 percent per

year in the period after 1950.



Explaining the Long Term Rise

       Any number of factors might have contributed to the rise in travel over the entire period

of 1820 to 2000 or over the two major subperiods: 1820 to World War I and the period since

World War I. Some of these factors are measurable, some not. Among those less easily

measured would be the improvements in the quality of ship travel, the shift from sail to steam

shipping, the introduction of passenger air travel and increased speed of such travel,

improvements in the supply and quality of hotels and restaurants abroad, the publication of guide

books, the growth and evolution of the package tour industry, improvements in the ability to

acquire necessary foreign currencies, government subsidies, changing perceptions of and

preferences for foreign travel, as well as the myriad changes that were taking place in travel and

tourism within the United States (that is to say substitute goods and services). While all of these

may have had some bearing on the increase in travel, to a very large extent the increase can be

explained by a few, measurable variables.

       Chief among the variables that fostered the upward trend in the number of American

tourists going overseas is population growth. Imagine if you will that as time passed there were

no changes in tastes and preferences, income per capita, relative prices, or the distribution of

income. Under these assumptions, the demand for travel would have changed at the same rate as

population grew. Growth of tourism would have been faster at some times, and slower at others,



                                                 19
                                                                       American Invasion of Europe.doc


but over the entire period 1820 to 2000, the demand for tourism would have risen at 1.9 percent

per year due to population growth. For the period before World War I, population growth would

have meant a 2.6 percent growth in demand for overseas travel, accounting for approximately

one-half (46%) the growth in the number of tourists. Since World War I, population growth

would have accounted for only 23 percent of the increase up through 1999, although its

importance was greater before World War II. Since 1950 population growth was responsible for

only 16 percent of the increased number of tourists.

       The remainder of the growth in overseas travel reflects an increase in the share of the

population going abroad. As can be seen in Figures 6A and 6B, although the percentage of the

population traveling overseas had not risen above one percent at any time before World War II,

the percentage had nevertheless increased substantially over time. From a barely noticeable 0.01

and 0.02 percent in the 1820s and 1830s, the figure rose more than ten-fold by World War I. The

share fell during World War I, rose noticeably during the 1920s, but then fell during the Great

Depression and World War II, with the percentages at the end of that war being roughly the same

as those at the time of World War I. After World War II, the percentage rose more steadily and

noticeably, with the figure at the end of the century being 30 times that at the end of the War.

       What explains the rise in the percentage of Americans traveling overseas? Were the

causes in the nineteenth century, or up to World War II, different from those that explain the rise

after World War II? Is the explanation different in the era of sea travel than in the years when

airplanes were the major mode of travel?

       Some of the increase was, of course, due to rising incomes. Economic theory would

certainly lead us to think so, and the Department of Commerce suggests this occurred at least at

some times. The Department of Commerce reported that “the trend of expenditures for foreign



                                                 20
                                                                        American Invasion of Europe.doc


travel was found to be closely related to the behavior of national income,” in the period 1921 to

1938.58 Their purpose, however, was not to estimate the effect of changes in income on travel

expenditures, but rather to show that World War II had disturbed that relationship. In an earlier

publication the Department of Commerce looked at the slightly longer period 1919 to 1938, and

concluded as well that outlays for foreign travel (including transportation charges) “were keenly

responsive to changes in economic activity.”59 We would be surprised if they had found some

other result, especially because both periods experienced substantial fluctuations in income --

recovery from World War I, a recession in 1921, the boom up to 1929, the Great Depression and

another economic downturn in 1937 -- which likely exaggerated the effect of income on

travel.60

        The extent to which growth in income boosted the demand for travel depends of course

on the income elasticity of demand. Assuming an income elasticity of unity, growth in demand

for tourism would be equal to the growth in real GDP per capita. No doubt the income elasticity

of demand for overseas travel was and is higher than unity, and while it may have fluctuated

from time to time, it also likely increased over time.61   Even with an assumption of unitary



58
   U.S. Department of Commerce “International Transactions of the United States During the
War, 1940-45,” pp. 63-66.
59
   Lary and Associates, “The United States in the World Economy,” p. 75-76. They did not
report any formal statistical tests in either case, only charts depicting the relationship. The chart
shown for the longer period does not show quite as close a relationship as appears to have been
the case for the slightly shorter period.
60
   Somewhat surprisingly, those data indicated that even though the downturn in national
income at the start of the Great Depression resulted in a decline in travel expenditures, it did not
immediately bring about a decrease in the number of overseas travelers. Those who went
overseas simply spent less on average, or at least were estimated to have done so by the
Department of Commerce.
61
   Gray, “The Demand for International Travel” pp. 83-92 estimated the income elasticity of the
U.S. for travel imports was 2.24 for the period 1950 to 1963. It is likely the expenditures on
travel are more elastic than the numbers of travelers, and his estimates include travel imports

                                                 21
                                                                      American Invasion of Europe.doc


elasticity, however, income growth would match the importance of population growth over the

long term, and exceed it in importance since World War I.     While the growth of population and

income can explain a substantial portion of the increase over the longer term and in the major

sub-periods, there were other forces at work, such as those enumerated above, only some of

which are measurable. Others cannot be easily quantified. Appreciation of the dollar and

reductions in passenger fares were two such influences that are amenable to measurement.

       There were changes in exchange rates that should have boosted the volume of travel,

although their greater impact may have been on shaping the direction of travel. Over the entire

period 1820 to 1999, the dollar appreciated against the British Pound at an annual rate of 0.6

percent per year, but almost all of this took place after World War II. (See Figure 7) The

Sterling/Dollar rate did not change at all for much of the period before World War I, and its

value in 1914 was about the same as in 1820, so would not have affected the expansion in

overseas travel before World War I. In the period since 1950, however, the story is different.

The dollar appreciated at 1.11 percent per year, so even if the elasticity of demand with respect

to exchange rate changes were low, there would have been some favorable influence on travel.

       Since World War I, changes in other exchange rates, especially the French franc, could

have influenced travel. The chief impact of a depreciation in the franc might have been to alter




from Canada, for which the income elasticity might be higher than for travel imports from
Europe. Williamson, “Consumer Behavior in the Nineteenth Century,” p. 117 Table 4, estimated
a total expenditure elasticity of per capita income on Sundries, which were heavily weighted by
professional expenses, recreation, charity and consumer durables, around 2.0 for Massachusetts
consumers in 1875.

                                                22
                                                                        American Invasion of Europe.doc


the tourists’ destinations in favor France, or increase the amount of time they spent in France vis-

a-vis other European countries.62 It may, however, also have spurred additional travel.

       Passenger fares too would seem to have been an important determinant of overseas travel.

Indeed, since tourism is a luxury item, it is likely to have a rather high price elasticity of demand.

Fares alone, whether airfares or ocean passenger fares, may not, however, be a good estimate of

the costs of travel. Before World War II, when ocean transportation was the chief means of

travel abroad, the ocean liners were improved over time in a variety of ways, and such

improvements were not necessarily reflected in the fares. According to the definitive study of

ocean steamship management, “While the economies resulting from increased size of vessels and

efficiency of marine engineering were accompanied by lower freight rates, similar economies in

passenger steamers were largely offset by the additional costs occasioned by increased speed,

comfort, luxury and betterments of passenger service.”63 Moreover, according to that same

study, passenger fares simply did not change that much: “Ocean fares have fluctuated less, and

have, on the whole, been maintained at a higher level than freights.”64 Passenger travel was

apparently less subject to competition than was freight traffic, in part because fares were subject

to passenger agreements established by the shipping lines, with at least 12 such agreements

governing traffic in the North Atlantic.65 And, perhaps of greater significance, there was no

competition from tramp vessels which might have weakened the cartel arrangements. Likewise,

air travel changed in dramatic ways after World War II - not the least of which was the shift from



62
   The depreciation of the franc after World War I has been cited as a reason for an upsurge in
tourism to France, and for making Americans unpopular there when they flaunted their new
purchasing power. Levenstein, Seductive Journey, p. 265-71.
63
   Johnson and Huebner, Principles of Ocean Transportation, p. 337
64
   Ibid, pp. 335-37
65
   Ibid. Chap. XIX and pp. 335-37.

                                                  23
                                                                          American Invasion of Europe.doc


propeller to jet propulsion - and the effect on passenger travel is not fully captured by the

changes in the air fares.

         Nevertheless, there seems little question that some reductions in fares, especially the

decline in ocean fares between 1869 and 1890 and the drop in real air fares between 1946 and

1972, had an impact on travel. The effect of reduced fares, however, is hard to judge because of

the difficulties involved in the construction of a consistent long term series on passenger fares.

The problems stem from the large number of ports of embarkation and disembarkation and the

existence of a number of shipping lines and airlines. With ocean travel there was also variation

in size and quality of ships within each line, as well as several different classes of travel available

on most ships, and variation in accommodations within class. There may be less variation in air

travel, but there have been differences in leg room, quality of meals and on-board entertainment

among other things. Moreover, fares for ocean passage or airline travel are hard to come by.

Despite these problems we have attempted to compile time series on both ocean fares and air

fares.

         It appears that before World War I, fares to destinations on the Continent were higher

than those to Liverpool, England and Queenstown, Ireland, to which the fares were the same.

There was also some variation between the one-way fare to Europe and the one-way return

fare.66 This variation, though not always present, was most prevalent in the lowest class of

travel, i.e. “steerage,” whereas the first- and second-class fares for the return trip, generally,

appear to be the same or less.67




66
   A very few roundtrip fares were found; those found were slightly less expensive than the sum
of the two one-way fares.
67
   In most incidences where the steerage fare was reported for both directions of travel, the fare
was higher on the return trip to the U.S., in one case $15 more than the $25-fare to Europe.

                                                  24
                                                                       American Invasion of Europe.doc


       Furthermore, data for the middle to late 19th century, taken from advertisements in the

New York Times and Harper's Hand-book for Travellers in Europe and the East, appear to be

rather sticky for months at a time. This might be due to cartel arrangements, which appears to

have been the case for freight rates, but it might indicate high menu costs associated with

changing the advertisements and therefore not the true price at the time of travel. Indeed, in later

years, some shipping lines stopped publishing prices and instead, instructed potential passengers

to inquire at given addresses for information about fares. Fares collected from advertisements,

then, may be biased upwards to the extent that shipping lines with lower fares chose not to

advertise prices in order to preserve flexibility in pricing. In many cases, the more commonly

known lines continued to maintain prices, perhaps, in order to reduce consumer uncertainty.

       These problems combined with the time-consuming effort of retrieving fares for each

year make the endeavor of constructing a price series rather complex, and any such series would

have to be taken with some margin for error. Nevertheless, we have compiled data on fares for

most of the second half of the 19th century up until the beginning of World War I.68 Our series,

shown in Figure 8, includes only first-class fares. 69 Although tourists embarked and

disembarked at a number of different ports, our series is based on fares from just one port in the



Fares were taken from various issues of The New York Times. These observations, however, are
based on a very limited sample and serve only to illustrate the problems in generating a times
series for these fares.
68
   These data seem to indicate that fares did not converge towards a single price, and thus we
cannot simply use the fare for one shipping line as a proxy for the series of fares that was
influencing consumer behavior. Thus we have constructed a series that takes into account fares
for several different shipping lines. Similarly, fares for one route and one class are not ideal
proxies for all routes and fares, but we think the differences in these cases are less troublesome
69
   These first class fares may bias downward any estimated impact on the growth in the number
of travelers because the middle class may have begun traveling in larger numbers late in the 19th
century and were likely more influenced by fares in second class or even third class. On the
other hand, although second and third class fares differed from first class, to a large extent they
appear to have moved in similar fashion to first class fares over time.

                                                 25
                                                                       American Invasion of Europe.doc


U.S. (New York), and two in Europe, Liverpool and Glasgow. According to Drew Keeling

“[s]eventy percent of U.S. immigrants between 1850 and 1914 arrived via the port of New

York,” indicating the significance of the port for international travel. 70 And, as can be seen in

Appendix Table 2, New York was the single most important port of arrival for U.S. citizens. We

used Liverpool and Glasgow as the destination ports because, as we have already mentioned, a

high percentage of travelers were going to Europe over this period, most of them likely made

Great Britain their first stop, and these two ports were the most commonly observed in

advertisements.71

       Fares included in our series come from many different shipping lines. In each year, we

collected several fares from advertisements for several lines. In cases where an ad displayed

more than one first class fare -- which would reflect different locations of the cabin and

differences in other amenities -- these were averaged to create one first-class fare for that line

on that date. All of the fares from each line for that year were then averaged.72 Keeling notes

that passengers were concentrated on the four largest shipping lines; half of all the sea-traveling

passengers used only these lines.73 Our series underrepresents these largest lines, with the four

making up roughly twenty-five percent of our advertised fares series.74 Our series, however,

covers a much longer time period, and those big four lines were not always the biggest carriers


70
    Keeling “The Transport Revolution,” p. 40.
71
    Southampton was used as a destination in two cases.
72
   In 5 of the years, 1896 and 1899-1902, no precise first-class fare was given but rather a
minimum fare. Using the other years as a guide, the range between lowest and highest first-class
fare was never greater than $60. Hence, the fare used in the series was $30 greater than the
minimum advertised.
73
    Ibid, p. 40. These lines were Cunard, White Star, Norddeutscher Lloyd and the Hamburg-
America Packet Company.
74
    Our estimated fares are lower than those estimated by Keeling, which could reflect the fact
that ours includes fares from many lines, whereas his are from Cunard which may have been one
of the higher priced lines.

                                                 26
                                                                        American Invasion of Europe.doc


before the 1880s. Clearly, this is a very crude series of passenger fares but the pattern is

somewhat as we would expect.75 For instance, between 1869 and 1888 there was an increase in

arrivals of passengers at unspecified ports (as mentioned above). We would expect to see lower

fares out of New York during this period as the number of substitute ports increased. Our series

of fares clearly shows this decline over that period.

       As can be seen in Figure 8, advertised fares appear to have declined before 1880, and

would have helped push up the volume of overseas travel. After 1880, there were some

substantial fluctuations, a noticeable decline after 1903 and an equally noticeable increase after

1907. Fares at the end of the period, however, were not much below those that prevailed before

the Civil War. Overall, it would appear that declines in transatlantic fares could not have pushed

up demand by very much over the long term.76

       We have also shown in Figure 8 a series of fares compiled by Drew Keeling that are

based on passenger revenues of the Cunard Line. These “fares” are typically higher than the

advertised fares, noticeably so in the early 20th century. This may be because these fares

represent what passengers actually paid for their entire ocean passage, and might include

expenditures on extra amenities purchased on board. Thus the actual expenditures exceed the

expected expenditures (i.e. advertised fares). Nevertheless, despite the differences, both series

show a rise in fares after 1890.




75
   As crude as this appears to be, it is based on historical precedent, being the same method used
by Isserlis to construct his classic series on freight rates. See Mitchell, British Historical
Statistics.
76
   In a separate paper “Fluctuations in Overseas Travel by Americans, 1820-2000,” we examine
the effects of changes in fares on short term fluctuations in travel.

                                                 27
                                                                         American Invasion of Europe.doc


       Air fare data are no more readily available than ocean passenger fares, despite their being

of more recent vintage.77 And, while there may seem to be fewer complications involved in

constructing an airfare series, because there may not be as much variation in quality across seats

within each class of service, the matter is still not completely straightforward. Fares varied

depending on the season of the year, the duration of the stay overseas, whether group affiliation

could be rationalized, and whether one made some amount of ground outlay in advance. That is

to say, at one time or another there have been, and in some cases still are, first class fares, tourist

fares, normal economy fares, off-season fares, shoulder season fares, advance purchase

excursion fares (APEX fares), group inclusive fares (GIT fares) with different minimum and

maximum durations of stay, excursion fares with different minimum and maximum durations of

stay, youth fares, family fares, military fares, an assortment of charter fares, and weekend

surcharges.78 From time to time, there have been discount airlines, such as Freddie Laker’s

Skytrain and Richard Branson’s Virgin Atlantic.79 Passengers have at times been able to skirt

purchasing directly from the airlines or even travel agents, and buy tickets from consolidators

and more recently via internet specials offered weekly by airlines, and regularly through some

commercial websites such as Expedia and Orbitz.

       The existence of numerous points of embarkation and disembarkation has also become

more important in the airline era than had been the case with ocean travel. The importance of


77
    Airfare data exist, but they are not readily available to the public or research scholars. We are
in the process of trying to gain access to the available data.
78
    See for example, “New York-London Fare History, 1945 to 1970,” Pan American Airways
Collection, University of Miami, September 1, 1970, and New York Times, “Travel Terms and
Air Fares,” Mar. 21, 1976.
79
    Laker Airways began as a charter company in 1966 and Atlantic Skytrain began low-fare
regularly scheduled service in 1977. “Cloud Over Laker Air,” New York Times, Oct. 25, 1981.
When Laker went bankrupt in 1982, Richard Branson attempted to fill the gap. “A Record
Entrepreneur Plans Cheap Air Fares,” New York Times, April 10, 1984.

                                                  28
                                                                      American Invasion of Europe.doc


Europe as a destination before World War I has given way to worldwide travel. While the ocean

passenger fares from New York to Liverpool might serve as a reasonable proxy for ocean fares

generally before World War I, and perhaps even for the interwar period, the same would not

seem to be true of New York airfares in the World War II period. In the years immediately

following World War II the New York to London fare would be a good index as other fares were

based on that one, but over time the importance of that route and fare dwindled.

       We have compiled some evidence on airfares for some portions of the post World War II

era. Shown in Figure 9 are three series. One shows Pan American World Airways first class

fares from New York to London; a second shows Pan American’s tourist-economy fares from

New York to London; the third shows the New York to London airfare implied by the evidence

on ‘average passenger revenue per passenger mile.’80

       Before 1952, there was only one class of service. Tourist class was introduced in 1952

with a fare around 30 percent below first class. Pan American estimated that this generated

somewhere between 162,000 and 234,000 additional passengers, and proposed that IATA adopt

yet lower economy class fares.81 In 1958 IATA did so, initiating economy class fares that were

20 percent below tourist class. Subsequently, neither of these fares declined in nominal terms

before 1976, and tourist-economy fares at the end of the period were about where they had been

right after World War II.82 The third series, the fare implicit in the average passenger revenue




80
   The implied fares were calculated as the product of the average passenger revenue per
passenger mile and the round-trip mileage for New York to London of 6,920 miles. Susan
Carter, et al, Historical Statistics of the United States, Series Df1129.
81
   “Proposal for Reduced-Fare, High-Density Service on the North Atlantic Route,” Pan
American Airways Collection, University of Miami, May 14, 1956.
82
   Fares had fallen immediately after the War. On Nov. 24, 1945 they were reduced from
$1,069 to $495, and then increased on Dec. 12 to $675. “New York-London Fare History.”

                                                29
                                                                       American Invasion of Europe.doc


per passenger mile, presents a different picture, declining from 1946 through 1972, but rising

thereafter and ending the period well above the fares at the beginning of the period.

       In Figure 10 we have shown the implicit fare series in nominal terms and also deflated by

the All Urban CPI (1982-84 =100). The deflated series shows a more a noticeable downward

trend through 1973 and a more gradual one after 1975. Airfares rose more slowly than consumer

prices in general, so consumers might have been expected to increase their overseas travel by air.

A more pertinent price might be that of domestic air fares, because some, perhaps many,

consumers would have been choosing between overseas or domestic travel. A comparison of the

average passenger revenue per passenger mile for domestic and international is shown in Figure

11. It appears that international travel was becoming relatively less expensive compared to

domestic travel until the early 1960s, and thereafter fares remained in roughly comparable

positions.



An Error Correction Model of tourism demand

       Although a wide variety of forces came into play to foster tourism at different times,

changes in the key economic variables -- GDP per capita and exchange rates -- go a long way

towards explaining the rise in the fraction of the population that traveled overseas. In what we

think is the first attempt to explain this rise, we estimate a series of demand equations including

those key variables, as well as evidence on passenger fares. These are the same variables used in

previous studies on travel demand, but all those other studies have focused on the post-World

War II era, when data are more readily available, and most have studied tourism in other




                                                 30
                                                                       American Invasion of Europe.doc


nations.83 Even with more recent and abundant data, however, there are difficulties not only

with the data but also with separating demand and supply effects in a single equation.

       Moreover, much of the previous tourism demand research has ignored spurious

regression problems by using nonstationary variables in the regression models.84 We attempt to

avoid these problems here by exploiting the common trend in our two main variables, per capita

real GDP and the number of overseas travelers, in an error correction model. We also estimate

error correction models with other variables including exchange rates, ocean fares and a dummy

variable for periods of war.

       On the basis of Augmented Dickey-Fuller (ADF) unit root tests, we conclude that ln(per

capita real GDP), ln(travelers) and ln(exchange rate) are all difference stationary. Moreover,

ln(per capita real GDP) and ln(travelers) are cointegrated, which suggest an error correction

specification that will allow us to incorporate not only short-run but also long-run effects.

       The cointegrating equation can be thought of as our long-run tourism demand model and

can be expressed as:



ln Tt = α 0 + α 1 ln GDPt + α 2 ln EXRt + α 3 ln OFAREt + α 4 ln AFAREt + dumWARt + u t          (1)




83
    Gray, “The Demand for International Travel,” pp. 83-92. See also Loeb, “International Travel
to the United States,” pp. 7-20 and Song, Wong and Chon, “Modelling and forecasting the
demand for Hong Kong Tourism,” pp. 434-451, to name a few.
84
   The problem of spurious regression with nonstationary variables was first identified by Engle
and Granger (1987) who proposed an error correction framework when linear combinations of
nonstationary variables were stationary. In the tourism literature, Zhou, Bonham and Gangnes
(2004), Kim and Hong (1998) and Lathiras and Siriopoulos (1998) are some examples of studies
that used cointegration models.

                                                 31
                                                                             American Invasion of Europe.doc


        The corresponding error correction model (ECM), which represents our short-run model,

can be written as follows85:



 Δ ln Tt = β 0 + β 1 Δ ln Tt −1 + β 2 Δ ln GDPt + β 3 Δ ln GDPt −1 + β 4 Δ ln EXR t + β 5 Δ ln EXR t −1
                                                                                               ∧          (2)
 + β 5 Δ OFARE t + β 6 Δ OFARE t −1 + β 7 Δ AFARE t + β 8 Δ AFARE t −1 + dumWAR t + πu t −1 + ε t



        In the above equations, Tt is the number of travelers per 1,000 population in period t. The

variable GDPt is per capita real GDP in period t. EXRt is the exchange rate between the British

pound and U.S. dollar for most models although we also include the French-U.S. exchange rate

in one version of the model reported over the subsample 1920-1999. For some periods we are

also able to take account of the influence of other variables. For the period 1852-1914 we have

available our series on first- class ocean passenger fares ( OFARES t ) that were described in the

text; for the post-WWI period we can also include the effect of changes in the French Franc-

dollar exchange rate and in airfares ( AFAREt ). Finally, we include a dummy variable

( dumWARt ) in all of our specifications.

        Our newly constructed time series of first-class ocean passenger fares and the implicit air

fares, adjusted for inflation, represents the “price of tourism” in the demand equation.86

Traveling, of course, includes much more than the expense of transportation, and some studies

have separated “on-site costs” and “long-distance travel costs” in order to determine the separate


85
   We estimate a univariate model rather than a VECM because Granger causality tests suggest,
consistent with our intuition, that causality runs from per capita real GDP to number of travelers
and not the reverse. The one-period lag was chosen on the basis of AIC tests.
86
   For airfares, we have used the average passenger revenue per passenger mile in our regression
estimates because that series takes into account the complexities of the fares, the many points of
embarkation and disembarkation, as well as the changing class structure.

                                                     32
                                                                        American Invasion of Europe.doc


effects.87 Other studies have concluded, however, that transportation plays the larger role in

determining tourism demand.88 Gray, writing in the 1960s, argued that prices of goods in the

destination country were “seldom completely known in advance by travelers.”89 This would

seem to be all the more true for earlier years. Therefore, in the absence of data regarding ‘on-site

costs’, we use the price of transportation to serve as a proxy for the price of tourism.

       Since the long-run elasticities are based on the results of equation (1), the main parameter

of interest in equation (2) is the speed of adjustment, π , which captures the fraction of

deviations from the underlying long-run relationship that is corrected within one year. The

                                                                          ∧
estimated residual from a first stage OLS regression of equation (1) is u t , which enters the ECM

in equation (2) with a one period lag. The speed of adjustment parameter π is the estimated

coefficient in the ECM on the lagged residuals from the first stage regression.

       We estimate a number of versions of these models depending on the explanatory

variables used and the time period over which those variables are available. The results of the

long-run models represented by equation (1) are reported in Table 3 and the results of the short-

run ECM (represented by equation (2)) are found in Table 4.

       Real GDP per capita is used to account for changes in travel demand caused by income

growth. Income elasticity estimates are drawn from the first stage estimation of the cointegrating

equation (Table 3). We expected these elasticities to be greater than 1.0 because travel would

seem to have been a luxury good, and our models suggest this was the case. The two models that

span the entire sample from 1820 to 1999, Models I and IIA, provide income elasticity estimates


87
   In addition to fares, Loeb used relative prices in the destination country vis-à-vis the country
of origin. See also Nowell, “Heterogeneous Visitors,” pp. 404-419.
88
   For instance, Pyo, Uysal and McLellan, “A Linear Expenditure Model,” pp. 443-454.
89
   Gray, “The Demand for International Travel,” p. 86.

                                                 33
                                                                       American Invasion of Europe.doc


of between 1.5 and 1.8.90 In some time periods the estimates were as low as 0.6, but ranged as

high as 2.3 in the post-World War II subsample (Model VA). The income elasticity in Model

VA is likely so high because the model does not include a variable for the price of air travel.

When we introduce airfares, as in Model VB, the income elasticity falls substantially. Indeed,

we get the anomalous result of a negative income elasticity in the post-World War II period

(Model VB) This seems to be because of the influence of changes in airfares on travel is so large

that it overwhelms the income effect.

       The dummy variable is for wars that may have had an impact on Americans’ ability or

desire to travel abroad. Although there were a number of wars in the world over the 1820 to

1999 period, many of which took place in Europe, our dummy variable is restricted to the

American Civil War, the two World Wars, and the Korean and Vietnam conflicts. Wars may

have affected overseas tourism by reducing destination options and crowding out private use of

transportation resources or at least increasing the competition for and costs of these resources.

This variable attempts to isolate wars that affected U.S. resource allocation and American tourist

decision-making. The dummy variable for war is of the wrong sign in four of the eight

subsamples, namely in the 1852-1914 period (Models IIIA and IIIB) and the post-World War II

period (Models VA and VB), but all of those coefficients are very small. This is not too

surprising a result, because in neither of these time periods was there a continent-wide war

underway in Europe. War did have an impact in other time periods. We do find a negative



90
   As discussed earlier, previous estimates have found elasticities of tourism demand as high as
2.0. Dora Costa, in “Less of a Luxury” has found that the expenditure elasticity for recreation
may have declined over time, at least over the 20th century. Our sample periods do not permit us
to assess the trend over the 20th century, but when we look at comparable models (Models IIB
and IIC) over the two centuries our estimates are consistent with hers, the elasticity falling from
1.8 to 0.59.

                                                 34
                                                                         American Invasion of Europe.doc


tourism response to war in several subsamples - 1820-1914 (Model IIB) and 1920-99 (Models

IIC and IV) - as well as over the full time period from 1820 to 1999 (Models I and IIA). All of

these coefficients were fairly large so it appears that a continent-wide war in Europe dampened

overseas travel, whereas wars outside Europe did not. The Korean and Vietnam wars may have

deterred travel to those regions of the world, but did not have much of an impact on travel

overall. The impact of the U.S. Civil War does not appear to have had a substantial impact.

Although a major domestic event, it does not appear to have significantly reduced travel

overseas. In two of the subsamples encompassing the years of the Civil War (Models IIIA and

IIIB), the coefficient was positive whereas in the period 1820-1914 the coefficient is negative, as

expected.

       The exchange rate is used as a determinant of travel demand because we are looking only

at the demand for overseas travel. The rate we use is the number of British pounds Sterling per

dollar, not only because it is the only exchange rate available for the entire period, but it is also

appropriate given the importance of the N.Y. to U.K. travel route. The British pound would be

the first new currency encountered by travelers to Europe, especially before World War I, and “it

was the overwhelmingly important foreign currency in the American foreign-exchange market”

at the time.91 As discussed earlier, there was little trend in this exchange rate before World War

I, so it had little impact on the growth of overseas travel in that period, but its importance should

have increased over time. To the extent that American tourists were sensitive to exchange rate

movements, the appreciation of the dollar relative to the British Pound after World War II should




91
   Officer, “Exchange Rates,” in Carter, et al, Historical Statistics of the United States, Vol. 5, p.
5-449.

                                                  35
                                                                         American Invasion of Europe.doc


have had a positive effect on overseas travel.92 The results of our long-run model suggest this to

be the case. We find that the elasticity of tourism with respect to movements in the exchange

rate was positive over all models except for Model IIB from 1820 to 1914 and that these

elasticities are larger in the 1920 to 1999 period then in comparably-defined models for earlier

periods. Indeed, the coefficients for the period 1852-1914, although positive, are relatively

small. In the post World War II period the coefficient is positive but quite small when air fares

are included in the model.

       The coefficient on the passenger fares in Models IV and VB has the expected negative

sign. Increases in fares result in a decline in overseas travel with airfare exerting a large effect

on travel in the post-WWII period reflected in Model VB. This would suggest that the

advertised fares represent the ‘price’ of traveling overseas.

       The short-run ECMs provide estimates of the speed of adjustment parameters for the

various models, which are reported as the coefficients on u(t-1) in Table 4. The speed of

adjustment back toward long-run equilibrium is relatively slow in our model, ranging from just

10 percent up to 44 percent.93 The slowest adjustment speeds are found in two models run over

the 1920 to 1999 period (Models IIC and IV), whereas in the post-WWII models (VA and VB)

the speed is much faster which suggests that the inclusion of the volatile period from 1914 to

1945 may be distorting the overall long-run relationship and the speed of adjustment parameters.




92
   Of course, by then changes in other bilateral exchange rates might have had independent
effects, but as yet we have not incorporated these into our analysis.
93
   A similar model estimated by Kim and Song (1998) for more recent U.S. tourism travel to
South Korea from 1961 to 1995 found a speed of adjustment parameter of 40 percent. The
difference between their estimate and ours is relatively small and not surprising given that they
are examining one country, and we are looking at the world.

                                                  36
                                                                       American Invasion of Europe.doc


This could also explain the slow adjustment speeds in the models estimated over the entire

sample from 1820 to 1999 (Models I and IIA).94

Conclusions

       We have tried to sketch out the contours of overseas travel by Americans as it developed

over the long term and provide some rough explanation for the changes that occurred. Two of

the most obvious features of this market are its very rapid rise -- on the order of 5 percent per

year -- and the duration of its growth, which has persisted for at least 180 years. Another

compelling characteristic is that its long term growth can be explained to a very large extent by

the growth of population and GDP per capita. To be sure there were numerous ups and downs in

the flow of tourists abroad, and several very substantial upsurges, reflecting world events and

developments on the supply side of the market. Despite these factors, the growth of income was

a consistent and strong force in explaining the growth of overseas travel relative to the

population. With real GDP per capita having increased at 1.86 percent per year and the

estimated long term elasticity of 1.52 (Model IIA, which includes the exchange rate variable) the

growth of income would have explained well over three-fourths of the 3.4 percent annual growth

in the number of overseas travelers relative to the population.

       As the industry grew, several notable changes occurred. Before 1900, overseas travel

was clearly and predominantly done by the elite of American society, and largely by men. Over

time there was an increase in the number of women who went abroad, rising from 10 percent of

travelers in the early 19th century to over half after World War II, and possibly before. Perhaps

an even more fundamental change was the increase in middle income travelers. The industry



94
  We further explore these short-run dynamics in a separate paper, “Fluctuations in Overseas
Travel by Americans, 1820-1900.”

                                                 37
                                                                        American Invasion of Europe.doc


rose from one that catered to the elite of American society in the early 19th century to what some

have described unfavorably as mass tourism. It is, however, still unclear exactly when middle

class Americans traveled overseas in large numbers, although there are many opinions. Daniel

Boorstin may have given initial voice to this idea, arguing that foreign travel had begun to

change sometime after the middle of the 19th century, shifting from a risky, adventuresome

experience engaged in by travelers, to a ‘spectator sport’ for tourists.95 In his view, the

culmination of the changes in travel occurred in the 1950s and early 1960s, but its force was felt

decades earlier when he alleged that the great backwash had begun after World War I. Despite

his colorful and beguiling rhetoric, however, the numbers of overseas travelers belie his

concerns. The great backwash of the post World War I era amounted to only a quarter of a

million people, less than 0.5 percent of the population.96 Indeed, even in the 1950s and early

1960s, when Boorstin thought mass tourism had reached its climax, less than one percent of

Americans were traveling overseas. There could not have been many middle income Americans

among them. If he was a bit premature in his claim, the numbers nevertheless may have become

as daunting as Boorstin et al would have one believe in the 1980s when more than five percent of

the population traveled overseas. And that percentage has continued to rise, now running around

10 percent.

       The increasing importance of tourism in the world’s economy, especially since World

War II, has encouraged a great deal of tourism research. However, most economic studies focus

only on the recent period. We have tried to illuminate a broader picture of overseas tourism and

its trends in order to understand the recent period in a larger or longer context. There are many


95
  Boorstin, The Image, p. 84.
96
  Of course, these numbers would have appeared larger relative to the smaller populations of
any single European destination country.

                                                 38
                                                                        American Invasion of Europe.doc


opinions about the industry, but little statistical evidence to provide the necessary support. This

paper has been an attempt to fill in that statistical landscape, perhaps easing the way for future

travelers.




                                                 39
                                                                                                                                                      American Invasion of Europe.doc




                                                              Figure 1
                                         Numbers of Americans Traveling Overseas, 1820-2000
        LN values
     12.000




     10.000

                                                                                                        2




      8.000




      6.000




      4.000




      2.000




      0.000
          1820      1830   1840   1850   1860   1870   1880   1890   1900   1910   1920   1930   1940       1950   1960   1970   1980   1990   2000



                                     Ocean Bound US Tourists                       Linear (Ocean Bound US Tourists)




Notes: The series is a combination of three slightly different series covering parts of the time period. See Appendix Table 1 for data and sources.




                                                                                          40
                                                                                                                                           American Invasion of Europe.doc




                                                            Figure 2
                                              Numbers of Americans Traveling Overseas, 1900-1950
       Thousands
     800


     700


     600


     500


     400


     300


     200


     100


       0
           1900   1903   1906   1909   1912    1915   1918   1921   1924   1927    1930       1933   1936   1939    1942    1945    1948



                            Arrivals of US Citizens                 Overseas Travelers                      Departures of US Citizens




Source: See Appendix Table 1 for data and sources.




                                                                                         41
                                                                                                                                              American Invasion of Europe.doc




                                                                  Figure 3
                                                   Thousands of American Traveling Overseas, 1950-2000
     1,000s of Overseas Travelers
     30,000




     25,000




     20,000




     15,000




     10,000




      5,000




          0
              1950   1953   1956    1959   1962   1965   1968    1971    1974   1977      1980    1983     1986   1989   1992   1995   1998

                              Overseas Travelers                Arrivals of US Citizens                  Departures of US Citizens




Source: See Appendix Table 1 for data and sources.




                                                                                             42
                                                                                                                                                   American Invasion of Europe.doc




                                                            Figure 4
                                               Female Share of Overseas Travelers
    60%




    50%




    40%




    30%




    20%




    10%




     0%
       1820   1830   1840    1850   1860   1870   1880      1890   1900   1910   1920   1930    1940     1950   1960   1970   1980   1990   2000


                            US Citizens Arriving, 1820-52                                      Adult Cabin Passengers, 1868-1909
                            Departures from American Ports, 1905-30                            Passport Data, 1948-




Sources: Walter F. Willcox, 1929, International Migrations, Vol. 1: Statistics, Table IX. Historical Statistics of the United States, Series H: 917
and 918; Statistical Abstract of the United States, 1909, Table 51.




                                                                                                    43
                                                                                                                    American Invasion of Europe.doc




                                                             Figure 5A
                                 Distribution of Arriving U.S. Citizens by Port of Entry, 1856-1919
         Percentage Share
        1.00


        0.90

        0.80


        0.70


        0.60

        0.50

        0.40


        0.30

        0.20


        0.10

        0.00
           57


           61


           65


           69




           77
           79


           83


           87


           91


           95
           97




           05


           09


           13


           17
           55


           59


           63


           67


          71
           73
           75




           81


           85


           89


           93




           99
          01
           03


           07


           11


           15


           19
        18


        18


        18


        18


        18


        18
        18


        18


        18


        18


        18
        18




        19
        19


        19


        19


        19
        18


        18


        18


        18


        18


        18




        18


        18


        18


        18




        18
        19




        19


        19


        19


        19
                            East Coast Ports       Southern Ports        West Coast Ports       Unspecified Ports

Source: See Appendix Tables 2 for data and sources.




                                                                        44
                                                                                                                                    American Invasion of Europe.doc




                                                            Figure 5B
                                            European Share of Overseas Travel by Americans, 1915-2000
        Percentage Share
       100%

        90%

        80%

        70%

        60%

        50%

        40%

        30%

        20%

        10%

         0%
         1910191319161919192219251928193119341937194019431946194919521955195819611964196719701973197619791982198519881991199419972000



                    Arrivals by Port of Entry     Passport Data     Departures by Area of Embarkation       Overseas Travelers



Source: See Appendix Tables 3 for data and sources.




                                                                                 45
                                                                                                                       American Invasion of Europe.doc




                                                       Figure 5C
                              Distribution of Overseas Travelers by Destination, 1915-2000
        Percentage Share
       100%


        90%


        80%


        70%


        60%


        50%


        40%


        30%


        20%


        10%


         0%




                         79
          9
                22

                          5
                         28

                         31

                         34

                         37

                         40

                         43

                         46

                         49

                         52

                         55

                         58

                         61

                         64

                         67

                         70

                         73

                         76



                         82

                         85

                         88

                         91

                         94

                         97

                         00
           1



                       2
               19



                      19

                      19

                      19

                      19




                      19



                      19

                      19

                      19

                      19



                      19

                      19



                      19

                      19

                      19

                      19



                      19

                      19

                      19

                      20
        19



                    19




                      19

                      19



                      19




                      19




                      19




                      19
                     Europe   Caribbean and Central America   South America    Other         South America and Other



Source: See Appendix Tables 3 for data and sources.




                                                                        46
                                                                        American Invasion of Europe.doc




                                 Figure 6A
          American Overseas Travelers as a Percent of U.S. Population
Percent                         1820 to 1950

0.50%


0.45%


0.40%


0.35%


0.30%


0.25%


0.20%


0.15%


0.10%


0.05%


0.00%
     20

     25

     30

     35

     40

     45

     50

     55

     60

     65

     70

     75

     80

     85

     90

     95

     00

     05

     10

     15

     20

     25

     30

     35

     40

     45

     50
  18

  18

  18

  18

  18

  18

  18

  18

  18

  18

  18

  18

  18

  18

  18

  18

  19

  19

  19

  19

  19

  19

  19

  19

  19

  19

  19
                                          47
                                                                                    American Invasion of Europe.doc




                                       Figure 6B
Percent
          American Overseas Travelers as Percent of U.S. Population, 1920 to 2000

10.00%


9.00%


8.00%


7.00%


6.00%


5.00%


4.00%


3.00%


2.00%


1.00%


0.00%
    20
    23
    26
    29
    32
    35
    38
    41
    44
    47
    50
    53
    56
    59
    62
    65
    68
    71
    74
    77
    80
    83
    86
    89
    92
    95
    98
  19
  19
  19
  19
  19
  19
  19
  19
  19
  19
  19
  19
  19
  19
  19
  19
  19
  19
  19
  19
  19
  19
  19
  19
  19
  19
  19




                                                           48
                                                                                                                                           American Invasion of Europe.doc




                                                            Figure 7
                                  Dollars per Pound Sterling and per French Franc, 1820-1999
       $s per foreign currency
      20.00


      18.00


      16.00


      14.00


      12.00


      10.00


       8.00

                   $s per Pound
       6.00
                     Sterling

       4.00


       2.00
                                                                                         $s per Franc
       0.00
           1820   1830   1840    1850   1860   1870   1880   1890   1900   1910   1920    1930   1940   1950   1960   1970   1980   1990




Sources: Data for the pound/dollar exchange rate was obtained from: Lawrence H. Officer, "Exchange rate between the United States dollar and
the British pound, 1791-2004." Economic History Services, EH.Net, 2004. URL: http://www.eh.net/hmit/exchangerates/pound.php. Data for the
French Franc/Dollar exchange rate are those in “consistent currency units” from Susan Carter, et al, Historical Statistics of the United States,
Cambridge University Press, Vol. 5, Series Ee665.


                                                                                    49
                                                                                                                              American Invasion of Europe.doc




                                                                    Figure 8
                                                   First Class TransAtlantic Fares, 1852-1914

             180


             160


             140
                                                                                                Keeling's Series

             120


             100
   Dollars




             80
                                      Advertised Fares

             60


             40

                                   Advertised Fares Deflated
             20


               0
                   1852 1855 1858 1861 1864 1867 1870 1873 1876 1879 1882 1885 1888 1891 1894 1897 1900 1903 1906 1909 1912




Data for the Advertised fares: 1852-1914” was computed as outlined in the text. Data for the Keeling’s Series: 1885-1914” were supplied by
Drew Keeling. These fares have been updated and extended from those published in “The Transport Revolution and Transatlantic Migration,”
Economic History, vol. 19, 1999, pp. 39-74.




                                                                                      50
                                                                                                                                              American Invasion of Europe.doc




                                                          Figure 9
                                         Comparison of NY-London Air Passenger Fares
                                      And Fares Implied by Average Passenger Revenue per Passenger Mile
      Dollars                                     Nominal Fares, 1945-1998
    1000


     900


     800


     700


     600


     500


     400


     300


     200


     100


      0
     1945 1947 1949 1951 1953 1955 1957 1959 1961 1963 1965 1967 1969 1971 1973 1975 1977 1979 1981 1983 1985 1987 1989 1991 1993 1995 1997


                                   Pan Am Tourist-Economy Fares                            Fares implied by APR/PM
                                   First Class Fares                                       Advertised Tourist-Economy Fares




The implied fares were calculated as the product of the average passenger revenue per passenger mile and the round-trip mileage
for New York to London of 6,920 miles. Susan Carter, et al, Historical Statistics of the United States, Series Df1129.




                                                                                                         51
                                                                                                        American Invasion of Europe.doc




                                         Figure 10
                                 Passenger Fares Implied by
                        Average Passenger Revenue per Passenger Mile
  US $s
                                   Nominal and Deflated
4000


3500


3000


2500

                      Deflated Fares
2000


1500


1000
                 Nominal Fares

500


  0
 1945194719491951195319551957195919611963196519671969197119731975197719791981198319851987198919911993




                                                                   52
                                                                                                              American Invasion of Europe.doc




                                             Figure 11
                        Average Passenger Revenue per Passenger-mile 1938-1993
                                      Domestic and International
Cents per mile

 0.16



 0.14



 0.12



 0.10

                               International
 0.08



 0.06

                                 Domestic
 0.04



 0.02



 0.00
        1938 1941 1944 1947 1950 1953 1956 1959 1962 1965 1968 1971 1974 1977 1980 1983 1986 1989 1992 1995




                                                                                53
                                                                      American Invasion of Europe.doc




                                          Table 1
              Selected Statistics on International Tourism, 1820 to 2000
                U.S.                      Arrivals of US                       Overseas Foreign
             Overseas      US Travelers   Citizens as % of   Total Resident     Travelers in the
             Travelers,    as % of Pop.         Pop.          Population             U.S.
              (1,000s)                                          (1,000s)           (1,000s)
Benchmark Values (3-year averages)
   1821              2.1         0.02%               0.02%             9,942                0
   1830              1.6         0.01%               0.01%            12,929                0
   1840              7.6         0.04%               0.04%            17,179                1
   1850             14.7         0.06%               0.06%            23,326                3
   1860             28.7         0.09%               0.09%            31,517                1
   1870             35.8         0.09%               0.09%            39,965                4
   1880             52.9         0.11%               0.11%            50,337                7
   1890             88.8         0.14%               0.14%            63,064               16
   1900            128.0         0.17%               0.17%            76,159               19
   1913            244.4         0.25%               0.25%            97,224
   1920            249.3         0.23%               0.13%           106,504               68
   1930            497.7         0.40%               0.37%           122,961               76
   1940            202.7         0.15%               0.20%           131,985               76
   1950            644.3         0.43%               0.46%           151,070              252
   1960          1,575.0         0.88%               1.11%           178,524              565
   1970          5,183.3         2.56%               2.99%           201,969            2,192
   1980          8,012.7         3.55%          NA                   225,469            8,166
   1990         15,100.7         6.09%          NA                   248,161           15,072
   1999         24,833.7         8.93%          NA                   277,825           24,712

Long Term Average Values
1820-49             4            0.02%               0.02%            15,252                1
1850-59            27            0.10%               0.10%            26,974                3
1860-64            25            0.07%               0.07%            33,188                1
1865-82            45            0.10%               0.10%            43,726                4
1883-99            92            0.14%               0.14%            64,402               20
1900-14           194            0.22%               0.22%            87,271               20
1915-19           115            0.11%               0.10%           102,699               47
1920-29           391            0.34%               0.27%           114,564               72
1930-39           375            0.30%               0.28%           126,874               78
1940-49           139            0.10%               0.13%           134,094               73
1950-59         1,047            0.63%               0.70%           163,123              345
1960-69         2,672            1.39%               1.74%           189,514            1,112
1970-79         6,738            3.16%               3.17%           212,691            4,043
1980-89        11,368            4.81%                  NA           235,277            9,487
1990-99        18,985            7.18%                  NA           263,135           20,178




                                                54
                                                                            American Invasion of Europe.doc




                                              Table 1 (cont.)
                                                                                        Overseas
                 U.S.                          Arrivals of US                            Foreign
               Overseas     US Travelers as    Citizens as % of   Total Resident       Travelers in
               Travelers,     % of Pop.              Pop.          Population           the U.S.


 Average Annual Rates of Growth
 1820-1860       6.7            3.6                 3.6               3.0                  5.8
 1861-1900       4.3            2.0                 2.0               2.2                  9.4
 1820-1900       5.3            2.6                 2.6               2.6                  6.2
 1900-1914       5.1            3.1                 3.1               1.9
 1900-1950       3.4            2.0                 2.0               1.4                 5.1
 1950-1970      10.8            9.2                10.3               1.5                 11.7
 1970-2000       5.6            4.4                                   1.1                 8.6
 1950-2000       7.6            6.3                                   1.2                 9.8
 1820-2000       5.4            3.5                                   1.9                 6.9



Notes to Table 1:
Sources: Historical Statistics of the United States, Series
         The average annual rates of increase were calculated between end-point values. The rates derived
by fitting a regression equation to the LN values differ somewhat.




                                                     55
                                                                       American Invasion of Europe.doc




                            Table 2
                 Mode of Travel Used, 1931-1970
               Percent Arriving              Percent Departing
  Year      By Sea         By Air         By Sea         By Air

  1931          98.5%           1.4%          99.0%             1.0%
  1932          98.1%           1.7%          98.8%             1.2%
  1933          97.6%           2.6%          98.3%             1.7%
  1934          97.0%           2.7%          97.6%             2.7%
  1935          96.3%           3.7%          96.5%             3.5%
  1936          96.4%           3.6%          96.8%             3.2%
  1937          95.9%           4.1%          96.1%             3.9%
  1938          95.8%           4.2%          95.9%             4.1%
  1939          94.4%           5.6%          94.0%             5.8%
  1940          89.8%          10.2%          89.2%            10.8%
  1941          80.8%          19.5%          78.7%            21.3%
  1942          65.2%          34.3%          60.7%            39.3%
  1943          44.7%          55.3%          17.2%            82.8%
  1944          40.8%          58.7%          22.9%            77.1%
  1945          34.5%          65.5%          25.3%            74.7%
  1946          41.2%          58.8%          35.1%            64.9%
  1947          42.9%          57.0%          42.4%            57.6%
  1948          47.9%          52.0%          47.7%            52.3%
  1949          45.6%          54.5%          47.2%            52.8%
  1950          50.9%          49.2%          47.6%            52.4%
  1951          42.7%          57.3%          39.9%            60.1%
  1952          43.5%          56.5%          39.9%            60.0%
  1953          38.8%          61.2%          40.0%            60.1%
  1954          37.6%          62.4%          40.0%            60.0%
  1955          36.0%          64.1%          35.0%            65.0%
  1956          32.1%          67.9%          31.9%            68.2%
  1957          29.2%          70.8%          29.3%            70.7%
  1958          26.2%          73.8%          26.7%            73.3%
  1959          26.1%          73.9%          25.9%            74.1%
  1960          24.2%          75.8%          24.5%            75.5%
  1961          22.3%          77.6%          23.4%            76.6%
  1962          22.0%          77.9%          23.3%            76.7%
  1963          21.1%          78.9%          21.8%            78.2%
  1964          19.6%          80.4%          20.1%            79.9%
  1965          16.6%          83.4%          16.9%            83.1%
  1966          13.9%          86.1%          13.4%            86.6%
  1967          11.4%          88.6%          11.5%            88.5%
  1968           9.4%          90.6%           9.8%            90.2%
  1969           8.7%          91.3%           9.5%            90.5%
  1970           8.6%          91.4%           9.2%            90.8%


Source: Historical Statistics of the United States, 1975, Series C:315-16, 330-31


                                                56
                                                                                                                  American Invasion of Europe.doc




                                                                   Table 3
                                Demand for Overseas Tourism ‐ Long Run Cointegrating Equations
                                      Dependent Variable: LN(overseas travelers per 1,000 population)


                           Model I:      Model IIA: Model IIB:    Model IIC: Model IIIA: Model IIIB: Model IV:    Model VA: Model VB:
                           1820‐1999      1820‐1999   1820‐1914    1920‐1999   1852‐1914   1852‐1914 1920‐1999      1945‐1999   1945‐1999
Constant                    ‐14.253        ‐11.326     ‐17.742      ‐0.772      ‐6.682      ‐2.538      ‐0.754       ‐19.448      25.845
                            (0.425)        (1.112)     (1.297)      (3.645)     (1.157)     (2.431)     (4.078)      (0.328)     (3.070)
ln(Per Capita Real GDP)      1.761          1.519       1.802        0.588       0.901       0.722      0.586         2.356       ‐0.592
                            (0.049)        (0.098)     (0.097)      (0.336)     (0.096)     (0.132)     (0.394)      (0.306)     (0.224)
War Dummy                   ‐0.602          ‐0.503     ‐0.529       ‐0.460       0.012       0.052      ‐0.461        0.052       0.061
                            (0.121)        (0.124)     (0.324)      (0.152)     (0.165)     (0.163)     (0.154)      (0.097)     (0.037)
ln(Exchange Rate, £/$)                      0.632      ‐2.018        2.352       0.249       0.624      2.352         1.003       0.140
                                           (0.222)     (0.615)      (0.474)     (0.353)     (0.396)     (0.484)      (0.358)     (0.148)
ln(Exchange Rate, FF/$)                                                                                 0.001
                                                                                                        (0.112)
ln(Ocean Fares)                                                                             ‐0.292
                                                                                            (0.151)
ln(Air Fares)                                                                                                                     ‐2.454
                                                                                                                                 (0.142)


R‐squared                    0.880          0.886       0.796        0.830       0.699       0.717      0.830         0.924       0.988
Adj. R‐squared               0.879          0.884       0.789        0.823       0.684       0.698      0.821         0.919       0.987
SE of regression             0.602          0.590       0.422        0.591       0.209       0.204      0.595         0.316       0.120



  Standard errors reported below coefficients




                                                                     57
                                                                                                                   American Invasion of Europe.doc


                                                                 Table 4
                                 Demand for Overseas Tourism ‐ Short Run Error Correction Model Equations
                                     Dependent Variable: ∆ LN(overseas travelers per 1,000 population)

                                   Model I:   Model IIA: Model IIB:   Model IIC:   Model IIIA: Model IIIB: Model IV:    Model VA:    Model VB:
                                  1820‐1999   1820‐1999   1820‐1914    1920‐1999    1852‐1914   1852‐1914   1920‐1999    1945‐1999    1945‐1999


Constant                            0.033       0.035       0.024        0.036        0.004       0.001        0.035       0.047        0.023
                                    (0.022)     (0.022)    (0.030)      (0.027)      (0.022)     (0.020)      (0.027)     (0.022)      (0.016)
∆ln(Travelers, t‐1)                 0.258       0.262       0.335        0.284        0.115       0.320        0.292       0.171        0.093
                                    (0.072)     (0.072)    (0.101)      (0.105)      (0.133)     (0.134)      (0.114)     (0.109)      (0.095)
∆ ln(Per Capita Real GDP, t)        -0.948      -0.969      0.707       -1.295        0.536      0.082        -1.235      -0.336        0.362
                                    (0.411)     (0.412)    (0.644)      (0.441)      (0.431)     (0.424)      (0.436)     (0.447)      (0.347)
∆ ln(Per Capita Real GDP, t‐1)      0.030       -0.025      -1.007       0.234       -0.364      -0.379        0.135       0.206       -0.275
                                    (0.425)     (0.427)    (0.679)      (0.447)      (0.453)     (0.445)      (0.444)     (0.422)      (0.279)
∆ ln(Exchange Rate, £/$, t)                     0.106       -0.204       0.009        0.258       0.516       -0.071       0.353        0.087
                                                (0.259)    (0.422)      (0.248)      (0.265)     (0.256)      (0.261)     (0.169)      (0.112)
∆ ln(Exchange Rate, £/$, t‐1)                   -0.246      0.097       -0.332        0.074      0.030        -0.197      -0.084        0.035
                                                (0.259)    (0.431)      (0.246)      (0.272)     (0.261)      (0.253)     (0.168)      (0.112)
∆ ln(Exchange Rate, FF/$, t)                                                                                   0.180
                                                                                                              (0.115)
∆ ln(Exchange Rate, FF/$, t‐1)                                                                                -0.146
                                                                                                              (0.113)
∆ ln(Ocean Fares, t)                                                                             -0.321
                                                                                                 (0.114)
∆ ln(Ocean Fares, t‐1)                                                                           -0.009
                                                                                                 (0.107)
∆ ln(Air Fares, t)                                                                                                                     -0.750
                                                                                                                                       (0.237)
∆ ln(Air Fares, t‐1)                                                                                                                   -0.073
                                                                                                                                       (0.019)
War Dummy (t)                       0.054       0.055       0.024        0.070        0.068       0.037        0.072       0.063        0.019
                                    (0.048)     (0.048)    (0.117)      (0.044)      (0.075)     (0.068)      (0.044)     (0.027)      (0.018)
u (t‐1)                             -0.131      -0.144      -0.277      -0.106       -0.340      -0.440       -0.104      -0.303       -0.297
                                    (0.033)     (0.033)    (0.066)      (0.038)      (0.106)     (0.104)      (0.038)      (0.05)      (0.091)


R‐squared                           0.169       0.183       0.219        0.316        0.222       0.391        0.356       0.677        0.548
Adj. R‐squared                      0.144       0.149       0.154        0.248        0.121       0.283        0.272       0.628        0.439
SE of regression                    0.245       0.244       0.241        0.174        0.148       0.133        0.171       0.086        0.055


                                                                       58
                                                                                                                      American Invasion of Europe.doc




Notes and Sources for Tables 3 and 4
        Data for real GDP per capita was obtained from: Louis D. Johnston and Samuel H. Williamson, "The Annual Real and Nominal GDP for
the United States, 1790 - Present." Economic History Services, October 2005, URL : http://www.eh.net/hmit/gdp/
        Data for the pound/dollar exchange rate and the GDP deflator was obtained from: Lawrence H. Officer, "Exchange rate between the
United States dollar and the British pound, 1791-2004." Economic History Services, EH.Net, 2004. URL:
http://www.eh.net/hmit/exchangerates/pound.php
        Data for the French Franc/Dollar exchange rate are those in “consistent currency units” from Susan Carter, et al, Historical Statistics of the
United States, Cambridge University Press, Vol. 5, Series Ee665.
       The sources of data for ocean fares 1852-1914 and the methods of calculating and deflating them are discussed in the text. The airfares
used were those implied by the Average Passenger Revenue per Passenger Mile for a roundtrip New York to London. Susan Carter, et al,
Historical Statistics of the United States, Series Df1129.
        The War dummy variable takes on a value of 1 in the years 1861-64 (The American Civil War), 1914-18 (World War I), 1939-45 (World
War II), the Korean War (1950-1953) and Vietnam (beginning with the Gulf of Tonkin, 1964-1975).
        For the shorter time period, 1885-1914, we compared the results using our first class passenger fares with those using the Cunard “fares”
compiled by Drew Keeling, but have not shown the results here. His fares have been updated and extended from those published in “The
Transport Revolution and Transatlantic Migration,” Economic History, vol. 19, 1999, pp. 39-74. In both of these specifications, income elasticity
was significantly positive, while the Sterling-dollar exchange rate also had a positive impact on travel demand but it was significant only in the
regression using our first-class fares. Finally, while the first class fares had the correct sign, the coefficient on the Cunard fares was positive,
although in neither case was the coefficient significant.




                                                                         59
                                                                       American Invasion of Europe.doc



                                          REFERENCES

Boorstin, Daniel. The Image: A Guide to Pseudo-Events in America, New York: Harper

        Colophon Books, 1964

Brown, Dona. Inventing New England, Washington: Smithsonian Institution Press, 1995,

Carter, Susan, et al, Historical Statistics of the United States, Cambridge University Press, 2006

Civil Aeronautics Board, “Milestones and Landmarks in U.S. Air Transport: 1903-72,” Handbook of

Airline Statistics, 1971, pp. 470-501.

Cocks, Catherine. Doing the Town: The Rise of Urban Tourism in the United States, 1850-1915,

        Berkeley: University of California Press, 2001

Cohn, Raymond, “Transatlantic U.S. Passenger Travel at the Dawn of the Steamship Era,”

        International Journal of Maritime History, June 1992.

Costa, Dora, “Less of a Luxury: The Rise of Recreation since 1888,” National Bureau of

        Economic Research, Working Paper No. 6054, 1997.

de Sauvigny, Guillaume de Bertier La France et les Francais vus par le voyageurs americains,

        1814-1848, Paris: Flamarion, 1982, 17-19.

Dulles, Foster Rhea, Americans Abroad: Two Centuries of European Travel, Ann Arbor:

        University of Michigan Press, 1964.

Dupont, Brandon, Alka Gandhi, and Thomas Weiss, “Fluctuations in Overseas Travel by

        Americans, 1820 to 2000.” Mimeo, Western Washington University, 2008.

Endy, Christopher. Cold War Holiday: American Tourism in France, Chapel Hill: University of

        North Carolina Press




                                                 60
                                                                      American Invasion of Europe.doc


Gerbod, Paul. “Les Touristes etrangers a Paris dans la premiere moitie du xixeme siecle,”

       Bulletin de la Society de l’Histoire de Paris et de l’Ile de France, 1983, pp. 241-57.

Johnson, Emory and Grover G. Huebner, Principles of Ocean Transportation, New York and

       London: D. Appleton and Company, 1920

Gray, H. Peter. “The Demand for International Travel by the U.S. and Canada,” International

       Economic Review, v. 7 (1), January 1966, pp. 83-92.

Johnston, Louis D. and Samuel H. Williamson, "The Annual Real and Nominal GDP for the

       United States, 1790 - Present." Economic History Services, October 2005, URL :

       http://www.eh.net/hmit/gdp/

Keeling, Drew “Repeat Migration Between Europe and the United States, 1870-1914,” paper

       presented at the 2005 Annual Meeting of the Social Science History Association.

Keeling, Drew. “The Transport Revolution and Transatlantic Migration,” Economic History, vol.

       19, 1999, pp. 40.

Lary, Hal and Associates. “The United States in the World Economy,” Bureau of Foreign and

       Domestic Commerce, Department of Commerce, Economic Series No. 23. Washington,

       D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1943

Litoff, Judy Barnett. “Enforced Tourists: American Women, Travel, and the ‘Far-Flung Fronts’

       of World War II,” Journal of Tourism and Cultural Change, 2005, pp. 178-93.

Loeb, Peter D. “International Travel to the United States: An Econometric Evaluation,” Annals

       of Tourism Research, v. 9 1982, pp. 7-20

Levenstein, Harvey. Seductive Journey: American Tourists in France From Jefferson to the Jazz

       Age, Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 1998


                                                61
                                                                       American Invasion of Europe.doc


Levenstein, Harvey. We’ll Always Have Paris: American Tourists in France Since 1930,

       Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2004.

Maffry, August “Overseas Travel and Travel Expenditures in the Balance of International

       Payments of the United States, 1919-38,” U.S. Department of Commerce, Economic

       Series No. 4, Washington, DC. 1939.

Mitchell, B.R., British Historical Statistics, New York: Cambridge University Press, 1988

Moore, Roy and Alma. Thomas Jefferson's Journey to the South of France, New York: Stewart,

       Tabori & Chang. 1999.

“New York-London Fare History, 1945 to 1970,” Pan American Airways Collection, University of

       Miami, September 1, 1970

New York Times, “Americans Abroad,” April 29, 1866.

New York Times, “Travel Terms and Air Fares,” Mar. 21, 1976.

New York Times, “Cloud Over Laker Air,” Oct. 25, 1981.

New York Times, “A Record Entrepreneur Plans Cheap Air Fares,” April 10, 1984.

North, Douglass, “The United States Balance of Payments, 1790-1860,” National Bureau of

       Economic Research Studies in Income and Wealth, vol. 24, Trends in the American

       Economy in the Nineteenth Century, Princeton, Princeton University Press, 1960, pp.

Nowell, Clifford and Joe Kerkvliet. “Heterogeneous Visitors and the Spatial Limits of the Travel

       Cost Model,” Journal of Leisure Research, 1999, v. 31, pp. 404-419.

Officer, Lawrence. “Exchange Rates,” in Susan Carter, et al, Historical Statistics of the United

       States, Cambridge University Press, Vol. 5, p. 5-449.

Okubo, Sumiye and Mark A. Planting, “U.S. Travel and Tourism Satellite Accounts for 1992,"

       Survey of Current Business, July 1998, pp. 11.

                                                 62
                                                                       American Invasion of Europe.doc


Perkins, Edwin. “Tourists and Bankers: Traveler’s Credits and the Rise of American Tourism,

       1840-1900,”Business and Economic History, 2nd Series, vol.8, 1979, pp. 16-28.

“Proposal for Reduced-Fare, High-Density Service on the North Atlantic Route,” Pan American Airways

       Collection, University of Miami, May 14, 1956.

Pyo, Sung Soo, Muzaffer Uysal and Robert W. McLellan, “A Linear Expenditure Model for

       Tourism Demand,” Annals of Tourism Research, v. 18, 1991, pp. 443-454;

Siddiqi, Asif (Online essay entitled “The Beginnings of Commercial Transatlantic Services” at

       www.centennialofflight.gov).

Simon, Matthew. “The United States Balance of Payments, 1861-1900,” both in National Bureau

       of Economic Research Studies in Income and Wealth, vol. 24, Trends in the American

       Economy in the Nineteenth Century, Princeton, Princeton University Press, 1960, pp..

Song, Haiyan, Kevin K.F. Wong and Kay K.S. Chon, “Modelling and forecasting the demand for

       Hong Kong Tourism,” Hospitality Management, v. 22, 2003, pp. 435-451.

Stowe, William W. Going Abroad: European Travel in Nineteenth-Century American Culture,

       Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1994

Twain, Mark. The Innocents Abroad,

TWA “Show Me: What Kind of Women Are You?” brochure found at

       www.ovi.ch/b377/brochures/showMe/index.html

Tolles, Frederick B. Meeting House and Counting House, New York: W.W. Norton, 1963,

U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis, “U.S. International Transactions Accounts Data,”

       www.bea.gov March 14, 2006.




                                                 63
                                                                        American Invasion of Europe.doc


U.S. Bureau of the Census. Historical Statistics of the United States, Colonial Times to 1970,

       Washington, D.C. 1975,

U.S. Bureau of the Census. Statistical Abstract of the United States, Washington, D.C., various

       issues

U.S Department of Commerce, Survey of International Travel, Washington, D.C. 1956.

U.S. Department of Commerce (1948), Office of Business Economics, Economic Series No. 65,

       “International Transactions of the United States During the War, 1940-45,” Washington,

       D.C., Government Printing Office.

U.S. Office of Business Economics, The Balance of International Payments of the United States,

       various years.

Willcox, Walter F. 1929, International Migrations, Vol. 1: Statistics

Williamson, Jeffrey. “Consumer Behavior in the Nineteenth Century,” Explorations in Economic

       History, 1967, pp. 117

Withey, Lynne. Grand Tours and Cook’s Tours: A History of Leisure Travel, 1750 to 1915, New

       York: William Morrow and Company, Inc. 1997.




                                                64
