                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                    SELL SIDE SCHOOL TIES

                                           Lauren Cohen
                                          Andrea Frazzini
                                         Christopher Malloy

                                        Working Paper 13973
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13973


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2008




We would like to thank Josh Coval, Eugene Fama, Owen Lamont, and seminar participants at the University
of Florida, Harvard Business School, SIFR, University of Chicago, Bentley College, and the Society
of Quantitative Analysts for helpful comments. We also thank Nick Kennedy, Stephen Wilson, Laura
Dutson, Matthew Healey, Meng Ning, Courtney Stone, and Bennett Surajat for excellent research
assistance. In addition, we are grateful to BoardEx and Linda Cechova for providing firm board data,
and to Devin Shanthikumar and Alexander Ljungqvist for sharing data with us. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Lauren Cohen, Andrea Frazzini, and Christopher Malloy. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Sell Side School Ties
Lauren Cohen, Andrea Frazzini, and Christopher Malloy
NBER Working Paper No. 13973
May 2008, Revised December 2008
JEL No. G10,G11,G14

                                              ABSTRACT

We study the impact of social networks on agents’ ability to gather superior information about firms.
Exploiting novel data on the educational backgrounds of sell side equity analysts and senior officers
of firms, we test the hypothesis that analysts’ school ties to senior officers impart comparative information
advantages in the production of analyst research. We find evidence that analysts outperform on their
stock recommendations when they have an educational link to the company. A simple portfolio strategy
of going long the buy recommendations with school ties and going short buy recommendations without
ties earns returns of 5.40% per year. We test whether Regulation FD, targeted at impeding selective
disclosure, constrained the use of direct access to senior management. We find a large effect: pre-Reg
FD the return premium from school ties was 8.16% per year, while post-Reg FD the return premium
is nearly zero and insignificant. In contrast, in an environment that did not change selective disclosure
regulation (the UK), the analyst school-tie premium has remained large and significant over the entire
sample period.


Lauren Cohen                                          Christopher Malloy
Harvard Business School                               Harvard Business School
Baker Library 273                                     Baker Library 277
Soldiers Field                                        Boston, MA 02163
Boston, MA 02163                                      cmalloy@hbs.edu
and NBER
lcohen@hbs.edu

Andrea Frazzini
Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
andrea.frazzini@chicagogsb.edu
       Certain agents play key roles in revealing information into securities
markets. In the equities market, security analysts are among the most important.
A large part of an analyst’s job is to research, produce, and disclose reports
forecasting aspects of companies’ future prospects, and to translate their forecasts
into stock recommendations. Therefore, isolating how, or from whom, analysts
obtain the information they use to produce their recommendations is important.
       In this paper we investigate ties between sell-side analysts and management
of   public   firms,    and    the   subsequent      performance     of   analysts’    stock
recommendations. We exploit common past experiences, namely attendance at
identical educational institutions, to identify firms where analysts are more likely
to gain direct access to senior management.              An advantageous aspect of our
network ties is that they are formed far before the information likely being
transferred across them, and that the underlying tie (ex. alumni link) is not
directly related to the type of information likely being transmitted years later (ex.
company related information).
       Our main goal is to test the hypothesis that analysts gain comparative
information advantages through their social networks; specifically, through
educational ties with senior officers and board members of firms that they cover.
We test this hypothesis by building portfolios that replicate sell-side analysts’
recommendations and by comparing how analysts perform on firms to which they
have ties, relative to firms to which they do not. We test this hypothesis for the
universe of sell-side analysts and publicly traded domestic firms for which we are
able to collect data on the educational background of both the analyst and senior
officers of the firm she covers.
       To better understand our approach, consider the following example. In 1992,
two sell-side analysts covered XYZ Corp.1 One analyst, Mr. Smith, shares a
connection with the firm, defined as having attended the same academic institution
as a member of the board of directors or a senior officer. Among the other stocks
he covers, Mr. Smith is also linked to CFM Corp., another large cap stock in the


1
 This example comes directly from our sample, however we mask the firms’ and analysts’ names.
We also alter the calendar dates.

                                Sell-Side School Ties — Page 3
same industry. The second analyst, Mr. Jones, shares no educational link to either
firm. As of December 1992, both analysts and the IBES consensus (median) rate
the stock as a "HOLD".2
        On February 10th, 1993, prior to market opening, Mr. Smith deviated from
the consensus and upgraded XYZ to a BUY rating. He held the BUY rating until
the stock delisted in December 1993. Mr. Jones maintained (and later reiterated) a
HOLD rating, reflecting the consensus recommendation. Mr. Jones eventually
dropped the stock from coverage, while the consensus recommendation remained a
HOLD until the delisting date.
        Following Mr. Smith’s upgrade, two major events pushed up XYZ’s stock
price. Immediately after the upgrade, on February 11, 1993, XYZ reported higher
fourth-quarter and full-year earnings, beating the consensus expectation. Then, in
October 1993, CFM Corp. announced its intention to acquire XYZ. XYZ’s price
rose 15.7% on the news. The merger was completed in December 1993. Figure 1
illustrates this timeline of events.
        Between February 10th, 1993 and December 1993 XYZ’s stock price rose by
78.6%. An investor who purchased the stock after Mr. Smith’s bullish call would
have outperformed a characteristic-adjusted benchmark by 52.9% over an 11-
month period.
        More generally, XYZ and CFM are not the only securities where Mr. Smith
had an educational connection to management. Between 1993 and 2006, Mr. Smith
covered a variety of stocks. Looking at his recommendations over time reveals his
tendency of producing superior advice on stocks where he shares a school link with
a member of the board of directors or a senior officer of the firm. Between 1993
and 2006 a calendar time portfolio replicating his BUY recommendations (with a 1
day lag) in stocks to which he shares a link outperformed a characteristic-adjusted
benchmark portfolio by 1.17% per month; the corresponding abnormal returns on
his non-linked calls was only 0.01%.
        The results in this example represent a much more systematic pattern


2
 The consensus rating refers to the average across all analysts covering the stock; we do not have
educational information on the remaining analysts.

                                  Sell-Side School Ties — Page 4
across the universe of sell-side equity analysts. Consistent with the hypothesis that
educational ties facilitate the transmission of private information, we find that
analysts produce significantly better recommendations on firms to which they have
an educational tie, relative to firms to which they do not.
        Analysts’ buy recommendations on school-tied stocks outperform buy
recommendations on non-tied stocks by an average of 45 basis points per month
(t=3.87), using 12-month calendar time portfolios following the recommendations.
Therefore, a calendar time portfolio strategy exploiting only this school-tie
informational advantage on buys, translates into roughly 5.40% outperformance
per year. The return differential is largely unaffected after controlling for other
determinants    of   returns   such    as   size,   book-to-market,   and   momentum.
Importantly, since our approach exploits variation within an analyst’s portfolio
(i.e., performance on tied versus non-tied stocks), our results are not simply an
artifact of a selected sample of "smart" or skilled analysts.
        We do not find a similar return differential on the analysts’ sell
recommendations. Analysts’ school-tied sells perform roughly the same as their
non-tied sell recommendation stocks following the recommendations. One
explanation consistent with this finding is that managers are willing to reveal
positive (but not negative) information about their firms. Alternatively, this would
be consistent with analysts obtaining both good and bad news from their school-
tied firms, but perhaps as part of a tacit agreement, acting only on the positive
news.
        There could be a number of mechanisms that allow information to be
transferred along the networks. It may be that alumni networks allow analysts
cheaper access to firm-level material information, which then allows them to form
superior recommendations. For example, the analyst may have access to explicitly
private conference calls with firm officials, or the network may simply reduce the
cost to the analyst of obtaining or analyzing information about the firm (ex. the
analyst can obtain information about upcoming earnings with fewer calls to the
firm). Alternatively, the education network may simply allow analysts to better
assess managerial quality. Under this mechanism, there is not a constant flow of


                               Sell-Side School Ties — Page 5
information in the network from the firm to the analyst, but instead some inherent
information within the network about managerial quality (ex. all members of the
Dartmouth network know that the Dartmouth CEO of firm ABC is quite good,
while the Dartmouth CEO of XYZ is not).
       In order to distinguish between these two alternatives, we exploit a
regulation introduced during our sample period explicitly aimed at blocking the
former mechanism of selective information transfer: Regulation FD, instated by the
SEC in October of 2000. The regulation quite openly gave as its aim the ending of
selective disclosure by firms to a subset of market participants. For instance, in the
SEC release regarding Regulation FD, the aim was given to stop the occurrence
that: "a privileged few gain an informational edge -- and the ability to use that
edge to profit -- from their superior access to corporate insiders, rather than from
their skill, acumen, or diligence." The SEC went on to caution that it was these
selective disclosure relationships that allowed agents to: "exploit `unerodable
informational advantages´ derived not from hard work or insights, but from their
access to corporate insiders.3" Our educational social networks may represent
exactly this type of `unerodable informational advantage´ that the SEC targeted
with Regulation FD. Specifically, if the channel that allows analysts to produce
superior recommendations on school-tied stocks is selective disclosure, we may
expect this superior ability to be attenuated post-Regulation FD. However, if the
education network simply measures analysts’ increased ability to assess managerial
quality for CEOs they attended school with, it is not clear this would be affected
at all by Regulation FD.

       We test this hypothesis by splitting our sample to observe analysts’ ability
on school-tied stocks pre- and post-Regulation FD. All of our evidence points to
selective disclosure being the main mechanism of information transfer along the
network. All of our effects are positive, large, and significant pre-Regulation FD,
and small and insignificant post-Regulation FD. The monthly returns of the long-
short calendar time portfolio on the differences between school-tied and non-school-

3
 Selective Disclosure and Insider Trading, SEC Release Nos. 33-7881, 34-43154, IC-24599, 65 Fed.
Reg. 51716 (Aug. 24, 2000).

                                  Sell-Side School Ties — Page 6
tied stocks pre-Regulation FD is 68 basis points per month (t=4.36), or 8.16% per
year. Post-Regulation FD, this difference is only 14 basis points per month, and
statistically indistinguishable from zero (t=0.84). Further, the difference between
the long-short portfolio returns in the two periods is large (55 basis points) and
statistically significant (t=2.38). To test this more carefully, we also run panel
regressions of returns on buy recommendations on a connection dummy variable, a
post-Reg FD dummy variable, an interaction term (connected*post-Reg FD), and
a host of firm, brokerage, and analyst-level control variables. Consistent with our
results from the calendar-time portfolios, we find that the coefficient on the
interaction term is strongly negative, while the combined effect (interaction
term+connected) is small (10bp) and insignificant (F-statistic of 1.18), indicating
that the school-tie premium is largely absent in the post-Reg FD period.                     In a
separate set of regressions, we also show that the number of school ties an analyst
possesses with her covered stocks strongly increases the likelihood of becoming an
"All-Star" analyst (a 2 standard deviation increase in connections more than
doubles the probability from 9.2% to 20.1%), but only in the pre-Reg FD period;
this result further highlights the value of social networks in precisely those times
when selective disclosure is least inhibited.

        We construct an out-of-sample test of the impact of Reg FD by replicating
our results in the United Kingdom, where there was no such law enacted at this
time.4 Over the entire sample period, we again find a large school-tie return
premium on buy recommendations for UK-listed stocks: a long-short portfolio that
purchases      linked     buy     recommendations          and     shorts     non-linked      buy
recommendations earns 187 basis points per month (t=2.79) in raw returns, and
167 basis points per month (t=2.20) in abnormal returns. However, unlike in the
US, we see no significant difference in this premium between the pre- and post-Reg
FD time periods.

4
  Regulations prohibiting the selective disclosure of material information by UK-listed firms have
been a part of UK law for decades since rules on insider dealing came into force in the 1980s.
Conversations with practitioners in the UK indicate that although clarifications and enhancements
to these norms were put into effect in 2001 (through the Financial Services and Markets Act) and
2005 (via the Market Abuse Directive), these acts were generally not viewed as structural shifts in
the disclosure environment in the same way that Regulation FD in the US was designed to be.

                                  Sell-Side School Ties — Page 7
       Lastly we perform a number of robustness checks. We find that the school-
tie outperformance is present in both large and small cap stocks, and for stocks
with both high and low analyst coverage. In addition, the effect is present in both
Ivy league and non-Ivy league connections between analyst and firm, and is nearly
unaffected by controlling for school-level returns at the stock level.
       The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section I of the paper
provides a brief background and literature review, while Section II describes the
data on both firms and analysts. Section III provides the main results on analyst
ability and sell-side school ties. Section IV explores the mechanism for information
transfer across the network, while Section V examines alternative hypotheses.
Section VI concludes.


    I. Background and literature review

       The opinions of sell-side equity analysts are among the most widely
solicited, anticipated, and dissected news items in the stock market each day.
Further, since analyst data is available in large quantities and in relatively
standardized formats, the sell-side analyst industry offers an ideal testing ground
for a number of theories of economic behavior. In this paper we use this testing
ground to investigate the idea that agents’ educational ties facilitate the
transmission of private information into security markets.
       A large literature on analyst performance supports the idea that analysts
bring valuable information to the market, and have incentives to do so. Numerous
studies document the potential profitability of trading on analyst recommendations
(see, for example, Womack (1996), Barber et al. (2001, 2003), Jegadeesh et al.
(2004)) and earnings forecast revisions (see Stickel (1991) and Gleason and Lee
(2003), among others).5 Of course, sell-side analysts have an incentive to produce
unbiased forecasts and recommendations for investors only if they are compensated
for such behavior. Due to a lack of data on direct compensation, the literature

5
  See also Michaely and Womack (2007), who combine information from recommendations and
earnings forecasts data and show that the subset of upgraded/downgraded recommendations
"supported" by an earnings forecast revision in the same direction are the most profitable
recommendations.

                               Sell-Side School Ties — Page 8
generally tests this idea by linking analyst behavior to measures of implicit
incentives or career concerns. Stickel (1992) finds that highly rated “All-American”
analysts (who are typically better compensated than other analysts) are more
accurate earnings forecasters than other analysts, suggesting that accuracy is
rewarded. Similarly, Mikhail, Walther, and Willis (1999) document that poor
relative performance leads to job turnover.
       An important strand of the literature, however, suggests that analysts’
career concerns and the conflicts of interest inherent in equity research create an
agency problem, potentially at the expense of investors who trust analyst research
to be unbiased. Hong, Kubik, and Solomon (2000), find that younger analysts
deviate less from the consensus than their older counterparts, consistent with the
predictions of reputation-based herding models.6 Hong and Kubik (2003) report
that controlling for accuracy, analysts who are optimistic relative to the consensus
are more likely to experience favorable job separations. They also find that
analysts are judged less on accuracy than optimism when it comes to stocks
underwritten by their employers, supporting allegations that analysts suffer from a
conflict of interest when covering stocks affiliated with their brokerage houses.7
Since we can control for investment banking affiliations, we can distinguish
information effects from these agency effects throughout the paper.
       Our paper is unique in that we try to isolate a channel through which
analysts acquire valuable information. As such, our work is related to the recent
passage of Regulation FD. Effective October 23, 2000, companies must reveal any
material information to all investors and analysts simultaneously in the case of
intentional disclosures, or within 24 hours in the case of unintentional disclosures.
According to SEC Proposed Rule S7-31-99, regulators believe that allowing
selective disclosure is "not in the best interests of investors or the securities
markets generally." Several recent papers examining the impact of Regulation FD
on the behavior of equity analysts conclude that the law has in fact been effective

6
  Chevalier and Ellison (1999) and Lamont (2002) find similar results for mutual fund managers
and macroeconomic forecasters, respectively. Also see Holmström (1999) and Scharfstein and Stein
(1990) for related work on career concerns.
7
  Lin and McNichols (1998), Michaely and Womack (1999), and Lin, McNichols, and O'Brien
(2005) also report evidence in support of this view.

                                 Sell-Side School Ties — Page 9
in curtailing selective disclosure to analysts (see, for example, Mohanram and
Sunder (2006), Agrawal, Chadha, and Chen (2006), and Gintschel and Markov
(2004)). Since our tests explore a specific possible channel of selective disclosure,
they are relevant to this debate.8
        Our empirical identification is similar to Cohen, Frazzini, and Malloy
(2007), who exploit educational connections between mutual fund managers and
corporate board members to identify information transfer through social networks.
The use of corporate board linkages as a measure of personal networks is common
in the network sociology literature (see, for example, Mizruchi (1982, 1992), Useem
(1984)). Board linkages are typically isolated by looking at direct board interlocks
between firms (as in Hallock (1997), "back-door" links among directors across firms
(as in Larcker et al. (2005) and Conyon and Muldoon (2006)), or direct and
indirect links between board members and government agencies or officials (as in
Faccio (2006) and Fisman et al. (2006), among others), and have shown to be
important mechanisms for the sharing of information and the adoption of common
practices across firms.9 Our approach is different in that we focus on direct links
between board members and equity analysts via shared educational backgrounds.


    II. Data

        The data in this study is collected from several sources. We search public
filings and other miscellaneous information available over the World Wide Web to
construct a novel database of educational backgrounds of sell-side analysts issuing
recommendations on US domestic stocks.
        We start by identifying all sell-side analysts on the I/B/E/S tape who
provide at least one recommendation on a domestic stock between 1993 and 2006.
For each analyst, I/B/E/S provides a numeric identifier, the analyst’s last name,


8
  See also Malloy (2005), who shows that geographically proximate analysts produce more accurate
forecasts, but do so both before and after the enactment of Regulation FD; as well as Groysberg,
Healy, Chapman, Shanthikumar, and Gui (2007), who document a decline in the forecast accuracy
advantage of sell-side analysts over buy-side analysts after the enactment of Regulation FD.
9
  Examples of the latter include the adoption of poison pills (Davis (1991)), corporate acquisition
activity (Haunschild (1993)), CEO compensation (Khurana (2002)), and the decision to make
political contributions (Mizruchi (1992)).

                                  Sell-Side School Ties — Page 10
the initial of his/her first name, and a code corresponding the analyst’s brokerage
firm. We use the broker translation file to reconstruct the name of the brokerage
house. Since our data construction methodology involves name searches, we delete
observations with multiple names for a given numeric identifier or multiple
identifiers for a given name. Finally, we discard teams, since I/B/E/S provides
only the team members’ last names but not their first name. This leads to an
initial list of 8,620 analysts issuing recommendations between 1993 and 2006.
        We hand-collect analysts’ educational backgrounds from a variety of
sources. Our main data source is Zoominfo.com, a search engine that specializes in
collecting and indexing biographical and employment data from publicly available
documents over the Web. From this site, we obtain each analyst’s full name, job
title, present and past employment history and the stocks covered in order to
correctly identify an analyst in our initial set. We supplement the initial search
with the BrokerCheck search engine available on the Financial Industry Regulatory
Authority website, which contains background information on current and former
FINRA-registered security investment professionals. Finally, if we are unable to
determine the analyst’s educational background using our primary sources, we use
other available sources over the Web on a case-by-case basis to collect additional
information. In building our final sample we use a conservative approach and
discard observations where we are unable to uniquely associate an analyst with a
specific educational background. This occurs either due to disagreement between
multiple sources, or because we are unable to correctly identify the analyst.10 For
each analyst we collect the name of the academic institution attended for either an
undergraduate or a graduate degree.11


10
   For example, if according to I/B/E/S a person named A. Summer covers technology stocks for
Goldman Sachs in 1999, but our web searches uncover an Alan Summer and an Amy Summer, both
of whom were analysts for Goldman Sachs covering technology stocks in 1999, we would not be able
to uniquely match this analyst.
11
   One drawback of our dataset is that graduation years are missing for 70% of the final sample
since most of the data is extracted from company releases or other public filings, which tend to
omit graduation years. Information on degree type is also missing for about 35% of analysts. We
have tried to collect these additional data items from each academic institution’s alumni network
but have been unable to collect a large enough sample to date, since many universities restrict
access to their alumni network and/or require written consent of the alumnus before releasing this
information.

                                 Sell-Side School Ties — Page 11
        Biographical information for boards of directors and senior company officers
is provided by Boardex of Management Diagnostics Limited. The data contain
relational links among board of directors and other corporate officials. Links in the
dataset are constructed by cross-referencing employment history, educational
background and professional qualifications. For each firm, we use the link file to
reconstruct the annual time series of identities and educational background of
board members and senior officers (defined as CEO, CFO or Chairman). The final
data contain current and past roles of company officials with start-year and end-
year, a board dummy and the academic institution for undergraduate and graduate
degree (where available). We hand match institutions from our analyst data and
Boardex and create a unique numeric identifier.12
        Finally, we match the firms associated with all company officials and sell-
side analysts to accounting and stock return data from CRSP/COMPUSTAT. Our
final sample includes educational background data on 1,820 analysts issuing a total
of 56,994 recommendations over 5,132 CRSP stocks between October 30th, 1993
and December 20th, 2006.
        Table I reports summary statistics for the matched samples of firms-boards-
analysts. From Panel A, we average 604 analysts and 5,746 recommendations per
year, which comprise 23% of the universe of sell-side analysts and 23% of the total
number of recommendations per year.13 Our sample of firms averages 1,705 per
year, which comprise 74% of total market value of CRSP stocks covered by sell-
side analysts.
        In Panel B we report summary statistics by firm-year or analyst-year. The
typical analyst in our sample covers 14 stocks while the mean coverage per firm is
around 5 analysts. The average size percentile is 0.78 while the average book-to-
market percentile in 0.37, reflecting the known fact that analyst coverage tends to

12
   See also Cohen, Frazzini, and Malloy (2007) for additional details on data construction and
matching using the BoardEx data.
13
   Note that in unreported tests we have verified that the characteristics of our sample are very
similar to those of the entire database of I/B/E/S recommendations over this time period (e.g., in
terms of the proportion of buys/sells; average calendar-time portfolio returns of all buy
recommendations, etc.). Also, as noted earlier, since our approach exploits variation within an
analyst’s portfolio (i.e., performance on tied versus non-tied stocks), our findings are not simply an
artifact of a selected sample of "smart" or skilled analysts.

                                   Sell-Side School Ties — Page 12
be skewed towards larger cap growth stocks.
         Table II reports summary statistics on our sample, broken down by
academic institution. Panel A reports the average number of analyst ties to senior
corporate officials, while Panel B reports the average number of analyst ties to firm
boards of directors. Harvard University accounts for 18.53% of analyst ties to
senior officials in our sample, and 18.22% of analyst ties to corporate boards; Ivy
League schools in general account for 43.72% of analyst ties to senior officials, and
48.51% of analyst ties to corporate boards.14


     III. Results: Returns to sell-side recommendations

        In this section we examine the stock return performance of recommendations
by sell-side analysts on securities to which they have school ties. We formally test
the hypothesis that recommendations issued on stocks with school ties outperform
recommendations issued on stocks without ties.
        To assess the relative performance of sell-side recommendations we use a
standard calendar time portfolio approach.15 We classify a stock as having
educational ties to the analyst if he/she attended the same institution of a senior
officer (defined as either the CEO, CFO, or Chairman of board) or a board
member.
         We use the I/B/E/S numeric recommendation code to assign each
recommendation to one of two portfolios: (1) a BUY portfolio consisting of all
stocks upgraded relative to the previous recommendation, or initiated, resumed or
reiterated coverage with a buy or strong buy rating, and (2) a SELL portfolio,
consisting of all stocks downgraded relative to the previous recommendation,
initiated, resumed or reiterated coverage with a hold, sell or strong sell rating, or
dropped from coverage by the analyst. We also consider a version of both
portfolios using only upgrades or downgrades. If the brokerage house does not
report a stock as dropped from coverage and a recommendation is not revised or

14
   Note that our results are not driven by a few particular schools (e.g., Ivy League), as we show
later in the paper.
15
   See also Barber, Lehavy, and Trueman (2005), and Barber, Lehavy, McNichols, and Trueman
(2005).

                                 Sell-Side School Ties — Page 13
reiterated within twelve months, we let it expire.
     Our portfolios are constructed as follows. For the BUY portfolio, we begin by
identifying each BUY recommendation as described above. For each buy
recommendation, we skip a trading day between the recommendation date t and
investment, and purchase the recommended stock at the close of day t+1. By
waiting a trading day we exclude the recommendation-date returns and ensure
that the portfolios are based on available information.16 Each recommended stock
remains in the portfolio until it is either downgraded, dropped from coverage, or
the underlying recommendation expires. Again, we skip a day between an event
that causes a stock to be unloaded and the actual disinvestment: e.g. if a stock is
downgraded at date t, we unwind the position at the close of date t+1. If more
than one analyst recommends a particular stock on a given date, then the stock
will appear multiple times in the portfolio, once for each recommendation.
     Finally, we compute value weighted calendar time portfolios by averaging
across   analysts,    weighting      individual    recommendations        by   the    analyst’s
recommendation        code.    For    the    BUY       portfolio,   we    reverse-score     the
recommendation codes so that a Strong Buy is set equal to 5 (instead of 1, as it is
in the raw data) and a Strong Sell is set equal to 1, so that a higher weight
indicates a relatively more bullish recommendation. We use the exact same method
for the SELL portfolio, with the exception that in the final step we use the actual
recommendation codes as portfolio weights; i.e., a Strong Buy is set equal to 1 and
a Strong Sell is set equal to 5, so that a higher weight indicates a relatively more
bearish recommendation.
     This approach yields a time series of returns for each portfolio and has the
advantage of corresponding to a simple investment strategy of following sell-side
recommendations, mimicking both the directional advice and the holding period
implied by the timing of the revisions.
     For each stock, we compute risk-adjusted ("DGTW") returns as in Daniel et
al. (1997) by subtracting the return on a value weighted portfolio of all CRSP


16
  I/B/E/S does not provide a time stamp, hence for recommendations issued prior to 9.30am this
approach excludes the first two trading-day' returns.

                                 Sell-Side School Ties — Page 14
firms in the same size, (industry-adjusted) market-to-book ratio, and one year
momentum quintile, from the stock’s raw return. We update the 125 characteristic
portfolios at the end of June of each year using conditional sorts, and adjust the
market-to-book ratios using the 48-industry classifications from Ken French’s
website.17
        Table III presents calendar time portfolio returns for our sample of BUY
recommendations, and illustrates one of our main results. BUY recommendations
with      school       ties   earn    1.49%    per   month     in       raw    returns,   while   BUY
recommendations without school ties earn 1.04%. A long/short portfolio which
purchases stocks after BUY recommendations by school-tied analysts and shorts
stocks after BUY recommendations by non-school-tied analysts earns 45 basis
points per month (t=3.87), which translates into an annual premium of 5.40%.
This long/short portfolio has the advantage that it conditions on the signal of the
recommendation (BUY in both cases), and so isolates solely the school-tie premium
portion of the analysts’ recommendations.                 If we restrict the sample to ties to
senior officials only (rather than to senior managers or anyone on the board of
directors), the return on this long-short portfolio increases to 55 basis points per
month (t=3.75). The risk-adjusted abnormal returns are given in the third and
fourth columns of Table III. The buy recommendations on stocks without school
ties earn basically a zero abnormal return. In contrast, the buy recommendations
on stocks where the analyst has school ties continue to outperform in abnormal
returns, resulting in the school-tied premium being largely unaffected by the other
return determinants (40 basis points, (t=4.63)).
        The last two columns of Panel A report portfolio returns for the subset of
upgrades only (i.e., upgrades to buy or strong buy only, excluding initiations and
reiterations). The long-short portfolio of tied minus untied upgrades again earns
large returns, ranging from 29 to 37 basis points per month over the full sample
period.
        Panel      B     of   Table    III    presents   results    for       the   sample   of   SELL
recommendations. Column 2 of Panel A indicates that we are unable to reject the

17
     http://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/data_library.html

                                      Sell-Side School Ties — Page 15
hypothesis of no difference between the raw returns of sell recommendations by
analysts with school ties and those without. The next two columns extend these
findings to DGTW-adjusted returns. For the sample of analysts with links to the
board of directors, the returns on sell recommendations by analysts with school ties
are actually significantly higher than those by analysts without ties. However, this
result is not robust to the subsample of downgrades, or the subsample of ties to
senior officials; the magnitude on the long-short portfolio is also fairly modest.
        Overall, our calendar time portfolio tests on the buy recommendations of
linked analysts reveal an economically and statistically significant channel through
which     analysts   produced    superior    recommendations.     Our   results   on   sell
recommendations suggest that either this information advantage does not extend
to negative information, or that incentives not to reveal such negative information
are strong.


  IV. Mechanism

        Our results on the outperformance of buy recommendations by analysts
with school ties suggest a statistically and economically important channel for the
transfer of private information. In this section we explore possible hypotheses
regarding the manner in which this information might be conveyed, the impact of
school ties on analyst status, and the types of information being transferred across
these networks.
        As noted above, our main test to distinguish between direct information
transfer as the driver of our findings versus superior assessments of managerial
quality is to split the sample pre- and post-Reg FD. The pre-Reg FD period was
allegedly a time period plagued with problems of selective disclosure between firms
and equity analysts, and the law put in place was expressly designed to curb these
practices. Table IV shows that the large returns to school ties on buy
recommendations are concentrated in the pre-Reg FD period (68 basis points per
month, or 8.16% (t=4.36) per year, pre- Reg FD for the long-short portfolio return,
compared to only 14 basis points (t=0.84) post-Reg FD). The average monthly
difference between the long-short portfolio returns in the two periods is large, 55

                                Sell-Side School Ties — Page 16
basis points, and statistically significant (t=2.38). Table V reports results for sell
recommendations, splitting the sample in the same way; not surprisingly given our
earlier results on sells, we find no significant differences between the two periods
for sell recommendations.
         The motivation expressed by the SEC in their release18 on Regulation FD
suggests that the school ties we identify in our tests are exactly the sort of private
information channel between firms and analysts that the regulation was designed
to address. The fact that our results are significantly weaker in the post-Reg FD
period suggests that the regulation was effective in curbing the apparent
information advantage that analysts gain through their school networks.
        To test this idea more formally, we employ panel regressions of returns on
buy recommendations on a connection dummy variable, a post-Reg FD dummy
variable, an interaction term (connected*post-Reg FD), and a host of firm, broker,
and analyst-level control variables. The dependent variables are either returns
(Ret) or abnormal returns (Xeret), where indicated; abnormal returns are daily
DGTW-adjusted returns. Control variables include: a measure of analyst
experience, equal to the number of years an analyst has been making
recommendations on I/B/E/S; an affiliation dummy, equal to one if the analyst is
employed by a bank that has an under-writing relationship with the covered firm19;
an All-Star dummy variable, equal to one if the analyst is listed as an "All-Star" in
the October issue of Institutional Investor magazine in that year20; a measure of
brokerage size, equal to the total number of analysts that work for a given
analyst’s brokerage house; and fixed effects for recommendation month and
industry, where indicated. Regressions are run daily, but the coefficients reported
in Table VI are converted to represent monthly returns (in percent); all standard
errors are adjusted for clustering at the recommendation month level.
        Table VI reports the regression results. Columns 1-3 show that the
coefficients on the connection dummy variables are positive, significant, and of the


18
   Selective Disclosure and Insider Trading, SEC Release Nos. 33-7881, 34-43154, IC-24599, 65 Fed.
Reg. 51716 (Aug. 24, 2000).
19
   The list of affiliated analysts is from Ljungqvist at al. (2006).
20
   The list of "all-star" analysts is from Ljungqvist at al. (2007).

                                  Sell-Side School Ties — Page 17
same order of magnitude as the return results from the portfolios (between 32-48
basis points per month), again indicating that buy recommendations by analysts
with school ties earn significantly higher returns than those by analysts without
such ties. Columns 4-6 report similar results when excess returns are used as the
dependent variable instead of raw returns, and when industry fixed effects and
analyst-level controls are included in the regressions.21

        Columns 7-9 present the key test of the impact of Reg FD on the school-tie
return premium. We include a post-Reg FD dummy variable plus an interaction
term (Conn. Either*post-Reg FD) designed to capture the effect of school ties in
the post-Reg FD time period.22 Consistent with the results from our portfolio tests,
we find that the coefficient on the interaction term is strongly negative and
significant,      while      the     combined         effect     (i.e.,    [Conn.       Either*post-
Reg]+[Connected_to_Either]) is small (10bp=-42bp+52bp, from Column 8) and
insignificant (F-statistic of 1.18), indicating that the school-tie premium is largely
absent in the post-Reg FD period. Column 9 reports results from the exact same
test, but for the subset of analysts that are in the sample both pre- and post-Reg
FD.    This is to control for a possibility that connected analysts may for some
reason leave the sample post-Reg FD. The results are virtually identical on this
sample of analysts.

        In summary, all of our findings indicate that Regulation FD had a large
impact on the school-tie premium that we identify in this paper, suggesting that
the most likely mechanism driving the superior performance of analysts on their
school-tied recommendations is direct information transfer.23


21
   Replacing raw returns (Column 1) as the dependent variable with abnormal returns (Column 4)
results in the constant term becoming insignificant, which indicates that the DGTW characteristic-
adjustment does a good job of capturing most of the unexplained variation in daily returns.
22
   We exclude month fixed effects in these regressions because the model cannot be estimated with a
post-Reg FD dummy and month fixed effects jointly (as they are collinear).
23
   Note that Cohen, Frazzini, and Malloy (2007) do not find a large impact of Reg FD on the return
premium that mutual fund managers earn on their school-connected stocks relative to their non-
connected stocks. This could be due to a different mechanism at work in the case of mutual fund
managers. It could also be due to the fact that equity analysts were under intense scrutiny during
this time period, not only as a result of Reg FD, but also due to alleged conflicts of interest that led
to several new policy measures being enacted by the SEC, NASD, and NYSE, and which
culminated in the Global Settlement of 2003.

                                   Sell-Side School Ties — Page 18
        Another way to quantify the value of the social networks we isolate in this
paper to the analyst is to test the extent to which school ties predict the
probability of that analyst’s becoming an All-Star. As in our prior tests, All-Star
status is defined as being listed as an "All-Star" in the October issue of
Institutional Investor magazine in a given year. All-Star status is a sought-after
designation among analysts, and is typically associated with higher-compensation
(Stickel (1992)).24     To assess the predictive power of an analyst’s network, we
regress a dummy variable for All-Star status in a given year on the average
number of school ties per analyst per year (Num Conn) plus a host of control
variables at the analyst- and stock-level. The dependent variable is a dummy
variable equal to one if the analyst was voted as an All-Star analyst for that year.
We employ a similar set of control variables as in Table VI, with the exception
that affiliation status is now measured as the average percentage of stocks (over
the year) in an analyst’s portfolio that have an underwriting relationship with the
analyst’s brokerage. Plus we also include a control variable for covered firm size,
equal to the average size of the firms covered by the analyst in that year. All
observations are at the analyst-year level; fixed effects at the year and analyst level
are included where indicated, and all standard errors are adjusted for clustering by
year.
        Table VII reports the coefficient estimates from these predictive regressions.
Columns 1-5 are OLS panel regressions, while Column 6 is a probit regression
where coefficient estimates are the marginal effects on the probability of being an
All-Star. Columns 1-3 indicate that the number of school ties (to senior officers, to
members of the board, or to either) are a strong positive predictor of the likelihood
of being an All-Star. The coefficient on connections in Column 3 implies that a 2
standard deviation move in connectedness through school ties more than doubles
the probability of being an All Star, from 9.2% to 20.1%. Columns 4 and 5


24
   Stickel (1992) shows that All-Star analysts also produce more accurate earnings forecasts than
other analysts, suggesting a link between reputation and performance. Interestingly, in unreported
tests we find that the All-Star analysts in our sample do not outperform other analysts on their
buy/sell recommendations; this result is consistent with prior evidence (see Groysberg et al. (2008),
footnote 27) that finds no relation between All-Star status and stock returns, except at very short
windows surrounding recommendation changes.

                                  Sell-Side School Ties — Page 19
illustrate the effect of Reg FD on this result: we include a post-Reg FD dummy
variable plus an interaction term (Conn. Either*post-Reg FD) designed to capture
the predictive impact of the number of school ties on All-Star status in the post-
Reg FD time period.25 Once again the interaction term is strongly negative, and
the combined effect ([Conn. Either*post-Reg FD]+[Num. Conn. to Either]) is close
to zero and insignificant, indicating that the number of school ties have no effect
on being an All-Star in the post-Reg FD period. The fact that school ties predict
All-Star status only before the imposition of Reg FD further highlights the value of
social networks precisely during those times when selective disclosure is least
inhibited.
        We also construct an out-of-sample test of the impact of Reg FD by
replicating our results in the United Kingdom, where there was no such regulation
enacted at this time. Again we form buy-sell portfolios of linked and non-linked
recommendations, but we now restrict our analysis to UK-listed stocks for which
we have analyst recommendations on I/B/E/S and available educational
background information on both the analyst and the senior officers of the firm.26
Table VIII shows that over the entire sample period, we again find a large school-
tie return premium on buy recommendations for UK-listed stocks: a long-short
portfolio that purchases linked buy recommendations and shorts non-linked buy
recommendations earns 187 basis points per month (t=2.79) in raw returns, and
167 basis points per month (t=2.20) in abnormal returns.                    Again we find no
significant school-tie premium on sell recommendations.               However, unlike in the
US, we see no significant difference in the school-tie premium on buy
recommendations between the pre- and post-Reg FD time periods.27 The point

25
   Again we do not include year fixed effects in these specifications, because the model cannot be
estimated with year fixed effects and the post Reg FD dummy variable included together. We do
include analyst fixed effects in Columns 5 and 6.
26
    Analogous to our US sample, we collect educational data on I/B/E/S analysts issuing
recommendations on stocks traded in the UK, as defined by the I/B/E/S country exchange code.
We hand matched firms from the Boardex sample to I/B/E/S using company names. Daily returns
(in local currency) are from Factset. Market equity and book equity are from Compustat Global.
Note that the coverage of our sample is sparse for non-US data: By requiring educational
information on I/B/E/S analysts covering UK stocks, we limit our sample to an average of
approximately 30 analysts, 77 stocks, and 175 recommendations per year over the 1993-2006 time
period.
27
   For brevity we only report results for links to senior management, and for raw returns (in Panel

                                  Sell-Side School Ties — Page 20
estimates of the school-tie premium are actually slightly higher (although not
significantly) in the post Reg FD time period. This gives confirming evidence that
the Reg FD effect we find in the main (US) sample is in fact driven completely by
this new regulation against selective disclosure. In the absence of regulatory
change, school ties continue to confer significant benefits to analysts.
        In order to better understand the type of information being transferred
across the networks, we also examine the relative forecast accuracy of analysts with
school ties, under the hypothesis that the information advantage gained by linked
analysts is specifically related to information that would allow an analyst to better
predict earnings per share numbers reported by firms. In unreported results, we
find no significant differences in relative forecast accuracy (or relative forecast
optimism) between the forecasts of analysts with school ties and those without.28
These results suggest that the school-tie return premium we document in Section
III is unlikely to relate to information obtained about future earnings per share
numbers. In unreported tests we also look at the propensity of buys among school
tied and non tied firms that later announce a merger, as well as merger-related-
news return decompositions, and find little difference, suggesting that the passing
of merger-related information is unlikely to fully explain our findings.


   V. Robustness

      In this section we perform a variety of robustness checks. First we compute
event-time cumulative abnormal returns (CAR) for our various categories of stock
recommendations. Abnormal returns are defined as DGTW characteristic-adjusted
returns. Table IX reports event-time CARs for upgrades and downgrades only,
broken down by school ties and time period. These event-time results, which we


B). Results are very similar for the full set of specifications used earlier.
28
   Following Malloy (2005) and Clement (1999) and using 1- and 2-year ahead earnings forecasts
drawn from the I/B/E/S Detail File, we run Fama-MacBeth cross-sectional regressions of de-
meaned absolute forecast error (DAFE), proportional mean absolute forecast error (PMAFE), and
relative optimism (OPT) on a variety of analyst characteristics plus a dummy variable equal to one
if the analyst is linked to the board of directors or a senior officer of the firm being covered.
Although the sign on the dummy variables in the DAFE and PMAFE regressions is consistently
negative (indicating that linked analysts are more accurate), the coefficients are generally
insignificant. These results are available on request.

                                 Sell-Side School Ties — Page 21
also plot in Figures 2 to 4 are consistent with the findings from our calendar time
portfolio tests. Over the full sample period, upgrades by analysts with school ties
earn a premium of 35 basis points over other upgrades in the 2 days around the
event, and a premium of almost 400 basis points over the calendar year after the
recommendation change. In the pre-Reg FD period, this premium increases to over
700 basis points over the calendar year after the change. Figures 2 and 3 show that
much of the upgrade return premium associated with school ties is concentrated
between 60 and 250 days after the recommendation, suggesting that whatever
information these linked analysts obtain does not get revealed into prices until
several months after the recommendation change.
     Table IX and Figures 2 to 4 also paint a consistent picture of the differential
impact of sell recommendations by our two types of analysts. As with the calendar
time portfolio tests, our event time results indicate that the performance of sell
recommendations by linked analysts is not significantly different from our control
sample of non-linked sell recommendations.
     Table X presents a series of robustness checks designed to ensure that our
results are not driven by particular types of analyst, firms, or academic
institutions. In general, our results are robust to a variety of breakdowns; further,
our findings are typically concentrated in precisely those areas where one might
expect information asymmetry to be most pronounced, and hence the return
premium associated with school ties to be largest. For example, Panel A of Table
X shows that the long-short portfolio return of linked buy recommendations minus
non-linked buy recommendations earns 89 basis points per month in a subsample
of small stocks (below the NYSE median market capitalization) over the full
sample period, and 144 basis points per month in the pre-Reg FD period.
     Panel B presents a series of breakdowns by type of analyst. First we separate
affiliated and unaffiliated analysts. The long-short portfolio return of linked buy
recommendations minus non-linked buy recommendations of non affiliated analysts
earns 44 basis points per month over the entire sample, 67 basis points per month
in the pre-Reg FD period and an insignificant 13 basis points post reg-FD. Returns
for affiliated analysts are similar in magnitude but insignificant. Splitting the


                             Sell-Side School Ties — Page 22
sample by the size of the brokerage house, the connection premium appears
concentrated in those analysts at the larger brokerage houses.
     Panel C shows that our results are not driven by a particular type of
academic institution. Although the school-tie premium is larger among Ivy League
institutions (57 basis points per month compared to 36 basis points for Non-Ivy
League institutions, over the full sample period), it is large and significant for both
sets of schools. School adjusted returns, defined as the raw return minus the
average return of a portfolio of all firms where at least a senior official (CEO, CFO
or Chairman) or a board member received a degree from the same institution, are
similar to our full sample results in Table III, indicating that individual school
effects do not drive our results. Finally, as with our earlier findings, the results for
sell recommendations are mixed, and generally insignificant.



  VI. Conclusion

       In this paper we investigate information dissemination in security markets.
We use the recommendations of sell-side equity analysts as a laboratory to study
the impact of social networks on agents’ ability to gather superior information
about firms. In particular, we test the hypothesis that analysts’ school ties to
senior corporate officers impart comparative information advantages in the
production of analyst research. Our main result is that equity analysts outperform
on their stock recommendations when they have an educational link to that
company. A simple portfolio strategy of going long the buy recommendations of
analysts with school ties and going short the buy recommendations of analysts
without ties earns returns of 5.40% per year in the full sample.
       This result suggests that analysts’ social networks facilitate the direct
transfer of information, or alternatively that these networks simply allow analysts
to better assess managerial quality. In order to distinguish between these two
hypotheses, we exploit a regulation introduced during our sample period explicitly
aimed at blocking the former mechanism of selective information transfer:
Regulation FD, instated by the SEC in October of 2000. We find a large effect of


                              Sell-Side School Ties — Page 23
the law: pre-Reg FD the return premium from school ties is 8.16% per year, while
post-Reg FD the return premium is nearly zero and insignificant. A similar test in
the UK, which did not experience a change in the disclosure environment at this
time, reveals a large and significant school-tie premium for buy recommendations
over the entire sample period, both pre- and post-2000.
      Taken together, our findings suggest that agents in financial markets can
gain informational advantages through their social networks.      In addition, laws
designed to block these types of information pathways can be effective in curbing
selective disclosure. The magnitude of our results indicates that informal
information networks are an important, yet under-emphasized channel through
which private information gets revealed into prices. Identifying the types of
information transferred across social networks and the extent to which social
networks are important in other information environments can provide us with a
richer understanding of information flow, and price evolution, in security markets.




                             Sell-Side School Ties — Page 24
References

Agrawal, Anup, Sahiba Chadha and Mark A. Chen, 2006, Who is afraid of
     Reg FD? The behavior and performance of sell-side analysts following
     the SEC’s Fair Disclosure Rules, Journal of Business 79, 2811-2834.

Barber, Brad, Reuven Lehavy, and Brett Trueman, 2005, Comparing the stock
     recommendation performance of investment banks and independent research
     firms, Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.

Barber, Brad, Reuven Lehavy, Maureen McNichols, and Brett Trueman, 2001, Can
     investors profit from the prophets? Security analyst recommendations and
     stock returns, Journal of Finance 56, 531-564.

Barber, Brad, Reuven Lehavy, Maureen McNichols, and Brett Trueman, 2003,
     Reassessing the returns to analysts’ stock recommendations, Financial
     Analysts Journal 59, 88-96.

Barber, Brad, Reuven Lehavy, Maureen McNichols, and Brett Trueman, 2005,
     Buys, holds, and sells: The distribution of investment banks’ stock ratings
     and the implications for the profitability of analysts’ recommendations,
     Journal of Accounting and Economics, forthcoming.

Chevalier, Judith, and Glenn Ellison, 1999, Career concerns of mutual fund
     managers, Quarterly Journal of Economics 114, 389-432.

Cohen, Lauren, Andrea Frazzini, and Christopher J. Malloy, 2007, The small world
     of investing: Board connections and mutual fund returns, Working paper,
     Yale University.

Conyon, Martin J., and Mark R. Muldoon, 2006, The small world of corporate
     boards, Journal of Business Finance and Accounting 33, 1321-1343.

Davis, Gerald F., 1991, Agents without principles? The spread of the poison pill
      through the inter-corporate network, Administrative Science Quarterly 36,
      583-613.

Faccio, Mara, 2006, Politically connected firms, American Economic Review 96,
      369-386.

Fisman, David, Ray Fisman, Julia Galef, and Rakesh Khurana, 2006, Estimating
     the value of connections to Vice-President Cheney, Working paper, Columbia
     University.

Gintschel, Andreas and Stanimir Markov, 2004, The effectiveness of Regulation
      FD, Journal of Accounting and Economics 37, 293-314.

Gleason, Cristi A., and Charles M. C. Lee, 2003, Analyst forecast revisions and

                            Sell-Side School Ties — Page 25
     market price discovery, The Accounting Review 78, 193-225.

Groysberg, Boris, Paul Healy, Craig Chapman, Devin Shanthikumar, and Yang
     Gui (2007), Do buy-side analysts out-perform the sell-side?, Working paper,
     Harvard University.

Groysberg, Boris, Paul Healy, and David Maber (2008), What drives (and does not
     drive) financial analyst compensation?, Working paper, Harvard University.

Hallock, K. F., 1997, Reciprocally interlocking board of directors and executive
      compensation, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 32, 331-344.

Haunschild, Pamela R., 1993, Interorganizational imitation: The impact of
     interlocks on corporate acquisition activity, Administrative Science Quarterly
     38, 564-592.

Holmström, Bengt, 1999, Managerial incentive problems: A dynamic perspective,
     Review of Economic Studies 66, 169-182.

Hong, Harrison, and Jeffrey D. Kubik, 2003, Analyzing the analysts: Career
     concerns and biased forecasts, Journal of Finance 58, 313-351.

Hong, Harrison, Jeffrey D. Kubik, and Amit Solomon, 2000, Security analysts’
     career concerns and herding of earnings forecasts, RAND Journal of
     Economics 31, 121-144.

Jegadeesh, Narasimhan, Joonghyuk Kim, Susan D. Krische, and Charles M. C.
     Lee, 2004, Analyzing the analysts: When do recommendations add value?,
     Journal of Finance 59, 1083-1124.

Khurana, Rakesh, 2002, Searching for a corporate savior: The irrational quest for
     charismatic CEOs, Princeton University Press.

Lamont, Owen, 2002, Macroeconomic forecasts and microeconomic forecasters,
    Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 48, 265-280.

Larcker, David F., Scott A. Richardson, Andrew J. Seary, and Irem Tuna, 2005,
     Back door links between directors and executive compensation, Working
     paper, University of Pennsylvania.

Lin, Hsiou-wei and Maureen F. McNichols, 1998, Underwriting relationships,
     analysts’ earnings forecasts and investment recommendations, Journal of
     Accounting and Economics 25, 101-127.

Lin, Hsiou-wei, Maureen F. McNichols, and Patricia O’Brien, 2005, Analyst
      impartiality and investment banking relationships, Journal of Accounting
      Research 43, 623-650.


                            Sell-Side School Ties — Page 26
Ljungqvist, Alexander, F. Marston and W.J. Wilhelm, 2006, Competing for
     Securities Underwriting Mandates: Banking Relationships and Analyst
     Recommendations, journal of Finance 61, 301-340.

Ljungqvist, Alexander, F. Marston and W.J. Wilhelm, 2007, Scaling the Hierarchy:
     How and Why Investment Banks Compete for Syndicate Co-Management
     Appointments, Review of Financial Studies forthcoming.

Malloy, Christopher J., 2005, The geography of equity analysis, Journal of Finance
     60, 719-755.

Michaely, Roni, and Kent L. Womack, 1999, Conflict of interest and the credibility
     of underwriter analyst recommendations, Review of Financial Studies 12,
     653-686.

Michaely, Roni, and Kent L. Womack, 2007, What are analysts really good at?,
     Working paper, Cornell University.

Mikhail, Michael B., Beverly R. Walther, and Richard H. Willis, 1999, Does
     forecast accuracy matter to security analysts?, Accounting Review 74, 185-
     200.

Mizruchi, Mark S., 1982, The American Corporate Network, 1904-1974, Beverly
     Hills: Sage Publications.

Mizruchi, Mark S., 1992, The Structure of Corporate Political Action: Inter-firm
     Relations and Their Consequences, Harvard University Press.

Mohanran, Partha and Shyam V. Sunder, 2006, How has Regulation FD affected
    the operations of financial analysts?, Contemporary Accounting Research 23,
    491-525.

Scharfstein, David S., and Jeremy C. Stein, 1990, Herd behavior and investment,
      American Economic Review 80, 465-479.

Stickel, Scott E., 1991, Common stock returns surrounding earnings forecast
       revisions: more puzzling evidence. The Accounting Review, 66, 402- 416.

Stickel, Scott E., 1992, Reputation and performance among security analysts,
      Journal of Finance 47, 1811-1836.

Useem, Michael, 1984, The Inner Circle, Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Womack, Kent, 1996, Do brokerage analysts’ recommendations have investment
    value?. Journal of Finance 51, 137-167.




                            Sell-Side School Ties — Page 27
                                    Table I: Summary statistics
This table reports summary statistics for the sample of sell side analysts and their covered stocks between
1993 and 2006. The sample of analysts includes all sell side analysts from the merged
CRSP/IBES/BOARDEX issuing recommendations on US stocks between 1993 and 2006. The sample of
stocks includes the stocks from the merged CRSP/IBES/BOARDEX data with non missing information
on the educational background of members of the board of directors and senior officers of the firm (CEO,
CFO or Chairman). Panel A reports the data coverage as a fraction of the total number of IBES
analysts, the total number of recommendations (%Reccs) and total market value of covered stocks
(%ME). Panel B reports pooled means. Analyst coverage is the # of analysts providing recommendations
for a given stock in the prior 12 months; # of stocks is the number of stocks for a given analyst with a
valid recommendation in the prior 12 months.

Panel A: coverage of IBES/CRSP universe
year      # analysts #stocks           # Reccs     % analysts       % stocks         % ME       %    Reccs
1993              153        650          1,066           0.14           0.22           0.52           0.10
1994              243        883          2,468           0.15           0.25           0.54           0.12
1995              283      1,022          2,701           0.16           0.28           0.56           0.12
1996              349      1,166          2,785           0.17           0.28           0.55           0.13
1997              402      1,396          3,339           0.17           0.33           0.66           0.15
1998              516      1,574          4,104           0.19           0.37           0.72           0.16
1999              602      1,737          4,897           0.21           0.44           0.75           0.19
2000              645      1,915          5,562           0.23           0.52           0.84           0.24
2001              682      1,905          6,397           0.25           0.61           0.86           0.28
2002              756      2,203         10,218           0.27           0.68           0.90           0.30
2003              813      2,167          8,829           0.30           0.71           0.90           0.33
2004              958      2,340          9,081           0.33           0.73           0.86           0.36
2005            1,078      2,474          9,374           0.36           0.76           0.88           0.40
2006              971      2,441          9,623           0.33           0.74           0.88           0.38
Average           604      1,705          5,746           0.23           0.49           0.74           0.23
Panel B: pooled observations              mean         median            min            max             std
Analysts coverage                          4.97           4.00           1.00         32.00           3.84
# firms per analysts                      13.87          12.00           1.00        122.00          10.12
Size percentile                            0.78           0.84           0.01          1.00           0.20
Book-to-market percentile                  0.37           0.33           0.01          1.00           0.25
12-month return percentile                 0.52           0.53           0.01          1.00           0.29
# of schools per year                       766            766            707           796             28
# of board members per year               8,388          8,160          2,355        14,389          4,176
# of senior officers per year             3,769          3,963          1,183         5,832          1,624
                   Table II: Links Between Sell Side Analysts and Firm’s Management by Academic Institution
This table shows summary statistics of the ties among sell side analysts and US traded firms based on educational backgrounds between 1993 and
2006. The sample of analysts includes all sell side analysts from the merged CRSP/IBES/BOARDEX issuing recommendations on US stocks between
1993 and 2006. The sample of stocks includes the stocks from the merged CRSP/IBES/BOARDEX data with non missing information on the
educational background of members of the board of directors and senior officers of the firm (CEO, CFO or Chairman). In Panel A we classify a stock
as having an educational tie to the analyst if he/she attended the same institution as a senior officer (defined as either the CEO, CFO or Chairman of
board). In panel B we classify a stock as having educational ties to the analyst if he/she attended the same institution as a member of the board of
directors. The table reports the distribution of the total number of educational links between 1993 and 2006 by academic institution.


                  Panel A: Analyst tied to firm’s senior officers                         Panel B: Analyst tied to board of directors

Rank         Academic institution              # of ties      % of total     Rank          Academic institution             # of ties     % of total
1            Harvard University                   941           18.53        1             Harvard University                 2,300          18.22
2            University of Pennsylvania           522           10.28        2             Columbia University                1,139           9.02
3            New York University                  350            6.89        3             University of Pennsylvania         1,065          8.44
4            Stanford University                  311           6.12         4             New York University                1,006          7.97
5            Columbia University                  288            5.67        5             Yale University                     717           5.68
6            Cornell University                   173            3.41        6             Stanford University                 597           4.73
7            M.I.T.                               168           3.31         7             M.I.T.                              491           3.89
8            Yale University                      155           3.05         8             Cornell University                  437           3.46
9            University of Chicago                140            2.76        9             UC Berkeley                         347           2.75
10           UT Austin                            137            2.7         10            University of Chicago               317           2.51
Others                                           1,893          37.28        Others                                           4,205          33.32
Ivy League                                       2,220          43.72        Ivy League                                       6,122          48.51
All                                              5,078           100         All                                              12,621          100
                                               Table III: Returns to School Ties, 1993—2006
This table shows calendar time portfolio returns. We classify a stock as having an educational tie to the analyst if he/she attended the same institution
as a senior officer (CEO, CFO or Chairman) or a board member. Each recommendation is assigned to one of two portfolios: (1) a BUY portfolio
consisting of all stocks upgraded with respect to the previous recommendation, or initiated, resumed or reiterated coverage with a buy (IBES code = 2)
or strong buy (IBES code = 1) rating, and (2) a SELL portfolio, consisting of all stocks downgraded with respect to the previous recommendation,
initiated, resumed or reiterated coverage with a hold (IBES code =3), sell (IBES code = 4) or strong sell (IBES code = 5) rating or dropped from
coverage. If the brokerage house does not report the stock as dropped from coverage and a recommendation is not revised or reiterated within twelve
months, it is considered expired. We skip a trading day between recommendation and investment (disinvestment). For the BUY portfolio each
recommended stock is held until it is either downgraded, dropped from coverage, or the recommendation expires. We compute value weighted portfolios
by averaging across analysts, weighting individual recommendations by the IBES recommendation code; for the BUY portfolio, we reverse these
recommendation codes so that a strong buy is set to 5 and a strong sell is set to 1. The SELL portfolio is constructed in a similar fashion with the
exception that that the original IBES recommendation codes (i.e., strong sell=5, and strong buy=1) are used as portfolio weight. We report average
returns and DGTW-adjusted returns for the period 1993 to 2006. DGTW characteristic-adjusted returns are defined as raw returns minus the returns on
a value weighted portfolio of all CRSP firms in the same size, (industry-adjusted) market-book, and 1-year momentum quintile. Returns are in monthly
percent. L/S is the average return of a zero cost portfolio that holds the portfolio of linked stocks and sells short the portfolio of non-linked stocks. t-
statistics are shown below the coefficient estimates, and 5% statistical significance is indicated in bold.

 Panel A: Buy recommendations                                 Buy recommendations (level)                               Only upgrades
                                                     Raw returns              Abnormal returns             Raw returns            Abnormal returns

 No shared educational background                    1.04                        0.04                      1.35                       0.31
                                                     (1.97)                      (0.43)                    (2.81)                    (3.14)

 Linked recommendations                                           L/S                        L/S                      L/S                         L/S
 Analyst linked to senior Management                  1.49        0.45            0.44      0.40            1.70     0.35               0.62     0.31
 or board of directors                                (2.91)     (3.87)           (3.24)    (4.63)          (3.35)   (2.32)             (3.49)   (2.30)

 Analyst linked to senior management                  1.59        0.55            0.51      0.47            1.65     0.29               0.61     0.30
                                                      (3.04)     (3.75)           (3.19)    (3.96)          (3.16)   (1.71)             (2.86)   (1.93)

 Analyst linked to board of directors                 1.47        0.43            0.45      0.41            1.72     0.37               0.62     0.31
                                                      (2.91)     (3.16)           (3.20)    (4.30)          (3.36)   (2.16)             (3.18)   (2.02)
                                       Table III: Returns to School Ties, 1993—2006 (continued)

Panel B: Sell recommendations                              Sell recommendations (level)                        Only downgrades
                                                 Raw returns                Abnormal returns       Raw returns           Abnormal returns

No shared educational background                 1.03                          -0.17               1.06                     -0.21
                                                 (1.83)                        -(1.31)             (1.81)                  -(1.45)

Linked recommendations                                         L/S                         L/S                L/S                     L/S
Analyst linked to senior Management               1.08         0.05              0.05     0.22      1.09     0.03            0.05    0.26
or board of directors                             (2.08)      (0.46)            (0.37)    (2.21)    (2.05)   (0.22)         (0.34)   (1.82)

Analyst linked to senior management               1.10         0.07              0.10     0.27      1.26     0.20            0.25    0.46
                                                  (2.05)      (0.46)            (0.61)    (1.92)    (2.20)   (0.85)         (1.01)   (1.94)

Analyst linked to board of directors              1.12         0.09              0.10     0.27      1.07     0.02            0.03    0.24
                                                  (2.18)      (0.77)            (0.76)    (2.45)    (2.04)   (0.09)         (0.21)   (1.69)
                         Table IV: Buy Recommendations, Returns to School Ties Pre and Post- REG FD
This table shows calendar time portfolio returns. We classify a stock as having an educational tie to the analyst if he/she attended the same institution
as a senior officer (CEO, CFO or Chairman) or a board member. Each recommendation is assigned to one of two portfolios: (1) a BUY portfolio
consisting of all stocks upgraded with respect to the previous recommendation, or initiated, resumed or reiterated coverage with a buy (IBES code = 2)
or strong buy (IBES code = 1) rating, and (2) a SELL portfolio, consisting of all stocks downgraded with respect to the previous recommendation,
initiated, resumed or reiterated coverage with a hold (IBES code =3), sell (IBES code = 4) or strong sell (IBES code = 5) rating or dropped from
coverage. If the brokerage house does not report the stock as dropped from coverage and a recommendation is not revised or reiterated within twelve
months it is considered expired. We skip a trading day between recommendation and investment (disinvestment). For the BUY portfolio each
recommended stock is held until it is either downgraded, dropped from coverage, or the recommendation expires. We compute value weighted portfolios
by averaging across analysts, weighting individual recommendations by the IBES recommendation code; for the BUY portfolio, we reverse these
recommendation codes so that a strong buy is set to 5 and a strong sell is set to 1. The SELL portfolio is constructed in a similar fashion with the
exception that that the original IBES recommendation codes (i.e., strong sell=5, and strong buy=1) are used as portfolio weight. We report average
returns and DGTW-adjusted returns for the period 1993 to 2006. DGTW characteristic-adjusted returns are defined as raw returns minus the returns on
a value weighted portfolio of all CRSP firms in the same size, (industry-adjusted) market-book, and 1-year momentum quintile. Returns are in monthly
percent. L/S is average return of a zero cost portfolio that holds the portfolio of linked stocks and sells short the portfolio of non-linked stocks. Pre- and
Post REG FD indicates returns for recommendations issued prior and subsequent to the introduction of Regulation FD on October 23, 2000. t-statistics
are shown below the coefficient estimates, and 5% statistical significance is indicated in bold.



    Panel A: Raw returns                       Pre REG FD            Post REG FD                 Difference                  Only Upgrades

    No shared educational background           1.25                  0.76                   0.50                           Pre       Post      Diff
                                              (1.93)                 (0.87)                 (0.46)                     REG FD      REG FD

    Linked recommendations                                L/S                   L/S                    L/S                 L/S        L/S      L/S
    Analyst linked to senior                    1.94     0.68          0.90    0.14           1.04    0.55                 0.53      0.11      0.43
    Management or board of directors            (3.12)   (4.36)       (1.05)   (0.84)        (1.01)   (2.38)              (2.30)     (0.64)   (1.41)

    Analyst linked to senior                    2.03     0.78          1.02    0.26           1.01    0.51                 0.64      -0.14     0.80
    Management                                  (3.12)   (3.50)       (1.19)   (1.51)        (0.95)   (1.73)              (2.44)    -(0.68)   (2.24)

    Analyst linked to board of                  1.94     0.69          0.84    0.09           1.10    0.60                 0.56      0.12      0.45
    Directors                                   (3.17)   (3.71)       (1.00)   (0.45)        (1.08)   (2.24)              (2.17)     (0.58)   (1.30)
            Table IV: Buy Recommendations, Returns to School Ties Pre and Post- REG FD (continued)


Panel B: Abnormal returns          Pre REG FD        Post REG FD           Difference          Only upgrades

No shared educational background   0.27              -0.26              0.53                 Pre       Post      Diff
                                   (2.09)            -(2.08)            (2.89)            REG FD     REG FD

Linked recommendations                       L/S                L/S               L/S        L/S        L/S      L/S
Analyst linked to senior           0.82     0.55     -0.05     0.21     0.87     0.34       0.50       0.08     0.42
Management or board of directors   (4.38)   (4.62)   -(0.27)   (1.71)   (3.26)   (1.94)     (2.36)     (0.50)   (1.54)

Analyst linked to senior           0.95     0.67     -0.07     0.19     1.01     0.48       0.68       -0.19    0.91
Management                         (4.14)   (3.97)   -(0.35)   (1.29)   (3.26)   (2.04)     (3.10)    -(0.83)   (2.75)

Analyst linked to board of         0.84     0.57     -0.06     0.20     0.91     0.37       0.50       0.07     0.42
Directors                          (4.40)   (4.39)   -(0.33)   (1.46)   (3.30)   (1.95)     (2.06)     (0.45)   (1.35)
                         Table V: Sell Recommendations, Returns to School Ties Pre- and Post- REG FD
This table shows calendar time portfolio returns. We classify a stock as having an educational tie to the analyst if he/she attended the same institution
as a senior officer (CEO, CFO or Chairman) or a board member. Each recommendation is assigned to one of two portfolios: (1) a BUY portfolio
consisting of all stocks upgraded with respect to the previous recommendation, or initiated, resumed or reiterated coverage with a buy (IBES code = 2)
or strong buy (IBES code = 1) rating, and (2) a SELL portfolio, consisting of all stocks downgraded with respect to the previous recommendation,
initiated, resumed or reiterated coverage with a hold (IBES code =3), sell (IBES code = 4) or strong sell (IBES code = 5) rating or dropped from
coverage. If the brokerage house does not report the stock as dropped from coverage and a recommendation is not revised or reiterated within twelve
months it is considered expired. We skip a trading day between recommendation and investment (disinvestment). For the BUY portfolio each
recommended stock is held until it is either downgraded, dropped from coverage, or the recommendation expires. We compute value weighted portfolios
by averaging across analysts, weighting individual recommendations by the IBES recommendation code; for the BUY portfolio, we reverse these
recommendation codes so that a strong buy is set to 5 and a strong sell is set to 1. The SELL portfolio is constructed in a similar fashion with the
exception that that the original IBES recommendation codes (i.e., strong sell=5, and strong buy=1) are used as portfolio weight. We report average
returns and DGTW-adjusted returns for the period 1993 to 2006. DGTW characteristic-adjusted returns are defined as raw returns minus the returns on
a value weighted portfolio of all CRSP firms in the same size, (industry-adjusted) market-book, and 1-year momentum quintile. Returns are in monthly
percent. L/S is average return of a zero cost portfolio that holds the portfolio of linked stocks and sells short the portfolio of non-linked stocks. Pre- and
Post REG FD indicates returns for recommendations issued prior and subsequent to the introduction of Regulation FD on October 23, 2000. t-statistics
are shown below the coefficient estimates, and 5% statistical significance is indicated in bold.



    Panel A: Raw returns                       Pre REG FD            Post REG FD                Difference                 Only Downgrades

    No shared educational background            0.92                   1.18                  -0.26                         Pre       Post      Diff
                                                (1.57)                (1.12)                -(0.23)                    REG FD      REG FD

    Linked recommendations                                L/S                   L/S                    L/S                 L/S        L/S      L/S
    Analyst linked to senior                    1.07     0.16          1.09    -0.09         -0.01    0.25                 0.11      -0.06     0.17
    Management or board of directors            (1.87)   (1.12)       (1.16)   -(0.53)      -(0.01)   (1.13)              (0.47)    -(0.29)   (0.52)

    Analyst linked to senior                    1.20     0.29          0.97    -0.21          0.24    0.50                 0.53      -0.22     0.74
    Management                                  (1.99)   (1.31)       (1.00)   -(1.08)       (0.22)   (1.65)              (1.39)    -(0.90)   (1.54)

    Analyst linked to board of                  1.13     0.21          1.10    -0.08          0.03    0.29                 0.07      -0.05     0.12
    Directors                                   (1.97)   (1.52)       (1.20)   -(0.40)       (0.03)   (1.25)              (0.30)    -(0.23)   (0.37)
             Table V: Sell Recommendations, Returns to School Ties Pre- and Post- REG FD (continued)


Panel B: Abnormal returns          Pre REG FD         Post REG FD            Difference        Only Downgrades
No shared educational background   -0.20               -0.13             -0.08                 Pre     Post      Diff
                                   -(1.79)            -(0.48)            -(0.30)            REG FD     REG
                                                                                                        FD

Linked recommendations                        L/S                L/S                L/S        L/S      L/S      L/S
Analyst linked to senior            0.05     0.25      0.04     0.17      0.01     0.09       0.31     0.21      0.09
Management or board of directors   (0.32)    (1.95)    (0.21)   (1.11)   (0.05)    (0.45)     (1.40)   (1.20)   (0.32)

Analyst linked to senior            0.23     0.43      -0.07    0.05      0.30     0.38       0.73     0.11      0.62
Management                         (1.10)    (2.25)   -(0.28)   (0.27)   (0.93)    (1.34)     (1.94)   (0.45)   (1.31)

Analyst linked to board of          0.13     0.34      0.05     0.17      0.08     0.16       0.26     0.22      0.05
Directors                          (0.76)    (2.35)    (0.27)   (1.04)   (0.33)    (0.74)     (1.28)   (1.09)   (0.16)
                                            Table VI: School Tie regressions

 This table reports panel regressions of returns on buy recommendations of analysts. The dependent variables are
 either returns (Ret) or Abnormal returns (Xeret), where indicated. Xeret are defined as size-BM-momentum
 adjusted returns as in Daniel et. al (1997). The regressions were run daily, but coefficients have been adjusted
 to represent monthly returns (abnormal returns) in percent. The first 3 variables are categorical variables of
 whether or not the analyst is connected in an education network to the given firm on which she is making a
 recommendation: (i) Connected to Either indicates the analyst is connected to either the senior officers or board
 of directors, (ii) Connected to Mgmt indicates the analyst is connected to the senior officers, and (iii) Connected
 to Board indicates the analyst is connected to the board of directors. Post Reg-FD is a categorical variable
 equal to 1 for all recommendations made after Regulation FD came into effect (Oct 23, 2000), and 0 for all
 recommendations made before. Conn. Either*Post Reg-FD is the interaction term between Connected to Either
 and Post Reg-FD. Analyst Experience is equal to the number of years the analyst has been making
 recommendations recorded in I/B/E/S. Affiliation is a categorical variable that measures whether or not the
 given firm has an underwriting relationship with the analyst's brokerage. All Star is a categorical variable equal
 to 1 if the investor was voted an all star analyst in the October issue of Institutional Investor magazine for the
 given year. Brokerage Size is the total number of analysts that work at the given analyst's brokerage house.
 Column 9 includes only those analysts that are in the sample both pre- and post-Reg FD. Fixed effects for
 month (Month), analyst (Analyst), and industry (Indus) using the Fama-French industry definitions, are
 included where indicated. All standard errors are adjusted for clustering at the month level, and t-stats using
 these clustered standard errors are included in parentheses below the coefficient estimates. 5% statistical
 significance is indicated in bold.

                          (1)        (2)          (3)       (4)       (5)        (6)        (7)        (8)       (9)
                          Ret        Ret          Ret      Xeret    Xeret      Xeret      Xeret      Xeret      Xeret
Connected to Either       0.36                             0.30      0.21       0.30       0.50       0.52       0.51
                         (5.16)                            (4.54)    (2.38)     (3.56)     (4.57)     (3.76)    (3.39)

Connected to Mgmt                    0.48
                                    (4.23)

Connected to Board                               0.32
                                                 (4.09)

Conn. Either*                                                                              -0.34     -0.42      -0.50
Post-RegFD                                                                                 (2.46)     (2.55)    (2.67)

Post Reg-FD                                                                                -0.42     -0.46      -0.55
                                                                                           (4.33)     (3.92)    (4.09)

Analyst Experience                                                   -0.01      0.04                  0.04       0.07
                                                                     (0.57)     (2.59)                (2.94)    (3.14)

Affiliation                                                          -0.41      -0.42                -0.36      -0.33
                                                                     (2.21)     (2.43)                (2.04)    (1.75)

All Star                                                             -0.22      -0.16                -0.20      -0.16
                                                                     (1.26)     (1.46)                (2.01)    (1.42)

Brokerage Size                                                       -0.00      0.00                  0.00       0.00
                                                                     (2.12)     (0.71)                (1.35)    (0.66)

Constant                  1.14       1.18        1.16      0.00      0.48       0.94       0.24       0.34       0.23
                         (87.95)   (163.74)      (99.02)   (0.37)    (2.14)     (1.94)     (3.04)     (1.52)    (0.80)

Fixed Effect            Month      Month       Month       Month    Month      Month
Fixed Effect                                                        Analyst    Indus      Indus      Indus      Indus
                               Table VII: All-Star Status and School Ties

This table reports the effect of being connected on All-Star status. The dependent variable in each regression is a
categorical variable for All Star status, which is equal to 1 if the analyst was voted an all star analyst in the
October issue of Institutional Investor magazine for the given year. All observations are thus at the analyst-year
level. The first 4 variables are variables that measure the average connectedness of an analyst to the portfolio of
firms that she covers. (i) Num. Conn. to Both indicates the number of firms the analyst covers to whom he is
connected to both the senior officers or board of directors, (ii) Num. Conn. to Mgmt indicates the number of
firms the analyst covers to whom he is connected to the senior officers, (iii) Num. Conn. to Board indicates the
number of firms the analyst covers to whom he is connected to the board of directors, and (iv) Num. Conn. to
Either indicates the number of firms the analyst covers to whom he is connected to either the senior officers or
board of directors. Post Reg-FD is a categorical variable equal to 1 for years after Regulation FD came into
effect (2000), and 0 for all years before. Conn. Both*Post Reg-FD is the interaction term between Connections to
Both and Post Reg-FD. Covered Firm Size is the average size of firm covered by the given analyst in the given
year. Analyst Experience is equal to the number of years the analyst has been making recommendations recorded
in I/B/E/S. Affiliation is the average percentage of stocks in an analyst's portfolio that have an underwriting
relationship with the analyst's brokerage. Brokerage Size is the total number of analysts that work at the given
analyst's brokerage house. Fixed effects at the year (Year) and analyst (Analyst) level are included where
indicated. Columns 1-5 are OLS panel regressions, while Column 6 is a probit regression, where coefficient
estimates shown are the marginal effects on the probability of being an All Star. All standard errors are adjusted
for clustering by year, and t-stats using these clustered standard errors are included in parentheses below the
coefficient estimates. 5% statistical significance is indicated in bold.



                                  (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)            (6)
                                                                                                Probit
     Num. Conn. to Board         0.033
                                 (4.54)
     Num. Conn. to Mgmt                      0.061
                                             (5.42)
     Num. Conn. to Either                                0.030       0.032       0.031           0.013
                                                         (4.58)      (6.00)      (5.29)          (10.84)
     Conn Both*                                                      -0.025      -0.025         -0.008
     Post Reg-FD                                                     (3.92)      (3.93)          (5.36)
     Post-RegFD                                                      0.014       0.037          -0.089
                                                                     (1.06)      (2.27)          (5.10)
     Covered Firm Size                                                           -0.003          0.015
                                                                                 (0.55)          (7.38)
     Brokerage Size                                                              0.000           0.001
                                                                                 (2.12)          (11.99)
     Affiliation                                                                 0.112           0.088
                                                                                 (2.06)          (5.67)
     Analyst Experience                                                          -0.004          0.009
                                                                                 (0.65)          (4.56)
     Constant                    0.060       0.067       0.057       0.064       0.056
                                 (8.97)      (15.18)     (7.72)      (10.81)     (1.53)
     Fixed Effect                Year        Year        Year
     Fixed Effect                                                   Analyst     Analyst
                                       Table VIII: Returns to School Ties, UK Evidence, 1993—2006
This table shows calendar time portfolio returns (in local currency). We classify a stock as having an educational tie to the analyst if he/she attended
the same institution of a senior officer (CEO, CFO or Chairman) or a board member. Each recommendation is assigned to one of two portfolios: (1) a
BUY portfolio consisting to all stocks upgraded with respect to the previous recommendation, or initiated, resumed or reiterated coverage with a buy
(IBES code = 2) or strong buy (IBES code = 1) rating, and (2) a SELL portfolio, consisting of all stocks downgraded with respect to the previous
recommendation, initiated, resumed or reiterated coverage with a hold (IBES code =3), sell (IBES code = 4) or strong sell (IBES code = 5) rating or
dropped from coverage. If the brokerage house does not report the stock as dropped from coverage and a recommendation is not revised or reiterated
within twelve months it is considered expired. We skip a trading day between recommendation and investment (disinvestment). For the BUY portfolio
each recommended stocks is hold until is either downgraded, dropped from coverage or the recommendation expires. We compute value weighted
portfolios by averaging across analysts, weighting individual recommendations by the IBES recommendation code, reversing the ranking from 1 (strong
sell) to 5 (strong buy). The SELL portfolio is constructed in a similar fashion with the exception that that the original IBES recommendation code from
5 (strong sell) to 1 (strong buy) is used as portfolio weight. We report average returns and DGTW-adjusted returns in the period 1993 to 2006. DGTW
characteristic-adjusted returns are defined as raw returns minus the returns on a value weighted portfolio of all I/B/E/S firms traded in the UK in the
same size, (industry-adjusted) market-book, and 1-year momentum quintile. Returns are in monthly percent. L/S is average return of a zero cost
portfolio that holds the portfolio of linked stocks and sells short the portfolio of non-linked stocks. Pre- and post REG FD indicates returns for
recommendations issued prior and subsequent to the introduction of Regulation FD in the US on October 23, 2000. t-statistics are shown below the
coefficient estimates, and 5% statistical significance is indicated in bold.



Panel A: All Sample 1993-2006                         Buy recommendations                                                Sell recommendations
                                                 Raw returns                 Abnormal returns                  Raw returns                       Abnormal returns
No shared educational background        0.71                                    -0.13                           0.45                                -0.24
                                       (1.41)      L/S                         -(0.51)       L/S               (0.78)          L/S                 -(0.91)       L/S

Analyst linked to senior                2.58     1.87                           1.54     1.67                  -0.34         -0.79                  0.02         0.26
Management                             (3.11)    (2.79)                         (2.09)   (2.20)                -(0.39)       -(1.06)                (0.04)   (0.46)


Panel B: Pre and Post- REG FD          Pre REG FD         Post REG FD           Difference           Pre REG FD            Post REG FD              Difference
No shared educational background        0.54               0.91                 0.37                  0.38                    0.57                  0.19         0.38
                                       (0.71)      L/S     (1.47)     L/S       (0.36)       L/S     (0.47)      L/S         (0.80)      L/S        (0.16)   (0.47)

Analyst linked to senior                2.32     1.78      2.90     1.99        0.58     0.21        -0.48     -0.86         -0.08     -0.65        0.41         0.21
management                             (1.98)    (2.11)    (2.48)   (1.82)      (0.34)   (0.15)      -(0.52)   -(1.18)       -(0.04)   -(0.40)      (0.23)   (0.14)
                       Table IX: Returns to School Ties, Event-time returns (upgrades/downgrades only)
This table shows event time cumulative abnormal returns. We classify a stock as having an educational tie to the analyst if he/she attended the same
institution as a senior officer (CEO, CFO or Chairman) or a board member. Each recommendation is assigned to one of two portfolios: (1) a BUY
portfolio consisting to all stocks upgraded with respect to the previous recommendation, and (2) a SELL portfolio, consisting of all stocks downgraded
with respect to the previous recommendation. We report event-time average cumulative abnormal returns (CAR). Abnormal returns are defined as
DGTW characteristic-adjusted returns: daily returns minus the returns on a value weighted portfolio of all CRSP firms in the same size, (industry-
adjusted) market-book, and 1-year momentum quintile. Returns are in percent, standard errors are clustered by calendar date, and t-statistics are shown
below the coefficient estimates. 5% statistical significance is indicated in bold. Panel B and panel C reports results prior and subsequent to the
introduction of Regulation FD on October 23, 2000, respectively.

                                                   Buy recommendation                                          Sell recommendations
CAR[t,t+k]                                [0, 1]     [2,125]   [2,250]      [0,250]                   [0, 1]      [2,125]    [2,250]    [0,250]
Panel A: full sample
No shared educational background           2.49        1.56        2.02        4.51                   -2.37        -1.11       -1.13      -3.50
                                         (35.40)       (4.08)     (3.19)      (7.07)                -(23.39)       -(2.88)    -(1.89)    -(5.77)
Analyst linked to senior                   2.83        2.62        3.99        8.47                   -2.65         0.12        1.01      -1.65
Management or board of directors         (20.92)       (3.54)     (3.23)      (6.82)                -(14.44)       (0.17)      (0.96)    -(1.55)
Difference                                 0.35        1.06        1.96        3.96                   -0.28         1.23        2.14      1.86
                                          (2.29)       (1.27)     (1.41)      (2.84)                 -(1.34)       (1.57)      (1.77)     (1.52)
Panel B: pre REG FD
No shared educational background           1.95        3.85        5.36        7.31                   -2.33        -1.04       -1.93      -4.26
                                         (17.84)       (5.29)     (4.52)      (6.14)                -(15.52)       -(1.46)    -(1.70)    -(3.71)
Analyst linked to senior                   2.33        5.16      12.09       14.53                    -2.38        -0.40        2.27      -0.11
Management or board of directors         (11.58)       (4.10)     (5.68)      (6.80)                 -(8.89)       -(0.32)     (1.15)    -(0.05)
Difference                                 0.38        1.31        6.73        7.22                   -0.05         0.64        4.20      4.16
                                          (1.66)       (1.98)     (2.77)      (2.95)                 -(0.15)       (0.45)      (1.84)     (1.81)
Panel A: post RED FD
No shared educational background           2.76        0.37        0.24        3.00                   -2.39        -1.14       -0.81      -3.20
                                         (30.70)       (0.83)     (0.33)      (4.06)                -(18.54)       -(2.46)    -(1.15)    -(4.48)
Analyst linked to senior                   3.13        1.08       -0.89        4.48                   -2.77         0.32        0.53      -2.24
Management or board of directors         (17.37)       (1.19)    -(0.60)      (3.00)                -(11.70)       (0.40)      (0.43)    -(1.80)
Difference                                 0.38        0.71       -1.14        1.48                   -0.38         1.46        1.34      0.96
                                          (1.88)       (0.70)    -(0.69)      (0.89)                 -(1.41)       (1.56)      (0.95)     (0.67)
                                           Table X: Robustness Checks
This table shows calendar time portfolio returns. We report average the DGTW-adjusted return of a zero cost portfolio that
holds the portfolio of linked stocks and sells short the portfolio of non-linked stocks between 1993 to 2006. In this table links are
defined as recommendations by an analyst who is linked either to the firm’s senior management or to the firm's board of
directors. "Pre" and "Post" REG FD refers to the introduction of Regulation FD on October 23, 2000. IPO are stocks with less
than 24 months from the IPO date. Panel A reports results broken down by stock characteristic. "IPO"s are stocks that are less
than 24 months removed from the IPO date. Panel B reports results broken down by analyst characteristics. "Affiliated"
analysts belong to a bank that has an under-writing relationship with the covered firm. Brokerage houses are classified as "large"
or "small" based on the median number or analysts issuing recommendations in the current calendar year. Panel C reports
results by institutions. School adjusted returns are defined as raw returns minus the average return of a portfolio of all firms
where at least a senior official (CEO, CFO or Chairman) or a board member received a degree from the same institution. “Top 5
most connected” are academic institutions, ranked by the total number of links in table II over the period 1990 to 2006. t-
statistics are shown below the coefficient estimates, and 5% statistical significance is indicated in bold.

BUY recommendations, linked recommendations minus not linked
Abnormal returns             Full        Pre REG     Post REG                                     Full      Pre REG       Post
                            sample          FD          FD                                       sample        FD        REG FD
Panel A1: Stocks characteristics
Large cap stocks              0.45           0.62         0.23        Small cap stocks              0.89        1.44         0.18
above NYSE median             (3.69)        (3.31)       (1.69)       above NYSE median            (3.22)       (3.71)      (0.47)

IPO                           0.87           0.98         0.75        Not IPO                       0.28        0.49         0.02
<24 months from IPO           (2.62)        (2.11)       (1.56)       >24 months from IPO          (3.11)       (3.76)      (0.15)

High analysts coverage        0.34           0.48         0.14        Low analysts coverage         0.45        0.67         0.17
above NYSE median             (3.10)        (3.21)       (0.95)       Below NYSE median            (3.78)       (3.99)      (1.04)

Panel B1: analysts characteristics
Affiliated                    0.62           0.82        -0.04        Non affiliated                0.44        0.67         0.13
                              (1.42)        (1.70)      -(0.05)                                    (3.67)       (4.14)      (0.79)

Large brokerage firm          0.46           0.69         0.16        Small brokerage firm         -0.39        0.03        -0.94
                              (3.92)        (4.31)       (0.97)                                   -(0.66)       (0.04)     -(1.17)

Panel C1: institutions characteristics
Ivy league                    0.57           0.98         0.03        Not ivy league                0.36        0.49         0.20
                              (3.55)        (4.65)       (0.12)                                    (3.02)       (2.95)      (1.15)

Top 5 most linked             0.38           0.67        -0.01        Not Top 5 most linked         0.52        0.75         0.23
                              (2.16)        (2.95)      -(0.04)                                    (4.12)       (4.16)      (1.35)

School adjusted returns       0.38           0.53        0.20         School adjusted returns       0.42        0.64        0.16
Senior management             (4.14)        (4.03)       (1.61)       Board                        (4.05)       (4.31)      (1.15)
                                   Table X: Robustness Checks (continued)


SELL recommendations, linked recommendations minus not linked
Abnormal returns             Full        Pre REG      Post REG                                Full     Pre REG      Post
                            sample          FD           FD                                  sample       FD       REG FD
Panel A2: Stocks characteristics
Large cap stocks              0.17           0.30         0.02     Small cap stocks            0.05       -0.02       0.15
above NYSE median             (1.73)        (1.65)        (0.11)   above NYSE median          (0.17)     -(0.04)     (0.47)

IPO                           -0.30         -0.14         -0.48    Not IPO                     0.10       0.20       -0.04
<24 months from IPO          -(0.73)        -(0.20)      -(1.21)   >24 months from IPO        (0.90)      (1.34)     -(0.25)

High analysts coverage        0.15           0.32         -0.07    Low analysts coverage       0.02       0.07       -0.05
above NYSE median             (1.31)        (2.25)       -(0.38)   below NYSE median          (0.18)      (0.46)     -(0.25)

Panel B2: analysts characteristics
Affiliated                    -0.46         -0.43         -0.54    Non affiliated              0.07       0.18       -0.07
                             -(0.80)        -(0.67)      -(0.42)                              (0.64)      (1.26)     -(0.41)

Large brokerage firm            0.10          0.32        (0.19)   Small brokerage firm         0.79        0.72       0.88
                              (0.84)        (1.99)       -(1.22)                              (1.20)      (0.90)     (0.80)

Panel C2: institutions characteristics
Ivy league                    0.23           0.54         -0.17    Not ivy league             -0.05       -0.06      -0.03
                              (1.47)        (2.38)       -(0.83)                             -(0.35)     -(0.34)     -(0.14)

Top 5 most linked             -0.03          0.06         -0.14    Not Top 5 most linked       0.18       0.34       -0.03
                             -(0.18)        (0.30)       -(0.64)                              (1.36)      (1.88)     -(0.16)

School adjusted returns       0.06           0.15         -0.06    School adjusted returns     0.08       0.20       -0.07
Senior management             (0.62)        (1.24)       -(0.41)   Board                      (0.80)      (1.55)     -(0.44)
                                                                  Figure 1: XYZ Corp

This figure shows returns of the XYZ Corp. around the upgrade by a linked analyst and return on its
corresponding DGTW benchmark



                                                                                                                               Merger completed


               1.8


                                                                                 CFM announces its intention to acquire XYZ



               1.6
Total Return




               1.4
                         Earnings announcement
                                                                      Rumors of a possible acquisition




               1.2




                1




                         XYZ Upgraded to BUY

               0.8
                Feb-93       Mar-93        Apr-93   May-93   Jun-93       Jul-93         Aug-93          Sep-93       Oct-93      Nov-93          Dec-93


                                                               XYZ Corp.              DGTW benchmark portoflio
                     Figure 2: Returns to School Ties, Event-time returns, 1993-2006
This figure shows event time cumulative abnormal returns. We classify a stock as having an educational tie to
the analyst if he/she attended the same institution of a senior officer (CEO, CFO or Chairman) or a board
member. Each recommendation is assigned to one of two portfolios: (1) a BUY portfolio consisting of all stocks
upgraded with respect to the previous recommendation, and (2) a SELL portfolio, consisting of all stocks
downgraded with respect to the previous recommendation. We report event-time average cumulative abnormal
returns (CAR). Abnormal returns are defined as DGTW characteristic-adjusted returns: daily returns minus the
returns on a value weighted portfolio of all CRSP firms in the same size, (industry-adjusted) market-book, and
1-year momentum quintile. Returns are in percent.



  10.0%




      8.0%




      6.0%




      4.0%
CAR




      2.0%



                                                                       trading day t+k
      0.0%
                     18         38         58         78          98         118          138        158        178        198        218         238



  -2.0%




  -4.0%
         BUY, no shared educational background                                           SELL, no shared educational background

         BUY, analyst connected to senior management or board of directors               SELL, analyst connected to senior management or board of directors
                   Figure 3: Returns to School Ties, Event-time returns, pre Reg. FD
This figure shows event time cumulative abnormal returns. We classify a stock as having an educational tie to
the analyst if he/she attended the same institution of a senior officer (CEO, CFO or Chairman) or a board
member. Each recommendation is assigned to one of two portfolios: (1) a BUY portfolio consisting of all stocks
upgraded with respect to the previous recommendation, and (2) a SELL portfolio, consisting of all stocks
downgraded with respect to the previous recommendation. We report event-time average cumulative abnormal
returns (CAR). Abnormal returns are defined as DGTW characteristic-adjusted returns: daily returns minus the
returns on a value weighted portfolio of all CRSP firms in the same size, (industry-adjusted) market-book, and
1-year momentum quintile. Returns are in percent.

  20.0%




  15.0%




  10.0%




      5.0%
CAR




      0.0%
                     18         38         58         78          98   trading
                                                                            118day t+k 138       158        178        198        218         238




  -5.0%




 -10.0%
         BUY, no shared educational background                                       SELL, no shared educational background

         BUY, analyst connected to senior management or board of directors           SELL, analyst connected to senior management or board of directors
                Figure 4: Returns to School Ties, Event-time returns, post Reg. FD
This figure shows event time cumulative abnormal returns. We classify a stock as having an educational tie to
the analyst if he/she attended the same institution of a senior officer (CEO, CFO or Chairman) or a board
member. Each recommendation is assigned to one of two portfolios: (1) a BUY portfolio consisting of all stocks
upgraded with respect to the previous recommendation, and (2) a SELL portfolio, consisting of all stocks
downgraded with respect to the previous recommendation. We report event-time average cumulative abnormal
returns (CAR). Abnormal returns are defined as DGTW characteristic-adjusted returns: daily returns minus the
returns on a value weighted portfolio of all CRSP firms in the same size, (industry-adjusted) market-book, and
1-year momentum quintile. Returns are in percent.

  5.0%


  4.0%


  3.0%


  2.0%


  1.0%


  0.0%
                  18          38         58         78         98         118           138       158         178        198        218         238
CAR




 -1.0%


 -2.0%                                                                trading day t+k


 -3.0%


 -4.0%


 -5.0%
         BUY, no shared educational background                                           SELL, no shared educational background

         BUY, analyst linked to senior management or board of directors                  SELL, analyst linked to senior management or board of directors
