                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            HOW ARE PREFERENCES REVEALED?

                                           John Beshears
                                            James J. Choi
                                           David Laibson
                                         Brigitte C. Madrian

                                        Working Paper 13976
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13976


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2008




The authors are grateful to participants at the "Happiness and Public Economics Conference" for
their feedback, particularly Alan Manning. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by John Beshears, James J. Choi, David Laibson, and Brigitte C. Madrian. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
How are Preferences Revealed?
John Beshears, James J. Choi, David Laibson, and Brigitte C. Madrian
NBER Working Paper No. 13976
April 2008
JEL No. A11,B4,D01,D60,G11,H1

                                             ABSTRACT

Revealed preferences are tastes that rationalize an economic agent’s observed actions. Normative
preferences represent the agent's actual interests. It sometimes makes sense to assume that revealed
preferences are identical to normative preferences. But there are many cases where this assumption
is violated. We identify five factors that increase the likelihood of a disparity between revealed
preferences and normative preferences: passive choice, complexity, limited personal experience,
third-party marketing, and intertemporal choice. We then discuss six approaches that jointly contribute
to the identification of normative preferences: structural estimation, active decisions, asymptotic choice,
aggregated revealed preferences, reported preferences, and informed preferences. Each of these approaches
uses consumer behavior to infer some property of normative preferences without equating revealed
and normative preferences. We illustrate these issues with evidence from savings and investment
outcomes.


John Beshears                                        David Laibson
Department of Economics                              Department of Economics
Littauer Center                                      Littauer M-14
Harvard University                                   Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
beshears@fas.harvard.edu                             and NBER
                                                     dlaibson@harvard.edu
James J. Choi
Yale School of Management                            Brigitte C. Madrian
135 Prospect Street                                  John F. Kennedy School of Government
P.O. Box 208200                                      Harvard University
New Haven, CT 06520-8200                             79 JFK Street
and NBER                                             Cambridge, MA 02138
james.choi@yale.edu                                  and NBER
                                                     Brigitte_Madrian@Harvard.edu
        Revealed preference theory constructs utility functions that rationalize empirical
observations of consumer choices and consumer budget constraints (Samuelson, 1938, 1948;
Little, 1949; Houthakker, 1950; Afriat, 1967). Economists usually assume that these revealed
preferences are also normative preferences—preferences that represent the economic actor’s true
interests. Economic welfare analysis and policy analysis almost always assume that revealed
preferences and normative preferences are identical.
        In some situations, it makes sense to give revealed preferences normative status. When a
ten-year-old child chooses chocolate over vanilla ice cream, she reveals a legitimate preference
for one flavor over another. The government should respect that preference, and ice cream
parlors should cater to it.
        However, there are many cases in which even the choices of adult consumers do not
reveal a true preference, but rather reflect the combined influence of true preferences and
decision-making errors. When a worker invests all of her retirement savings in her employer’s
stock, economists should not necessarily assume that she has acted in her best interest. In
surveys, workers on average report that an investment in their employer’s stock is less risky than
an investment in a diversified mutual fund (John Hancock Financial Services, 2002). When
workers put all their financial eggs in one basket, they are probably revealing many things, one
of which is confusion about the true risk characteristics of their employer’s stock.
        Human behavior is jointly determined by both normative preferences and other factors
such as analytic errors, myopic impulses, inattention, passivity, and misinformation. Despite
these complications, economists need not throw up their hands and reject all revealed
preferences. This paper describes a compromise that uses behavior to identify normative
preferences while acknowledging that revealed preferences often differ from normative
preferences. We summarize and extend a long line of economic research that proposes empirical
and policy frameworks that distinguish between revealed and normative preferences (e.g. Luce,
1959; Laibson, Repetto, and Tobacman, 1998; Camerer et al., 2003; Bernheim and Rangel, 2007;
Thaler and Sunstein, 2008).
        In Section 1, we describe the kinds of situations where normative preferences are least
likely to be revealed by people’s choices. We illustrate these issues with evidence from savings
and investment decisions. We identify five factors that increase the likelihood that revealed




                                                 3
preferences will not have normative merit: passive choice, complexity, limited personal
experience, third-party marketing, and intertemporal choice.
       Section 2 discusses six frameworks that can jointly contribute to the identification of
normative preferences: structural estimation, active decisions, asymptotic choice, aggregated
revealed preferences, reported preferences, and informed preferences. Each framework relies on
consumer behavior to infer some property of normative preferences without equating revealed
and normative preferences.
       Practical policy analysis should use insights from all the six frameworks discussed in
Section 2. Section 3 concludes with a discussion of how to design institutions—including
government policies—when there is likely to be a gap between revealed and normative
preferences.

1. Red flags
       In this section we discuss five factors—passive choice, complexity, limited personal
experience, third-party marketing, and intertemporal choice—that often create a wedge between
revealed and normative preferences.


1.1. Passive choice
       In many situations, economic agents do not actively make choices. Instead, they
passively accept defaults that are chosen by others. In theory, acceptance of a default could be a
conscious and meaningful decision. In practice, acceptance of a default often reflects other
forces, like procrastination.
       For instance, an agent may accept a default she knows is not optimal because she plans to
switch to a superior alternative soon. However, if the agent procrastinates, this switch will not
materialize or will be delayed. Such procrastination dynamics are especially likely to arise when
the marginal cost of delaying an additional day is small, leading to long total delays and
significant cumulative costs. (See Akerlof, 1991, for a theoretical example and Madrian and
Shea, 2001, and Choi, Laibson and Madrian, 2005b, for empirical examples.)
       Highly suggestible agents may also accept defaults because they believe—perhaps
erroneously—that the person who set the default was making a carefully considered
recommendation (Madrian and Shea, 2001; Beshears et al., 2006a).



                                                 4
        Preferences revealed through passive choice are often inconsistent, since variation in
defaults generates large variation in (passively) accepted outcomes.1 For example, Choi,
Laibson, Madrian, and Metrick (2006) examine four companies that changed the default
enrollment regime for their retirement savings plans. When the default is non-participation (an
opt-in default), enrollment rates range from 25% to 43% six months after hire (despite the
existence of a large employer match at three of the four firms). By comparison, when the default
is automatic enrollment (with an option to opt out), enrollment rates range from 86% to 96% six
months after hire. At these four firms, automatic enrollment increases participation by 50 to 67
percentage points.
        The impact of defaults on savings outcomes extends well beyond savings plan
participation. Similar effects have been documented for almost every aspect of retirement saving,
including asset allocation, contribution rates, pre-retirement cash distributions, and annuitization
(see Beshears et al., 2006a, for a summary of this research).


1.2. Complexity
        Problems that are hard to solve tend to delay choice because they force agents to incur
large up-front problem-solving costs. Thus, complexity increases the fraction of individuals that
accept default options (O’Donoghue and Rabin, 1999a). Complexity also biases choice, since
people tend to avoid more complicated alternatives (Shafir et al., 1993; Iyengar and Kamenica,
2006). Finally, complexity adds noise to choices. Since complicated options may not be well-
understood, some consumers choosing a complicated option will do so because they misestimate
its value (Luce, 1959; McFadden, 1981; Gabaix, Laibson, and Li, 2005).


1.2.1. Complexity and the number of choices
        The large number of available investment options makes asset allocation decisions
complex. For instance, at year-end 2005, there were 8,454 mutual funds registered in the United
States.2,3 Allocating money across these mutual funds is an overwhelming task unless the agent


1
  See, for example, Madrian and Shea (2001), Choi, Laibson, Madrian, and Metrick (2002, 2004, 2006), Johnson
and Goldstein (2003), Abadie and Gay (2006), Listokin (2006), Johnson et al. (1993), Aura (2001), Park et al.
(2000), Cronqvist and Thaler (2004), and Holden and Nicholson (1998).
2
  Investment Company Institute, 2006 Investment Company Fact Book. See www.icifactbook.org.
3
  There are also many thousands of other investment vehicles, including ETFs, hedge funds, and derivatives.


                                                       5
employs a heuristic, such as considering the mutual funds at only one asset management
company.
       Iyengar and Kamenica (2006) show that experimental subjects are more likely to choose
a simple (risk-free) investment than a complex (risky) investment as the number of investment
options increases. Iyengar and Kamenica also find support for this result in a cross-section of
401(k) plans: for every 10 additional mutual funds in a 401(k) investment menu, the average
allocation to equities is 3.3 percentage points lower.
       A superabundance of options also delays savings plan enrollment. A typical employer-
sponsored savings plan allows employees select any contribution rate up to 15 or 20 percent of
their pay (subject to IRS contribution limits), and balances can be invested in any convex
combination of—on average—14 different investment options (U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics,
2005; Hewitt Associates, 2005). Iyengar, Huberman and Jiang (2004) document a negative
relationship between the number of investment options offered in a savings plan and employee
participation: each additional 10 funds in the menu of investment options is associated with a
decline in participation rates of 1.5 to 2.0 percentage points. Conversely, Choi, Laibson, and
Madrian (2006a) and Beshears et al. (2006b) show that simplifying the savings plan enrollment
decision increases participation rates. They study an intervention at two firms in which non-
participating employees were given the opportunity to opt into a single pre-selected contribution
rate and asset allocation. Even though the number of 401(k) choices available did not decrease,
this simplified reframing of the enrollment decision increased participation by 10 to 22
percentage points.


1.2.2. Complexity and long horizons
       Choices with distant consequences are more complex. Forecasting what will happen later
today is much easier than forecasting events on a particular afternoon four decades from now.
Looking ahead forty years, one needs to consider numerous divergent paths: unemployment,
sickness, divorce, bankruptcy, bequests, etc.
       Decisions with consequences in the distant future reflect both normative preferences and
forecasting errors. Some of those forecasting errors will be predictable. For example, recently
released estimates from the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services project a 7.2% annual
increase in health care spending for the years 2005-2015, outstripping both the annual rates of



                                                 6
GDP growth and overall inflation (Borger et al., 2006). It is likely that many households are not
aware of these forecasts. The inferences that economists draw regarding households’
intertemporal preferences depend critically on whether households foresee these health costs
(some of which they will need to bear). If we observe a low current savings rate, that could
reflect either a high discount rate and a rational forecast of future health costs or a low discount
rate and an under-estimate of future health costs. It is hard for the social scientist to know which
mechanism is at play.


1.3. Limited personal experience
         Limited personal experience creates another wedge between revealed preferences and
normative preferences. Human learning is often generated by feedback. A child learns that hot
food burns the roof of his mouth through experience rather than lectures. Likewise, video renters
learn to return their videos on time after paying a late fee (Fishman and Pope, 2007), and credit
card account holders learn to pay their bills on time by first paying late fees (Agarwal et al.,
2007).
         Consumers with little or no feedback are not likely to learn what is in their best interest.
What personal experiences could teach a middle-aged worker whether she is saving the right
amount for retirement? In principle, she could learn by observing others, particularly people in
older generations. However, every generation faces different financial circumstances, so the
applicability of prior generations’ experience is unclear. Moreover, people are generally far more
responsive to their own experiences than the experiences of others. For example, Choi, Laibson,
and Madrian (2005a) show that when Enron, WorldCom, and Global Crossing employees’
401(k) balances—which were heavily invested in their employer’s stock—were wiped out by
those companies’ bankruptcies, workers at other U.S. firms did little to reduce their own
investments in employer stock.


1.4. Third-party marketing
         Tom Sawyer tricked his friends into paying him for the privilege of painting his family’s
fence. A great deal of real behavior is also influenced by marketing. For example, S&P 500
index funds charge fees that vary by an order of magnitude (Hortaçsu and Syverson, 2004).
Moreover, this range of fees cannot be explained by variation in bundled non-portfolio services,



                                                   7
such as customer service quality (Choi, Laibson, and Madrian, 2006b). Instead, the willingness
to pay high fees is partially due to the effective marketing and branding of the underlying good—
an index fund—which is a commodity.
         It is not obvious how economists should evaluate preferences for branded commodities
(cf. Becker and Murphy, 1993). If people feel good when they drink Coke out of a Coke bottle,4
it might not be problematic that they buy Coke even though they prefer the taste of Pepsi in
double-blind tastes (McClure et al., 2004). However, there are some cases where such brand
preferences may not deserve normative weight. When asset management firms induce their
clients to invest in dominated (high-fee) assets and when employers persuade their rank-and-file
workers to hold employer stock, economists should wonder whether these revealed preferences
have normative legitimacy or reflect mistakes (cf. Ariely et al., 2003).


1.5. Intertemporal choice
         Intertemporal choices raise two sets of normative questions. First, even if an economic
agent makes choices that imply a consistent discount rate, it is not obvious that that revealed
discount rate should be accorded normative status (Ramsey, 1928; Pigou, 1932; Harrod, 1948;
Solow, 1974; Kahneman et al., 1997; Anand and Sen, 2000). Why should utility experienced at
date t have less weight than utility experienced at a later date t+τ? Only discounting due to
mortality risk is easily defended philosophically (see previous citations). However, mortality
discounting is an order of magnitude too small to explain the intertemporal preferences revealed
by actual households’ savings choices;5 the revealed exponential discount rate is around 5% per
year (e.g., Gourinchas and Parker, 2002).
         Recently Nordhaus (2006) has shown that the policy recommendations for addressing
global warming hinge critically on the normative discount rate. For example, the highly
influential Stern report (2006) bases its benchmark analysis on a normative discount rate of 0.1%
per year, which is 1/50th the magnitude of the revealed preference discount rate of 5%.6

4
  Advertising has endowed Coke with many positive affective associations: family, friends, small-town America,
etc.
5
  In 1996, the annual hazard rate of dying for a 40-year-old in the US was 0.0022 (Vital and Health Statistics,
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention/National Center for Health Statistics, 1999).
6
  From the FAQ section of the Stern report: “We carefully examine the case for discounting the future just because it
is the future—which in economic terms is known as pure time preference. This requires a consideration of the
ethical issues involved in comparing the incidence of costs and benefits between generations, some of which are
distant in time. We argue—in line with economists including Ramsey, Sen, Pigou and Solow—that the welfare of


                                                         8
         The discussion in the previous two paragraphs posits the existence of a constant revealed
discount rate, and then asks whether the normative discount rate should match it. However, a
growing body of evidence suggests that revealed discount rates are not constant. Instead,
discount rates are higher in the short run than the long run (Ainslie, 1992; Loewenstein and
Prelec, 1992; Laibson, 1997; Angeletos et al., 2001; DellaVigna and Malmendier, 2006). Such
variation raises a host of additional normative problems. One particularly salient problem is that
non-constant discount rates imply dynamically inconsistent preferences.
         To illustrate this problem, imagine that a person can make an investment at a cost of C
utils to gain delayed benefits of B utils. For analytic simplicity, assume that benefits occur one
period after the costly investment. The individual has a quasi-hyperbolic discounting function
(Phelps and Pollak, 1968; Laibson, 1997), whereby rewards and costs at times 0, 1, 2, 3, ..., are
multiplied by respective weights 1, β·δ, β·δ2, β·δ3, …, with 0 < β ≤ 1 and 0 < δ ≤ 1. When β = 1,
this model is identical to the classical exponential discounting model. When β < 1, this model
reproduces the “hyperbolic” pattern of more discounting in the short run and less discounting in
the long run. O’Donoghue and Rabin (1999b) call these preferences “present-biased.”
         Consider the case in which β = 1/2 and δ = 1 (the value δ = 1 is used in Akerlof, 1991).
Set C = 4 and B = 6, so the undiscounted cost of investment is 4 and the undiscounted benefit is
6. With these parameter values, the investment looks appealing when viewed from a temporal
distance:
         -βδtC + βδt+1B = -(1/2)(4) + (1/2)(6) = 1 > 0.
However, the investment is undesirable if the agent is asked to do it right now:
         -C + βδB = -(4) + (1/2)(6) = -1 < 0.
         Hence, a person with this discounting function has two competing sets of revealed
preferences. When asked to make decisions in advance, the agent will choose to invest. When
such decisions are not binding, the agent will not end up investing (since she always breaks her
previous plans when the moment of action arises). In situations like this, revealed preferences
cannot be a reliable guide to normative preferences. Alternative or additional normative
assumptions are needed (cf. Bernheim and Rangel, 2007).



future generations should be treated on a par with our own. This means that the only justification for a positive rate
of pure time preference in assessing the impacts of climate change is the possibility that the human race may be
extinguished. As the possibility of this happening is low, we assume a low rate of pure time preference, 0.1%.”


                                                           9
2. Inferring normative preferences
           The previous section described situations in which revealed preferences deviate from
normative preferences. For policy purposes, economists would like to identify normative
preferences when such deviations occur. In the current section, we summarize six methods for
doing so. None of these methods is ideal, and all of them should be viewed as complementary
ways of measuring normative preferences. As we discuss each method, we will review its
strengths and weaknesses.


2.1. Structural estimation
          For an economist trained in modern empirical methods, a natural way to measure
normative preferences is to estimate them with a structural model. Such a model would have two
components:


      (1) A (positive) behavioral model with a parameter vector θ


      (2) A set of normative axioms that map the parameters θ into normative preferences


The behavioral model would incorporate all of the economic and psychological motives that
shape behavior, including the mechanisms that generate mistakes (e.g., non-Bayesian inference)
and the preferences that are normatively illegitimate (e.g., present bias7).
          To implement this analysis, experimental data or field data would be used to estimate the
parameter vector θ in behavioral model (1). These parameters would then be mapped into
normative preferences using the axioms in (2).
          As an example, suppose consumers’ static revealed preferences are normatively
legitimate but their dynamic preferences are not, as in the case where they suffer from present
bias. Such an argument would be supported by the normative axiom that the welfare function
should have no intertemporal discounting except for that due to mortality risk (Ramsey, 1928;
Pigou, 1932; Harrod, 1948; Solow, 1974; Kahneman et al., 1997; Anand and Sen, 2000). At the
same time, the normative axioms might respect people’s static preferences over risky

7
    Laibson (1997), O’Donoghue and Rabin (1999b).


                                                    10
alternatives. In this example, θ would contain both static risk aversion parameters and dynamic
discounting parameters. Both types of parameters would be simultaneously estimated from
available data,8 but only the static risk preferences would be elevated to normative status.
         This structural estimation framework has the strength that it forces the researcher to make
clear assumptions about behavioral biases while enabling the researcher to simultaneously
identify both normative preferences and the underlying behavioral model. On the other hand, the
structural model has the weakness that it is costly to implement—like most structural models—
and it may not be robust to model specification errors.


2.2. Active decisions
         In some cases, revealed preferences and normative preferences diverge because people
stay at a default that even they report is not in their best interest. For example, two-thirds of
survey respondents at one company reported that their current savings rate was too low relative
to their ideal savings rate. A third of these undersavers said they were planning to increase their
savings plan contribution rate in the next two months, but almost none of them actually did so
(Choi, Laibson, Madrian, and Metrick, 2002 and 2006). (We will discuss self-reported
preferences further in Section 2.5.)
         In situations like this, outcomes vary with the type of default that is used. As discussed in
Section 1.1, savings plan participation rates vary enormously with the participation default that is
chosen: opt-in versus opt-out. The default biases outcomes, both because consumers tend to
procrastinate and because consumers tend to follow the implicit advice that a default represents.
To the extent that the wedge between normative and revealed preferences is created by inertia
around the default, a default-free mechanism may produce outcomes closer to the normative
benchmark. For example, an active decision mechanism forces individuals to explicitly state their
preferences (Carroll et al., 2007). Active decision mechanisms have no default option.9



8
  See Laibson, Repetto, and Tobacman (2006) for an example of such a structural estimation without any normative
interpretation.
9
  In practice, there is a default, but the default is only used in the case when the agent refuses to make a decision for
herself. For example, in an active decision implementation (Carroll et al., 2007), employees at a firm were told that
they had to make an active savings plan participation decision within 30 days of their hire date. Approximately 95%
did so, though some employees needed repeated reminders to nudge them into compliance. The 5% of employees
who ignored these reminders were eventually given the (hidden) default of non-enrollment. One could raise the
compliance rate by punishing non-compliance, but such punishments might be socially inefficient.


                                                           11
         In the context of an employer-sponsored savings plan, such an approach might require all
workers to affirmatively state whether they do or do not want to participate in the savings plan.
Workers would be required to announce this preference by a certain deadline. Carroll et al.
(2007) document that the enrollment rate achieved under an active decision regime lies between
the rate obtained under an opt-in system (default is non-enrollment) and the rate obtained under
an opt-out system (default is enrollment). Active decision participation rates are slightly closer to
the participation rates achieved under the latter regime.


2.3. Asymptotic choice
         In most stationary economic environments, short-run choices are likely to be further from
normative optimality than long-run choices (Plott, 1996).10 For example, in firms with saving
plans that use a non-enrollment (opt-in) default, procrastination may delay enrollment, thereby
biasing downward the short-run participation rate. Learning mechanisms—including imitation of
peers, educational seminars, and experiential feedback—may also make long-run choices better
than short-run choices.
         Hence, it is likely that the participation/savings behavior of experienced workers is
normatively more informative than the behavior of inexperienced workers. One should therefore
give disproportionate weight to the investment behavior of high-tenure workers when attempting
to infer normative preferences (Choi, Laibson, Madrian, and Metrick, 2003; Carroll et al., 2007).
         Credit card data provide strong evidence of learning effects. Controlling for person fixed
effects and transitory account characteristics, new account holders pay fees that are four times
greater than the fees paid by experienced account holders (Agarwal et al., 2007).11 The fees paid
by new account holders reflect mistakes that are avoided by more experienced account holders.
Each time an account holder pays a fee—for instance, a late payment fee—her likelihood of
paying that fee the next month drops by a third.
         When new account holders pay fees, most of them are not revealing a high willingness to
pay fees in exchange for services (like paying $30 for the service of being able to pay one’s bill
late). Instead, most new account holders are revealing that they have not yet optimized their


10
   Plott (1996) describes the ”discovered preferences hypothesis.“ The quality of decisions evolves with experience.
In stage 1, choices are noisy and prone to reflect errors. In stage 2, choices become systematic but still do not reflect
a complete strategic understanding of the environment. In stage 3, choices become stable and strategically rational.
11
   For this analysis, experienced account holders have at least four years of feedback.


                                                           12
account management skills. With time and experience, such optimization takes place, and fee
payments dramatically decline. It is this decline—learning—that differentiates mistakes from
price discrimination. It is therefore the asymptotic behavior that reflects the normative
preferences of the account holders.


2.4. Aggregated revealed preferences
        In some settings, agents make noisy, error-prone decisions. Despite these errors,
aggregate behavior contains some useful normative information. For example, consider the case
in which agent’s choices are equal to optimal behavior plus noise with a mean that is close to
zero. Then aggregate behavior reveals information about the central tendencies of normative
preferences. Nevertheless, aggregate behavior masks critical information about heterogeneity in
normative preferences. It would be inappropriate to mandate that people choose the average
behavior of their unconstrained peers.
        However, averages can nevertheless be useful normative tools. For instance, individual
agents may make better decisions if they are informed about the aggregate choices of their peers.
Aggregate revealed preferences may also serve as useful defaults.
        In some cases decision errors will not have a mean near zero. In such situations
inferences from a population’s central moments can lead to biased conclusions. The common
phenomenon of employer stock holding in employer sponsored retirement savings plans is likely
to be a manifestation of a non-zero-mean error.12


2.5. Self-reported preferences
        In many cases, decision-makers report that they know what they should do but
nevertheless fail to implement that action. For example, 70% of smokers in the U.S. report that
they want to quit. Moreover, 41% temporarily stopped smoking for a day or more during the
previous twelve months in an unsuccessful attempt to quit (Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, 2002). At the company discussed in Section 2.2, many workers said they planned on
saving more soon, but almost none of them actually did so. The preference workers revealed
through their actions contradicts their reported preference.


12
  Alternatively, significant holdings of employer stock could be modeled with zero mean decision errors (with a
high variance) and a behavioral constraint that prevents agents from shorting company stock.


                                                        13
        Historically, economists have rejected self-reports on the grounds that behavior has real
consequences and self-reports are (usually) only cheap talk. We agree that self-reports can’t be
taken at face value, but we also believe that they should not be ignored completely. In our view,
successful models of human decision-making should be able to explain both behavior and self-
reports. Like behavior, self-reports can be measured and modeled.13 Like behavior, self-reports
can be used to predict things that economists unambiguously care about (like future behavior).
        We recognize that self-reports are sometimes motivated by signaling, but behavior can
also be driven by signaling motives. Self-reports often reveal at least something about an agent’s
goals and values. Normative economics should allow self-reports to have some standing. It
would be strange to try to infer someone’s normative preferences without at least considering
their own stated views on the question.
        Finally, self-reports can be used to assess a consumer’s confidence that his behavioral
choices are optimal. Choi, Laibson, and Madrian (2006b) find that consumers who choose low-
fee index funds are more confident about their investment choice than consumers who choose
high-fee index funds. Hence, self-reports may provide a natural tool for discovering when
revealed preferences diverge most from normative preferences. In this view, economists should
be more willing to interpret revealed preferences as normative preferences when consumers
report that they are confident in their own choices.
        Finally, reported preferences have different contextual features than revealed preferences.
For example, four hours before a diner goes to a restaurant, you can ask her how many courses
she plans to eat. But it is difficult for the economist to measure the time t – 4 preference with
behavior.14 In this sense, reported preferences offer a far richer range of contexts than revealed
preferences. The measurement of revealed preference is essentially limited to the diner’s choices
at the restaurant. The diner’s reported preferences can be measured at any time and in any
context (e.g. when she is trying on a wedding dress or when she is inspecting the dessert tray at a
Michelin 3-star restaurant).




13
   For example, models of naïve quasi-hyperbolic agents (Akerlof, 1991; O’Donoghue and Rabin, 1999a, 1999b)
predict a gap between self-reported plans and actual subsequent behavior.
14
   There is, however, a new business that encourages people to write financially binding commitment contracts that
would reveal such in-advance preferences: http://stickk.com/


                                                        14
2.6. Informed preferences
        Informed opinions come in two forms. First, external observers may offer expert advice
(e.g., academics, consultants, financial planners, etc.). Second, decision-makers may themselves
gain more expertise when they receive formal training and education. When trained/educated
decision-makers make a choice, we call this an “informed preference.”
        In our view, both sources of expert opinion—external experts and educated consumers—
should play a role in the identification of normative preferences. This is particularly true when
exogenous education or training can be shown to systematically change people’s behavior.
Naturally, there are limits to such arguments, especially when “education” is little more than
marketing or brainwashing. However, at least some education is not overwhelmed by these
problems. When economists measure normative preferences, we should give disproportionate
weight to the actors who have substantial domain-relevant human capital and do not suffer from
conflicts of interest.
        There is an important limit to this line of argument. Years of formal domain-relevant
education are a good indicator of expertise. By contrast, small quantities of education may mean
very little. In laboratory and field experiments, small doses of education often do not influence
choice, particularly when the education is separated in time from the choice. For example, a two-
page survey that taught people to take advantage of the employer match did not lead non-
participants to enroll in their 401(k) plan (Choi, Laibson, and Madrian, 2005b), even though
failing to reap the full employer match represented a pure arbitrage loss for survey recipients.15
Likewise, workplace educational seminars (Choi, Laibson, Madrian, and Metrick, 2006),
simplified mutual fund fee disclosure forms (Choi, Laibson, and Madrian, 2006b, Beshears et al.,
2008), and financial catastrophes due to under-diversification that befall other investors (Choi,
Laibson, and Madrian, 2005a) have been shown to have very little impact on investment choices.
This body of research implies that decision-making skills are difficult and costly to acquire or
transmit.

3. Conclusion
        Once economists acknowledge a gap between revealed preferences and normative
preferences, it is natural to extend our models so we can model this gap. We have reviewed five

15
  The arbitrage opportunity exists for employees who are over age 59½. They face no penalty for withdrawing
funds from their 401(k) plan.


                                                      15
factors that tend to increase the gap between revealed and normative preferences: passive choice,
complexity, limited personal experience, third-party marketing, and intertemporal choice.
       We have also discussed six ways of measuring normative preferences when they deviate
from revealed preferences. Structural estimation specifies a positive model with a precise set of
economic and psychological motives (perhaps including non-Bayesian thinking and other
decision-making errors). This model is then estimated using data, and the resulting positive
preferences are mapped into normative preferences using normative axioms.
       Active decisions eliminate some biases generated by default regimes. Under an active
decision regime, individuals are required to explicitly state their preference without being
influenced by (or being able to rely on) a default option. In some circumstances, this preference
elicitation will be more reliable and more socially efficient than allowing consumers to express
their preferences by opting into or out of a pre-chosen default.
       In most stationary economic environments, initial choices are likely to be further from
normative optimality than choices made after many periods of experience. One should therefore
give more weight to asymptotic choices when attempting to infer normative preferences.
       When homogeneous individuals make noisy, error-prone decisions, their individual
decisions do not reflect normative preferences, but their aggregate behavior can. Hence,
normative preferences can sometimes be inferred from the central tendencies of aggregated
preferences.
       Self-reported preferences reveal something about an agent’s goals and values. Normative
economics should allow self-reports to have some standing. This is particularly true when self-
reports can be used to distinguish confident consumer decisions from decisions that were made
in a state of confusion.
       Informed opinions come in two forms. External observers may offer expert advice, and
decision-makers may themselves gain more expertise when they receive training or education.
When trained/educated decision-makers make a choice, we call this an informed preference.
Economists measuring normative preferences should give disproportionate weight to the actors
who are most likely to know what they are doing.
       This literature review leads naturally to the question of policymaking. Authors like
Hayek (1944) and Friedman (1962) have convincingly argued that governments are not likely to
successfully divine people’s preferences and make optimal choices on their behalf. We agree. If



                                                16
we had to choose between government paternalism or consumer autonomy, we would take the
latter without hesitation. Like most economists, we worry about the overconfidence, arrogance,
and corruption of powerful political decision-makers.
        In practice, however, we do not need to choose between the extremes of paternalism and
autonomy. For example, consider the role of the medical doctor (or the car mechanic). Doctors
are experts who advise their patients on decisions (and even make some decisions for their
patients). On the other hand, the doctor’s authority is only delegated authority. The patient or the
patient’s family is free to ignore the doctor’s advice. The doctor plays an advisory role to an
autonomous consumer.
        Like doctors, the government (and other influential social institutions, like employers) are
in a good position to advise autonomous agents without dictating to those agents. We believe
that such advisory roles are appropriate, though they need to be monitored to reduce the
likelihood of abuse. Governments could play a constructive advisory role if (1) their advice is
only given in circumstances when the many different measures of normative preferences
discussed above tend to coincide, and (2) their advice is offered without any obligation to obey
(e.g. an opt-out default).16 By contrast, in cases with ambiguous or contradictory measures of
normative preference, we side with Hayek and Friedman – government should withdraw.




16
  The Pension Protection Act of 2006 is an example of legislation that was based on many measures of normative
savings preferences that are congruent and jointly deviate from the revealed savings preferences of many
households.


                                                      17
References

Abadie, A., and S. Gay. 2006. “The Impact of Presumed Consent Legislation on Cadaveric
      Organ Donation: A Cross Country Study.” Journal of Health Economics 25, 599-620.

Afriat, S. N. 1967. “The Construction of Utility Functions from Expenditure Data.” International
        Economic Review 8, 67-77.

Agarwal, S., J. C. Driscoll, X. Gabaix, and D. Laibson. 2007. “Learning in the credit card
      market,” Harvard University Working Paper.

Ainslie, G. W. 1992. Picoeconomics: The Strategic Interaction of Successive Motivational States
       Within the Person. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Akerlof, G. A. 1991. “Procrastination and Obedience.” American Economic Review Papers and
       Proceedings 81, 1-19.

Anand, S., and A. Sen. 2000. “Human Development and Economic Sustainability.” World
      Development 28, 2029-2049.

Angeletos, G.-M., D. Laibson, A. Repetto, J. Tobacman, and S. Weinberg. 2001. “The
      Hyperbolic Consumption Model: Calibration, Simulation, and Empirical Evaluation.”
      Journal of Economic Perspectives 15(3), 47-68.

Ariely, D., G. Loewenstein, and D. Prelec. 2003. “‘Coherent Arbitrariness’: Stable Demand
        Curves Without Stable Preferences.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 118, 73-105.

Aura, S. 2001. “Does the Balance of Power Within a Family Matter? The Case of the Retirement
       Equity Act.” IGIER Working Paper 202.

Becker, G. S. and K. M. Murphy. 1993. “A Simple Theory of Advertising as a Good or Bad”
       Quarterly Journal of Economics

Bernheim, D. and A. Rangel. 2007. “Beyond Revealed Preference: Choice Theoretic
      Foundations for Behavioral Welfare Economics” Stanford mimeo.

Beshears, J., J. J. Choi, D. Laibson and B. C. Madrian. 2006a. “The Importance of Default
      Options for Retirement Savings Outcomes: Evidence from the United States,” NBER
      Working Paper No. 12009. Forthcoming in Stephen J. Kay and Tapen Sinhas, editors,
      Lessons from Pension Reform in the Americas. New York: Oxford University Press.

Beshears, J., J. J. Choi, D. Laibson and B. C. Madrian. 2006b. “Simplification and Saving,”
      NBER Working Paper No. 12659.

Beshears, J., J. J. Choi, D. Laibson and B. C. Madrian. 2008. “Simplified Disclosure,” Harvard
      mimeo.


                                               18
Borger, C., S. Smith, C. Truffer, S. Keehan, A. Sisko, J. Poisal, and M. K. Clemens. 2006.
       “Health Spending Projections Through 2015: Changes on the Horizon.” Health Affairs
       Web Exclusive 25, W61-W73.

Camerer, C., S. Issacaroff, G. Loewenstein, T. O’Donoghue, and M. Rabin. 2003. “Regulation
      for Conservatives: Behavioral Economics and the Case for ‘Asymmetric Paternalism,’”
      University of Pennsylvania Law Review, Vol 151, No. 3, January, 1211-1254.

Carroll, G., J. J. Choi, D. Laibson, B. C. Madrian, and A. Metrick. 2007. “Optimal Defaults and
        Active Decisions.” Harvard mimeo.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2002. “Cigarette Smoking Among Adults — United
       States, 2000.” Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 51(29), 642-645.

Choi, J. J., D. Laibson, and B. C. Madrian. 2005a. “Are Empowerment and Education Enough?
        Underdiversification in 401(k) Plans.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2005(2):
        151-198.

Choi, J. J., D. Laibson, and B. C. Madrian. 2005b. “$100 Bills on the Sidewalk: Suboptimal
        Saving in 401(k) Plans.” NBER Working Paper No. 11554.

Choi, J. J., D. Laibson, and B. C. Madrian. 2006a. “Reducing the Complexity Costs of 401(k)
        Participation Through Quick Enrollment.” NBER Working Paper 11979.

Choi, J. J., D. Laibson, and B. C. Madrian. 2006b. “Why Does the Law of One Price Fail? An
        Experiment on Index Mutual Funds.” NBER Working Paper 12261.

Choi, J. J., D. Laibson, B. C. Madrian, and A. Metrick. 2002. “Defined Contribution Pensions:
        Plan Rules, Participant Choices, and the Path of Least Resistance.” In J. Poterba, ed., Tax
        Policy and the Economy 16, Cambridge: MIT Press, 67-113.

Choi, J. J., D. Laibson, B. C. Madrian, and A. Metrick. 2003. “Optimal Defaults.” American
        Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 93, 180-185.

Choi, J. J., D. Laibson, B. C. Madrian, and A. Metrick. 2004. “For Better or for Worse: Default
        Effects and 401(k) Savings Behavior.” In D. A. Wise, ed., Perspectives on the Economics
        of Aging, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 81-121.

Choi, J. J., D. Laibson, B. C. Madrian, and A. Metrick. 2006. “Saving for Retirement on the Path
        of Least Resistance.” In E. McCaffrey and J. Slemrod, eds., Behavioral Public Finance:
        Toward a New Agenda, New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 304-351.

Cronqvist, H., and R. H. Thaler. 2004. “Design Choices in Privatized Social-Security Systems:
      Learning from the Swedish Experience.” American Economic Review Papers and
      Proceedings 94, 424-428.




                                                19
DellaVigna, S., and U. Malmendier. 2006. “Paying Not to Go to the Gym.” American Economic
      Review 96, 694-719.

Fishman, P. and D. G. Pope. 2007. “Punishment-Induced Deterrence: Evidence from the Video-
      Rental Market,” Wharton mimeo.

Friedman, M. 1962. Capitalism and Freedom. Phoenix Books: University of Chicago Press.

Gabaix, X., D. Laibson, and H. Li. 2005. “Extreme Value Theory and the Effects of Competition
      on Profits.” Harvard University Working Paper.

Gourinchas, P.-O., and J. A. Parker. 2002. “Consumption Over the Life Cycle.” Econometrica
      70, 47-89.

Harrod, R. F. 1948. Towards a Dynamic Economics. London: Macmillan.

Hayek, F. 1944. (republished 1994) The Road to Serfdom, 50th anniversary edition, University of
       Chicago Press.

Hewitt Associates. 2005. Survey Findings: Trends and Experiences in 401(k) Plans 2005.
       Lincolnshire, IL: Hewitt Associates.

Holden, K. C., and S. Nicholson. 1998. “Selection of a Joint-and-Survivor Pension.” University
      of Wisconsin Institute for Research on Poverty Discussion Paper 1175-98.

Hortaçsu, A, and C. Syverson. 2004. “Product Differentiation, Search Costs, and Competition in
       the Mutual Fund Industry: A Case Study of S&P 500 Index Funds.” Quarterly Journal of
       Economics 119, 403-456.

Houthakker, H. S. 1950. “Revealed Preference and the Utility Function.” Economica 17, 159-
      174.

Investment Company Institute, 2006 Investment Company Fact Book.

Iyengar, S. S., G. Huberman, W. Jiang. 2004. “How Much Choice Is Too Much?: Contributions
   to 401(k) Retirement Plans,” In Olivia Mitchell and Stephen Utkus, eds., Pension Design and
   Structure: New Lessons from Behavioral Finance (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press):
   pp. 83-96.

Iyengar, S. S., and E. Kamenica. 2006. “Choice Overload and Simplicity Seeking.” University of
       Chicago Graduate School of Business Working Paper.

John Hancock Financial Services. 2002. Eighth Defined Contribution Plan Survey: Insight into
      Participant Investment Knowledge & Behavior. Boston: John Hancock Financial
      Services.




                                              20
Johnson, E. J., and D. G. Goldstein. 2003. “Do Defaults Save Lives?” Science 302, 1338-1339.

Johnson, E. J., J. Hershey, J. Meszaros, and H. Kunreuther. 1993. “Framing, Probability
      Distortions, and Insurance Decisions.” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 7, 35-51.

Kahneman, D., P. P. Wakker, and R. Sarin. 1997. “Back to Bentham? Explorations of
     Experienced Utility.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 112, 375-405.

Laibson, D. 1997. “Golden Eggs and Hyperbolic Discounting.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
       112, 443-477.

Laibson, D., A. Repetto, and J. Tobacman. 1998. “Self-Control and Saving for Retirement”
       Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, No. 1, 91-196.

Laibson, D., A. Repetto, and J. Tobacman. 2006. “Estimating Discount Functions with
       Consumption Choices over the Lifecycle.” Harvard University Working Paper.

Listokin, Y. 2006. “What Do Corporate Default Rules and Menus Do? An Empirical
       Examination.” Yale Law and Economics Research Paper.

Little, I. M. D. 1949. “A Reformulation of the Theory of Consumer’s Behaviour.” Oxford
         Economic Papers 1, 90-99.

Loewenstein, G., and D. Prelec. 1992. “Anomalies in Intertemporal Choice: Evidence and an
      Interpretation.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 107, 573-597.

Luce, R. D. 1959. Individual Choice Behavior: A Theoretical Analysis. New York: John Wiley
       and Sons.

Madrian, B. C., and D. F. Shea. 2001. “The Power of Suggestion: Inertia in 401(k) Participation
      and Savings Behavior.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 116, 1149-1187.

McClure, S., J . Li, D . Tomlin, K . Cypert , L . Montague, P . Montague (2004) “Neural
      Correlates of Behavioral Preference for Culturally Familiar Drinks” Neuron, Volume
      44, Issue 2, 379–387.

McFadden, D. 1981. “Econometric Models of Probabilistic Choice.” In C. F. Manski and D.
     McFadden, eds., Structural Analysis of Discrete Data with Econometric Applications,
     Cambridge: MIT Press, 198-272.

Nordhaus, W. 2006. “The Stern Review on the Economics of Climate Change.” Yale
      University Mimeo.

O'Donoghue, T., and M. Rabin. 1999a. “Procrastination in Preparing for Retirement.” In H.
      Aaron, ed., Behavioral Dimensions of Retirement Economics, Washington D.C.:
      Brookings Institution Press, 125-156.


                                              21
O'Donoghue, T., and M. Rabin. 1999b. “Doing It Now or Later.” American Economic
      Review 89, 103-124.

Park, C. W., S. Y. Jun, and D. J. MacInnis. 2000. “Choosing What I Want Versus Rejecting
       What I Do Not Want: An Application of Decision Framing to Product Option Choice
       Decisions.” Journal of Marketing Research 37, 187-202.

Phelps, E. S., and R. A. Pollak. 1968. “On Second-Best National Saving and Game-Equilibrium
       Growth.” Review of Economic Studies 35, 185-199.

Pigou, A. C. 1932. The Economics of Welfare. London: Macmillan.

Plott, C. R. 1996. “Rational Individual Behavior in Markets and Social Choice Processes: The
        Discovered Preference Hypothesis.” In K. Arrow, E. Colombatto, M. Perlaman, and C.
        Schmidt, eds., The Rational Foundations of Economic Behavior, New York: St. Martin’s
        Press, 225-250.

Ramsey, F. P. 1928. “A Mathematical Theory of Saving.” Economic Journal 38, 543-559.

Samuelson, P. A. 1938. “A Note on the Pure Theory of Consumer’s Behaviour.” Economica 5,
      61-71.

Samuelson, P. A. 1948. “Consumption Theory in Terms of Revealed Preference.” Economica 15,
      243-253.

Shafir, E., I. Simonson, and A. Tversky. 1993. “Reason-Based Choice.” Cognition 49, 11-36.

Solow, R. M. 1974. “The Economics of Resources or the Resources of Economics.” American
       Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 64, 1-14.

Stern, N. 2006. “Stern Review on the Economics of Climate Change.” HM Treasury.

Thaler, R. and C. Sunstein. 2008. Nudge: Improving Decisions About Health, Wealth, and
        Happiness Yale University Press.

U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. 2005. National Compensation Survey: Employee Benefits in
       Private Industry in the United States, 2003. http://www.bls.gov/ncs/ebs/sp/ebbl0021.pdf
       (accessed January 15, 2007).




                                              22
