                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                ANALYSIS OF U.S. GREENHOUSE GAS TAX PROPOSALS

                                         Gilbert E. Metcalf
                                          Sergey Paltsev
                                            John Reilly
                                           Henry Jacoby
                                         Jennifer F. Holak

                                       Working Paper 13980
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w13980


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2008




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Gilbert E. Metcalf, Sergey Paltsev, John Reilly, Henry Jacoby, and Jennifer F. Holak. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Analysis of U.S. Greenhouse Gas Tax Proposals
Gilbert E. Metcalf, Sergey Paltsev, John Reilly, Henry Jacoby, and Jennifer F. Holak
NBER Working Paper No. 13980
April 2008
JEL No. H23,Q54

                                              ABSTRACT

The U.S. Congress is considering a set of bills designed to limit the nation's greenhouse gas (GHG)
emissions. This paper complements the analysis by Paltsev et al. (2007) of cap-and-trade bills and
applies the MIT Emissions Prediction and Policy Analysis (EPPA) model to carry out an analysis of
the tax proposals. Several lessons emerge from this analysis. First, a low starting tax rate combined
with a low rate of growth in the tax rate will not reduce emissions significantly. Second, the costs
of GHG reductions are reduced with the inclusion of non-CO2 gases in the carbon tax scheme. Third,
welfare costs of the policies can be affected by the rate of growth of the tax, even after controlling
for cumulative emissions. Fourth, a carbon tax -- like any form of carbon pricing -- is regressive. However,
general equilibrium considerations suggest that the short-run measured regressivity may be overstated.
Additionally, the regressivity can be offset with a carefully designed rebate of some or all of the revenue.
Finally, the carbon tax bills that have been proposed or submitted are for the most part comparable
to many of the carbon cap-and-trade proposals that have been suggested. Thus the choice between
a carbon tax and cap-and-trade system can be made on the basis of considerations other than their
effectiveness at reducing emissions over some control period.


Gilbert E. Metcalf                                   Henry Jacoby
Department of Economics                              Joint Program on the Science
Tufts University                                     and Policy of Global Change
Medford, MA 02155                                    Massachusetts Institute of Technology
and NBER                                             1 Amherst St. (Bldg. E40)
gilbert.metcalf@tufts.edu                            Cambridge, MA 02139
                                                     hjacoby@MIT.EDU
Sergey Paltsev
Joint Program on the Science                         Jennifer F. Holak
and Policy of Global change                          Joint Program on the Science
Massachusetts Institute of Technology                and Policy of Global Change
1 Amherst St. (Bldg. E40)                            Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139                                  1 Amherst St. (Bldg. E40)
paltsev@MIT.EDU                                      Cambridge, MA, 02138
                                                     holak@mit.edu
John Reilly
Joint Program on the Science
and Policy of Global Change
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
1 Amherst St. (Bldg. E40)
Cambridge, MA 02139
jreilly@mit.edu
                                    Analysis of U.S. Greenhouse Gas Tax Proposals
      Gilbert Metcalf*§, Sergey Paltsev*, John Reilly*, Henry Jacoby* and Jennifer Holak*

                                                                        Abstract
     The U.S. Congress is considering a set of bills designed to limit the nation’s greenhouse gas (GHG)
     emissions. Several of these proposals call for a cap-and-trade system; others propose an emissions tax.
     This paper complements the analysis by Paltsev et al. (2007) of cap-and-trade bills and applies the MIT
     Emissions Prediction and Policy Analysis (EPPA) model to carry out an analysis of the tax proposals.
     Several lessons emerge from this analysis. First, a low starting tax rate combined with a low rate of
     growth in the tax rate will not reduce emissions significantly. Second, the costs of GHG reductions are
     reduced with the inclusion of non-CO2 gases in the carbon tax scheme. The costs of the Larson plan, for
     example, fall by 20 percent with inclusion of the other GHGs. Third, welfare costs of the policies can be
     affected by the rate of growth of the tax, even after controlling for cumulative emissions. Fourth, a
     carbon tax – like any form of carbon pricing – is regressive. However, general equilibrium
     considerations suggest that the short-run measured regressivity may be overstated. A portion of the
     carbon tax is passed back to workers, owners of equity, and resource owners. To the extent that
     relatively wealthy resource and equity owners bear some fraction of the tax burden, the regressivity will
     be reduced. Additionally, the regressivity can be offset with a carefully designed rebate of some or all of
     the revenue. Finally, the carbon tax bills that have been proposed or submitted are for the most part
     comparable to many of the carbon cap-and-trade proposals that have been suggested. Thus the choice
     between a carbon tax and cap-and-trade system can be made on the basis of considerations other than
     their effectiveness at reducing emissions over some control period. Either approach (or some hybrid of
     the two approaches) can be equally effective at reducing GHG emissions in the United States.

                                                                        Contents
      1. INTRODUCTION......................................................................................................................2
      2. PRICE INSTRUMENTS FOR GHG MITIGATION ................................................................2
          2.1     Efficiency......................................................................................................................3
          2.2     Political Feasibility .......................................................................................................4
          2.3     Revenue Generation......................................................................................................5
          2.4     Incentives for Rent-Seeking Activity............................................................................5
          2.5     Administrative Cost ......................................................................................................6
      3. PROVISIONS OF U.S. TAX PROPOSALS .............................................................................7
          3.1     Proposed Tax System Design........................................................................................7
      4. ANALYSIS METHOD............................................................................................................11
          4.1     The Emissions Prediction and Policy Analysis (EPPA) Model ..................................11
          4.2 Assumptions about External Conditions ..........................................................................13
      5. TAX POLICY COST, EFFECTIVENESS AND ENERGY MARKET EFFECTS ................14
          5.1     Emissions Reductions and Welfare Effects ................................................................14
          5.2     Energy Market Effects ................................................................................................16
          5.3     Alternative Versions of the Tax Proposals..................................................................22
              5.3.1 Advantages of All-GHG Mitigation Policies..........................................................22
              5.3.2 Tax Rate Growth......................................................................................................25
          5.4 Comparison of the Congressional Tax and Cap-and-Trade Proposals ..........................29
      6. REVENUE AND DISTRIBUTION ........................................................................................31
          6.1     Theory of Tax Incidence .............................................................................................32
          6.2     A Distributional Analysis............................................................................................32
      7. CONCLUSION........................................................................................................................38
      8. REFERENCES.........................................................................................................................39
      APPENDIX: DETAILS OF SIMULATION RESULTS .............................................................39

* Joint Program on the Science and Policy of Global Change, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
§
  Department of Economics, Tufts University and National Bureau of Economic Research


                                                                                 1
1. INTRODUCTION
   Legislative proposals to impose price penalties on U.S. greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions fall
into two categories: cap-and-trade systems and emissions taxes. Such economic-incentive-based
policies can be highly effective in achieving pollution abatement, and they have desirable
efficiency characteristics compared to so-called “command-and-control” instruments that
mandate investment in particular technologies or specify design standards that apply uniformly
across emitters. Ample evidence of the efficacy of price-based approaches is provided by U.S.
experience with cap-and-trade programs, especially the SO2 program, and some measure to
impose a price penalty on GHG emissions is likely an essential part of any U.S. effort to reduce
emissions.
   Either of these approaches – cap-and-trade or tax – could yield a target level of abatement,
and in the process they would have similar economic consequences, particularly considering that
either can be adjusted over time. There are nonetheless advantages and disadvantages of each
approach which are important inputs to discussion of the choice of approach. We review these
distinguishing characteristics in Section 2. In Section 3, we discuss issues in the design and
implementation of an emissions tax and lay out the features of the three bills under consideration
now in the U.S. Congress. These include one submitted by Representative Larson, one by
Representatives Stark and McDermott, and a third now in draft form by Representative Dingell.
As in the analysis of cap-and-trade proposals by Paltsev, et al. (2007), the MIT Emissions
Prediction and Policy Analysis (EPPA) model is applied to the analysis, and a brief description
of this facility is provided in Section 4.
   In Section 5 we present model results for the emissions reductions yielded by these proposals
along with their economic cost and effects on energy markets. Also illustrated there are the
effects of possible modifications of these bills, such as extension from their CO2 focus to
coverage of non-CO2 GHGs and adjustments in the tax profile over time. Then, as one concern
with such pricing proposals is their distributional consequences, in Section 6 we explore the
impacts of these tax plans by income class. Finally, in Section 7 we provide some conclusions to
be drawn from the analysis.
2. PRICE INSTRUMENTS FOR GHG MITIGATION
    In a cap-and-trade system a government agency sets the number of emissions allowances, and
trading among them determines their price.1 Firms make abatement decisions based on the
relative cost of purchasing (or not selling) allowances compared to the cost of abatement. Even if
allowances are given for free, firms face an opportunity cost – the price they could sell them for
in the market – if they choose to emit greenhouse gases. Under a tax approach the government
sets the emissions price directly, and firms respond through decisions to pay the tax or abate.
Under either policy emitters will tend to abate to the point where the marginal cost of emissions
reduction is equal to the emissions price.

1
    For an introduction to U.S. experience with cap-and-trade systems and issues in their application to greenhouse
      gases see Ellerman, Joskow and Harrison (2003).


                                                             2
   Thus far nations have only limited experience with either taxes or cap-and-trade systems for
control of greenhouse gases. Finland enacted the first GHG tax in 1990. It was followed by
Sweden and Norway in 1991 (Brannlund and Gren, 1999) and Denmark in 1992. Some of these
taxes evolved to become combined GHG-energy taxes as is discussed in Anderson and Lohof
(1997). Quebec recently passed a GHG tax (Dougherty, 2007) and British Columbia has
recently introduced a carbon tax (Fowlie and Anderson, 2008). In addition to these national-
level initiatives, the European Union has embraced the cap-and-trade approach through its
Emissions Trading Scheme (ETS) to meet its obligations under the Kyoto Protocol2 and other
nations are considering similar systems.
   It is important to point out that there is not a stark either-or choice between tradable
allowances and taxes. Hybrid instruments can be constructed, for example the addition of a
safety valve to a cap-and-trade system where the government stands ready to sell permits at a
fixed price thereby preventing permit prices from exceeding this level. With a safety valve, a
cap-and-trade system works as a constraint on emissions only so long as the permit price is
below the safety level; above that level the system works like a tax. Also, to the degree that
allocations are auctioned rather than freely distributed, a cap-and-trade system has many
characteristics of a tax. Still, even though either instrument, or various hybrids, can be effective
at pricing GHGs, the pure versions differ in important respects.

    2.1 Efficiency
   An emissions tax and a cap-and-trade system can be designed to have equivalent efficiency
effects so long as there is no uncertainty in the marginal costs of abatement. In the presence of
uncertainty, however, the two systems can differ. Weitzman (1974) explores conditions under
which a tax provides higher or lower expected social benefits than a cap-and-trade system in a
world with uncertainty.3 His analysis demonstrates the importance of the relative slopes of
marginal damages and abatement costs in choosing the optimal instrument.
   Weitzman’s analysis needs some modification in the case of GHGs, because marginal
abatement costs are a function of the flow of emissions, whereas marginal damages are a
function of the stock of gases in the atmosphere. Several economists have modified Weitzman’s
model to allow for the stock nature of GHGs. While the analysis is more complicated and
involves more than simply the relative slopes of marginal abatement and damage curves, the
analyses consistently find that taxes dominate cap-and-trade systems for a broad range of
parameter values consistent with scientific understanding of the global warming problem.4
Regardless of these efficiency arguments, some advocates prefer a system with a quantitative cap
out of a desire to be sure of some prescribed environmental gain.


2
  A description and early assessment of the ETS system may be found in Buchner, Carraro and Ellerman (2006).
3
  The relative advantage of price versus quantity instruments depends on uncertainty in the marginal abatement cost
    curve only. Uncertainty over the marginal damages of emissions affects the net benefits of an emissions control
    policy but does not affect the relative superiority of one policy instrument over another.
4
   See Hoel and Karp (2002), Newell and Pizer (2003), and Karp and Zhang (2005).


                                                           3
   In practice, of course, the efficiency difference among approaches may be smaller than these
model estimates because in either case the level of policy stringency can be adjusted as evidence
on the cost of abatement is revealed, and to the extent that features such as banking and
borrowing allow smoothing of abatement among time periods. By the same token, the difference
in certainty of emissions reduction is also easily overstated because a cap may be relaxed if
prices rise too high, and tax plans can be tightened in the face of underachievement.
   Another potential difference among the systems arises in application to U.S. electric utilities,
some of which operate in deregulated markets while others remain subject to state-level rate
regulation.5 In a cap-and-trade system with freely distributed permits it is not clear to what
degree regulators will allow utilities to pass the price of emissions allowances (i.e., their
opportunity cost) through to customers if the permits have been given without charge. If they do
not, consumers will face no incentive to reduce electricity consumption, thereby forcing more of
the abatement elsewhere at higher cost. In the case of an emissions tax this issue is avoided
because the incentive is uniform across utilities under various levels of regulation.6

    2.2 Political Feasibility
   It is argued that a major advantage of cap-and-trade over an emissions tax is its political
feasibility. It is noted, for example, that the EU Emissions Trading System (ETS) is a
demonstration that a cap-and-trade system can be implemented whereas an effort in the 1990s to
implement an EU-wide GHG tax was a failure. A key factor in this EU experience was the fact
that a decision to implement a tax required unanimity among EU members whereas the ETS
required only majority approval. Political feasibility may thus depend in part on the specific
features of different political systems. It is important to keep this factor in mind when
considering instrument viability in the United States.
   At first glance, U.S. experience also appears to support the argument that a cap-and-trade
system is the more likely to be politically feasible. First, the U.S. has successfully implemented
several cap-and-trade systems, e.g., for NOx emissions in some regions and for sulfur dioxide
emissions from electric utilities on a national basis.7 Second, the most recent effort to employ a
tax instrument in this context was the BTU tax proposed by President Clinton in 1994. While the
BTU tax passed the House, it failed in the Senate and was ultimately replaced by a 4.3¢ per
gallon increase in the federal motor vehicle fuels tax, justified as part of a deficit reduction
package.



5
  Joskow (2006) provides a current overview of the state of competition in electricity markets.
6
   This is only a concern if permits are allocated to electric utilities. If permits are given further upstream (i.e. to
    coal mines or natural gas gathering points), then it is irrelevant whether electric utilities are regulated or not. The
    cost of permits would be included in the price of fuel purchased by regulated utilities and would presumably be
    allowed as part of the cost recovery in the rate-making process.
7
  See Ellerman et al. (2000) for a description and assessment of the sulfur program, and Ellerman, Joskow and
    Harrison (2003) for a review of the lessons for greenhouse gas control of previous U.S. experience with these
    systems.


                                                              4
   Analysis of why the Clinton tax proposal failed is beyond the scope of this paper, but one
factor is that a BTU tax is not an efficient penalty on CO2 or GHGs because of the differences in
emissions among fuels per heat unit. The tax did not have a sharply articulated focus but rather
was a compromise between a carbon tax to address global warming and a broad-based energy
tax. A tax based on carbon content would have provided incentives to substitute natural gas for
coal, and the tax base was designed to win support from coal state legislators. The lack of a
focus and the fundamental compromise embedded in the tax design made it difficult to fend off
requests for exemptions and other loopholes. Moreover, the scientific case that climate change is
a serious threat has become much more compelling in the past decade. Also, while the Clinton
Administration was not successful with the BTU tax, it also made no progress in Congress with
the idea of a cap-and-trade system. It may well be that, in a changed political climate motivated
by growing concern about climate change, the opposition to a tax instrument will be lower.

      2.3 Revenue Generation
   A GHG tax would raise revenue that could be used to lower other taxes, reduce the federal
deficit or finance new government spending. A cap-and-trade system can raise revenue if the
government auctions the permits rather than giving them away. While there is precedent in the
U.S. for auctioning valuable rights (e.g., broadcast spectrum, offshore oil leases), experience to
date with cap-and-trade programs has been that the permits are given to regulated entities for
free. However, there appears to be a growing willingness to auction allowances if the trend in
proposed cap-and-trade legislation is evidence, but the degree to which such provisions will
survive in any final legislation remains to be seen. Similarly, in its 2005-07 trial period the EU
ETS allocated all allowances for free, but small percentages of auctioning are planned in some
EU parties in the 2008-2012 Kyoto commitment period. Whether a GHG tax or cap-and-trade
system with auctioning is chosen, a sizable economic literature demonstrates a “double-
dividend” that can be gained from a revenue-raising instrument if the funds collected are used to
lower other distorting taxes, such as those on labor and capital.8

      2.4 Incentives for Rent-Seeking Activity
   One reason for the perceived political advantage of cap-and-trade systems is the historic
granting of free permits to the regulated entities, usually industrial and commercial firms.
Permits are valuable assets and their allocation becomes a tool to help build support for the
program. This creates incentives for industries to lobby to receive a large share of these assets.
Commonly referred to as rent seeking, expenditure of resources to obtain valuable assets from
governments is a socially wasteful activity and can lead to particularly inefficient outcomes. In
addition, free distribution of allowances to entities that are the point of accounting and regulation
can create an inequitable outcome because some firms will receive a valuable asset for free while

8
    See Goulder (1995) for a discussion of double-dividends and Fullerton and Metcalf (1998) for a history of this
      literature. Gurgel et al. (2007) provide an estimate of this effect using a forward-looking version of the MIT
      EPPA model.


                                                              5
passing most of the cost of abatement on to downstream fuel or electricity users. To the degree
the distributional impacts of the policy are a concern, the design of allowance allocation under a
cap-and-trade system requires detailed consideration of who actually bears the economic burden
of the policy, not who happens to be given the task of turning in allowances or even who is
directly responsible for abating emissions.
   Experience in the EU ETS suggests that rent seeking can lead to restrictions on permits that
may undermine some of their efficiency characteristics. For example, the ETS retains some
allowances for new entrants, an incentive to create a new entity that would be eligible for some
of these assets. It also requires that firms return allowances if an entire facility shuts down. The
cheapest abatement option may be to simply shut down some of the highest emitting facilities,
but this rule in the ETS creates an incentive to keep them operating at a low level, or to install
more expensive abatement technology so that they do not have turn back in valuable allowances.
These rules lead firms in these particular situations to equate the marginal cost of abatement to
the price of emissions plus the value of the expected additional allocation of allowances or the
value of all of the allowances they would have to turn in if they shut down. This result violates
the efficiency criteria that all firms face the same marginal cost of abatement.
   Another difficult aspect of allocation is what happens over time as adjustments are made to
the level of allowances available to entities. The rent-seeking behavior of firms in getting
allowances leads them to formulate their case on the basis of “need”. There is thus a strong
tendency to distribute allowances in some proportion to the level of emissions of firms. If
emissions levels continue to be a basis for allocating new allowances in succeeding periods, the
incentive to abate emissions is partly undermined because doing so might mean a lower
allocation of allowances in the future.
   Though competing interests may seek earmarks of expected revenue, a GHG tax does not
create the same type of valuable financial asset to be allocated, as does a cap-and-trade system.
While this may raise the political barrier to enacting a tax, it also may avoid an industry give-
away that is weakly connected to the points where the costs will be felt. A concern with carbon
taxes that has been frequently raised is that industry concessions will be required to obtain
political support for carbon pricing and that providing free permits is more efficient than
excluding industries from a tax. This is unquestionably true, but exclusion is not the only way
concessions can be provided to the energy sector through a carbon tax. One alternative approach
would be to provide an emissions floor similar to the health spending deduction in the personal
income tax. An emissions floor would only levy a carbon tax on emissions above a given floor
(e.g., 3 percent of a three year moving average of emissions).

   2.5 Administrative Cost
   The U.S. already has a well-developed administrative structure to collect taxes. Levying the
tax at an upstream level on a relatively small number of firms, all of which already pay taxes,
would reduce the administrative and compliance costs of the tax considerably. The farther
downstream the implementation, the greater the implementation cost. In contrast, a new structure


                                                   6
would be needed if a cap-and-trade system were put in place. Moreover, benchmarking would
be required for a cap-and-trade system if permits were allocated on the basis of historic
emissions – as was done with the U.S. Acid Rain Program and the EU ETS.
   Finally, if the European experience is followed and a downstream cap-and-trade program put
in place, administrative complexity would rise considerably. In fact, the ETS exempts emitters
of less than 10,000 tons of CO2 per year and thereby only covers about 50% of the EUs
emissions. The administrative costs of the U.S. Acid Rain Program are likely closer to those of
an upstream GHG tax than a downstream trading system such as the EU ETS. Some of the cap-
and-trade proposals in the U.S. have gone upstream for transportation fuels and so the coverage
rises to 85%. Since fuel sales are well recorded and already taxed, there does not appear to be
much reason that nearly 100% of emissions of carbon dioxide from fossil fuel combustion could
not be covered with little administrative burden. The Acid Rain program, a very successful cap-
and-trade system, was limited to a small number of large electric utilities in the United States,
and other sources of SO2, from transportation fuels for example, were regulated through other
measures.
3. PROVISIONS OF U.S. TAX PROPOSALS
   The economic and environmental effects of an emissions tax depend on its features within a
particular country, and also on activities in other countries through the influence of trade in
energy, non-energy goods and emissions allowances.

   3.1 Proposed Tax System Design
    Table 1 summarizes key features of the three tax proposals studied here. The Dingell proposal
is still in draft, but Larson’s plan has been filed as H.R. 3416 and the one from Stark and
McDermott is numbered H.R. 2069. Features of such tax systems that are of importance in
determining performance and cost are not fully defined in all cases, requiring additional
assumptions on our part. Later we explore some possible extensions of these proposals.
    Tax Rates. Emissions tax legislation will set a schedule of tax rates over time. For all three
proposals the tax is on CO2 only. As shown in table, the Larson and Stark-McDermott proposals
impose the tax beginning in 2008. This target seems unlikely given the probable time lags in the
political process, so we assume all proposals go into effect in 2012, which is the start year in the
Dingell draft. Because the EPPA model operates every 5 years, the first period of modeled tax
effect is 2015. The proposals involve different initial tax rates, and they also differ in the rules
for adjusting that rate over time and for inflation. With the assumption of a 2012 start for all
proposals, the resulting time profile of the CO2 taxes is shown in Table 2, with the levels
illustrated in Figure 1. They range from a constant $14 per ton CO2 under the Dingell proposal
to a tax rising to $561 per ton under provisions of the Larson Bill.




                                                  7
                   Table 1. Congressional Bills.

                   Dingell Draft 2007                                                  Larson 2007                                                  Stark-McDermott 2007
Bill Number/                                                                            H.R. 3416; America's Energy Security Trust Fund Act         H.R. 2069; Save Our Climate Act of 2007
Name                                                                                   of 2007
Basic              Carbon tax (on just carbon) and gasoline tax                        Carbon tax (on just carbon)                                  Carbon tax (on just carbon)
Framework

Tax                $50/ton C and $0.50/gallon of gasoline, no increase in              Starting in 2008: $15/ton CO2, increase at 10% real          Starting in 2008: $10/ton C, increase by $10 nominal
                   tax rates over time                                                 annually                                                     annually; tax is frozen when CO2 emissions reach 20% of
                                                                                                                                                    1990 levels
Additional         • Carbon tax and gasoline tax phased in over 5 years and            • Carbon tax covers coal (including lignite and peat),       • Carbon tax covers coal (including lignite and peat),
Details            then adjusted for inflation                                         petroleum and any petroleum product, and natural gas         petroleum and any petroleum product, and natural gas which
                   • Carbon tax covers coal (including lignite and peat),              which is extracted, produced, or manufactured in the         is extracted, produced, or manufactured in the U.S. or entered
                   petroleum and any petroleum product, and natural gas                U.S. or entered into the U.S. for consumption, use, or       into the U.S. for consumption, use, or warehousing
                   • Gasoline tax covers gas, jet fuel, kerosene (petroleum            warehousing                                                  • No tax on the sale or exchange of taxable fuel for export or
                   based), etc. Exemption for diesel and biofuels that do              • Tax rate increase includes a cost of living adjustment     for deposit in the Strategic Petroleum Reserve
                   not contain petroleum                                               • No tax on the sale of taxable substances for export        •Provisions to ensure a substance is only taxed once, and
                                                                                       •Provisions to ensure a substance is only taxed once, and    credits or refunds (without interest) for previously taxed
                                                                                       credits or refunds (without interest) for previously taxed   substances used to make another taxable substance
                                                                                       substances used to make another taxable substance
Provisions                                                                             • It is the sense of Congress that the major GHG
Related to                                                                             emitting countries will join with the U.S. in reducing
Foreign                                                                                GHG emissions
Reductions
Credit                                                                                 • Credit or refund (without interest) for sequestered        • Credit or refund (without interest) for embedded or
Provisions                                                                             carbon and qualified offset projects in the U.S.             sequestered carbon

Other              • Revenue from carbon tax goes to Medicare and Social               • America's Energy Security Trust Fund: revenue from         • Use of revenue from tax undetermined
Features           Security, universal healthcare (upon passage), SCHIP,               tax goes to:                                                 •A study shall be conducted every 5 years on the
                   conservation, renewable energy R&D, and Low Income                   (1) tax credit for R&D and investment in clean energy       environmental, economic, and revenue impacts of the tax
                   Home Energy Assistance Program                                      technology (1/6 of fund or $10 billion, whichever is
                   • Revenue from gas tax goes to highway trust fund (40%              less),
                   for mass transit, 60 % for roads)                                   (2) affected industry transition assistance (portion of
                   • Revenue from tax on jet fuel goes to airport and airway           funds from 2008, declines annually),
                   trust fund                                                          (3) payroll tax relief (remaining funds)
                   • Bill includes a phase out of the mortgage interest                • Study shall be conducted on the best methods to assess
                   deduction on large homes. Revenue will be used to                   and collect a tax on non-carbon GHGs
                   expand the Earned Income Tax Credit
* Dingell Proposal: http://www.house.gov/dingell/carbonTaxSummary.shtml
* Larson Proposal: U.S. House of Representatives, H.R. 3416
* Stark Proposal: U.S. House of Representatives, H.R. 2069
Note: Larson and Stark proposals start in 2008, but for our runs we started them in 2012.



                                                                                                                      8
Table 2. Carbon Tax Rates.
               CO2-e Price ($/tCO2-e)
            Dingell                      Stark       Larson
2015          14                          10           20
2020          14                          23           32
2025          14                          34           52
2030          14                          43           83
2035          14                          51          134
2040          14                          58          216
2045          14                          64          348
2050          14                          69          561


                                   600
                                            CO2-e Prices
                                   500
                Price ($/tCO2-e)




                                   400           Dingell

                                   300           Stark
                                                 Larson
                                   200

                                   100

                                    0
                                     2015    2020        2025   2030       2035   2040   2045   2050
                                                                   Year

                                    Figure 1. Carbon Tax Rates in the Core Scenarios.

    Note also that the Dingell proposal contains a separate $0.50 tax on gasoline, imposed
simultaneously with the tax on CO2 emissions. It is held constant in real terms over time.
    In Section 5 we also simulate cases that are modifications of the particular patterns in these
bills to explore other regions of the possible space of tax activity and allow a comparison with
results from the cap-and-trade analysis by Paltsev, et al. (2007). In order to compare the relative
stringency of these GHG pricing systems, both among the emissions tax proposals and with the
cap-and-trade bills, we estimate the cumulative emissions between 2012, when the tax is
assumed to go into effect, and 2050 which is the end of the simulation period.
    Point of Taxation. An emissions tax may be imposed either at an upstream level (mines, oil
and gas wells), midstream (electric-generating plants and refineries) or downstream (energy
using industries). The primary effect of this choice is to determine which entities must comply
with the tax by monitoring emissions, maintaining records, and making tax payments. The direct
cost of emissions abatement may not be incurred at this stage in the production process, and how
much of the direct mitigation cost is passed forward to consumers is not a choice made by firms
but rather depends on the underlying elasticities of supply and demand for the goods and services
being produced.


                                                                       9
   For example, if one point of tax collection is at oil refineries, emissions abatement and
associated cost would come mainly from reductions in fuel use downstream. The abatement
would include additional spending for more efficient vehicles, heating equipment and alternative
fuels, or the sacrifice of amenities that increase fuel consumption (e.g., reducing the use of
larger, more powerful vehicles). Refiners would bear any cost of abatement at their facilities, but
would pass the bulk of the cost on to petroleum product consumers. Similarly, a chemical
company will make essentially the same decisions about product line and equipment choices
whether it pays a separate natural gas price along with taxes for the emissions released, or simply
pays a higher fuel price that includes the tax cost premium.
   The fact that cost incidence is determined by market forces then frees-up policy makers to
levy the tax at the stage of production where administrative costs are lowest. The current texts of
these bills are not specific about points of tax accounting and collection, so in the analysis below
we assume that the tax is applied upstream where administrative costs are minimized.
   Coverage by Sector and Greenhouse Gas. All three of the current proposals limit the tax to
CO2, omitting the other greenhouse gases (CH4, N2O and the industrial gases). In the analysis
below we not only explore the CO2-only cases, but also consider the implications of expanding
the tax to cover non-CO2 greenhouse gases. Specifically, we examine the cost reduction that
could be gained by extending the tax to all GHGs while maintaining the same emissions result as
under a CO2-only tax.
   A second design issue is the sector coverage. For example, a tax comparable in coverage to
the EU ETS would cover electric utilities and heavy industry only. All three of the current
proposals apply the tax to U.S. CO2 from all fossil fuel use. The tax does not apply, however, to
non-fossil sources such as processing emissions from the cement industry, and it exempts
emissions embodied in fuels that are exported. The proposed tax also does not apply to land-use
emissions from agriculture or forestry, which are also generally not included among the capped
sources in cap-and-trade proposals. We match this coverage in the simulations, taxing energy use
on the basis of carbon content while excluding exported fuels, land use sinks, and processing
emissions.
   Application of Tax Revenue. Proposals have been made in the past to rebate emissions tax
revenues on a per capita basis.9 Alternatively, the revenue can be used to lower other taxes to
achieve distributional and/or efficiency goals.10 One possible application of these funds is the
reduction of taxes either on capital (corporate income, dividends or capital gains) or labor
(earned income). Existing taxes distort choices in the economy and reducing them may lower
this distorting effect and increase economic activity, an effect termed a “double dividend”
because the GHG policy would yield not only an environmental dividend but also an economic
one. There is a possibility that the efficiency improvements from tax reduction could completely

9
     See, for example, the U.S. Sky Trust Proposal at http://www.usskytrust.org.
10
     Metcalf (2007) analyzes an emissions tax with revenue recycling to achieve distributional goals, and Gurgel et al.
      (2007) explore the double-dividend effect of recycling of auctioned permits in a cap-and-trade system to labor
      and capital taxes.


                                                             10
offset the direct cost of the abatement policy, an outcome called a “strong” double dividend. The
case where the emission control cost is reduced but not completely offset by revenue recycling
has been referred to as a “weak” double dividend. It is also possible if energy is highly taxed that
revenue recycling can actually reduce economic activity (see Metcalf, Babiker and Reilly, 2004),
but this outcome is unlikely in the U.S. where energy is only lightly taxed.
   As summarized in Table 1, the three current proposals would spread the revenues across a
wide variety of applications from lowering Social Security taxes to various forms of fuel
assistance and expenditure programs. In the simulations below no attempt is made to model the
effect of these specific provisions and the analysis assumes that revenues are redistributed in a
lump-sum manner to the modeled consumer in the EPPA representation of the U.S. economy.
While the amount of revenue raised through these tax proposals differs from the revenue raised
in cap-and-trade proposals, tax revenues raise the same issues as the recycling of allowance
auction revenue. For an analysis of this issue see Gurgel et al. (2007).
   Provision for Tax Credits. However the system is defined in terms of sectors and gases, it
may provide for the meeting of the tax obligation with allowances gained from both inside and
outside the system. Tax credits are explicitly provided in the Stark and Larson Bills for carbon
capture and storage activities. Two of the proposals provide for domestic credits such as those
that might be defined for land-use and forestry projects, but they make no mention of crediting of
reductions achieved in non-U.S. systems such as the Kyoto-sanctioned Clean Development
Mechanism (CDM) or other trading systems such as the EU Emission Trading Scheme. These
types of credits are not included in the simulations below.
4. ANALYSIS METHOD

      4.1 The Emissions Prediction and Policy Analysis (EPPA) Model
   To assess costs and energy system implications of an emissions tax we apply the MIT
Emissions Prediction and Policy Analysis (EPPA) model. It is the same version of the model
described in Paltsev, et al. (2007), so we only briefly describe its main features here. The
standard version of the EPPA model is a multi-region, multi-sector recursive-dynamic
representation of the global economy (Paltsev et al., 2005). In a recursive-dynamic solution
economic actors are modeled as having “myopic” expectations.11 This assumption means that
current period investment, savings, and consumption decisions are made on the basis of current
period prices. This version of the model is applied below.
   The level of aggregation of the model is presented in Table 3. The model includes
representation of abatement of non-CO2 greenhouse gas emissions (CH4, N2O, HFCs, PFCs and
SF6) and the calculations consider both the emissions mitigation that occurs as a byproduct of
actions directed at CO2 and reductions resulting from gas-specific control measures. Control can

11
     An alternative, forward-looking version of the EPPA model optimizes choices over time where economic actors
      are said to have perfect foresight (Gurgel et al.,2007). The behavior of the forward-looking model in terms of
      abatement and CO2-e prices is very similar to the recursive model, the main difference being that optimization
      through time leads to somewhat lower welfare costs as one might expect.


                                                            11
be limited to reductions in the emissions of: CO2 from the combustion of fossil fuels or extended
to include the industrial gases that replace CFCs controlled by the Montreal Protocol and
produced at aluminum smelters; CH4 from a number of sources; and N2O from chemical
production and improved management of inorganic fertilizer applications.
Table 3. EPPA Model Details.
  Country or Region†                             Sectors                             Factors
  Developed                                      Non-Energy                          Capital
   United States (USA)                           Agriculture (AGRI)                  Labor
   Canada (CAN)                                  Services (SERV)                     Crude Oil Resources
   Japan (JPN)                                   Energy-Intensive Products (EINT)    Natural Gas Resources
   European Union+ (EUR)                         Other Industries Products (OTHR)    Coal Resources
   Australia & New Zealand (ANZ)                 Transportation (TRAN)
   Former Soviet Union (FSU)                     Household Transportation (HTRN)
   Eastern Europe (EET)                          Energy                              Shale Oil Resources
  Developing                                       Coal (COAL)                       Nuclear Resources
   India (IND)                                     Crude Oil (OIL)                   Hydro Resources
   China (CHN)                                     Refined Oil (ROIL)                Wind/Solar Resources
   Indonesia (IDZ)                                 Natural Gas (GAS)                 Land
   Higher Income East Asia (ASI)                   Electric: Fossil (ELEC)
   Mexico (MEX)                                    Electric: Hydro (HYDR)
   Central & South America (LAM)                   Electric: Nuclear (NUCL)
   Middle East (MES)                               Electric: Solar and Wind (SOLW)
   Africa (AFR)                                    Electric: Biomass (BIOM)
   Rest of World (ROW)                             Oil from Shale (SYNO)
                                                   Synthetic Gas (SYNG)
                                                   Liquids from Biomass (BI-OIL)
  †
      Specific detail on regional groupings is provided in Paltsev et al. (2005).


   Non-energy activities are aggregated to six sectors, as shown in the table. The energy sector,
which emits several of the non-CO2 gases as well as CO2, is modeled in more detail. The
synthetic coal gas industry produces a perfect substitute for natural gas. The oil shale industry
produces a perfect substitute for refined oil. All electricity generation technologies produce
perfectly substitutable electricity except for Solar and Wind which is modeled as producing an
imperfect substitute, reflecting its intermittent output. Biomass use is included both in transport
fuel and electric generation although it does not penetrate the electric sector in these simulations.
There are 16 geographical regions represented explicitly in the model including major countries
(the U.S., Japan, Canada, China, India, and Indonesia) and 10 regions that are aggregations of
countries.
   When viewing the EPPA model results for emissions prices and welfare costs it is well to
remember that in any period the model seeks out the least-cost reductions regardless of what
combination of the six categories of gases is controlled or which sector they originate, applying
the same marginal emissions penalty across all controlled sources. This set of conditions, often
referred to as “what” and “where” flexibility, will tend to lead to least-cost abatement. To the



                                                               12
degree that emissions tax legislation departs from these ideal conditions, costs for any level of
greenhouse gas reduction will be higher than computed in a model of this type.
    The results also depend on a number of aspects of model structure and particular input
assumptions that simplify the representation of economic structure and decision-making. For
example, the difficulty of achieving any emissions path is influenced by assumptions about
population and productivity growth that underlie the no-policy reference case. The simulations
also embody a particular representation of the structure of the economy including the relative
ease of substitution among the inputs to production and the behavior of consumers in the face of
changing prices of fuels, electricity and other goods and services. Further assumptions must be
made about the cost and performance of new technologies and what might limit their market
penetration. Specifications of alternatives to conventional technologies in the electric sector and
in transportation are particularly important. Finally, the EPPA model draws heavily on
neoclassical economic theory. While this underpinning is a strength in some regards, the model
does not reflect economic rigidities that could lead to unemployment or misallocation of
resources, nor does it capture regulatory and policy details that can be important in the utility
sector as discussed earlier.
    Given the many assumptions that are necessary to model national and global economic
systems, the precise numerical results are not as important as the insights to be gained about the
general direction of changes in the economy and components of the energy system and about the
approximate magnitude of the price and welfare effects to be expected given specific design
features of an emissions tax. An uncertainty analysis of these proposals (e.g., Webster et al.,
2003), a task beyond the scope of this study, would be required to quantify the range about any
particular result, although the relative impacts of caps of different stringency would likely be
preserved.

   4.2 Assumptions about External Conditions
   In addition to the features that may be built into emissions tax legislation, a number of
external factors will influence the economic effects of the system. Two are of particular interest.
   Non-U.S. mitigation measures. Estimates of the cost of emissions taxes in the U.S. will be
influenced by emissions control measures being taken elsewhere. Most important, the level of
global control will affect the prices of crude oil and other fossil fuels that the U.S. either imports
or exports, and the prices of traded quantities of biofuels. Trade in non-energy goods also will be
affected, although the effects on the U.S. are generally small in relation to the influence from
trade in energy goods. To facilitate comparison with the analysis of cap-and-trade policies by
Paltsev, et al. (2007), the same external conditions are assumed here, as follows.
    • Europe, Japan, Canada, Australia, and New Zealand follow an allowance path that is falling
      gradually from the simulated Kyoto emissions levels in 2012 to 50% below 1990 in 2050.
    • All other regions adopt a policy beginning in 2025 that returns and holds them at year 2015
      emissions levels through 2034, and then returns and maintains them at 2000 emissions
      levels from 2035 to 2050.


                                                   13
   Trade restrictions. Biofuels offer a relatively low-cost alternative for emission mitigation in
the transport sector, and if unrestrained (and depending on emissions targets in other countries)
the trade in these fuels can have large effects on land use and related issues of environmental
degradation and food prices. In the U.S. biofuels are popularly seen as an abundant domestic
resource that could reduce dependence on foreign oil, but despite this interest imports of ethanol
into the U.S. are currently restricted by tariffs. Paltsev, et al. (2007) provide an assessment of
the implications of trade restrictions in a cap-and-trade framework. The insights from that
analysis apply equally to an emissions tax, and so no analysis of these effects is supplied here.
5. TAX POLICY COST, EFFECTIVENESS AND ENERGY MARKET EFFECTS

      5.1 Emissions Reductions and Welfare Effects
   Figure 2 shows the total emissions from non-CO2 GHGs weighted at their global warming
potential value and CO2 from fossil energy12 for the U.S. with no mitigation policy and with each
of the emissions taxes shown in Table 2 and Figure 1. The Dingell Bill keeps emissions about
level for a decade or so, but growth resumes afterward driven by U.S. economic growth.
Relative to emissions in the reference scenario (no policy in the U.S. or abroad), U.S. cumulative
emissions are 13 percent lower over the 2012-2050 period. Tax levels under the Stark proposal
are sufficient to keep GHG emissions approximately at today’s level through mid-century with
cumulative emissions 25 percent lower than in the reference scenario. Tax rates as specified in
the Larson Bill would yield substantial reductions relative to the reference scenario with
cumulative emissions lower by 46 percent over the control period.

                                               14000
                                                       GHG Emissions and Allowance Allocation
                                               12000
                      Total GHGs (mmt CO2-e)




                                               10000

                                               8000

                                               6000
                                                            Larson
                                               4000         Stark
                                                            Dingell
                                               2000
                                                            Ref
                                                  0
                                                   2005 2010 2015 2020 2025 2030 2035 2040 2045 2050
                                                                          Year

                                                 Figure 2. Total GHG emissions for core proposals




12
     We do not include an estimate of the land use sinks or of emissions from cement manufacture.


                                                                          14
   Welfare effects of these tax provisions are shown in Table 4 and Figure 3. As discussed in
Paltsev et al. (2007), the version of the EPPA model used here incorporates endogenous labor
supply, allowing employment to respond to changes in the market economy. Under this
formulation the welfare measure includes not only changes in aggregate market consumption but
also effects on leisure time. The measure of overall economic cost we report is the change in
welfare measured as equivalent variation.13
Table 4. Welfare Changes.
                                             Welfare Changes (%)
                                   Dingell            Stark            Larson
2015                                  0.01               0.01             0.01
2020                                 -0.09              -0.09            -0.16
2025                                 -0.25              -0.27            -0.24
2030                                 -0.21              -0.39            -0.74
2035                                  0.07              -0.32            -1.25
2040                                  0.21              -0.38            -1.71
2045                                  0.32              -0.38            -2.08
2050                                  0.49              -0.33            -2.23
2012-2015                             0.10              -0.30            -1.21

                                         1.00
                                                    Welfare Changes
                                         0.50
                    Welfare Change (%)




                                         0.00

                                         -0.50

                                         -1.00
                                                        Dingell
                                         -1.50          Stark
                                         -2.00          Larson

                                         -2.50
                                             2015     2020      2025    2030     2035   2040   2045   2050
                                                                            Year

                                                 Figure 3. Welfare Impacts of Core Proposals.


13
     The general equilibrium modeling convention is based on economic theory whereby workers willingly choose to
      work or not, and when they choose not to work they value their non-work time at the marginal wage rate. GHG
      mitigation tends to increase the cost of consuming market goods and thus workers have a tendency to choose to
      work less, and thus have more non-work time. As a result, the percentage welfare changes in Figure 3 combine a
      loss of market consumption that is partly offset by a gain in leisure. Moreover, the denominator is larger by the
      amount of leisure accounted for in the model. How much non-work time to credit is somewhat arbitrary and so
      the denominator in this calculation can be made larger or smaller depending on how much time is accounted.
      For the model used here we assume a reasonable number of potential labor hours rather than accounting all
      waking hours of people of all ages, and so our measured welfare in the economy is about 18% larger than market
      consumption as reported in Appendix tables. For a discussion, see Matus et al. (in press).


                                                                            15
    The Dingell proposal has a very small welfare cost until after 2030 when the combination of
assumed conditions yields a welfare improvement. The cause of this behavior is the terms-of-
trade benefits resulting from emissions mitigation undertaken by other countries which outweigh
the effect of the CO2 tax (mainly through lower oil prices benefiting the fuel-importing U.S.).
These terms-of-trade effects also partially counteract the welfare costs attributable to the Stark
and Larson proposals. Larson is the most costly, leading to a reduction in welfare of over 2% by
2050. (Note this welfare measure does not include benefits from reduced climate risk or of
ancillary benefits as may be gained in reduced air pollution.) Aggregate welfare losses
(discounted to 2005 dollars) range from a 0.1 percent gain under the Dingell plan to a 1.2 percent
loss under Larson.
    Because of the importance of terms-of-trade effects it is useful to recall the underlying
assumptions about international actions. These cases vary the stringency of the policy in the U.S.
but leave unchanged the mitigation efforts of the rest of the world. Under the Larson proposal
the U.S. takes on reduction targets similar to other developed countries with the developing
countries following later. In the Stark and Dingell cases the U.S. effort eventually falls behind
even that of developing countries.
    In viewing these results it is well to keep in mind the political realism of the more- and less-
stringent cases, where the U.S. makes a stronger or weaker effort in relation to others. For our
purpose, a common assumption about external conditions provides a point of departure for
comparing different U.S. effort levels. The importance of assumptions about mitigation efforts
abroad in assessment of U.S. domestic proposals is further emphasized in Paltsev et al.
(forthcoming) where we explore alternative scenarios of rest-of-world effort. Together these
scenarios highlight the strategic implications of cooperative and non-cooperative mitigation that
arise through terms-of-trade effects, further complicating policy coordination among countries
with different impressions of climate impacts and with incentives to “free ride” on abatement
efforts elsewhere.

   5.2 Energy Market Effects
    In this section, we consider the impact of the tax on energy markets.
    Fuel Price Effects. A carbon tax has substantial effects on fuel and electricity markets, both
in terms of prices and quantities consumed. In reviewing these results it is important to
distinguish between the producer and consumer prices of fuels where the consumer price equals
the fuel price plus a CO2 tax component that depends on the level of the tax and the CO2 content
of the fuel. The GHG contents of fuels are relatively stable, so the price inclusive of the GHG tax
can be calculated by adding the appropriate CO2 penalty for a gallon, barrel, ton, or tcf of the
fuel. Table 5 shows the added cost resulting from a $27 per ton CO2-e tax for a variety of fuels
and the percentage increase this implies relative to the average price for these fuels for 2001-
2005 (excluding Federal and State excise taxes). (These figures indicate the initial impact
assuming prices have not had time to adjust.) The percentage changes in price indicate the




                                                  16
increase in the consumer price if the entire tax is passed forward to consumers. In reality (as
discussed below), some of the burden of the tax will be shifted back to producers.14
   In an upstream system the CO2 tax will be embedded in the fuel price while in a downstream
system consumers will pay separately for the fuel and for the tax. Mixed systems will have the
CO2 tax embedded in some fuel prices and separate from others. We follow the convention of
reporting the fuel prices, exclusive of the tax, and electricity prices inclusive of the tax because
the effect of CO2-e prices on the electricity price depends on the mix of fuels, the degree of
capture and storage, among other things, that change across scenarios.
Table 5. Relation Between Carbon and Fuel Prices.
                       Fuel                         Base Price            Added          Added Cost
                                                    Ave. 2002-           Cost ($)           (%)
                                                      2006
                                                     (2005$)
                        Crude Oil ($/bbl)               $40.00            $12.20              30%
             Regular Gasoline ($/gal)                    $1.82             $0.26              14%
                     Heating Oil ($/gal)                 $1.35             $0.29              21%
      Wellhead Natural Gas ($/tcf)                       $5.40             $1.49              28%
 Residential Natural Gas ($/tcf)                        $11.05             $1.50              14%
            Utility Coal ($/short ton)                  $26.70            $55.30              207%


     Source: U.S. average prices for 2001-2006 computed from DOE EIA price data. Base
       cost price is the 5-year (2002-2006) average price, except coal (2001-2005). To
       the gasoline price we have added $0.42 to include the federal and an average of
       state gasoline excise taxes.


   The percentage price increases for fuels will vary from the estimates in Table 5 as the CO2 tax
varies, and also with changes in the fuel price. The EPPA model projects fuel price changes in
the reference case, and also estimates how these prices will further change as a result of
mitigation policy. In addition, the base price and price projection for any particular year is most
appropriately viewed as a five-year average because the model simulates the economy in 5-year
time steps. The results for the reference and three tax cases are shown in Figure 4. For a sense of
the actual fuel prices projected in these scenarios, the index values in the figure can be multiplied
by the base prices in Table 5.
   The fuel price effects of a CO2 tax can be summarized as follows: The producer price for
petroleum products falls relative to the reference projection due to reductions in the crude oil
price. This result reflects the fact that there is significant rent in the crude oil price, and the
global policy to restrict GHG emissions reduces oil consumption, acting in effect like a
monopsony buyer that extracts some of the producer rent. The reduction in overall world
demand for oil has a strong effect, relative to the reference, in all cases. The relatively smaller

14
     More of the tax will be shifted back to producers (and ultimately to owners of fossil fuel resources) if the tax is
      part of a worldwide GHG pricing system.


                                                               17
difference among the policy cases occurs because only the stringency of the U.S. policy is
varying. We also see the effect of strengthening of the policy in developing countries in 2035,
which causes oil prices to fall relative to the reference.
                          2.5                                                                                4
                                (a) Petroleum                                                                     (b) Natural Gas
                                                                                                           3.5
Price Index, 2005=1.0




                           2




                                                                                   Price Index, 2005=1.0
                                                                                                             3
                          1.5                                                                              2.5
                                                                                                             2
                           1                     Ref
                                                 Dingell                                                   1.5                                Ref
                                                                                                             1                                Dingell
                          0.5                    Stark
                                                                                                                                              Stark
                                                 Larson                                                    0.5
                                                                                                                                              Larson
                           0                                                                                 0
                           2005 2010 2015 2020 2025 2030 2035 2040 2045 2050                                 2005 2010 2015 2020 2025 2030 2035 2040 2045 2050
                                                 Year
                                                                                                                                    Year
                          1.4                                                                              2.5
                                (c) Coal
                          1.2                                                                                    (d) Electricity
  Price Index, 2005=1.0




                                                                               Price Index, 2005=1.0
                                                                                                            2
                           1
                          0.8                                                                              1.5

                          0.6                              Ref                                              1                                Ref
                          0.4                              Dingell                                                                           Dingell
                                                           Stark                                           0.5                               Stark
                          0.2                              Larson                                                                            Larson
                           0                                                                                0
                           2005 2010 2015 2020 2025 2030 2035 2040 2045 2050                                2005 2010 2015 2020 2025 2030 2035 2040 2045 2050
                                                 Year                                                                               Year

Figure 4. Fuel prices in the reference and core scenarios: (a) petroleum product prices,
    (b) natural gas prices, (c) coal prices, and (d) electricity prices.

   Natural gas markets in EPPA are modeled such that international prices do not fully equalize,
and so changes in domestic demand can have a larger effect on domestic prices. Whether this
result accurately describes emerging global gas markets depends on how fast LNG infrastructure
can be developed, especially whether terminals in the U.S. will be built to keep pace with
demand, and LNG production facilities abroad can expand. Many analysts see a single world
gas market emerging soon, and so the EPPA model structure may underestimate the potential
role of natural gas and overestimate the rise in domestic prices. However, with a global policy
other regions also change their demand for gas, and exert strong pressure on prices even with a
world market.
   With the Stark and Larson proposed emissions taxes, U.S. gas prices approximately follow
the reference level for the first 10 years, then rise above the reference through 2030 or 2040
depending on the policy case, and then fall below the reference price. This price pattern reflects
the changing role of gas under CO2 policy. Depending on CO2 and fuel prices, gas can be a
relatively low-GHG fuel for electricity generation where it substitutes for coal. However, at
higher GHG prices coal generation with CO2 capture and storage (CCS) is even less CO2
intensive and more economic. In other end uses for natural gas, such as in space heating, a CO2


                                                                         18
price spurs increased efficiency or a switch to electricity thereby reducing the demand for gas.
Thus, the increase in the price of gas in middle years occurs when the increase in demand for gas
for electricity generation is strong and offsets decreased demand elsewhere in the economy. As
GHG prices rise further, coal with CCS displaces natural gas generation and the demand for gas,
and its price, falls relative to the reference. How fast this transition occurs depends on the
stringency of the policy. The flat $50/tC (13.64$/tCO2) in the Dingell proposal is insufficient to
bring in CCS, and so the main abatement option it spurs is substitution of gas for coal which
dominates through 2050. Thus, unlike the other two proposals, we see a somewhat higher gas
price through 2050.
    There is relatively little rent in coal prices, so the model results show less adjustment in the
price (and more in the quantity of coal consumed). Also, once tax rates rise enough to support
coal generation with CCS, coal demand and prices recover. The Dingell Bill is, again, different
in character because the tax rate is insufficient to spur adoption of CCS. With growth in the
economy and rising gas prices, coal generation without CCS begins to grow again. The
electricity price is inclusive of the GHG tax and emissions mitigation increases prices relative to
the reference. The EPPA model includes increasing adjustment costs when technologies expand
rapidly. In the more stringent Stark and Larson cases this feature of the sector results in
electricity prices overshooting the long run level and then falling to their more normal long run
level by 2040. By that time, the electricity sector is substantially decarbonized. The difference
between the electricity price in the policy cases and the reference is the marginal cost of adding
capture and sequestration plus any difference in the carbon tax times any remaining emissions.
Since we assume a capture efficiency of 90% and upwards, differences in the carbon tax across
these two scenarios have a minimal effect on electricity prices. In contrast, in the Dingell Bill
CCS is not adopted and so the electricity increase reflects the roll-in of the carbon tax. Note that
under the baseline it is assumed that coal generation improves in efficiency, and higher fuel
prices (inclusive of the carbon tax) lead to further substitution of labor and capital for fuel
implying a further effort to improve efficiency of the coal generation.
    Table 6 shows how the carbon tax is distributed between producers and consumers of fossil
fuels under the various tax proposals.15 In addition to the three Congressional proposals, we
include a hypothetical carbon tax that allows for 287 billion metric tons of emissions over the
2012 – 2050 control period. This tax is on all GHGs and starts at $18 per ton CO2-e and rises at
a 4 percent rate (real) annually.
    The carbon tax on coal products is predominantly shifted forward to consumers in all tax
proposals. This reflects the lack of Hotelling rents in coal. The natural gas burden shifting
differs significantly between the Dingell proposal and the other proposals. Natural gas prices
first rise as demand for gas as a substitute for coal in electricity generation drives its price up.
Thus, the incidence on consumers is greater than 100% for periods because the full tax is passed

15
     Producer and consumer prices with the emissions tax are compared to a scenario in which the United States is not
      undertaking a GHG policy but other countries are. The price changes between these scenarios allow us to
      measure the incidence.


                                                            19
forward and the producer price also rises. Carbon capture and storage reverses this substitution
into natural gas by 2040 and drives natural gas prices down for all the tax plans except for
Dingell's. This illustrates the point that a low carbon pricing policy will simply shift demand
from coal to natural gas without providing sufficient incentives to substitute towards non-CO2
emitting power sources. Between two-thirds and three-quarters of the burden of the carbon tax
on crude oil is passed forward to consumers in the form of higher prices. Given the structure of
the EPPA model, which includes an efficient global market for crude oil (a Hecksher-Ohlin
assumption) but assumes coal and gas are imperfect substitutes among countries (imposing an
Armington trade pattern), the oil price incidence is most affected by policies abroad.
Table 6. Consumer Share of Carbon Tax Burden
                2015     2020       2025      2030      2035       2040      2045      2050
Coal
  Dingell        0.97      0.95      0.91       0.93      0.93      0.93       0.94      0.94
  Stark          0.97      0.97      0.95       0.95      0.96      0.97       0.98      0.98
  Larson         0.98      0.97      0.97       0.97      0.98      0.99       1.00      1.00
  287 bmt        0.98      0.97      0.94       0.94      0.95      0.96       0.97      0.98
Natural Gas
  Dingell        0.78      1.25      2.88       2.23      2.30      2.27       2.19      1.59
  Stark          0.79      1.01      1.75       2.03      2.01      1.28       0.86      0.14
  Larson         0.78      0.98      1.43       1.33      0.94      0.73       0.60      0.68
  287 bmt        0.73      0.98      2.14       2.52      1.85      1.49       0.73      0.14
Crude Oil
  Dingell        0.78      0.67      0.07       0.02      0.55      0.60       0.70      0.71
  Stark          0.74      0.76      0.53       0.58      0.74      0.74       0.75      0.71
  Larson         0.81      0.81      0.66       0.61      0.72      0.78       0.84      0.88
  287 bmt        0.89      0.87      0.85       0.84      0.80      0.78       0.77      0.73


    Effects on the Structure of Primary Energy Use. As presented in Figure 5, all three CO2 tax
proposals show reductions in primary energy use compared to the reference case, an increase in
the use of natural gas through about 2030 that parallels a significant absolute reduction in the use
of coal, and growth in the use of coal again after 2030. Shale oil production begins to take
market share in 2045 in the reference but it is driven out of the market under all of the tax
proposals. The return of coal use in the Stark and Larson scenarios is a result of the economic
viability of coal power generation with carbon capture and storage (CCS). Under the Stark Bill
most coal use is CCS by 2040 while under the Larson Bill CCS dominates by 2035. As noted
previously, in the Dingell scenario coal with CCS is never used. The carbon price is too low to
induce the shift to this more expensive technology.
    As might be expected from the imposition of a constant tax level, the Dingell Bill has most of
its effect in the period to 2025, with some demand reduction and substitution of natural gas for



                                                  20
                       coal. The time of maximum demand reduction is 2025 after which this effect is overwhelmed by
                       economic growth.
                      200                                                                             200
                                (a) Reference                                                                (b) Dingell
                      150                                                                             150




                                                                                  Energy Use (EJ)
    Energy use (EJ)




                      100                                                                             100

                                                                                                                                                                Biomass Liquids
                       50                                                                             50
                                                                                                                                                                Renew able Elec.
                                                                                                                                                                Hydro
                        0                                                                              0
                                                                                                                                                                Nuclear
                              2005 2010 2015 2020 2025 2030 2035 2040 2045 2050                             2005 2010 2015 2020 2025 2030 2035 2040 2045 2050
                                                   Year                                                                          Year                           Gas
                      200                                                                             200                                                       Shale
                               (c) Stark                                                                      (d) Larson                                        Petrol. Prod.
                      150                                                                             150                                                       Coal
Energy Use (EJ)




                                                                                    Energy Use (EJ)




                      100                                                                             100


                      50                                                                               50


                        0                                                                               0
                             2005 2010 2015 2020 2025 2030 2035 2040 2045 2050                              2005 2010 2015 2020 2025 2030 2035 2040 2045 2050
                                                   Year                                                                           Year


                       Figure 5. Primary energy use in the reference and core scenarios: (a) reference case, (b)
                           Dingell, (c) Stark, and (d) Larson.

                          The most dramatic change in the structure of energy use would be produced by the Larson
                       proposal. The demand reduction is large and growing with time and the rising tax pressure.
                       Natural gas demand increases above reference levels through about 2030 and then declines as the
                       tax drives even natural gas out of the market. Coal is hit very hard in the period 2020 to 2035,
                       but then recovers as carbon capture and storage (CCS) becomes available as an option at large
                       scale. The other striking feature of the Larson proposal is the very large increase in biofuel
                       liquids to replace petroleum products in the transport sector.16 In this case petroleum product use

                       16
                            At this point it is worth recalling the dependence of results on EPPA model structure and input assumptions. It is
                             assumed that biofuels will be allowed to compete for market share on an economic basis, without constraints
                             because of environmental or other side effects. The same assumption applies to CO2 capture and storage.
                             Relaxation of these assumptions about competition on an economic basis would raise the estimated emissions
                             price and welfare cost of each of the cap-and-trade cases. On the other hand, the reference scenario does not fully
                             address environmental issues associated with shale oil development and continued expansion of fuel use and
                             associated pollutant emissions. Adding environmental constraints on these could change technological choices
                             in the reference and reduce fossil fuel use from what we project thus leaving less reduction needed to meet a
                             given greenhouse gas target.



                                                                                                            21
falls over 50 percent, whereas in the reference case petroleum product use rises by about 87
percent.
    The Stark proposal lies somewhere between the other two systems in terms of effect on
energy structure. Coal use is again reduced in the period 2020 to 2035, again to be saved by the
large-scale introduction of coal with CCS. Gas use is reduced by mid-century, but not as strongly
as under the Larson proposal. Interestingly, at the Stark-proposed tax levels oil stays in the
market to 2050, and biofuels do not take market share.
    In all these simulations the assumption is made that nuclear power is restrained by public
acceptance. If nuclear is allowed to enter on purely economic grounds, given the cost
assumptions underlying the analysis, we would see a significant increase in nuclear generation,
especially with the tax outlined in the Larson plan. An analysis in Paltsev, et al. (2007) of a cap-
and-trade system limiting emissions to 203 bmt shows a six-fold increase in nuclear power
capacity by 2050 in the absence of political constraints on its use. With projected cumulative
emissions of 216 bmt, the Larson proposal should lead to a similar growth in nuclear power.
Whether it is realistic to expect a six-fold increase in nuclear capacity in the U.S. over the next
forty years remains to be seen. Further, whether nuclear or coal with CCS, or some combination
of the two, is used depends critically on their relative cost and the policy environment
surrounding them, both of which are highly uncertain.
    It is important to note that the large demand for biofuels in the Larson case is a result of it
being the main alternative to fossil-based transportation fuel in the EPPA model. If the model
included relatively low cost vehicles that could be run in total or in part on electricity—an option
requiring improvements in battery technology—then the demand for biofuels could be
substantially reduced, to be replaced by demand for electricity. The basic determinant of which
technology wins in an economic model, presuming an equal quality of service delivered, is
which is less expensive. Where there are close technology competitors, small changes in
estimated cost, well within ranges of uncertainty about where breakthroughs may occur, can lead
to a different technology choice and mix of energy inputs.

   5.3 Alternative Versions of the Tax Proposals
   In this section we consider two variants on the tax proposals before Congress. First we
consider the impact of including all GHGs in the tax base for the carbon tax. Broadening the
base should lower the welfare costs of achieving given reductions. Second, we investigate the
impact of altering the rate of adjustment of the carbon tax over time.
   5.3.1 Advantages of All-GHG Mitigation Policies
   Subjecting non-CO2 greenhouse gases to the emissions tax can be important in reducing the
policy cost. Reilly et al. (2006) provide an evaluation of the cost-effectiveness and climate
effects of including non-CO2 GHGs in a control regime. These findings suggest that even
though their relative importance falls over time in policies aimed at substantial reductions in
greenhouse gases, their overall role in a cost-effective strategy should not be overlooked. Initial



                                                  22
levels of reduction of several of these gases can be achieved at low cost relative to CO2, so they
are a natural early target for control efforts.
   We ran scenarios where the carbon tax is applied to all GHGs and the tax rate is increased at
the growth rate specified in the bills, but the initial tax rate is adjusted so that cumulative
emissions are unchanged from the tax scenarios analyzed above.17 For example, the Larson Bill
has an initial tax rate in 2015 of $19.96/tCO2-e that grows at 10 percent real annually and results
in 216 bmt of cumulative emissions over the control period. To get the same cumulative
emissions while including all GHGs and maintaining the 10 percent tax rate growth, the initial
2015 tax rate can be lowered to $13.30/t CO2-e, decreasing the tax rate for all subsequent years
as well. By 2050 the tax rate falls sharply relative to the CO2-only rate: $374 versus $561.
Similarly, the tax rates in the Stark plan are reduced by $8.94 per ton in each year. Thus the tax
rate in 2015 is $1.50 and rises to $60.05 per ton CO2-e by 2050. The tax rate under the Dingell
plan drops from $13.64 per ton CO2-e to $12.80. See Figure 6.
                                        600
                                                Tax Rates: Alternative Tax Bases
                                        500
               Tax Rate ($/ton CO2-e)




                                                        Dingell CO2
                                                        Dingell GHG
                                        400
                                                        Stark CO2
                                        300             Stark GHG
                                                        Larson GHG
                                        200             Larson GHG

                                        100

                                         0
                                                2015    2020        2025   2030    2035   2040   2045   2050
                                                                              Year
                                              Figure 6. Tax Rates, All-GHG Application and CO2-Only.

   Figure 7 compares the welfare effects of the all-GHG and CO2-only implementations for the
same mitigation in terms of CO2 equivalent emissions. Including all GHGs in the Dingell tax
has little impact on welfare, in large part because the welfare effects are dominated by terms-of-
trade effects occurring as a result of the policies undertaken abroad. For the Stark plan, the
aggregate NPV welfare costs are reduced from 0.30 percent to 0.11 percent, a reduction of nearly
two-thirds. Including all GHGs in the Larson plan reduces aggregate NPV welfare costs from
1.21 percent to 0.96 percent, a reduction of twenty percent. The welfare costs under the Larson
Bill diverge sharply between 2030 and 2040 due to the differential entry of high-cost liquid
biofuels. Biomass liquids enter in a significant way under the CO2-only scenario in 2030 while
they enter a decade later under the all-GHG tax scenario.



17
     For the Dingell tax on all GHGs, we do not include the gasoline tax.


                                                                              23
                                 1
                                      Welfare Changes: Alternative Tax Bases
                                 1


            Welfare Change (%)   0

                                 -1
                                             Dingell CO2

                                 -1          Dingell GHG
                                             Stark CO2
                                 -2
                                             Stark GHG

                                 -2          Larson GHG
                                             Larson GHG
                                 -3
                                      2015    2020         2025     2030     2035   2040   2045   2050
                                                                        Year

                                  Figure 7. Welfare Costs, All-GHG Application and CO2-Only.

   Adding the other greenhouse gases to the tax base has a substantial impact on GHG mitigation
under the various scenarios. Table 7 shows what share of the reduction in 2015 comes from
each gas and how much the gases are reduced under the Larson Bill. The fluorinated gases, for
example, are driven nearly to zero and account for one-fifth of the total reduction in that year.
Figure 8 shows the distribution of GHG reductions under the Larson Bill in different years. Half
the reductions in 2015 arise from reducing non-CO2 gases despite their being a small fraction of
total GHG emissions in that year. The large jump in CO2 emission reductions in 2040 reflects
the entry of liquid biofuels. Abatement opportunities for the non-CO2 gases are relatively
inexpensive, but are exhausted at relatively low prices. Thus, their share of abatement and their
effect on welfare costs is strongest when CO2-e prices are relatively low (i.e. in early years of
policies with growing tax rates, such as the Larson Bill, or policies that have relatively lower tax
rates overall, such as the Dingell proposal).
Table 7. GHG Reductions in 2015 Under the Larson Bill Applied to all GHGs.
                                          Reduction               Share of Total       Percentage
                                         (mmt CO2e)                 Reduction       Reduction for Gas
GHG                                          1093.9                   100%                 13%
CO2                                           533.3                   49%                  8%
CH4                                           229.5                   21%                  38%
N2O                                           125.4                   11%                  33%
Fluorinated Gases                             206.1                   19%                  96%




                                                                        24
                                                12000

              Emission Reductions (mmt CO2-e)
                                                           GHG Reductions, Larson Bill
                                                10000

                                                               CO2 Reductions
                                                8000
                                                               Non-CO2 Reductions
                                                6000

                                                4000

                                                2000

                                                     0
                                                           2015       2020      2025     2030          2035   2040   2045   2050
                                                                                                Year
                                                                  Figure 8. GHG Reductions in the Larson Bill.

   5.3.2 Tax Rate Growth
   The various tax proposals differ in tax rate adjustment over time. In this section, we analyze
how emissions and welfare are affected by changes in the tax rate profile over time. The Dingell
proposal fixes the carbon and gasoline tax rates in real terms over the control period. We
consider two variants (illustrated in Figure 9). First we consider modifying the proposal to
allow the carbon tax and tax on gasoline to grow at 4 percent real over the control period. This
reduces aggregate emissions from 350 bmt to 286 bmt, a reduction of 18 percent. Second, we
broaden the tax base in this second variant to cover all greenhouse gases, eliminate the gasoline
tax, and set the initial carbon tax to achieve aggregate emissions of 286 bmt as in the first
variant. These variants demonstrate that in general an increasing tax rate is needed to keep
emissions growth from reoccurring in a growing economy.
                                                80
                                                         Dingell Variants: Tax Rates
                                                70
         Tax Rate ($/ton CO2-e)




                                                60                 Constant Real

                                                50                 4% Grow th

                                                40                 All GHGs

                                                30

                                                20

                                                10

                                                 0
                                                  2015         2020          2025      2030          2035     2040   2045    2050
                                                                                              Year

                                                                      Figure 9. Dingell Tax Rate Variants.



                                                                                               25
    Figure 10 shows the welfare impacts of the original proposal and the two variants. Now there
is a modest welfare loss under either variant reflecting the more stringent policy. The figure
demonstrates that it is more efficient to broaden the carbon tax to include other GHGs than it is
to increase the gasoline tax. Taxing all greenhouse gases instead of carbon along with a higher
gasoline tax cuts the aggregate NPV welfare loss nearly in half, from -0.44 percent to -0.23
percent. This occurs because of the inexpensive opportunities to reduce other greenhouse gases,
many of which have very high global warming potentials. The message from these two
scenarios can be extended. In general, it is more efficient to achieve a given GHG reduction
through a broad-based carbon tax (or cap-and-trade system) rather than combining a partial
carbon pricing scheme with sectoral regulatory schemes.

                                   0.60
                                           Dingell Variants: Welfare Changes
                                   0.40

                                   0.20
              Welfare Change (%)




                                   0.00

                                   -0.20

                                   -0.40
                                                   Constant Real
                                   -0.60
                                                   4% Grow th
                                   -0.80
                                                   All GHGs
                                   -1.00
                                       2015      2020         2025   2030          2035   2040   2045   2050
                                                                            Year
                                           Figure 10. Welfare Changes under the Dingell Variants.

    The Stark Bill increases the tax rate by $10 per ton C ($2.73 per ton CO2-e) per year in
nominal terms. By the end of the control period, the annual increase in the tax rate is quite small
in real terms. Our first variant on this bill is to increase the tax rate by $10 annually in real
terms. This leads to a tax rate of over $100 per ton CO2-e (in year 2005 dollars) in 2050 in
contrast to the Stark Bill which leads to a rate of just under $70 per ton CO2-e by 2050 (in year
2005 dollars). This reduces aggregate emissions modestly from 301 bmt to 289 bmt, a reduction
of 4 percent. The second variant is to broaden the tax base to include all GHGs and increase the
tax rate by $10 real annually. The initial tax rate is set to achieve the same aggregate emissions
as in the first variant. To match these aggregate emissions while increasing the tax at the same
rate, the tax is imposed beginning in 2016.18 By 2050 the tax rate rises to roughly $95 per ton
CO2-e. Tax rates for the original bill plus the two variations are shown in Figure 11.



18
     Strictly speaking it begins in 2015 with a tax rate of one-third of a cent per ton CO2e.


                                                                            26
                                    120
                                            Stark Variants: Tax Rates
                                    100
                                                    $10 Nominal

           Tax Rate ($/ton CO2-e)    80             $10 Real

                                                    $10 Real, All GHGs
                                     60


                                     40


                                     20


                                      0
                                       2015       2020         2025      2030          2035   2040     2045           2050
                                                                                Year

                                                      Figure 11. Stark Tax Rate Variants.

   Figure 12 shows the welfare impacts of the variations on the Stark Bill. Simply shifting
from a nominal to a real increase in the rate raises the welfare cost modestly, especially after
2035 when the tax rates begin to diverge sharply. The aggregate NPV welfare loss rises from
0.30 percent to 0.35 percent reflecting the more stringent emission limits in this case.
Broadening the tax to include all GHGs allows the tax rate to start at a much lower level. This
combined with the greater range of emission reduction options open to firms lowers the welfare
cost substantially with the aggregate NPV cost now 0.23 percent. This scenario provides an
opportunity to achieve greater emission reductions at a lower U.S. welfare cost than in the Stark
Bill as filed.

                                    0.10
                                              Stark Variants: Welfare Changes                    $10 Nominal
                                    0.00
                                                                                                 $10 Real, CO2 Only

                                    -0.10                                                        $10 Real, All GHGs
           Welfare Change (%)




                                    -0.20

                                    -0.30

                                    -0.40

                                    -0.50

                                    -0.60
                                          2015     2020        2025      2030          2035   2040     2045           2050
                                                                                Year

                                            Figure 12. Welfare Changes under the Stark Variants.




                                                                            27
   Lastly, we look at the Larson Bill to consider how different growth rates for the tax can affect
welfare. Recall in the previous sub-section we considered broadening the tax base to cover all
GHGs while increasing the rate at a 10 percent real annual growth rate and lowering the initial
tax rate to achieve the same aggregate emissions over the control period (216 bmt). Here we
maintain the tax on all GHGs but lower the growth rate for the tax from 10 percent real to 4
percent real annually while adjusting the initial tax rate to achieve the same aggregate emissions
between 2012 and 2050. The tax rates for the Larson Bill and the two variants are shown in
Figure 13. The slower growth rate for the tax leads to a rate in 2050 of $150 per ton CO2-e, a
reduction of 60 percent relative to the 2050 rate for the all-GHG tax rising at 10 percent
annually. As noted above, broadening the tax base to include all GHGs lowers the aggregate
NPV welfare cost from 1.21 percent of welfare to 0.96 percent. Adjusting the tax schedule to
achieve the same emissions while increasing the tax rate at 4 percent annually lowers the cost
further to 0.78 percent (see Figure 14 for welfare impacts).

                                    400
                                             Larson Variants: Tax Rates
                                    350
                                                   Larson
           Tax Rate ($/ton CO2-e)




                                    300
                                                   Larson-GHG
                                    250            Larson-GHG-4%

                                    200

                                    150

                                    100

                                    50

                                     0
                                      2015      2020        2025    2030          2035   2040   2045   2050
                                                                           Year
                                                   Figure 13. Larson Tax Rate Variants.

    This result raises an important policy design point for carbon tax proposals. Optimal tax
design would set a schedule of tax rates over the control period. How should we set those rates?
Absent uncertainty, the tax rate should grow at an annual rate equal to the rate of return on assets
of comparable risk. The argument is straightforward. In the absence of uncertainty, tax and
permit systems will operate identically if designed to have the same price profile over time.
Consider a permit system in which all the permits are given out at the beginning of the policy.
Permits would be an asset that could be used now or saved for future use. Financial arbitrage
ensures they earn the same rate of return as other assets. Since permits pay no dividend, their
price must increase at this given rate of return. Any other time profile for carbon prices will lead
to lower overall welfare. Since a permit system can be replicated with a tax, in the absence of
uncertainty the optimal tax system would have tax rates growing at an annual rate equal to the



                                                                          28
rate of return of otherwise identical assets to permits.19 That the welfare cost of the Larson Bill
decreased with the 4 percent tax growth rate compared to the 10 percent tax growth rate reflects
this theoretical result.

                                   0.5
                                          Larson Variants: Welfare Changes
                                   0.0
              Welfare Change (%)




                                   -0.5


                                   -1.0


                                   -1.5
                                                   Larson
                                                   Larson-GHG
                                   -2.0
                                                   Larson-GHG-4%

                                   -2.5
                                      2015      2020        2025    2030          2035   2040   2045    2050
                                                                           Year

                                          Figure 14. Welfare Changes under the Larson Variants.

     5.4   Comparison of the Congressional Tax and Cap-and-Trade Proposals
   In Paltsev, et al. (2007) we describe and analyze a number of Congressional cap-and-trade
proposals. In that analysis, the cap-and-trade bills allow anywhere from 148 to 306 billion
metric tons of cumulative emissions between 2012 and 2050. These measures impose reductions
in emissions between 24 and 63 percent from the business as usual scenario. Initial carbon
prices range from $7 to $53 per ton CO2-e in 2015. Prices in 2050 range from $39 to $210 per
ton CO2-e. Welfare losses in most cases are modest, with the largest loss in 2050 equaling less
than two percent of welfare.
   Since that analysis, attention has focused on revised bills including one by Senators
Lieberman and Warner (S.2191) and one by Senators Bingaman and Specter (S.1766). S.2191,
depending on the availability of credits, has prices starting around $50 per ton CO2-e, rising to
around $200 in 2050, and limits U.S. cumulative emissions to about 200 bmt.20 S.1766 creates
allowances that limit U.S. cumulative emissions to 250 bmt, but the legislation includes a safety
valve feature, the Technology Accelerator Payment (TAP), that may allow emissions to exceed
this level of emissions. The TAP price starts at $12/tCO2-e and increases at 5 percent real per
year, reaching nearly $80/tCO2-e by 2050.



19
   The EPPA model is not forward-looking and thus an interest rate is not explicitly identified, but the rate of return
    on capital is implicit in the base data, and those data are consistent with an overall return on capital in the range
    of 4 to 5%.
20
   See Appendix D of Paltsev, et al. (2008) for a full analysis of the Lieberman-Warner Bill (S.2191).


                                                                       29
   The Stark tax Bill is closest to the Bingaman-Specter legislation if the TAP price is triggered.
In that case, the Bingaman-Specter Bill would likely achieve somewhat higher levels of
abatement than Stark because the price is slightly higher and it applies to all GHGs. The Dingell
Bill would allow the most emissions between 2012 and 2050 of all the carbon pricing proposals
under consideration. Its welfare loss in the long run is, not surprisingly, the lowest of all the
proposals, as shown in the summary provided in Table 8.
   The Larson Bill, with cumulative emissions at 216 bmt, is similar to the Lieberman-Warner
Bill, but at higher welfare cost in the long run. This occurs for two reasons. First, Lieberman-
Warner includes options for credits that can, if effective, bring uncovered GHGs and sinks under
the policy. Second, the Larson Bill starts the tax rate at a lower level but increases it at over
twice the growth rate of the cap-and-trade bills with banking.21 As noted in the last section, the
optimal growth rate for a carbon tax in the absence of uncertainty is to grow at the real rate of
return.
Table 8. Congressional Tax Proposals Summary.
                                                              Price (CO2-e)            Welfare Change (%)
               Proposal                    Cumulative         2015       2050         2020          2050        Total
                                           Emissions
Carbon Tax Proposals
Dingell (CO2 only)                               349              14       14         -0.09          0.49        0.10
Stark (CO2 only)                                 301              10       69         -0.09         -0.33       -0.30
Larson (CO2 only)                                216              20      561         -0.16         -2.23       -1.21
Dingell (all GHGs)                               349              13       13         -0.10          0.49        0.10
Stark (all GHGs)                                 301               2       60         -0.03         -0.13       -0.11
Larson (all GHGs)                                216              13      374         -0.10         -2.13       -0.96
Generic Tax Proposals
28% Reduction                                    287              18       70         -0.13         -0.18       -0.21
50% Reduction                                    203              41      161         -0.32         -1.45       -0.89
58% Reduction                                    167              53      210         -0.55         -1.79       -1.40
     * 186 are the actual allowances for covered sectors; 216 is the estimate of total emissions including
        uncovered sectors from WRI (2007). The actual national emissions depend on growth in
        uncovered sectors. Cumulative emissions are measured in billions of metric tons of CO2-e.


    The last three rows of Table 8 provide generic carbon tax proposals with tax rates growing at
optimally in the EPPA model (at 4 percent real). The tax systems in these proposals differ from
the proposed carbon taxes in that they extend to all GHG emissions. They differ from each other
in the starting tax rates, which determine the cumulative emissions reductions from the business
as usual case. The first proposal reduces cumulative emissions between 2012 and 2050 by a
little over one-quarter. With a price of about $20 per ton CO2-e in 2015 it is similar to the

21
     With banking and borrowing, the price of cap-and-trade permits should grow at the same rate as the expected
      return on safe assets. Since the allowance distribution in cap-and-trade proposals is such that none of the model
      runs ever calls for borrowing, a banking option in the cap-and-trade proposals is sufficient for carbon prices to
      grow at a four percent annual real rate.


                                                             30
Larson Bill with broader coverage of gases and a lower growth rate in the tax rate. Cumulative
emissions are one-third higher in this case than that Larson variation, but welfare losses are
substantially lower. This scenario can also be contrasted with the Stark proposal which allows
just 5 percent more emissions over the control period than this hypothetical scenario. The tax
rate starts out considerably higher, but matches the Stark rate in 2050. Welfare losses are
initially slightly higher than under the Stark proposal, but roughly half the loss by 2050.
Cumulative welfare losses are about 40 percent higher in the Stark proposal than under this
hypothetical tax proposal.
6. REVENUE AND DISTRIBUTION
   Options for use of the revenue from a GHG tax include lump-sum distribution to households,
reducing labor or capital taxes, or spending the funds for other purposes (e.g., R&D or low-
income fuel assistance). As can be seen from Table 9 the potential revenue streams are
substantial, ranging in just the first period of the policy from $69 billion under the Stark Bill to
$126 billion for the Larson Bill.22 This corresponds to between 4 and 7 percent of non-carbon
tax federal tax revenue. Potential revenue rises most rapidly under the Larson Bill.
Table 9. Carbon Tax Revenue.
                2015        2020        2025         2030         2035       2040        2045         2050
Total Potential Tax Revenue (billions $/yr)
Dingell 88        82      84       94       109   118   129                                         141
Stark    69       145     207      263      324   369   415                                         440
Larson 126        192     296      361      439   536   700                                         1031
U.S.     321      334     347      359      369   379   388                                         397
Pop.
Potential Tax disbursement/family of 4 ($/yr)
Dingell 1,102     988     964      1,050    1,181 1,249 1,335                                       1,420
Stark    857      1,741   2,385    2,930    3,517 3,892 4,280                                       4,431
Larson 1,567      2,301   3,410    4,020    4,763 5,655 7,218                                       10,386
CO2 Revenue as a Percentage of Non-CO2 Federal Tax Revenue (%)
Dingell 5%        4%      3%       3%       3%    3%    3%                                          3%
Stark    4%       6%      8%       9%       9%    9%    9%                                          9%
Larson 7%         9%      11%      12%      13%   14%   16%                                         21%


   Table 9 also shows the potential tax disbursement to a family-of-four household each year.
For this purpose we have simply divided the population by 4 as if the population were divided
into four-person households and then divided the total revenue by this artificially constructed
number of households. The amount ranges from about $857 to $1567 in 2015, and ranges from
$1420 to $10,386 in 2050.


22
     We do not include the additional gasoline tax revenue under the Dingell plan since that is earmarked for the
      Highway and Mass Transit Trust Funds.


                                                             31
    To further illustrate the fiscal potential of an emissions tax we also include in Table 9 the
carbon tax revenue as a percentage of Federal non-CO2 tax revenue.23 The potential tax revenue
is substantial, especially under the Larson and Stark proposals. If the revenue were used to cut
taxes evenly across different income groups and income sources, this would be approximately
the percentage reduction in the Federal tax bill that taxpayers could expect to see. Table 9
illustrates that for the range of tax rates under consideration in these proposals, tax revenues are a
constant or growing share of federal tax revenues. This is important if the carbon tax revenue is
used to lower other distortionary taxes as policymakers will wish for some assurance that funds
will persist to finance the tax reductions elsewhere.
    An area of considerable concern is the distributional impact across different income groups of
an emissions tax. The EPPA model is not designed to address this issue as it has a representative
agent for each country but results from the model can be combined with other data to provide
information on this issue. We consider both the incidence of the tax itself as well as the
incidence of the rebated funds under an assumption of revenue neutrality.


     6.1 Theory of Tax Incidence
   We begin with some general comments on incidence analysis. It is important to distinguish
between the statutory and economic incidence of a tax. The statutory incidence refers to who is
required to remit the tax to the government. In an upstream tax system as we have
conceptualized it, coal producers, natural gas distribution centers, petroleum refineries, and fossil
fuel importers would bear the statutory incidence of the tax. The economic incidence refers to
which taxpayers suffer a loss in real income following the imposition of the tax. If fuel prices
rise in response to the GHG tax by the full amount of the tax then consumers will face higher
energy and product prices and will bear the economic burden of the tax. It is important to note
that the economic incidence determines the distributional impacts of a tax. Moreover, economic
incidence is not a choice made by policy-makers, but is determined by equilibrium price
responses following the imposition of a tax.24

     6.2 A Distributional Analysis
   Metcalf (2007) uses data from the National Income and Product Accounts Input-Output
Tables along with data from the Consumer Expenditure Survey to measure the burden of carbon
taxes and other environmental taxes at the household level in the United States.25 We use results
from the EPPA analysis in two ways to supplement the distributional analysis done in that paper.
First, the short-run reductions in carbon emissions from a carbon-only policy are used to predict



23
   Tax rates in EPPA are based on combined Federal, State and local taxes. For purposes of estimating the Federal
    share, we have assumed that it grows at the rate of GDP and that remaining tax revenue is State and local taxes.
24
   See Fullerton and Metcalf (2002) for a fuller discussion of tax incidence.
25
   The methodology for this burden analysis is described in Metcalf (1999).


                                                           32
the revenue that could be raised from the tax in the short-run. This helps determine the average
tax rate in the analysis.
   Second, we use output from the EPPA analysis to determine the portion of the tax that is
passed forward to consumers in the form of higher prices. Considerable work has been carried
out on the incidence of energy taxes in general and – to a limited extent – of carbon taxes in
particular.26 In general it is assumed that these taxes are fully passed forward into higher
consumer prices. This follows from the finding from general equilibrium modeling that taxes on
consumption are fully passed forward. That result, however, may not extend to energy markets
when resource rents may occur. In this case the owner of a scarce and fixed resource asset can
bear the burden of an energy tax. This follows from the basic incidence result that the side of the
market that is more inelastic bears more of the burden of a tax. Fossil fuel resources in the
ground are perfectly inelastic and so would be expected to bear more of the burden of a tax in the
long run. Demand becomes more elastic as alternatives to fossil fuels become available. Thus in
the short run the tax is passed almost fully to consumers, but in the long run resource owners,
who are typically of higher income levels, bear some of the tax burden. The result is that the
distribution across households of a carbon tax could look different in the short and long run.
   We use data from the 2003 Input-Output Tables and Consumer Expenditure Survey for our
analysis. We model a tax of $15 per ton CO2 on fossil fuels only in year 2005 dollars. Energy
related emissions of CO2 in 2003 were 5,800 million metric tons. In the absence of behavioral
responses, a carbon tax that year would have collected $87 billion. Based on results from the
EPPA analysis of a hypothetical tax that allows for cumulative emissions over the control period
of 287 bmt, we assume that the tax would collect $82 billion in the short run. Before considering
short-run forward and backward shifting, we provide results assuming the entire tax is passed
forward as has been assumed in previous analyses.
   Table 10 shows the price increases for industry commodities in the Input-Output accounts for
2003 that are most impacted by the carbon tax. Not surprisingly the tax disproportionately
impacts energy sectors, with coal facing the largest price impact. Note that these price increases
are not simply the price of carbon embedded in a unit of fossil fuels as the price of industry
commodities depend on a number of inputs in addition to the fuel itself. These are also not the
prices faced by consumers. Consumers, for example, purchase almost no coal directly. Instead
they purchase electricity produced from coal as well as industrial products where coal is used as
an energy source. Table 11 shows the price increases for commodities arising from the industry
price increases in Table 10. Prices for electricity and fuels rise the most with other price
increases generally less than one percent.


26
     The distributional impact of energy taxes of one form or another has been considered by Poterba (1989), Bull,
      Hassett and Metcalf (1994), and others. Recent distributional analyses of carbon taxes have been analyzed by,
      among others, Hassett, Mathur and Metcalf (2007), and Metcalf (2007). In a related vein, the incidence of cap-
      and-trade programs with grandfathered permits has been examined by Dinan and Rogers (2002) and Parry
      (2004). In all cases the authors assume the taxes are fully passed forward to consumers in the form of higher
      prices.


                                                            33
Table 10. Selected Industry Price Increases Following a $15 per ton CO2-e Tax.
                 Industry                       Rate
Coal Mining, except oil and gas                 19.1%
Petroleum and coal products                     16.7%
Electricity                                     12.6%
Natural Gas                                     12.3%
Primary metals                                   3.9%
Other Mining, except oil and gas                 2.4%
Pipeline transportation                          2.4%
Nonmetallic mineral products                     2.1%
Air transportation                               1.9%
Paper products                                   1.7%
 Source: Authors' calculations.

Table 11. Selected Commodity Price Increases Following a $15 per ton CO2-e Tax.
      Commodity                   Rate
Electricity                  12.55%
Natural Gas                  12.28%
Home Heating Oil              9.56%
Gasoline                      7.73%
Air Transportation            1.86%
Automobile Purchases          0.90%
Mass Transit                  0.90%
Food At Work                  0.86%
Toiletries                    0.72%
Household Supplies            0.71%
 Source: Authors' calculations.


    These price increases are applied to households in the Consumer Expenditure Survey for
2003. These budget impacts for the carbon tax assume no consumer behavioral response.
Consumer substitution away from more carbon-intensive products will contribute to an erosion
of the carbon tax base. The burden for consumers, however, will not be reduced as much as tax
collections will fall. Firms incur costs to shift away from carbon-intensive inputs, costs that will
be passed forward to consumers. Consumers also will engage in welfare-reducing activities as
they shift their consumption activities to avoid paying the full carbon tax. Although the burdens
reported here do not take account of the range of economic responses to the tax, the impacts
provide a reasonable first approximation of the welfare impacts of a carbon tax. Below we
discuss whether these behavioral responses affect the distributional analysis.
    Table 12 presents distributional impacts assuming full forward shifting. The carbon tax by
itself is highly regressive with the lowest income groups facing an average increase in tax related
spending equal to 3.7 percent of their income. This includes both direct spending on fuels as
well as the higher cost of commodities resulting from the use of now-more expensive fuels in


                                                  34
their production. The percentage of income spent on energy directly and indirectly falls as
household income rises, with the top income group facing an increase in spending equal to 0.8
percent of income. The EPPA analysis assumes a lump sum rebate of the carbon tax revenue.
Maintaining that assumption here offsets the regressivity of the tax. Providing a per capita lump
sum rebate is highly progressive, with the lowest income groups seeing a benefit equal to 5.6
percent of income. The benefit as a percentage of income falls so that the top income group
receives a rebate equal to roughly one-half percent of income. The net impact is a modestly
progressive reform. The lowest income group sees a fall in overall tax burden equal to about two
percent of income. Households in the bottom sixty percent of the income distribution see a
decrease in taxes and the top income deciles see increases in taxes of at most 0.2 percent. Table
12 illustrates the important point that the distributional impact of the tax depends importantly on
how the revenue is recycled in the tax system.
Table 12. Distributional Impacts Assuming Full Forward Shifting.
Income       Carbon       Lump-Sum         Net
 Decile       Tax as      Rebate as       Impact
           Percent of     Percent of
             Income         Income
            (Income        (Income
              Loss)          Gain)
   1           -3.7              5.6          1.9
   2           -3.0              4.0          1.0
   3           -2.3              3.1          0.8
   4           -2.0              2.4          0.4
   5           -1.7              2.1          0.4
   6           -1.5              1.6          0.1
   7           -1.3              1.3          0.0
   8           -1.2              1.2          0.0
   9           -1.0              0.9         -0.1
   10          -0.8              0.6         -0.2
 Source: Authors' calculations


   To consider further the sources of the regressivity of carbon taxes, we measure the
distributional impact of a carbon tax applied to coal, natural gas, and petroleum separately in the
Consumer Expenditure Survey. Results are shown in Figure 15. The distribution of consumer
impacts for carbon pricing across the three fuels is remarkably similar. The burden through coal
and natural gas appears to be slightly more regressive than the burden through oil, but the
differences are quite small. It does not appear that carbon pricing for any of the fuels is
especially important for explaining the overall distributional impact of the carbon tax.




                                                    35
                                                  3
                                                       Distributional Impacts by Fuel
                                                 2.5                                                  Coal



                    Tax's Percentage of Income
                                                                                                      Natural Gas
                                                  2                                                   Oil


                                                 1.5


                                                  1


                                                 0.5


                                                  0
                                                        1      2     3     4     5        6   7   8     9     10
                                                                                 Decile
                                                            Figure 15. Distributional Impacts by Fuel.

   As noted above, behavioral responses by consumers and firms will reduce the burden of the
carbon tax to some extent.27 Behavioral changes raise two issues. The first is the overall
revenue burden of the tax following consumer and firm responses to the tax. We have tried to
control for this by scaling the amount of tax collected based on results from the EPPA model
runs. The second issue is whether these behavioral responses affect the distributional results
appreciably. Consider first consumer demand shifts away from more to less carbon intensive
consumer goods. The very regressive results we find in Table 12 for the tax (ignoring the rebate)
are unlikely to be affected by changes in behavior. For this to occur we would need very
different price elasticities for electricity and fuels across the income distribution. While there is
some support for differences in income elasticities across income groups, little support exists for
very different price elasticities across income groups. Any differences that do exist are likely to
exacerbate the regressive results found in Table 12 if low-income households have fewer
substitution possibilities than do high-income households.
   A second possible area of concern arises from substitution in production. We would expect,
for example, a shift in the generation of electricity from coal to natural gas thereby raising the
price of natural gas relative to coal. The finding in Figure 15 that the distributional impact of
carbon price impacts is similar across fuels suggests that fuel switching should not affect the
burden appreciably. These two considerations both maintain the assumption of full forward
shifting of the tax. We next consider how relaxing this assumption affects the distributional
impact.
   The assumption of full forward shifting is at best an approximation for a carbon tax in the
short run. We explore the implications of backward shifting by using the results on fuel prices

27
     But note that some of the reduced tax payment is offset by higher deadweight losses arising from the behavioral
      responses.


                                                                                     36
from the hypothetical tax that allows 287 bmt emissions over the 2012-2050 control period. For
the short-run scenario we use the producer and consumer prices for 2015, the first period for
which we have model runs after the tax is imposed. Coal prices are almost entirely shifted
forward into higher consumer prices (see Table 6).
   Table 13 and Figure 16 present results for when we allow for different amounts of backward
shifting. In the case of the long-run results, we do not claim that these are the actual burdens
that would be borne. Rather this is what the distributional burden would be if consumption
patterns were the same as in 2003. The point of the exercise is to illustrate the impact that
differential shifting has on the distributional burden of the carbon tax. For allocating the burden
of the tax shifted backwards, we use the distribution of capital holdings in the Consumer
Expenditure Survey (CEX) to distribute the tax. Our operating assumption is that holdings of
capital ownership in fossil fuel resource stocks are proportional to capital holdings in the CEX.28
Table 13. Impact of Different Shifting Assumptions on Carbon Tax Burden.
Income             Full           Short Run          Long Run
 Decile          Forward           Shifting           Shifting
                 Shifting        (% Change          (% Change
               (% Change         in Income)         in Income)
               in Income)
      1             -3.7              -3.2                -2.5
      2             -3.0              -2.8                -2.2
      3             -2.3              -2.4                -2.5
      4             -2.0              -1.9                -1.6
      5             -1.7              -1.6                -1.4
      6             -1.5              -1.4                -1.2
      7             -1.3              -1.3                -1.2
      8             -1.2              -1.2                -1.1
      9             -1.0              -1.1                -1.1
      10            -0.8              -0.9                -1.1
     Source: Authors' calculations


    The first finding to note in Figure 16 is that even in the short-run backward shifting mitigates
the regressivity of the carbon tax.29 The burden on the lowest decile falls by 11 percent when
some of the tax is shifted backwards. The ratio of the burden in the lowest decile relative to the
highest decile falls from 4.5 to 3.5 once one allows for backward shifting in the short run. The
change in distributional burden is more striking in the long run. The burden on the lowest two
deciles falls by 30 percent while the burden in the top decile rises by about 35 percent. Now the
ratio in burdens between the top and bottom deciles falls from 4.5 to 2.3.

28
   This overstates the impact on U.S. residents as much of the tax would be shifted to foreign owners of reserves. In
    fact, one could reasonably argue that nearly all of the impact would be foreign owners since the United States
    accounts for 2.5 percent of world proved reserves of oil and 3.3 percent for natural gas BP (2007).
29
   Table 12 only looks at the carbon tax and not the rebate. The rebate is unaffected by the extent of forward
    shifting.


                                                           37
                                               4.0
                                                     Distributional Impacts Over Time
                                               3.5                                          Forw ard Shifting

                  Tax's Percentage of Income
                                                                                            SR Shifting
                                               3.0
                                                                                            LR Shifting
                                               2.5

                                               2.0

                                               1.5

                                               1.0

                                               0.5

                                               0.0
                                                     1     2    3    4    5     6       7   8      9      10
                                                                           Decile
                                                         Figure 16. Distributional Impact Over Time.

   This analysis suggests a number of important points. First, distributional analyses that
assume full forward shifting of the tax in the short-run are likely to modestly overstate the
regressivity of a carbon tax. Second, the ability to shift the burden of the tax back has larger
effects in the longer run and may dampen the regressivity of a carbon tax significantly.30 In the
long-run, it is also likely that some of the tax will be exported to non-U.S. owners of natural gas
and oil reserves. Third, how the United States uses the carbon tax revenue affects the overall
distribution of the tax significantly. If we ignore the use of proceeds from the carbon tax, it
looks distinctly regressive. A lump-sum rebate of the proceeds would be highly progressive and
would in fact lead to a modestly progressive carbon tax reform. Such a rebate foregoes the
opportunity to use the revenue to make efficiency improvements in the U.S. tax system. Metcalf
(2007) analyzes a carbon tax swap where the revenue is used to lower labor income taxes.
Green, Hayward and Hassett (2007) emphasize the benefits of using carbon tax revenue to pay
for reductions in capital income taxation. Results from Gurgel et al. (2007) suggest that the
greatest efficiency gains arise from using carbon revenues to lower taxes on capital.
7. CONCLUSION
    We have used the MIT EPPA model to evaluate carbon tax proposals as a policy instrument
to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. Several lessons emerge from the analysis. First, a low
starting tax rate combined with a low rate of growth in the tax rate will not reduce emissions
significantly. The Dingell proposal reduces emissions from the reference case by 12 percent

30
     The distributional analysis here uses annual income to rank households. It has long been understood that this
      biases consumption and energy taxes towards greater regressivity than when a measure of lifetime income is
      used to rank households. Hassett, Mathur and Metcalf (2007) construct different proxies for lifetime income to
      address this bias.


                                                                                38
over the 2012–2050 control period while the Stark proposal reduces emissions by 25 percent.
The Larson Bill with its more rapid growth rate for the tax rate reduces emissions by nearly 50
percent over this period. In all cases the welfare impacts are relatively modest ranging from a
slightly positive impact for the Dingell plan to a discounted welfare cost of 1.2 percent for the
Larson plan.
    Second, the costs of emissions reductions are reduced with the inclusion of non-CO2 gases in
the carbon tax scheme. The costs of the Larson plan, for example, falls by 20 percent with
inclusion of the other GHGs. Third, welfare costs of the policies can be affected by the rate of
growth of the tax, even after controlling for cumulative emissions. In our model, that suggests
that a tax rising at the rate of interest over the control period will achieve a given cumulative
emissions target at minimum cost. Lowering the growth rate for the tax to four percent and
including all GHGs lowers the welfare cost of meeting the cumulative emissions reduction in the
Larson plan by roughly one-third. For the Stark plan, the welfare cost savings is about one-
fourth.
    Fourth, a carbon tax – like any form of carbon pricing – is highly regressive. The regressivity
can be offset with a carefully designed rebate of some or all of the revenue. Moreover, general
equilibrium considerations suggest that the short-run measured regressivity may be overstated.
Over time, a portion of the carbon tax is passed back to workers, owners of equity, and resource
owners. To the extent that resource and equity owners bear some fraction of the tax burden, the
regressivity will be reduced because these assets are disproportionately owned by those with
higher incomes.
    Finally the carbon tax bills that have been proposed or submitted lead to a range of emissions
reductions that are comparable to many of the cap-and-trade proposals that have been suggested.
Thus the choice between a carbon tax and cap-and-trade system can be made on the basis of
considerations other than their effectiveness at reducing emissions over some control period.
Either approach (or some hybrid of the two approaches) can be equally effective at reducing
GHG emissions in the United States.



8. REFERENCES
Anderson, R. and A. Lohof, 1997: The United States Experience with Economic Incentives in
   Environmental Pollution Control Policy, Washington, DC: Office of Economy and
   Environment, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
BP, 2007: BP Statistical Review of World Energy June 2007.
Brannlund, R. and I.-M. Gren (eds.), 1999: Green Taxes: Economic Theory and Empirical
   Evidence from Scandinavia, Edward Elgar: Cheltenham, UK.
Buchner, B., C. Carraro, and A.D. Ellerman, 2006: The Allocation of European Union
   Allowances: Lessons, Unifying Themes and General Principles, MIT Joint Program on the
   Science and Policy of Global Change: Cambridge, MA.




                                                  39
Bull, N., K. Hassett, and G. Metcalf, 1994: Who Pays Broad-Based Energy Taxes? Computing
    Lifetime and Regional Incidence. The Energy Journal, 15(3): 145-164.
Dinan, T. and D. Rogers, 2002: Distributional Effects of Carbon Allowance Trading: How
    Government Decisions Determine Winners and Losers. National Tax Journal, 55(2):199-
    221.
Dougherty, K., 2007: Quebec the First to Announce Carbon Tax," National Post, national
    edition, A1.
Ellerman, A.D., P. Joskow, and D. Harrison, 2003: Emissions Trading: Experience, Lessons, and
    Considerations for Greenhouse Gases, Pew Center on Global Climate Change: Washington,
    DC.
Ellerman, A.D., P. Joskow, J.-P. Montero, R. Schmalensee, and E. Bailey, 2000: Markets for
    Clean Air: The U.S. Acid Rain Program, Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, UK.
Fowlie, J. and F. Anderson, 2008: B.C. Introduces Carbon Tax, The Vancouver Sun. Vancouver,
    B.C., Feb. 19.
Fullerton, D. and G. Metcalf, 1998: Environmental Taxed and the Double-Dividend Hypothesis:
    Did You Really Expect Something for Nothing?, Chicago-Kent Law Review, 73: 221-256.
Fullerton, D. and G. Metcalf, 2002: Tax Incidence. In: A. Auerbach and M. Feldstein, Handbook
    of Public Economics, Vol. 4., Elsevier Science B.V.: Amsterdam, pp. 1787-1872.
Goulder, L., 1995: Environmental Taxation and the 'Double Dividend': A Reader's Guide,
    International Tax and Public Finance, 2:157- 183.
Green, K., S. Hayward, and K. Hassett, 2007: Climate Change: Caps Vs. Taxes, American
    Enterprise Institute: Washington, DC.
Gurgel, A., S. Paltsev, J. Reilly, and G. Metcalf, 2007: U.S. Greenhouse Gas Cap-and-Trade
    Proposals: Application of a Forward-Looking Computable General Equilibrium Model, MIT
    Joint Program on the Science and Policy of Global Change Report 150, June, 27 p.
    (http://web.mit.edu/globalchange/www/MITJPSPGC_Rpt150.pdf).
Hassett, K., A. Mathur, and G. Metcalf, 2008: The Incidence of a U.S. Carbon Tax: A Lifetime
    and Regional Analysis, National Bureau of Economic Research: Cambridge, MA.
Hoel, M. and L. Karp, 2002: Taxes Versus Quotas for a Stock Pollutant, Resource and Energy
    Economics, 24: 367-384.
Joskow, P., 2006: Markets for Power in the United States: An Interim Assessment, The Energy
    Journal, 27(1):1-36.
Karp, L. and J. Zhang, 2007: Regulation of Stock Externalities with Correlated Abatement Costs,
    Environmental and Resource Economics, 32: 273-299.
Matus, K., T. Yang, S. Paltsev, J. Reilly, and K.-M. Nam, 2008: Toward Integrated Assessment
    of Environmental Change: Air Pollution Health Effects in the USA, Climatic Change, in
    press.
Metcalf, G., 1999: A Distributional Analysis of Green Tax Reforms, National Tax Journal,
    52(4): 655-681.
Metcalf, G., 2007: A Proposal for a U.S. Carbon Tax Swap: An Equitable Tax Reform to
    Address Global Climate Change, The Hamilton Project, Brookings Institution: Washington,
    DC.
Metcalf, G., M. Babiker, and J. Reilly, 2004: A Note on Weak Double Dividends, The B.E.
    Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy, 4, 1 (Topics) Article 2.


                                               40
Newell, R. and W. Pizer, 2003: Regulating Stock Externalities under Uncertainty," Journal of
    Environmental Economics and Management, 45: 416-432.
Paltsev, S., J. Reilly, H. Jacoby, A. Gurgel, G. Metcalf, A. Sokolov and J. Holak, 2007:
    Assessment of U.S. Cap-and-Trade Proposals, MIT Joint Program on the Science and Policy
    of Global Change Report 146, April, 71 p.
    (http://web.mit.edu/globalchange/www/MITJPSPGC_Rpt146.pdf). Also to appear in reduced
    version in Climate Policy, in press.
Parry, I., 2004: Are Emissions Permits Regressive, Journal of Environmental Economics and
    Management, 47: 364-387.
Poterba, J., 1989: Lifetime Incidence and the Distributional Burden of Excise Taxes, American
    Economic Review, 79(May): 325-330.
Reilly, J., M. Sarofim, S. Paltsev, and R. Prinn, 2006: The Role of Non-CO2 Greenhouse Gases
    in Climate Policy: Analysis Using the MIT IGSM, Energy Journal, Special Issue No. 3: 503-
    520.
Webster, M., C. Forest, J. Reilly, M. Babiker, D. Kicklighter, M. Mayer, R. Prinn, M. Sarofim,
    A. Sokolov, P. Stone, and C. Wang, 2003: Uncertainty Analysis of Climate Change and
    Policy Response, Climatic Change, 61(3): 295-320.
Weitzman, M., 1974: Prices Vs. Quantities, Review of Economic Studies, 41(4): 477-491.




                                               41
                                    APPENDIX: Details of Simulation Results*

Page Simulation Run31
     43    Reference Scenario
     44    Scenario 1: Dingell Proposal
     45    Scenario 1a: Dingell Cum GHG CO2 Only
     46    Scenario 2: Dingell Cum GHG
     47    Scenario 2a: Dingell Cum GHG with Gas Tax
     48    Scenario 3: Dingell 4%
     49    Scenario 3a: Dingell 4% Cum GHG CO2 Only
     50    Scenario 4: Dingell 4% Cum GHG
     51    Scenario 4a: Dingell 4% Cum GHG with Gas Tax
     52    Scenario 5: Stark Proposal
     53    Scenario 6: Stark Cum GHG
     54    Scenario 7: Stark Real
     55    Scenario 8: Stark Real Cum GHG
     56    Scenario 9: Larson Proposal
     57    Scenario 10: Larson Cum GHG
     58    Scenario 11: 216 bmt
     59    Scenario 12: 287 bmt


* Only a sample page is attached here. The full version of the Appendix is available as a
separate file with this report at http://web.mit.edu/globalchange/www/abstracts.html#a160.




31
     All prices and taxes are in 2005 dollars.


                                                      42
                                                            Reference Scenario
                                           2005     2010     2015    2020     2025      2030      2035      2040      2045      2050
ECONOMY WIDE INDICATORS
Population (million)                        296      309      321      334      347      359       369       379       388       397
GDP (billion 2005$)                       11981    14339    16921    19773    22846    26459     30534     34929     39530     44210
% Change GDP from Reference                   --       --       --       --       --       --        --        --        --        --
Market Consumption (billion 2005$)         8217     9858    11533    13384    15364    17761     20467     23392     26456     29567
% Change Consumption from Reference           --       --       --       --       --       --        --        --        --        --
Welfare (billion 2005$)                    9656    11773    13933    16342    18948    22016     25414     29032     32780     36553
% Change Welfare from Reference(EV)           --       --       --       --       --       --        --        --        --        --
CO2-E Price (2005$/tCO2-e)                  0.00     0.00     0.00     0.00     0.00     0.00      0.00      0.00      0.00      0.00

PRICES (index, 2005=1.00)
Petroleum Product                           1.00     1.15     1.30     1.48     1.69     1.87      1.97      2.09      2.19      2.25
Natural Gas                                 1.00     1.11     1.27     1.48     1.66     1.95      2.31      2.73      3.12      3.55
Coal                                        1.00     1.04     1.07     1.09     1.13     1.16      1.20      1.24      1.28      1.32
Electricity                                 1.00     1.11     1.19     1.27     1.35     1.38      1.42      1.42      1.42      1.41

TRADE & PRODUCTION (selected indicators)
Bio Liquids Production in US (EJ)            0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0       0.0       0.0       0.0       0.0
Net Bio Liquids Imports (EJ)                 0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0       0.0       0.0       0.0       0.0
Net Bio Liquids Imports (billion 2005$)     0.00     0.00     0.00     0.00     0.00     0.00      0.00      0.00      0.00      0.00
Net Crude Oil Imports (billion 2005$)      77.40    85.21    93.97   102.60   110.94   126.11    149.39    170.99    159.14    144.83
Net Agriculture Exports (billion 2005$)    25.64    25.53    20.40    19.29    14.24    12.35     11.48     10.92     11.61     14.99

GHG EMISSIONS (mmt CO2-e)
GHG Emissions                             7091.9   7680.1   8201.5   8595.6   9219.3   9884.8   10711.0   11507.3   12433.3   13283.3
CO2 Emissions                             5984.3   6517.4   6995.2   7357.3   7915.4   8518.8    9283.0   10012.9   10871.0   11655.9
CH4 Emissions                              583.4    602.0    611.6    617.1    630.5    643.1     652.2     663.6     676.5     683.1
N2O Emissions                              385.2    387.9    381.3    372.4    366.5    365.6     372.8     380.8     391.0     407.3
Fluorinated Gases Emissions                140.0    173.8    214.4    250.0    308.1    358.5     404.3     451.3     496.2     538.5

PRIMARY ENERGY USE (EJ)
Coal                                        22.6     24.3     25.8     26.6     30.9     35.0      39.9      44.8      49.6      53.3
Total Petroleum Products                    42.0     46.0     49.6     52.6     55.2     58.8      63.9      68.8      73.6      78.5
   Including Shale Oil                       0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0       0.0       0.0       9.7      19.6
Natural Gas                                 22.5     24.7     26.8     28.9     28.4     28.3      27.7      26.8      25.8      25.1
Nuclear (primary energy eq)                  9.3      9.0      8.8      8.7      8.6      8.5       8.4       8.4       8.3       8.3
Hydro (primary energy eq)                    2.9      2.8      2.8      2.8      2.8      2.9       2.9       3.0       3.1       3.2
Renewable Elec. (primary energy eq)          0.6      0.7      0.8      1.0      0.9      1.2       1.1       1.4       1.5       1.6
Biomass Liquids                              0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0       0.0       0.0       0.0       0.0
Total Primary Energy Use                    99.8    107.6    114.6    120.5    126.8    134.6     143.9     153.1     161.9     170.0
Reduced Use from Reference                   0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0       0.0       0.0       0.0       0.0

ELECTRICITY PRODUCTION (EJ)
Coal w/o CCS                                 6.9      7.6      8.3      8.6     10.2     11.7      13.4      15.2      17.0      18.5
Oil w/o CCS                                  0.3      0.3      0.3      0.3      0.4      0.4       0.4       0.5       0.5       0.6
Gas w/o CCS                                  2.1      2.5      3.1      3.9      3.3      3.1       2.9       2.7       2.4       2.3
Nuclear                                      3.0      3.0      3.0      3.0      3.0      3.1       3.1       3.1       3.1       3.1
Hydro                                        0.9      1.0      1.0      1.0      1.0      1.0       1.1       1.1       1.1       1.2
Other Renewables                             0.2      0.2      0.3      0.3      0.3      0.4       0.4       0.5       0.6       0.6
Gas with CCS                                 0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0       0.0       0.0       0.0       0.0
Coal with CCS                                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0       0.0       0.0       0.0       0.0
Total Electricity Production                13.4     14.6     15.9     17.1     18.2     19.7      21.3      23.1      24.7      26.2


                                                               43
