NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TECHNOLOGY CAPITAL AND THE U.S. CURRENT ACCOUNT
Ellen R. McGrattan
Edward C. Prescott
Working Paper 13983
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13983

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2008

Appendices, data, and codes are available at our website http://www.minneapolisfed.org/research/sr/sr406.html.
We thank seminar participants at NYU, UPenn, Berkeley, ITAM, Miami, the SED, Kansas, Toronto,
the IMF, Maryland, and the Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City, Minneapolis, New York, Philadelphia,
and San Francisco for feedback on earlier drafts of the paper. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, the Federal Reserve
System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Ellen R. McGrattan and Edward C. Prescott. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Technology Capital and the U.S. Current Account
Ellen R. McGrattan and Edward C. Prescott
NBER Working Paper No. 13983
April 2008
JEL No. F32
ABSTRACT
The U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) estimates the return on investments of foreign subsidiaries
of U.S. multinational companies over the period 1982–2006 averaged 9.4 percent annually after taxes;
U.S. subsidiaries of foreign multinationals averaged only 3.2 percent. Two factors distort BEA returns:
technology capital and plant-specific intangible capital. Technology capital is accumulated know-how
from intangible investments in R&D, brands, and organizations that can be used in foreign and domestic
locations. Used abroad, it generates profits for foreign subsidiaries with no foreign direct investment
(FDI). Plant-specific intangible capital in foreign subsidiaries is expensed abroad, lowering current
profits on FDI and increasing future profits. We develop a multicountry general equilibrium model
with an essential role for FDI and apply the BEA's methodology to construct economic statistics for
the model economy. We estimate that mismeasurement of intangible investments accounts for over
60 percent of the difference in BEA returns.

Ellen R. McGrattan
Research Department
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
90 Hennepin Avenue
Minneapolis, MN 55480
and NBER
erm@mcgrattan.mpls.frb.fed.us
Edward C. Prescott
Economics Department
ASU / Main Campus
PO BOX 873806
Tempe, AZ 85287-3806
and NBER
edward.prescott@asu.edu

1. Introduction
The U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis estimates the return on investments of foreign
subsidiaries of U.S. multinational companies over the period 1982–2006 averaged 9.4 percent annually after taxes, whereas returns on investments of U.S. subsidiaries of foreign
multinationals averaged only 3.2 percent. These series are displayed in Figure 1.1 The
figure shows that the differences in these returns are not only high on average but are
persistently high. Furthermore, when compared with estimates of returns of U.S. businesses on domestic operations, returns on investments abroad are 4 to 5 percentage points
higher, and returns on investments made by foreign companies in the United States are
1 to 2 percentage points lower. Since one-third of U.S. C-corporation profits come from
their foreign subsidiaries, understanding why their foreign operations appear to be doing
so much better than their domestic operations is both interesting and important.
In this paper, we estimate the importance of unmeasured intangible investments that
distort measured returns on foreign direct investment. We do this by developing a multicountry general equilibrium model that includes intangible capital. The main theoretical
innovation is the inclusion of two distinct types of intangible capital: technology capital
that can be used at multiple locations and intangible capital that is plant-specific. Examples of technology capital include accumulated know-how from investments in research
and development (R&D), brands, and organizations that is not specific to a plant. Technology capital used abroad generates rents for foreign subsidiaries with no foreign direct
investment. Thus, given technology capital, foreign subsidiaries play an essential role.
We apply the same methodology as the BEA to construct economic statistics for our
model economy. We emphasize that the names for the BEA statistics are not appropriate
in our model world. In the model world, which has no uncertainty, the after-tax returns
1

The U.S. return is direct investment receipts from Table 1 of the U.S. International Transactions
divided by the U.S. direct investment position at current cost from Table 2 of the U.S. International
Investment Yearend Positions. The foreign return is analogous: direct investment payments divided
by the foreign direct investment position at current cost.

1

% 14
12

Averages, 1982−2006
USDIA: 9.40%
FDIUS: 3.15%

Foreign Subsidiaries of U.S. Companies

10

8

6

U.S. Affiliates of Foreign Companies

4

2

0

-2
1982

1984

1986

1988

1990

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

2004

2006

Figure 1. BEA Rates of Return on Foreign Subsidiary Capital

on all investments are equal. Consequently, all differences in returns that are constructed
with the BEA methodology are due to differences in the timing and magnitude of foreign
intangible investment and income.
We find that abstracting from either technology capital or plant-specific intangible
capital has large consequences for the BEA-measured rates of return on U.S. foreign subsidiaries and U.S. affiliates of foreign companies. We estimate that the mismeasurement
of intangible investments leads to a 4 percentage point difference in FDI returns for the
period 1982–2006, with the return on foreign FDI in the United States very close to what
theory predicts and the return on U.S. FDI higher than predicted.
Our finding rests critically on differences in the timing and magnitude of inward and
outward FDI in the United States. After World War II, foreign direct investments in the
2

United States were negligible and did not begin to rise significantly until the late 1970s.
If foreign companies make large expensed investments in plant-specific intangible capital
when setting up operations, profits of foreign affiliates will appear low relative to those
of domestic companies.2 This is the case for U.S. affiliates of foreign companies. On the
other hand, if significant intangible investments have already been made, then accounting
profits will appear high because they include the rents from this intangible capital. This
is the case for U.S. companies that have had large direct investment incomes throughout
the post-World War II period.
To estimate the return differentials for inward and outward FDI, we use secular trends
for the period 1960–2006 in U.S. current account series—namely, net factor incomes and
net exports—to tie down the paths of the key exogenous parameters of our model. We
then use these inputs to make predictions for asset holdings and returns. The key parameters are countries’ degree of openness to foreign multinationals’ technology capital,
technology capital’s share of income, and the relative size of the United States vis-à-vis
foreign countries.
The degree of openness is the degree to which foreign multinationals’ technology capital is allowed to be used in production by foreign multinationals. In a country that is
closed, only domestic firms operate; there is no FDI income, and FDI returns are zero.
As a country opens up, it gains because foreign companies have technologies that can be
operated in the country through their FDI and at any location within the country. As
countries open, productivity increases because more multinationals have more locations in
which they can use their technology capital. The extent of the increase depends on the
income share of technology capital. We find that the degree of openness and the share of
income to technology capital are important determinants for FDI incomes.
The relative size of a country is a function of both its population and its total factor
2

High startup costs of new FDI by foreign affiliates in the United States is one explanation that the
BEA gives for comparatively low returns on foreign direct investment in the United States.

3

productivity relative to that of other countries. We find that the path of the relative size
of the United States vis-à-vis foreign countries is an important determinant for the path
of U.S. net exports. In particular, we find that the recent slowdown in population growth
in countries hosting U.S. FDI accounts for much of the recent decline in the U.S. trade
balance.
As an external check, we also compare the model’s prediction for the U.S. consumption
share of gross domestic product (GDP) and the ratio of U.S. GDP to world GDP. We find
that the trends in the model shares are consistent with data from U.S. national accounts
and the Conference Board and Groningen Growth and Development Centre (GGDC)
(2008).
The model that we develop has efficient domestic and international goods and asset
markets. Multinationals are price-takers using different technologies in competitive markets to produce a single composite good that is freely shipped anywhere in the world.
All investments, whether at home or abroad, earn the same rate of return. We abstract
from financial market and trade barriers to isolate the impact of mismeasuring intangible
investments.3 We also assume that U.S. and foreign technologies are symmetric, with neither having a comparative advantage in production of technology capital. An open issue
is whether extending the theory to include financial frictions or asymmetric technologies
can account for the remaining gap in the FDI return differential.
Our paper is related to the empirical literature concerned with improving measures
of cross-border asset returns and external positions.4 This literature has been engaged
in a lively debate about whether there are indeed significant cross-border rate of return
differentials on portfolio assets and direct investment assets. Most agree that there are
3

Caballero, Farhi, and Gourinchas (2008) and Mendoza, Quadrini, and Rı́os-Rull (2006) develop
general equilibrium models with financial frictions to estimate the effects on the current accounts of
unanticipated capital liberalizations. Fogli and Perri (2006) estimate the impact of lower U.S. business
cycle volatility on the U.S. trade balance due to lower precautionary savings. None of these papers
consider the impact of unmeasured investments.

4

See, for example, Gourinchas and Rey (2007) and Curcuru, Dvorak, and Warnock (forthcoming).

4

return differentials in FDI, and the focus of research—both inside and outside the BEA—
has been on improving estimates of the market value of foreign subsidiaries. Market values
include the value of intangible assets and, if used when constructing FDI returns, could
potentially eliminate the puzzling differential between returns on U.S. foreign operations
and returns on foreign operations in the United States. Unfortunately, these researchers
face two difficult problems: market values of subsidiaries and parents are not separately
available and current estimates of direct investment at market value are not meaningful
if firms have capital that can be used simultaneously at home and abroad. In this paper,
we take a different approach to this difficult measurement problem: we allow for the fact
that actual and measured returns may differ and use theory to infer the differential in
measured returns. We also focus on the direct investment position at current cost, which is
the empirical counterpart to foreign subsidiary (tangible) reproducible costs in our theory.
More closely related to our work are two recent papers that use the neoclassical growth
model, augmented to include intangible capital, to study U.S. foreign direct investment.
Bridgman (2007) uses a model with plant-specific intangible capital and evidence on R&D
expenditures by multinationals to adjust reported rates of return on FDI. He adjusts
reported rates by the ratio of tangible to total capital. He finds that the adjusted return
differential is considerably smaller than the reported return differential and attributes
this finding to cross-country differences in tangible to intangible capital ratios in foreign
subsidiaries. Kapicka (2008) uses a growth model that includes technology capital to
estimate the welfare gains of a fully open United States. He first shows that the model
with technology capital successfully predicts the time paths of inward and outward foreign
direct investments.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a brief history of U.S. policies
that impact the timing and magnitude of inward and outward FDI. Section 3 describes
the theory we use. We first derive the aggregate production function for a closed economy

5

with technology capital and then extend the derivation to the multicountry case. We then
use the aggregate production functions in a multicountry general equilibrium model. In
Section 4, we choose parameters based on U.S. data and compare equilibrium paths of our
model with trends in U.S. time series. Conclusions are found in Section 5.

2. History of U.S. Policies Related to FDI
The findings of our quantitative analysis depend critically on the timing and magnitude
of inward and outward FDI in the United States, which in turn depends on how we model
the relative degree of openness to foreign technology capital in the United States and
elsewhere. Our theory of FDI is consistent with U.S. current account facts if we model the
United States after World War II as initially less open to inward FDI than the rest of the
world was to U.S. outward FDI, with a rapid change occurring during the 1970s. In this
section, we review key policies that discouraged inward FDI during the postwar period.
These policies lead us to conclude that our modeling of U.S. openness is reasonable.

2.1. Bretton Woods System of Fixed Exchange Rates
In compliance with the Foreign Investment Study Act of 1974, the U.S. Secretary of Commerce was asked to report on foreign direct investment in the United States. Appendix
G, entitled “Investment Motivation,” outlines reasons why foreign companies invested or
did not invest in the United States. According to the report, “currency undervaluation
acted as a strong disincentive to foreign direct investment in the United States, both because it placed an artificially high price on dollar-denominated assets, and because it gave
foreign producers an inherent cost advantage in selling in U.S. markets through exports”
(U.S. Department of Commerce 1976, p. G-40).
The United States suspended convertibility from dollars to gold in August 1971. Between 1971 and 1973, the dollar depreciated 35 percent relative to the German mark, 26
6

percent relative to the Japanese yen, 27 percent relative to the French franc, 28 percent
relative to the Dutch guilder, and 35 percent relative to the Swiss franc.
In February 1973, the Bretton Woods currency exchange market closed.

2.2. Interest Equalization Tax
Another disincentive for foreign multinationals considering investing in the United States
was the high cost of financing under the interest equalization tax (IET) (U.S. Department
of Commerce 1976, p. G-58). The IET, which was effective in 1963, was a tax of 15 percent
on interest received from foreign borrowers. The intent of the tax was to eliminate the
deficit in the balance of payments. The effect was to close U.S. capital markets to foreign
affiliates in the United States.
The interest equalization tax was removed in 1974.

2.3. Extraterritorial Application of U.S. Laws
According to Damm (1970), foreign companies considering investment in the United States
were concerned with a “growing trend toward extraterritorial application of U.S. laws and
regulations” (p. 41). Ellis (1970) provides many examples of extraterritorial application
of U.S. antitrust law, including cases where the economic activities took place outside the
United States.
Although there was no formal dissolution of extraterritorial application of U.S. antitrust law, some foreign governments reacted to orders of the U.S. courts by making it
illegal for their companies to comply with them. For example, the Watkins report (Watkins
1968) recommended that the Canadian government “enact legislation to prohibit compliance with foreign antitrust orders, decrees, or judgments.”

7

2.4. National Security Acts
During World War I, national security concerns were the impetus for FDI restrictions in
certain industries and for the Trading with the Enemy Act (TWEA) of 1917.
The TWEA allowed the president to “investigate, regulate, direct and compel, nullify,
void, prevent or prohibit, any acquisition, holding, withholding, use, transfer, withdrawal,
transportation, importation or exportation of, or dealing in, or exercising any right, power,
or privilege with respect to, or transactions involving, any property in which any foreign
country or a national thereof has any interest.” President Wilson invoked the TWEA
during the war to seize all U.S. assets of German companies. He also seized all foreignowned radio stations, including those owned by British companies. President Roosevelt
invoked the TWEA during World War II to seize German and Japanese assets in the
United States.
According to Graham and Marchick (2006), uncertainty about whether the U.S. government would seize foreign assets in an international emergency was resolved in 1976
when the TWEA was supplanted by the International Emergency Economic Powers Act
(IEEPA). The IEEPA stipulated conditions of an international emergency and took away
the right to transfer title of foreign assets to the United States in such an emergency.
Until the IEEPA in 1976, the TWEA was the primary regulation concerned with the
impact of foreign direct investment on national security.

3. Theory
In this section, we describe a multicountry general equilibrium model that builds on McGrattan and Prescott (2007). We begin by describing the technologies available to multinationals. We then describe the problems faced by citizens in the different countries. Finally,

8

we describe how BEA accountants would record transactions with the data from our model
economy.

3.1. Technologies
A country’s stock of technology capital is the number (or measure) of technologies owned
by its multinationals. A technology is a production unit that can be operated in any
country and at any location within a country. An example of such a technology is a
company brand or patent that can be used—with inputs of tangible capital, plant-specific
intangible capital, and labor—in many locations simultaneously. The number of locations
in a country is proportional to its population.
We start by describing production in one country and then extend the analysis below
to a multicountry world.
Single-Country Production
We model a country as a measure of locations. Firms choose locations in which to set
up operations and use their technology capital. Production also requires inputs of labor,
tangible capital, and plant-specific intangible capital. For simplicity, assume that z is a
composite of these three factors of production. One unit of technology capital and z units
of the composite input at a given location produce y = g(z). Consider the case of brand
equity with units of technology capital indexed by m. For ease of exposition, assume for
now that m is discrete and that m = 1 is the Wal-Mart brand, m = 2 is the Home Depot
brand, and so on. The number of locations constrains the number of operations for each
brand. In other words, Walmart can operate only one store per location, and Home Depot
can operate only one store per location. It may be the case that both Wal-Mart and Home
Depot have stores at the same location.
We want to derive the total output for a country with locations N , technology capital

9

stock M , and composite input Z. Now, we treat the number of locations and the number
of technologies as real variables and choose z : [0, N ] × [0, M ] → IR+ to solve
Y = F (N, M, Z) = max
z

Z

g (z (n, m)) dn dm

subject to

Z

z (n, m) dn dm ≤ Z.

We put conditions on g(·) so that there is an optimal plant size and limits to any organization’s span of control. Specifically, we assume that it is increasing and strictly concave.
Given the properties of g(·), the maximal production allocation requires that all brands
be operated in all locations, with an equal amount of the composite input in each of
the N M production units. Thus, the aggregate production function is F (N, M, Z) =
N M g (Z/(N M )). Suppose that g(z) = Az 1−φ , where A is a parameter determining the
level of technology and φ ≥ 0. The aggregate production function in this case is
φ

Y = F (N, M, Z; A) = A (N M ) Z 1−φ .

(3.1)

Below we assume that A may vary by country. The aggregate product F displays constant
returns in the two factors of production M and Z: F (N, λM, λZ) = λF (N, M, Z). Notice,
if φ = 0, then (3.1) nests the standard specification, which is linear in Z.
Multicountry Production
In the multicountry case, the only factor that can be used both at home and abroad
is technology capital (e.g., brands). Let i index the country where production is occurring,
and let j index the country of origin of the multinational. The number of locations of
country i is Ni . The technology capital used by multinationals from j is M j . The composite capital-labor input in country i used to produce output with technology capital of
multinationals from j is Zij . With these inputs, we write total output in country i as
Yi =

X

j



F Ni , M j , Zij ; Ai , σi

= Ai Ni M i

φ

Zii

1−φ

+

X
10

j6=i

Ai σi Ni M j

φ  j 1−φ
,
Zi

(3.2)

which is the sum of outputs of all multinationals, where Ai is the technology parameter
for multinationals from i operating in country i, and Ai σi is the technology parameter
for foreign multinationals operating in i with σi ≤ 1. If we maximized (3.2) subject to
the constraint that the sum of composite inputs does not exceed the total in country i,
P j
j Zi ≤ Zi , then the total (maximal) output is
 
1 X
Yi = Ai Ni M i + σiφ

j6=i

M

j

φ

Zi1−φ .

(3.3)

This expression facilitates comparison to the closed economy case. If σi = 0, (3.3) is
equivalent to (3.1).
Degree of Openness
As before, we include the technology parameter Ai , which is common to all production
units. In the multicountry case, there is an additional parameter in the specification of the
production technology in (3.2), namely σi . The parameter σi is a measure of the degree of
openness of country i. A value of 1 implies that a country is totally open—so domestic and
foreign firms have the same opportunities in country i. A value of less than 1 implies that
domestic and foreign firms are not treated equally. In particular, there are costs to foreign
firms, and these costs have the same effect as if they had lower total factor productivity
(TFP) than domestic firms.5
1/φ

Another interpretation of openness is possible if we set ωi = σi

and rewrite (3.3) as

follows:
h 
X
Yi = Ai Ni M i + ωi

j6=i

Mj

iφ

Zi1−φ .

(3.4)

Here, ωi can be interpreted as the fraction of foreign technology capital permitted to be
brought in and used by foreign multinationals. If ωi is equal to zero, costs are infinite and
no foreign firms are permitted. This is the closed-economy case. As we noted before, in
5

A natural extension of this model would include industries, some of which are permitted to operate
and some of which are blocked.

11

this case, country i has constant returns in technology capital and the composite input Z.
If ωi is greater than 0, the sum of output across the open countries is greater than the
sum of output for the same countries if they were closed. It is as if there were increasing
returns when in fact there are none.
This scale effect is more evident if we rewrite (3.4) in terms of effective technology
P
capital. Let Mi be the effective capital used in country i, that is, Mi = M i + ωi j6=i M j .

Substituting this into (3.4) yields the same expression as (3.1). The difference is that the
effective capital stock is larger when countries are open.
Composite Input
The composite capital-labor input in country i is modeled as a Cobb-Douglas technology,
αI  1−αT −αI
αT 

Lji
KIj,i
Zij = KTj ,i

(3.5)

with inputs of tangible capital, KTj ,i , plant-specific intangible capital, KIj,i , and labor Lji .
Multinationals own the technologies that we have described above. Households own
equity of these multinationals. We turn next to a description of the problems solved by
each.

3.1.1.

Multinationals

The stand-in multinational from j maximizes the present value of the stream of dividends:
max

X

t

pt (1 − τdt ) Dtj ,

(3.6)

where dividends are the sum of dividends across all operations in all countries indexed by
P j
i and are given by Dtj = i Dit
with
j
Dit



j j
j
j
j
j
= (1 − τp,it ) Yit − Wit Lit − δT KT ,it − XI,it − χi XM ,t − KTj ,i,t+1 + KTj ,it ,
12

(3.7)

χji = 1 if i = j and 0 otherwise, XIj,i is investment in plant-specific capital which is split
j
among locations in country i that j operates, and XM
is the technology capital investment

of multinational j used in all locations in which j operates. The output produced by j in
country i is given by Yij = F (Ni , M j , Zij ; Ai , σi ), where F is defined (3.1) with Zij defined
in (3.5). The wage rate in country i is Wi and is the same rate paid by all multinationals
operating in i.
Dividends for j are equal to worldwide after-tax profits less net investment of tangible
P
capital, i (KTj ,i,t+1 −KTj ,it ). (The latter is called undistributed profits in the U.S. National
Income and Product Accounts (NIPA) and reinvested earnings in the U.S. International
Transactions Accounts (ITA).) Taxable profits are equal to sales less expenses, where the
expenses are wage payments, tangible depreciation, and expensed investments on plantspecific intangible capital and technology capital. Taxable profits in country i are taxed
at rate τp,i . We assume that multinationals do not engage in transfer pricing to avoid
taxation.6
The capital stocks of the multinational next period are given by

KTj ,i,t+1 = (1 − δT ) KTj ,it + XTj ,it
KIj,i,t+1 = (1 − δI ) KIj,it + XIj,it
j
j
Mt+1
= (1 − δM ) Mtj + XM
,t .

Here, we assume that depreciation rates can differ for the three types of capital.

3.1.2.

Households

The stand-in household in country i chooses consumption, hours of work, and next period
6

Evidence of Bernard, Jensen, and Schott (2006) and estimates of the U.S. Department of the Treasury
(1999) suggest that corporate tax revenues lost to transfer pricing are small—on the order of 1 to 2
percent of corporate tax liabilities.

13

asset holdings to solve

max

X
t

subject to

X
t


β t U Cit /Nit , Lit /Nit + L̄nb,it /Nit Nit


pt (1 + τci ) Cit +
≤

X
t



X
j







j
j
+ Bi,t+1 − Bit 
Vtj Si,t+1
− Sit

pt (1 − τli ) Wit Lit + (1 − τdt )

X
j



j
Dtj + rbt Bit + κit  ,
Sit

where Ci is total consumption of households in i, Ni is the total population in i, Li is
the labor input in the business sector, L̄nb,i is the labor input in the nonbusiness sector,
Sij is holdings of equities from j which have a price V j and dividend Dj per share, Bi is
holdings of debt which earns interest at rate rb , and subscript t indexes time. Taxes are
levied on consumption at rate τci , labor at rate τli , and dividends at rate τd .7 Transfers
plus nonbusiness income less nonbusiness investment is summarized by κi .8
We assume that the number of locations in country i is proportional to the population
of i. In other words, we assume that a foreign multinational can set up more operations
in a country like the United States that has many consumers than a country like Belgium
with few. Without loss of generality, we use a proportionality constant of 1 and therefore
use Ni to denote both the number of locations and the number of people in i.
We abstract from uncertain events, since we are interested in secular trends. Thus,
the returns on household assets are equal in equilibrium, and the composition of their
portfolio is not uniquely determined. When choosing parameters, we preset debt holdings
and foreign share holdings and let equilibrium conditions determine the total net worth of
households.

7
8

The dividend tax rate does not depend on i. If it did, we would need to allow for clientele effects.
Activity in the nonbusiness sector is added (and treated exogenously) in order to ensure that the
NIPA aggregates are of the right order of magnitude.

14

The equity value for multinationals from j is given by
Vtj = (1 − τdt )

X

KTj ,i,t+1 +

i

X
i


j
(1 − τp,it ) KIj,i,t+1 + (1 − τp,jt ) Mt+1
,

(3.8)

which is a sum of the values of its capital stocks at home and abroad. The prices of each
type of capital depend on tax rates. (See McGrattan and Prescott (2008) for the derivation
of (3.8).)

3.2. Comparison of BEA and Model Accounts
We want to compare the time series for our model world economy with those published by
the BEA. To do so, we have to construct variables comparable to those that are reported
in the BEA national and international accounts.
We start with the national accounts—in particular, GDP. GDP for country i at date
t is given by
GDPit = Cit +

X

j

XTj ,it + X̄nb,it + NXit ,

(3.9)

where NXi is net exports of goods and services by country i. Here, we are assuming that
C includes both private and public consumption expenditures and X̄nb includes all nonbusiness investment expenditures of households, nonprofit institutions, and governments.
Another way to calculate GDP is by adding up all domestic incomes. Specifically, if we
sum up compensation of households (Wi Li ), total before-tax profits of businesses operatP
P
i
ing in i, (Yi − Wi Li − j (δT KTj ,i + XIj,i ) − XM
), tangible depreciation ( j δT KTj ,i ), and
total nonbusiness value added (Ȳnb,i ), we have GDP from the income side:
i
GDPit = Yit + Ȳnb,it − XM
,t −

X

j

XIj,it .

(3.10)

This has to be equal to product in (3.9). From (3.9) and (3.10), it is easy to calculate net
exports as total output—business plus nonbusiness—produced in country i less the sum
of consumption and all investments.
15

Given that we are interested in measurement, it is worth noting that GDP for country
i, as defined in (3.10), is not a measure of production of country i in the model economy.
In the model economy, total production in country i is Yi + Ȳnb,i . GDP is lower because
some investments are expensed.
Next, consider adding flows from and to other countries. The BEA’s measure of gross
national product (GNP) is the sum of GDP plus net factor income from abroad.9 Net
factor receipts (NFR) are the sum of FDI income of multinationals and portfolio equity
and debt income of households:10
NFRit =

X

i
{Dlt
+ KTi ,l,t+1 − KTi ,lt } +

l6=i

X

l
Sit
Dtl + max (rbt Bit , 0) .

(3.11)

l6=i

Analogously, net factor payments (NFP) from i to the rest of the world are the sum of FDI
income of foreign affiliates in i sent back to foreign parents, and portfolio incomes from
stocks and bonds of country i that are sent to investors outside of i:
NFPit =

X

l
{Dit
+ KTl ,i,t+1 − KTl ,it } +

l6=i

X

Slti Dti + max (−rbt Bit , 0) .

(3.12)

l6=i

Adding net factor income to net exports and to GDP, we have the current account (CA)
and GNP, respectively:
CAit = NXit + NFRit − NFPit
GNPit = GDPit + NFRit − NFPit .

The net factor income flows (in (3.11) and (3.12)) are used by the BEA to construct
rates of return on capital in foreign subsidiaries. There are several problems with these
measures of income, however. First, a substantial part of net investment (reinvested earnings) is not included. In the case of income from foreign direct investment, only net
9
10

Here, we abstract from wage compensation from abroad because it is negligible in the U.S. accounts.
Equity holdings are categorized by the BEA as direct investment when the ownership exceeds 10
percent. Otherwise they are categorized as portfolio income.

16

investment in tangible capital is included. In the case of portfolio income, no net investment is included. Second, even if all net investment were to be included, income from the
same investment of technology capital is made in different geographic locations.
To illustrate the problem, we construct returns on foreign direct investment using
the BEA methodology for the following simple example with two “countries”: the United
States indexed by u and the rest of world indexed by r. In this case, the actual returns
that U.S. multinationals earn on their three types of investments are:
rT t = (1 − τp,rt ) αT (1 − φ) Yrtu /KTu,rt − δT



rI t = αI (1 − φ) Yrtu /KIu,rt − δI
u
+ Yrtu ) /Mtu − δM ,
rM t = φ (Yut

which follows from the maximization problem in (3.6). Since these returns are equated in
equilibrium, we can write rt = rT t = rI t = rM t , where rt is the common rate of return on
all investments in the model’s world economy.
Reported returns of U.S. subsidiaries from the rest of the world are equal to the
FDI income (dividends plus reinvested earnings) divided by the tangible capital stock of
U.S. multinationals abroad:

rFDI,t = (1 − τp,rt ) Yrtu − Wrt Lurt − δT KTu,rt − XIu,rt /KTu,rt

XIu,rt
Yrtu
= rt + (1 − τp,rt ) [φ + (1 − φ) αI ] u − (1 − τp,rt ) u ,
KT ,rt
KT ,rt

(3.13)

which is not equal to rt when either technology capital or plant-specific intangible capital
is nonnegligible. Interestingly, the reported return can be higher or lower than the actual
return. It is higher if investment of U.S. foreign subsidiaries in plant-specific intangible
capital, XIu,rt , is not too large. It is lower otherwise.
17

The question we address in the next section is, How large is the impact of this mismeasurement when the model is parameterized to generate time series consistent with the
U.S. national and international accounts?

4. Quantitative Predictions for the United States
In this section, we parameterize our model for the United States and the rest of world
so that the secular trends in the model current accounts line up with counterparts in
the U.S. international accounts compiled by the BEA. We then use the model to make
predictions about measured returns and asset holdings of foreign subsidiaries.
In the Data Appendix, we provide information about the sources of our data, which
are primarily from the U.S. national and international accounts. Prior to constructing
any statistics, we adjust measures of U.S. GDP and U.S. GNP to exclude consumption
taxes and intermediate financial services and to include depreciation of consumer durables
and capital services of consumer durables and government fixed capital. When we use
the terms GDP and GNP, we mean the adjusted series. The adjustments imply average
measures of GDP and GNP that are about 3.8 percent higher than the BEA’s published
series. (See McGrattan and Prescott (2008) for further details.)
For the rest of world, we use data on transactions with the United States and measures
of population and GDP from the GGDC. In computing total GDP, we restrict the rest of
world to regions doing nonnegligible trade and FDI with the United States. The list of
these regions and the countries within is provided in the Data Appendix.
In McGrattan and Prescott (2008), we check the sensitivity of our analysis to changes
in the model’s parameters. We briefly summarize the findings at the end of this section.

18

4.1. Model Inputs
Table 1 summarizes the parameters held constant when computing the equilibrium paths
of our model. Table 2 summarizes all time-varying parameters. The series are smoothed
to allow us to focus on trends. Table 3 summarizes the initial capital stocks.
Populations and total factor productivities are assumed to grow over time at rates γN
and γA , respectively. Trend growth rates are assumed to be the same for both the United
States and rest of world. Trend growth in population is set at 1 percent per year and trend
growth in total factor productivity at 1.2 percent per year. These rates, along with income
shares in Table 1, imply a growth rate of 3 percent per year for output,

γY = (1 + γN )

1−(1−φ)(αT +αI )
(1−φ)(1−αT −αI )

1

(1 + γA ) (1−φ)(1−αT −αI ) − 1,

on a balanced growth path. We do allow for deviations from trend through variations
in the populations and TFP of the rest of world relative to the United States, which we
describe below.
Utility is logarithmic, and the weight on leisure, equal to 1.32, ensures that the time
to work is consistent with U.S. aggregate hours. The discount factor is chosen so that the
average annual real interest rate is slightly above 4 percent.
Parameters of the nonbusiness sector were set at U.S. levels. These include the fraction
of time to nonbusiness activity at 6 percent, the nonbusiness investment share of GDP at
15.4 percent, and nonbusiness value added as a share of GDP at 31.2 percent.
In choosing tax rates, we fixed the two that have little impact on capital returns,
namely, τc and τl , and set them equal to average rates for the United States. For the
consumption tax, we take the ratio of sales and excise taxes to total consumption, implying
τc = 0.073. For the labor tax rate, we use the methodology of Prescott (2002), implying
τl = 0.29. Although some countries, such as those in Europe, have higher consumption
19

tax rates than labor tax rates, what is relevant is the intratemporal tax wedge, 1 − (1 −
τl )/(1 + τc ). For our parameter choices, this wedge is equal to 34 percent.
The key constants for our analysis are depreciation rates and income shares, since
they determine the magnitudes of the stocks of capital. In the case of tangible capital, we
have measures from the BEA. We set the depreciation rate for tangible investment δT at 6
percent per year to be consistent with BEA tangible investments and fixed capital stocks.
Given a rate of depreciation, we then set αT equal to 0.23 so that the model’s business
tangible investment is consistent with U.S. business investment.
In the case of the two types of intangible capital, we have direct measures of only some
intangible expenditures. Furthermore, there is an added complication in our model with
technology capital: the size of the technology capital stock also depends on the countries’
degrees of openness. What we do, therefore, is to use measures of expenditures on R&D
and national advertising and estimates of expenditures on organizational capital to provide
a plausible range for investment in technology capital. In addition, we use measures
of U.S. equity values to indirectly infer the magnitude of the remaining plant-specific
intangible investment. In McGrattan and Prescott (2008), we do sensitivity analysis and
show how the results change as we change the depreciation rates and income shares for
these intangible capitals.
The National Science Foundation (2007) reports U.S. R&D expenditures over the
period 1960–2006 that averaged 2.4 percent of GNP. The U.S. Bureau of the Census
(1960–2008) and Universal McCann (2005–2007) report estimates of national advertising
expenditures that are on average equal to 1.2 percent of GNP for the period 1960–2006.
Together, these imply an investment share of 3.6 percent; we view this as a plausible lower
bound if we abstract from organizational know-how which is more difficult to measure.
Corrado, Hulten, and Sichel (2005) have estimates of investment in organizational capital
for the period 1988–2000 and conclude that it is in the range of 2.2 to 3.1 percent of GDP.

20

Since part of the organizational capital is plant-specific, we chose 5 to 6 percent of GNP
as a plausible range for total investment in technology capital.
For market values, we use the Federal Reserve Board’s Flow of Funds Accounts (1945–
2006), which reports market values for corporate and noncorporate equity. Since there are
very large movements in corporate equity values, ranging from 0.4 times GDP to 1.8 times
GDP over our sample, we set parameters so that the model and data are consistent in the
1960s.11 During this decade, the value was relatively stable and averaged 1.5 times GNP.
With these targets for technology capital investment and market value, we set the
benchmark shares and annual depreciation rates for intangible capital as follows: φ = 7
percent, αI = 7 percent, δM = 8 percent, and δI = 0 percent. A value of δM = 8 percent
which is intermediate to estimates for depreciation of R&D and organizational capital. In
our sensitivity analysis we show that the main results are unaffected if we double δM or
set it equal to 0.12 With δM = 8 percent, a value of φ = 7 percent yields an average ratio
of technology capital investment to GNP of 5.3 percent and an average ratio of technology
capital stock to GNP of 0.53 over the sample period 1960–2006.
For plant-specific intangible capital, we started with a depreciation rate for plantspecific capital δI equal to zero and set αI so that the predicted market value of U.S. businesses is about 1.5 times GNP over the period 1960–1969. If we set the depreciation
rate higher and adjust αI to keep the stock of intangible unchanged, then our results are
unaffected. For our benchmark parameterization, the average plant-specific intangible investment is 3.9 percent of GNP, and the average ratio of plant-specific intangible capital
to GNP is 1.2 over the sample period 1960–2006.

11

In McGrattan and Prescott (2005), we show that changes in taxes and regulations played a quantitatively important role in the secular movements of corporate equities, but the theory used there
and extended here is not well suited to modeling transitions after tax reforms.

12

When we check sensitivity of our results to changes in constants, we also adjust the paths of openness
parameters and relative size to ensure consistency of the U.S. and model current accounts. This is
described below.

21

Table 2 reports all time-varying parameters used to compute the model’s equilibrium
paths. Since we are matching the secular trends in the model and in the data, we do our
computations on a 5-year basis (with all relevant constants appropriately adjusted). We
smooth the time series and report the smoothed series at 5-year intervals.
The second column shows the trend in the ratio of the rest of world population to
that of the United States. Data are from Conference Board and Groningen Growth and
Development Centre (2008), and the countries in rest of world are listed in the Data
Appendix. In 1960, the rest of the world’s population was about 8.2 times larger than
that of the United States. The population ratio rose to 9.4 by 1990 and then fell back
to 9 by 2006. For the benchmark parameterization, we assume the decline in population
continues. However, in McGrattan and Prescott (2008), we show that this assumption
does not affect our main findings.
The third and fourth columns in Table 2 show effective U.S. tax rates on dividends
and profits. The source of the dividend tax rate is McGrattan and Prescott (2003, Figure
1). The tax rate on profits is equal to the tax liability of corporations divided by corporate
profits (with the Federal Reserve Bank profits subtracted from both the numerator and
denominator). We assume the same rates apply to both corporate and noncorporate
business income. Because the United States taxes worldwide incomes, the relevant tax
rates for both U.S. FDI abroad and FDI in the United States are the U.S. rates.
The last five columns of Table 2 contain time-varying inputs that are set so as to
generate model current accounts with trends that are similar to the U.S. current accounts.
The first two of these inputs are the openness parameters {σrt } and {σut } that determine
how open the rest of world is to U.S. multinationals and how open the United States is to
foreign multinationals, respectively.
The openness parameters are crucial for determining the level of incomes of foreign
direct investment. If they are equal to zero in all periods, the model predicts no FDI
22

income at all. As we noted in Section 2, to generate the patterns of U.S. time series, with
U.S. FDI receipts higher than FDI payments, it is necessary to set σrt > σut for all years
considered. We also chose a path for σut that was increasing faster than σrt during the
second half of our sample to capture the faster growth in income of U.S. affiliates of foreign
companies which occurred in the late 1970s.13
The next input, which is listed in column 7 of Table 2, is the total factor productivity
of the rest of the world relative to that of the United States. Without loss of generality,
we scale U.S. TFP in such a way as to have U.S. GDP in 1960 equal to 1. Both relative
TFPs and relative populations affect the relative size of the rest of world to the United
States:
Relative size =



Art
Aut



1
1−(1−φ)(αT +αI )



Nrt
Nut



.

(4.1)

Size is a measure of effective persons. In McGrattan and Prescott (2007), we show that
the size of a country is what is relevant for output and productivity. In models without
technology capital, only relative TFPs matter.
In terms of the exercise of fitting the current accounts, the path of relative size is most
important for the trade balance, since variations in population or TFP require shipments
(or loans) to equate capital-output ratios. In McGrattan and Prescott (2008), we show
that the slowdown in rest of world population relative to the United States has been an
important contributor to the recent large decline in the U.S. trade balance.14
The last two columns in Table 2 are per capita U.S. debt But /Nut and the U.S. holding
r
of foreign shares Sut
. Technically, these are not exogenous parameters. However, because

households are indifferent to the composition of their portfolios, we need to preset two of
the three asset holdings and allow the third to be endogenously determined. We do this in
13

14

To simplify the fixed point problem of matching the U.S. and model current account series, which
is done for the benchmark model and for all alternative specifications considered in McGrattan and
Prescott (2008), we restricted the paths as follows: σrt = ar + br t and σut = au (1+ bu tanh(cu + du t))
and chose values for the coefficients {ar , br , au , bu , cu , du }.
In McGrattan and Prescott (2008), we compare theoretical and quantitative predictions for productivity and net exports in models with and without technology capital.

23

such a way as to match the secular movements in interest net income and total portfolio
net income.15
The last set of inputs needed to compute equilibrium paths are the initial capital
stocks. The values we use are summarized in Table 3 and are found as follows. We use the
fact that the ratio of plant-specific intangible capital to tangible capital is equated across
countries and technologies on the equilibrium path and assume this is true in the initial
period. We also restrict the initial capital stocks by assuming that there are no jumps in
inital investment growth rates. The initial stocks are set so that the growth rates for all
investments are equated in the first and second period. To pin down the ten initial stocks,
one more restriction is needed. The last restriction that we impose is that U.S. GDP is 31
percent of world GDP in 1960.

4.2. The United States, 1960–2006
We now use our parameterized model economy to study the U.S. international accounts
over the period 1960–2006. We first show that the model incomes and products exhibit
the same level and trends as in U.S. domestic and international data. Then we compare
the capital stocks in foreign subsidiaries and returns on these stocks with BEA estimates
using their methodology. We find that the BEA mismeasurement of intangible earnings
and stocks accounts for over 60 percent of the 6.25 percent average difference in reported
rates of return on FDI.

4.2.1.

Incomes

Averages over the period 1960–2006 for the broad categories of GNP for the actual and
predicted U.S. accounts are displayed in Table 4. This table verifies that our choices of

15

To match portfolio equity incomes, we need an implausibly large drop in foreign share holdings in
r has almost no effect on the
2000. In McGrattan and Prescott (2008), we show that our choice of Sut
paper’s main findings.

24

parameters yield good agreement between the average U.S. and model components of gross
national product. In both theory and data, consumption is about 74 percent of GNP on
average over the sample. Business tangible investment is between 11 and 12 percent of
GNP. The share of nonbusiness investment in the model is set so that it is 15 percent
of GDP (which is close in magnitude to GNP throughout the sample). The ratio of net
exports to GNP is about −1.1 percent on average.
On the income side, the model generates the right split between business and nonbusiness income. We can further break down business income into capital and labor income
if we know how much of intangible investments are expensed by owners of business and
how much by shareholders. In previous work, we assumed that half was expensed by each.
If we assume the same split here, then the model’s average business labor income is 67
percent of business income, just as it is in the United States.
The final component of U.S. GNP is net factor income from the rest of world. Here
again, there is good agreement between average U.S. levels and the model’s predictions
because we chose parameters for openness and relative size to match the trends in the
data. Net portfolio income, which is non-FDI equity and interest receipts less payments,
is −0.2 percent of GNP for both the United States and the model. We do not report
the subcategories of portfolio income because household portfolio composition is not determined in theory. The foreign direct investments, on the other hand, are, and we show
both receipts and payments. U.S. receipts have averaged 1.1 percent of GNP, whereas
payments have averaged 0.2 percent of GNP, which is what our model predicts. Adding
up domestic income and net income from the rest of world gives us GNP in the last row of
Table 4. In the case of the actual accounts, there is an additional statistical discrepancy
of 0.6 percent of GNP.
Figure 2 shows the model predictions for U.S. FDI receipts from their subsidiaries,
U.S. FDI payments from U.S. affiliates to their parents, and the U.S. trade balance. These

25

fit the secular trends by construction, since we chose the inputs in Table 2 to generate
comparable trends.16 Most noteworthy is that the model can replicate the trends in the
U.S. current account flows. The essential elements of the model that make this possible
are technology capital and locations.
The top panel of Figure 3 shows the portfolio net income component of the U.S. current
accounts. This includes both dividends from foreign equities and interest on external debt.
In the lower panel, we show the interest income to highlight the fact that the model matches
both the debt and equity components of income.
Figure 4 is an external check on the model fit. In the top panel, we show the share of
consumption in GDP for the United States. The consumption share is around 72 percent
in 1960 for both the model and the data. Over the sample, the rise in the model’s share is
consistent with the U.S. trend. Between 1960 and 2006, the model predicts a rise of roughly
5 percentage points. Many have interpreted this rise as a sign that U.S. households are
“saving too little.” This is not the case in the model, since nothing prevents households
from smoothing consumption optimally. Furthermore, there is a lot of new investment
occurring as the world opens to foreign direct investment. Some of this new investment is
not counted in U.S. or rest of world GDP.
In the bottom panel of Figure 4, we show the model’s prediction for the U.S. share of
world GDP and the share calculated from the GGDC (2008) dataset. The model shows a
decline in U.S. GDP relative to that of the world, consistent with observations up to 2000.
The GGDC data display a larger decline after 2000. As in the case of net exports, the
pattern of relative GDPs for the model depends importantly on patterns in relative TFPs
and populations.

16

In doing so, we did not try to match the U.S. FDI receipts at the end of the sample, which were
temporarily high due to a one-time-only tax rate reduction allowed by the American Jobs Creation
Act (AJCA) of 2004. Faust, Gleckman, and Barrett (2004) estimated that $300 billion would be
repatriated under section 965 of the Internal Revenue Code, which was added by the AJCA.

26

In summary, the model does a remarkably good job generating trends in domestic and
international incomes and products that are close to those observed in the United States.
We therefore regard the model as a useful framework to assess the puzzling patterns in
U.S. foreign capital stocks and returns. We turn to this next.

4.2.2.

Assets and Returns

Figure 5 shows the time series for direct investment positions at current cost. The theoretical counterparts are tangible capital stocks.17 Panel A displays the BEA data. Panel
B displays the model’s equilibrium paths. We see from the BEA data that stocks of
U.S. foreign subsidiaries were about 6 percent of U.S. GNP in 1960, whereas the stocks
of U.S. affiliates were less than 2 percent of U.S. GNP. Stocks of affiliates remained low
until the second half of the 1970s and then rose rapidly, nearly to the level of U.S. foreign
subsidiaries by 2006. As a result, the net position first rises and then falls roughly in half.18
The model is able to capture the rise and fall in the net asset position, but the level of
the capital stock in U.S. subsidiaries is higher than predicted. Thus, if we compare the BEA
returns and the model returns, we find that the U.S. rate of return on direct investment
abroad is lower than the BEA estimate. In Figure 6, we display the same returns as earlier
(see Figure 1), along with the predictions of the model. The BEA reports an average
return on U.S. subsidiary capital of 9.40 percent. The model estimate is 7.08 percent on
average, 2.32 percentage points below the BEA’s. Notice, however, that the model does
well in fitting the returns on foreign capital in the United States. The average return for
U.S. affiliates is 3.15 percent, whereas the model predicts 3.12 percent. Our estimates

17

Part of the direct investment position is due to accumulated debt from intercompany loans, but this
is small relative to the value of tangible capital stocks.

18

In McGrattan and Prescott (2005), we capitalized the income of U.S. foreign subsidiaries in order to
estimate the fundamental value of U.S. operations abroad. We estimated the value of the stock of
foreign subsidiaries—net of foreign stocks in the United States—at close to 0.3 times GDP for the
1990s. Similar calculations were made by Hausmann and Sturzenegger (2006). The inconsistency
between our estimate of the net asset position and the BEA’s was a motivating factor for the current
study.

27

imply that the mismeasurement of intangible incomes and stocks accounts for about 63
percent of the return differential reported by the BEA (that is, 3.96/6.25).
The average actual rate of return on foreign direct investment in the model economies—
both the United States and rest of world—is 4.6 percent over the 1982–2006 period. The
BEA methodology applied to the model yields an estimate of 7.1 percent for U.S. capital
because multinationals are earning rents on their technology capital. But foreign multinationals are also earning rents on technology capital. So why is there a large difference in
predicted FDI returns? The main difference is the expensing of plant-specific capital. Foreign direct investment—both tangible and intangible—is negligible for foreign companies
at the beginning of our sample and then increases rapidly. The expensing of intangible
capital lowers the subsidiary profits of foreign companies and implies a lower return than
U.S. capital abroad. In terms of equation (3.13), the net investment term XIu,rt that is
subtracted from income is large.
In McGrattan and Prescott (2008) we do extensive sensitivity analysis. The key
parameters for the implied return differential in Figure 6 are income shares and depreciation
rates for the two types of intangible capital. We find that if these parameters are chosen
to be consistent with observed market values, observed tangible investment rates, and
estimated intangible investment rates, then the model predicts a sizable gap in measured
FDI returns even though there is no actual gap.19 However, if we choose parameters that
imply a low value for the plant-specific intangible capital, regardless of the implications
for market values and other stocks, we find that the model predicts a smaller gap in
measured FDI returns. For example, if we set δI equal to 6 percent rather than 0 percent
without changing αI , and adjust openness parameters and relative size to match the current
account series, we find that the ratio of plant-specific intangible capital to GNP is half of
the benchmark value. In this case, the return differential is 2.7 percentage points rather
19

See, for example, Nakamura (2003) and Corrado et al. (2005) for estimates of intangible investment
rates.

28

than 4. The smaller gap follows from the fact that the model predicts low returns for
foreign subsidiaries in the United States when their expensed investment in plant-specific
intangible capital is large.
The income share on technology capital φ is the key parameter in determining the high
rate of return on U.S. foreign subsidiaries. If we decrease φ from 7 percent to 6 percent, the
model predicts an average rate of return for U.S. FDI of 6.6 percent, down from 7.1 percent
in the benchmark economy. The implied technology capital stock of foreign affiliates in the
United States is also lower, the lower φ. If φ is 6 percent, we predict a return of 2.3 percent
for foreign subsidiaries in the United States and the implied differential is 4.3 percentage
points. Thus, interestingly, the smaller the share on technology capital, the larger the
implied gap in returns because plant-specific intangible capital plays a larger role as we
decrease φ.
For all parameterizations that we consider, the return differential eventually disappears as the growth rate of foreign investment in the United States approaches the growth
rate of U.S. investment abroad. When this happens, we find that all FDI returns appear
to be too high because technology capital is earning rents even when there has been no
foreign direct investment.

4.2.3.

Discussion

We have shown that abstracting from intangible investments has large consequences for
reported capital stocks and returns. Much of the unreported capital, however, is not
categorizable as “domestic” or “foreign” on one side of a net asset position. Technology
capital is global by nature, and it is large. In our model economy for the period 1960–2006,
we find that the reproducible stock of technology capital of U.S. companies, M u , averages
0.53 times U.S. GDP, and its market value—given by the third term on the right-hand

29

side of (3.8)—accounts for about 13 percent of the total market value of U.S. corporate
and noncorporate businesses.
How then should we evaluate the performance of our economy? From the standpoint
of the model economy we study, what matters is consumption and hours. These are data
that we observe.

5. Conclusion
We develop and use a multicountry model to show that abstracting from intangible investments has large consequences for measured rates of return on U.S. foreign subsidiaries and
U.S. affiliates of foreign companies. We estimate a return differential of 4 percent per year
between returns on direct investment of the United States and returns on direct investment
in the United States. This difference is due to the accounting of intangible investments.
Our paper considers only mismeasurement as leading to differences in domestic and
foreign rates of return. Other factors that we abstract from may also have played a
role. These include transfer pricing by multinationals to avoid U.S. taxation, different
risk characteristics of U.S. and foreign projects, and financial market frictions in foreign
countries. We also may have built in too much symmetry in our modeling of the United
States and the rest of world. If, for example, there are differences in technology-capital
intensities between countries, we would expect larger differences in returns.
The model that we use does a remarkably good job generating trends in domestic
and international incomes and products that are close to those observed in the United
States. The model time series display large declines in the U.S. trade balance and the
reported U.S. net asset position even though goods and asset markets are perfectly efficient.
Thus, one of the main lessons we take from our study is that care must be taken when

30

drawing inferences from the international accounts. These accounts can appear to have
unsustainable trends when in fact there are none.20

20

See Backus et al. (2006) and Obstfeld and Rogoff (2006) for two sides of the debate concerning the
sustainability of the U.S. current accounts.

31

Data Appendix
The data sources for this study are listed below. After each source we note the specific
tables that we use and where we use them. For more details, see McGrattan and Prescott
(2008) and the accompanying materials at our website (http://www.minneapolisfed.org).
National Income and Product Accounts, 1960–2006
• Tables 1.1.5, 2.5.5, 3.1, 3.5. Gross domestic product and components are used
to construct averages in the top panel of Table 4. Adjustments are made so
that the income and product measures are comparable in the theory and data.
Specifically, consumption taxes and intermediate financial services are excluded
from value added and all expenditures on fixed assets are treated as investment.
See McGrattan and Prescott (2008) for details.
• Table 1.7.5. Gross national product (adjusted in the same way as GDP) is used
when constructing all averages in Table 4 and in Figures 2–3 and Figure 5.
• Table 1.13. National income by sector is used to construct business and nonbusiness income in the middle panel of Table 4. In the nonbusiness sector, we include
households, nonprofits, general government, and government enterprises.
• Tables 1.14, 3.2. Gross value added of domestic corporations is used to construct
the tax rate on profits (with the Federal Reserve profits excluded) in Table 2.
• Table 4.1. Net exports and net factor incomes are used to construct averages of
the current account components in Table 4. The net exports series is also shown
in Figure 2.
• Table 5.7.5. Private inventories are added to fixed assets for estimating tangible
capital stocks and their depreciation rates.
Fixed Assets, 1960–2006
• Tables 1.1, 6.1. Current-cost net stocks by owner and by sector are used to adjust
measures of consumption and investment in Table 4 and to estimate tangible
capital stocks and their depreciation rates.
International Transactions Accounts, 1960–2006
• Tables 1, 6. U.S. direct investment receipts and payments are plotted in Figure
2 and used to construct the rates of return in Figures 1 and 6. Portfolio incomes
plotted in Figure 3 are determined residually by subtracting direct investment
incomes from net factor incomes in NIPA.
32

Flow of Funds Accounts for the United States, 1960–2006
• Table F6. Investment expenditures of households, nonprofit institutions, and
governments are counted as nonbusiness investment in Table 4.
• Table F10. Consumer durable depreciation is added to depreciation because we
include durable consumption with tangible investment.
• Tables L213, B100. Corporate and noncorporate equity values are used to estimate business market value.
• Table L107. Direct investment positions at current cost are plotted in Figure 5
and used to construct the rates of return in Figures 1 and 6.
GGDC Total Economy Database, 1960–2006
• GDP in constant 1990 dollars is used to construct U.S. share of world GDP in
Figure 4 using the list of countries below as rest of world.
Rest of world regions and countries
• Canada
• Western Europe: Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, France, all Germany, Greece, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, Malta, Netherlands, Norway,
Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, United Kingdom
• Eastern Europe: Albania, Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Poland, Romania,
Yugoslavia
• Latin America and Other Western Hemisphere: Argentina, Barbados, Bolivia,
Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Guatemala,
Jamaica, Mexico, Peru, Puerto Rico, St. Lucia, Trinidad and Tobago, Uruguay,
Venezuela
• Asia: China, Hong Kong, Japan, Singapore, S. Korea, Taiwan
• Oceania: Australia, New Zealand

33

References
Backus, David, Frederic Lambert, Espen Henriksen, and Chris Telmer, 2006, “Current
Account Fact and Fiction,” Working paper, New York University.
Bernard, Andrew B., J. Bradford Jensen, and Peter K. Schott, 2006, “Transfer Pricing
by U.S.-Based Multinational Firms,” Working paper, Tuck School of Business at Dartmouth.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 1945–2006, Flow of Funds Accounts of
the United States, Statistical Release Z.1 (Washington, DC: Federal Reserve System).
Bridgman, Benjamin, 2007, “Do Intangible Assets Explain High U.S. Foreign Direct Investment Returns? The Role of Multinational Taxes,” Working paper, Bureau of Economic
Analysis.
Caballero, Ricardo, Emmanuel Farhi, and Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, 2008, “An Equilibrium Model of ‘Global Imbalances’ and Low Interest Rates,” American Economic
Review, 98(1): 358–93.
Conference Board and Groningen Growth and Development Centre, 2008, Total Economy
database, www.ggdc.net.
Corrado, Carol, Charles Hulten, and Daniel Sichel, 2005, “Measuring Capital and Technology: An Expanded Framework,” in C. Corrado, J. Haltiwanger, and D. Sichel, eds.,
Measuring Capital in the New Economy (Chicago: University of Chicago Press).
Curcuru, Stephanie E., Tomas Dvorak, Francis E. Warnock, forthcoming, “Cross-Border
Returns Differentials,” Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Damm, Walter, 1970, “The Economic Aspects of European Direct Investment in the United
States,” in S. E. Rolfe and W. Damm, eds., The Multinational Corporation in the World
Economy: Direct Investment in Perspective (New York: Praeger).
Ellis, J.J.A., 1970, “The Legal Aspects of European Direct Investment in the United
States,” in S. E. Rolfe and W. Damm, eds., The Multinational Corporation in the
World Economy: Direct Investment in Perspective (New York: Praeger).
Faust, Dean, Howard Gleckman, and Amy Barrett, 2004, “The Cash Heads Home,” Business Week, December 27.
Fogli, Alessandra, and Fabrizio Perri, 2006, “The ‘Great Moderation’ and the U.S. External
Balance,” Working Paper 12708, National Bureau of Economic Research.
34

Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, and Helene Rey, 2007, “From World Banker to World Venture
Capitalist: The U.S. External Adjustment and the Exorbitant Privilege, in R. Clarida,
ed., G7 Current Account Imbalances: Sustainability and Adjustment (Chicago: University of Chicago Press), 11–55.
Graham, Edward M., and David M. Marchick, 2006, U.S. National Security and Foreign
Direct Investment (Washington, DC: Institute for International Economics).
Hausmann, Ricardo, and Federico Sturzenegger, 2006, “Global Imbalances or Bad Accounting? The Missing Dark Matter in the Wealth of Nations,” Working paper, Center
for International Development, Harvard.
Kapicka, Marek, 2008, “How Important is Technology Capital? Measurement and Theory,”
Working paper, University of California at Santa Barbara.
McGrattan, Ellen R., and Edward C. Prescott, 2003, “Average Debt and Equity Returns:
Puzzling?” American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 93(2): 392–97.
McGrattan, Ellen R., and Edward C. Prescott, 2005, “Taxes, Regulations, and the Value
of U.S. and U.K. Corporations,” Review of Economic Studies, 72(3): 767–96.
McGrattan, Ellen R., and Edward C. Prescott, 2007, “Openness, Technology Capital, and
Development,” Staff Report 396, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.
McGrattan, Ellen R., and Edward C. Prescott, 2008, “Appendices: Technology Capital
and the U.S. Current Account,” Staff Report 407, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.
Mendoza, Enrique, Vincenzo Quadrini, and Victor Rı́os-Rull, 2006, “Financial Integration,
Financial Deepness and Global Imbalances,” Working paper, University of Maryland.
Nakamura, Leonard, 2003, “A Trillion Dollars a Year in Intangible Investment and the
New Economy,” in J.R.M. Hand and B. Lev, eds., Intangible Assets (Oxford: Oxford
University Press).
National Science Foundation, Division of Science Resources Statistics, 2007, National Patterns of R&D Resources: 2006 Data Update, NSF 07-331, Brandon Shackelford and
John E. Jankowski, project officers. Arlington, VA.
Obstfeld, Maurice, and Kenneth Rogoff, 2006, “The Unsustainable U.S. Current Account
Position Revisited,” Working Paper 10869, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Prescott, Edward C., 2002, “Richard T. Ely Lecture: Prosperity and Depression,” American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 92(2): 1–15.

35

Universal McCann, 2005–2007, “Insider’s Report: Robert Coen Presentation on Advertising Expenditures,” www.mccann.com.
U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis, 1929–2006, Survey of Current Business (Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office).
U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, 1960–2008, Statistical Abstract of
the United States (Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office).
U.S. Department of Commerce, 1976, Foreign Direct Investment in the United States,
Report of the Secretary of Commerce in Compliance With the Foreign Investment
Study Act of 1974 (Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office).
U.S. Department of the Treasury, Internal Revenue Service, 1999, “Report on the Application and Administration of Section 482,” Publication 3218 (4-1999). Available at
http://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-pdf/p3218.pdf.
Watkins, Melville H., 1968, Foreign Ownership and the Structure of Canadian Industry,
Prepared for the Privy Council Office (Ottawa: Queen’s Printer).

36

TABLE 1. Model Constants at Annual Rates
Parameter

Expression

Value

Population
Technology

γN
γA

1.0
1.2

Preferences
Discount factor
Leisure weight

β
ψ

.98
1.32

Fraction of time at work, i = u, r
Nonbusiness investment, i = u, r

L̄nb,i /Ni
X̄nb,i /GDPi

6.0
15.4

Nonbusiness value-added, i = u, r

Ȳnb,i /GDPi

31.2

Tax rates on labor i = u, r

τl,i

29.0

Tax rate on consumption, i = u, r

τc,i

7.3

φ

7.0

(1 − φ)αT
(1 − φ)αI

21.4
6.5

(1 − φ)(1−αT −αI )

65.1

Technology capital
Tangible capital

δM
δT

8.0
6.0

Plant-specific intangible capital

δI

0

Growth Rates (%)

Nonbusiness Sector (%)

Fixed Tax Rates (%)

Income Shares (%)
Technology capital
Tangible capital
Plant-specific intangible capital
Labor
Depreciation Rates (%)

37

TABLE 2. Model Time-Varying Inputs

Year

Tax Rates
Relativea
Populations Dividends Profits

Openness
ROW

U.S.

Per
Relativea Capita
TFPs U.S. Debt

U.S.
Foreign
Shares

1960

8.20

.400

.408

.8350

.6900

.3730

0

.010

1965
1970

8.42
8.64

.400
.400

.403
.396

.8397
.8443

.6942
.7003

.3727
.3725

0
0

.032
.050

1975
1980
1985

8.86
9.08
9.30

.397
.370
.246

.386
.375
.361

.8490
.8537
.8583

.7090
.7207
.7357

.3722
.3719
.3714

0
0
−.049

.070
.113
.178

1990
1995

9.37
9.28

.164
.153

.348
.336

.8630
.8677

.7531
.7718

.3717
.3731

−.098
−.146

.220
.260

2000
2005

9.16
9.04

.152
.152

.327
.320

.8723
.8770

.7899
.8058

.3743
.3751

−.195
−.244

.300
−.050

2010
2015

8.91
8.79

.152
.152

.315
.312

.8817
.8863

.8186
.8283

.3743
.3732

−.270
−.293

.000
.000

2020
2025
2030

8.67
8.55
8.42

.152
.152
.152

.310
.309
.308

.8910
.8957
.9003

.8352
.8399
.8431

.3723
.3721
.3731

−.293
−.293
−.293

.000
.000
.000

2035

8.30

.152

.307

.9050

.8452

.3745

−.293

.000

a

Note: “Relative” implies rest of world relative to the United States.

38

TABLE 3. Model Initial Capital Stocks Relative to Initial U.S. GDPa
Parameter

Expression

Value

Technology capital stocks
U.S. companies
ROW companies

u
KM
,0
r
KM
,0

.523
1.06

Tangible capital stocks
U.S. companies at home
U.S. companies abroad

KTu,u,0
KTu,r,0

1.28
.105

KTr ,r,0
KTr ,u,0

2.81
.014

KIu,u,0
KIu,r,0

1.16
.095

KIr,r,0
KIr,u,0

2.53
.012

ROW companies at home
ROW companies abroad
Plant-specific intangible capital stocks
U.S. companies at home
U.S. companies abroad
ROW companies at home
ROW companies abroad
a

Initial U.S. GDP is normalized to 1, and initial ROW GDP is normalized to 2.2.

39

TABLE 4. U.S. and Model Components of U.S. GNP, 1960–2006
(Averages, All Relative to GNP)
Variable

Data

Model

Domestic Product
Consumption
Investment

.740
.266

.735
.268

.113
.153

.116
.153

−.012

−.011

.994

.993

Business income
Nonbusiness income

.678
.310

.683
.310

Gross Domestic Income

.988

.993

Portfolio income (net)
Direct investment receipts

−.002
.011

−.002
.011

Less: Direct investment payments

−.002

−.002

Net Factor Income

.006

.007

Statistical Discrepancy

.006

—

Gross National Income

1.000

1.000

Business tangible
Nonbusiness
Net Exports
Gross Domestic Product
Domestic Income

Net Income from Rest of World

40

% 2.5
U.S. FDI Receipts
2
1.5
1
Model

0.5

Data

0
1960

1965

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

% 1.25
1

U.S. FDI Payments

0.75
0.5
0.25
0
-0.25
1960

1965

1970

%4
2

U.S. Net Exports

0
-2
-4
-6
-8
1960

1965

1970

Figure 2. BEA and Model Components of the U.S. Current Accounts
(as a Percentage of U.S. GNP)
41

%1
U.S. Portfolio Net Income

Model

0.5

Data

0

-0.5

-1
1960

1965

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

%1
U.S. Interest Net Income
0.5
0
-0.5
-1
-1.5
1960

1965

1970

1975

Figure 3. BEA and Model Portfolio Income of the U.S. Current Accounts
(Total and Interest Component, as a Percentage of U.S. GNP)

42

% 80
U.S. Consumption Share
78
76
74
Model

72

Data

70
1960

1965

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

% 36
34

U.S. Share of World GDP

32
30
28
26
24
1960

1965

1970

1975

Figure 4. BEA and Model Ratios of U.S. Consumption to GDP
and U.S. GDP to World GDP

43

%

30
25

U.S. Foreign Subsidiaries
20
15

U.S. Affiliates of
Foreign Companies

10
5
0

Net Position
-5
1960

1965

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

A. BEA

%

30
25

U.S. Foreign Subsidiaries

20
15
10
5

U.S. Affiliates of
Foreign Companies

0

Net Position
-5
1960

1965

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

B. Model

Figure 5. Tangible Capital Stocks in Subsidiaries
(as a Percentage of U.S. GNP)

44

2005

% 14
12

Foreign Subsidiaries of U.S. Companies

Average Differential, 1982−2006
BEA: 6.25%
Model: 3.96%

10

8

6

BEA
Model

4

2

0

U.S. Affiliates of Foreign Companies
-2
1982

1984

1986

1988

1990

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

2004

Figure 6. BEA and Model Rates of Return on Subsidiary Capital

45

2006

