                                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               HEALTHY, WEALTHY, AND WISE:
ECONOMIC STATUS, POOR HEALTH IN CHILDHOOD,                                                    AND HUMAN CAPITAL DEVELO

                                                          Janet Currie

                                                    Working Paper 13987
                                            http://www.nber.org/papers/w13987


                                  NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                           1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                             Cambridge, MA 02138
                                                  May 2008




           This essay is based on the Albert Rees memorial lecture presented to the Society of Labor Economists
           on June 3, 2005. I have benefited from helpful comments from Hoyt Bleakley, Scott Grosse, and from
           audiences at LSE, IZE, the 2006 Work, Pensions, and Labour Economics Conference, Vassar, and
           the 2007 American Economics Association meetings, as well as those of Roger Gordon and three anonymous
           referees. I am grateful to the Russell Sage Foundation for financial support. The views expressed
           herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
           Economic Research or the Russell Sage Foundation.

           NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
           reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
           NBER publications.

           © 2008 by Janet Currie. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
           be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Healthy, Wealthy, and Wise: Socioeconomic Status, Poor Health in Childhood, and Human
Capital Development
Janet Currie
NBER Working Paper No. 13987
April 2008
JEL No. I12,J24

                                            ABSTRACT

There are many possible pathways between parental education, income, and health, and between child
health and education, but only some of them have been explored in the literature. This essay focuses
on links between parental socioeconomic status (as measured by education, income, occupation, or
in some cases area of residence) and child health, and between child health and adult education or
income. Specifically, I ask two questions: What is the evidence regarding whether parental socioeconomic
status affects child health? And, what is the evidence relating child health to future educational and
labor market outcomes? I show that there is now strong evidence of both links, suggesting that health
could play a role in the intergenerational transmission of economic status.


Janet Currie
International Affairs Building
Department of Economics
Columbia University - Mail code 3308
420 W 118th Street
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
jc2663@columbia.edu
       When economists think of “human capital,” they often mean education. A large body of

literature has established that investments in education pay off in the form of higher future

earnings, and that on average, differences in education can explain a significant fraction of the

variation in wages and incomes among adults, as well as variation in many other positive

outcomes. But what determines a child’s educational success? Most studies, beginning with

Coleman (1966) point to family background as the number one factor. This raises, however, a

“chicken and egg” problem. We know that more education leads to higher income, and that

children in higher income families are likely to get more education than other children. But why

does income matter? Clearly we need to open the “black box” of the family in order to determine

why it is that better backgrounds promote success in life.

       While there are clearly many things about background that might matter, research

increasingly implicates health as a potentially major factor. Given the importance of “health

capital” for education and earnings (Grossman, 2000; Case, Fertig, and Paxson, 2005; Currie and

Madrian, 1999; Smith, 1999), it is possible that poor health in childhood is an important

mechanism for intergenerational transmission of education and economic status.

       While it is impossible to provide a conclusive answer to this larger question, this essay

addresses two narrower related questions: What is the evidence regarding whether parental

socioeconomic status affects child health? And, what is the evidence relating child health to

future educational and labor market outcomes? That is, the puzzle at the heart of this review is

whether low parental SES has an effect on future educational and labor market outcomes through

its effects on child health. The focus is primarily on children from developed countries, because

it is perhaps more obvious why the common and severe health problems of children in many

                                                  3
developing countries might impede human capital development.

       The first two sections of this essay examine the evidence regarding the two questions

posed above. In each section, I discuss theoretical reasons why one might expect an effect,

correlational evidence, and studies aimed at determining whether there is a causal relationship.

The last section of the paper attempts a summing up, aimed at determining whether we have

enough information to say whether poor health is likely to be a major cause of intergenerational

persistence in economic status.

       I show that there is strong evidence of links between parental socioeconomic status and

child health and between child health and future outcomes, but that it is difficult to say on the

basis of the existing evidence how large the overall effect of health might be or whether it

explains a significant amount of intergenerational transmission. A significant problem is that

health is inherently multi-dimensional and difficult to summarize in a single index. Many studies

focus on narrow measures (e.g. individual chronic conditions) which generally either have low

prevalence, or relatively small effects. Further progress on this problem may await better health

measures utilizing more complete data linking health in childhood to eventual attainments.



1. Does Parental Socioeconomic Status Affect Child Health?

a) Why Might Parental SES Affect Child Health?

       In the standard model of child health production, parents are assumed to maximize an

intertemporal utility function such as:

(1) Σt=1T Et(1/1+σ)tUt + B(AT+1),

where σ is the discount rate, B is a bequest function, A denotes assets, and Ut is given by:

                                                  4
(2) Ut = U(Qt, Ct, Lt,; Xt, u1, ε1t),

where Q is the stock of child health, C is consumption of other goods, L is leisure, X is a vector of

exogenous taste shifters, u is a vector of permanent individual specific taste shifters, and ε

denotes a shock to preferences. Utility is maximized subject to the following set of constraints:

(3) Qt = Q(Qt-1, Gt, Vt; Zt, u2, ε2t),

(4) Ct = Yt - PgtGt - (At+1 - At),

(5) Yt = It + wtHt + rAt,

(6) Lt + Vt + Ht =1,

where G and V are material and time inputs into health production, Z is a vector of exogenous

productivity shifters, u2 are permanent individual specific productivity shifters, ε2t is a

productivity shock, Y is total income, P represents prices, I is unearned income, w is the wage, r

is the interest rate, and endowments of health and assets, Q0 and A0 are assumed to be given.

Equation (3) can be interpreted as a "production function" for child health which describes the

way that inputs are can be converted into health (see Grossman, 2000).

        Health inputs are valued by consumers not for their own sake, but because they affect

child health, which in turn has a direct effect on parental utility. Non-market time is an input into

both health production and the production of other valued non-market goods (i.e. leisure

activities). This model is dynamic in the sense that the stock of child health today depends on

past investments in health, and on the rate of depreciation of health capital (which is one of the

elements of u2).

        The model can be solved to yield Frisch demand functions for Ct, Ht, Gt, and Vt of the

following form:

                                                   5
(7) Ct, Ht, Gt, and Vt = F(λt ,Xt, Zt, wt, Pt, Mt, r, σ, u1, u2, ε1t, ε2t),

where λt is the marginal utility of wealth and Mt is a vector of moments of the distribution of {Xk,

Zk, wk, Pk, ε1k, ε2k}, and k=t+1,..., T.

Substituting the solutions for G and V into (3) yields a Frisch demand function for Qt that is

conditional on Qt-1:

(8) Qt = Q*(Qt-1, λt , Xt, Zt, wt, Pt, Mt, r, σ, u1, u2, ε1t, ε2t),

Repeated substitution of lagged versions of (8) into (8), yields a Frisch demand for Qt that is not

conditional on Qt-1:

(9) Qt = Q**(Q0, λt ,Jt, Xt, Zt, wt, Pt, Mt, r, σ, u1, u2, ε1t, ε2t),

where Jt = {Xk, Zk, wk, Pk, ε1k, ε2k}, and k=1,...,t-1.

Finally, substituting in the determinants of λt yields a Marshallian demand function for Qt:

(10) Qt = Q***(Q0, A0 ,Jt*, Xt, Zt, wt, It, Pt, Mt*, r, σ, u1, u2, ε1t, ε2t),

where Mt* is a vector of moments of the distribution of {Xk, Zk, wk, Ik, Pk, ε1k, ε2k}, and k=t+1,...,

T and Jt* = {Xk, Zk, wk, Ik, Pk, ε1k, ε2k}, and k=1,...,t-1.

        This model can be considerably simplified by assuming that the elements of Mt* are

functions of current and past realizations of the exogenous variables. In panel data, we can also

control for Q0, A0, r, σ, u1, u2 by including a child-specific fixed effect, η to yield the following

reduced form demand for health:

(11) Qt = Q'(Jt*, Xt, Zt, wt, It, Pt, η, ε1t, ε2t).

Alternatively, we could start with (8), allow the elements of Mt to be functions of current and past

realizations of the exogenous variable, and capture λt, r, σ, u1, u2, with either a child-specific or

family specific fixed effect to arrive at:

                                                         6
(12) Qt = Q''(Qt-1, Jt*, Xt, Zt, wt, Pt, η, ε1t, ε2t).

          This simple model yields several insights into why parental SES might matter for child

health. First, the budget constraint will be less binding in wealthier families, and these families

will be able to purchase more or better quality material health inputs. Inputs include factors such

as better quality medical care and food, as well as safer toys, housing, and neighborhoods. Set

against this is the possibility that parents with a higher value of time in market work will invest

less time in child health production, though to the extent that parents can purchase substitute care

of adequate quality, this may not have any negative effect.

          Lower socioeconomic status is, however, not only a matter of what inputs one can afford

to buy, but also a matter of what one can do and chooses to do with the inputs one has at hand.

Parents of lower SES may have different past experiences with the health care system, or health

beliefs (e.g. about whether it is normal for a child to have coughing or wheezing), or preferences,

which would be reflected in the taste shifters X and u. Fuchs (1992) emphasizes the rate of time

preference and a sense of self-efficacy as two things that are related to socioeconomic status but

might have independent effects on the way parents choose to combine inputs in order to produce

child health. Cutler and Lleras-Muney (2006) also emphasize the effect of education on decision

making about health behaviors.

          Parental education is often highlighted as a productivity shifter in the health production

function (3), and as we will show below, poorer children seem to be more subject than richer

children to health insults, which would then change the productivity of future investments in child

health.

          In his model of capacity formation, Heckman (2007) focuses on the dynamic aspect of the

                                                         7
human capital investment model, and specifically on the way that Qt depends on Qt-1. Cunha,

Heckman and Schennach (2006) focus on the development of cognitive skills, arguing that a

model in which there are “dynamic complementarities” and “self-productivity” fits the available

evidence well. Dynamic complementarities imply that investments in period t are more

productive when there is a high level of capability in period t-1. Self-productivity implies that

higher levels of capacity in one period create higher levels of capacity in future periods.

Heckman (2007) hypothesizes that a similar argument might be true of child health, and that there

might also be complementarities between child health and cognitive development, the question

explored in section 2 below.

       Finally, children of lower SES families are likely to have lower Q0 at birth. There is a

tendency among economists to assume that differences that are manifest at birth must be purely

genetic. However, a good deal of evidence in epidemiology suggests that this view is simply

wrong-headed. Studies by David Barker (for example, Barker, 1998) show that fetal conditions

are related to adult risk of disease. Gluckman and Hanson (2005) offer a more recent summary of

work on this idea which has come to be known as the “fetal origins hypothesis.” This work can

be seen in the broader context of research investigating the interplay between genes and

environment (see for example, Rutter, 2006). The idea is that genes may predispose a person to a

condition, but that it generally takes an environmental trigger to activate the expression of the

gene. Moreover, genes that are associated with pathology in one set of circumstances may have

protective functions in other contexts, which may explain why they persist in the genome. Thus,

low SES children may have low Q0 at birth because of the circumstances surrounding their births,

rather than because their parents have “inferior” genetic endowments.

                                                  8
b) Correlations Between Parent’s SES and Child Health

          Differences in the health of high and low SES children are apparent at birth. For instance,

using data from the 1958 British birth cohort, which followed all the children born in one week in

March, Currie and Hyson (1999) show that among children whose fathers were in the highest

prestige occupations, 5 percent were low birth weight (birth weight less than 2,500 grams)

compared to 6.4 percent of children whose father’s were in the lowest prestige occupations (or

whose father information was missing). In California, birth records indicate that in the 1970s, 6

percent of children born into the highest income quartile of zip codes were low birth weight

compared to 7 percent of children born into the lowest income quartile. By the 1990s, the

incidence of low birth weight had decreased slightly for both groups, but the gap had widened:

The comparable numbers were 5.5 percent and 6.8 percent.

          Measures of SES vary from study to study. In addition to parent’s occupation or measures

based on area of residence, many studies focus on the correlation between maternal education and

measures of child health. In fact, this robust relationship was one factor underlying the World

Bank’s drive over the past decade to promote maternal education in developing countries (World

Bank, 1993).       Much of the literature on maternal education and child health focuses on

developing countries, emphasizes the effects of improvements in relatively low levels of

education, and does not attempt to establish whether the measured effect of maternal education is

causal.

          This sub-section focuses on the relationship between income and health, as an illustration

of the strong and consistent relationship between SES and health. Maternal reports about child

health (in a standard question, mothers are asked if the child’s health is excellent, very good,

                                                   9
good, fair, or poor) suggest that poor children are in worse health than richer children. In an

important paper, Case, Lubotsky, and Paxson show that in the U.S., these gaps in health status

tend to grow as children age. Table 1 shows estimates from ordered probits exploring the

relationship between family income and child health for various age groups. Panel 1 reproduces

estimates from Case, Lubotsky and Paxson, while panels 2 and 3 show estimates for similar

analyses using Canadian and British data.

       All of the estimates are negative and significant, showing that reported health status

increases with income, even in early childhood (since higher numbers indicate worse health).

The analyses using Canadian and British data are notable because they show that even in

countries with universal health insurance poor children are in worse health than richer children.

However, for each age group, the estimates are smaller in absolute value in Canada and the U.K.

       Currie and Stabile (2003) suggest that variations in the incidence of health insults may be

of particular importance in explaining the gap in health status between rich and poor. In their

Canadian panel data, poor children receive many more health insults (such as new diagnoses of

chronic conditions, and hospitalizations) than richer children. The poor children recover more

slowly, but after four years have recovered to the same extent as the richer children--the real

difference is in the incidence of the negative shocks to health.

       Many authors have documented the fact that poor children suffer more insults to their

health than richer ones For example, Newacheck (1994), Brooks-Gunn and Duncan (1997),

Newacheck and Halfon (1998), and Case, Lubotsky and Paxson (2002) all show that poor

children are more likely to have many chronic conditions. In the U.K., 11 percent of 0 to 3 year

old children have chronic conditions in families with income over 50,000 pounds, compared to

                                                 10
23 percent of 0 to 3 year old children in families with incomes less than 10,000 pounds per year

(Currie, Price, and Shields, 2004). In the U.K. this result is driven by a higher incidence of

asthma and mental health problems, the two most common classes of chronic conditions. In the

U.S., a wider array of chronic conditions, such as arthritis and heart problems, are sensitive to

income.

       Currie and Lin (2007) update these analyses for the U.S. using data from the U.S. National

Health Interview Survey for 2001-2005, and by examining mental health conditions. Mental

health conditions are very prevalent, may have large impacts on educational attainments, and

differentially affect poor children. Moreover, a great deal of literature outside economics

suggests that there might be a causal relationship between low socioeconomic status and mental

health problems, perhaps because low SES acts a stressor. See for example, McLeod and

Shanahan (1993), Kessler and Cleary (1980), Lundberg (1997) and Dohrenwend, Levav, and

Shrout (1992).

       Table 2 shows a sharp difference in maternal assessments of health by poverty status.

Only 70 percent of poor children are reported to be in excellent or very good health compared to

86.9 percent of higher income children. The gap grows from 15.5 percentage points among 2 to

3 year olds to 19.2 percentage points among 13 to 17 year olds.

       Asthma is the leading chronic condition among children and is also known to be one of

the leading causes of pediatric emergency room utilization, hospitalization, and school absence

(U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 2006). Table 2 shows that 15.9% of poor children and

13.1% of non-poor children have been told by a physician that they have asthma. Asthma that is

properly controlled may not have serious consequences for human capital development, but poor

                                                 11
children are less likely than richer children to be properly managing their asthma. As a result

poor children are 1.2 times more likely to have ever been told that they have asthma than other

children, but they are 3.2 times more likely to be limited by asthma.

       Mental health conditions are the second most prevalent set of conditions, with Attention

Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) being the largest single diagnosis within this category:

parents of 7.1 percent of poor children and 6.0 percent of non-poor children have been told that

their children have ADHD.1 Hearing, vision, and speech problems, such as stuttering or

stammering, are together the third most common category of chronic conditions.

       Taking all of the listed chronic conditions together, a staggering 32.4 percent of poor

children and 26.5 percent of other children have been told that they have at least one of these

conditions. Taking differences in the probability that a condition is diagnosed into account would

likely increase the gap in incidence between rich and poor children, since poor children are less

likely to receive medical attention for their health problems, and are therefore less likely to be

properly diagnosed.

       Disparities between rich and poor children in the extent to which they are limited by their

conditions are much greater than disparities in the reported prevalence of conditions between poor

and non-poor children: 11.4 percent of poor children say that they are limited by chronic

conditions compared to 7.0 percent of higher income children. The fraction of children with a


1 ADHD is characterized by an inability to pay attention (inattention) and/or hyperactivity.
The main diagnostic criteria for ADHD are laid out in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition (American Psychiatric Association, 1994). They are: that six or
more symptoms of inattention, or six or more symptoms of hyperactivity have persisted for at
least six months “to a degree that is maladaptive and inconsistent with developmental level”
(AAP, 2000, Table 1); that some of the symptoms were present before seven years of age; and
that impairment from the symptom is present in two or more settings (such as home and school).
                                                  12
limitation due to a chronic condition rises with age, and rises more sharply for poor children than

for others. By the teenage years, poor children have almost double the probability of being

limited by their chronic condition: 14.1 percent compared to 7.8 percent of other children.

         Turning to illnesses, many children suffer from asthma attacks and 3.2 percent of all poor

children end up in emergency rooms due to an attack each year, compared to only 1.6 percent of

other children. It is anomalous then that respiratory allergies are reported to be more common

among other children than among poor children. Finally, a surprisingly large fraction of children

have frequent diarrhea and/or three or more ear infections in a year, indicating a high burden of

infectious disease, especially among poor children. Other types of acute health problems are also

more likely to strike poor children.2 According to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control (2004),

poor children have almost 12 times more restricted activity days because of dental problems than

higher-income children. Untreated dental disease can lead to problems eating, speaking, and

learning.

         A significant limitation with parental reports about child health is that there may be

systematic differences in the way that parents of different backgrounds perceive and report

illness. For example, if a health condition such as asthma is very common in a particular group,

parents may not perceive that the health problem limits their children. However, in this case, the

true gap between rich and poor children in the extent to which they are limited by chronic

conditions would be even larger than that reported in Table 2.

         As a second example, although injuries rather than illnesses are the leading cause of death

among children in developed countries (Bonnie et al., 1999), NHIS data on the burden of injury is


This last criterion means that teachers are often important for the diagnosis of ADHD.
2 This observation is consistent with a large body of previous work including Starfield et al (1984).
                                                          13
very limited. The NHIS asks only about injuries that “required” medical attention, and reports of

such injuries go up with income, which is clearly at odds with the available data on child

accidental death rates. In the U.K., 6 children out of every 100,000 died annually due to injuries

from 1991 to 1995. But the death rate due to injuries rose to 20 out of 100,000 among children

of manual workers (Unicef, 2000). One possible explanation is that rich and poor parents have

different views about what sort of injuries “require” medical attention.

       In the U.S., Case, Lubotsky and Paxson (2003) show that parental reports of children’s

health status are highly correlated with physician reports in the National Health and Nutrition

Examination Survey (NHANES), a national survey which has both types of reports.

Unfortunately, most questions about chronic conditions in the NHANES are asked to parents

rather than based on a determination by the physician (typically, parents are asked whether a

doctor has ever told them that the child has a particular condition). More objective measures of

the extent of correlation between measures of SES and health await better health data, perhaps

from “registry” data sets that include all patient encounters with the medical system.

       The NHANES does have objective information about some health measures, most notably

body size and nutritional status based on blood tests. Hedley et al. (2004) estimate that of

children 6 to 19, 31 percent are overweight or at risk of overweight, while 16 percent are

overweight. The poor are at higher risk of obesity than the rich. Hence, the growth in obesity

will likely exacerbate existing differences in health between rich and poor since many diseases

such as heart disease and diabetes are related to obesity (Cutler, Glaeser and Shapiro, 2003).

Using data from the 3rd NHANES, Bhattacharya and Currie (2001) show that family income




                                                 14
below 1.3 times the U.S. poverty line was a significant predictor of high blood cholesterol and

high body mass index even conditional on other demographic variables.

       Other potential health measures are not well measured in any survey. For example, there

is a good deal of evidence that low income children are more likely to be exposed to toxic

chemicals, some of which are thought to have effects on cognitive development. This issue is

explored in the “environmental justice” literature. For example, Rauth et al. (2006) examine a

group of children who were prenatally exposed to pesticide (cholorpyrifos) and find that children

in a high exposure group were five times more likely to be developmentally delayed than those in

a lower exposure group. This is not an experimental study, but the results suggest that differential

exposure to toxic substances might be a significant problem for poor children.

       One might be interested in whether the temporal pattern of family income made a

difference to child health. The theory sketched above suggests that persistent poverty is likely to

have worse effects on health than transitory poverty, since health is a stock that will be affected

by past investments, and children with low “capacities” may be less able to parlay new

investments in their health capital into good outcomes. Cross-sectional surveys such as the

NHIS and the NHANES cannot be used to address this question.

       Several authors have used data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth to address

this issue, although its health measures are rather limited. Korenman and Miller (1997) find that

children in persistently poor families have lower height-for-age. McLeod and Shanahan (1993,

1996) and Strohschein (2005) find that child mental health, and particularly aggressive behavior,

may be affected more by persistent poverty than by current poverty alone. Guo and Harris

(2000) focus on a measure of the number of years since birth that the child’s household has been

                                                 15
in poverty. They estimate a structural model and show some of the effect of poverty on child

cognitive outcomes is mediated through the effects of poverty on child health at birth. They also

find that later child health is significantly related to cognitive outcomes, where child health is

measured using number of illnesses in the past year, whether the child had medical attention, and

whether the child is reported to be limited in his or her physical activities.



c) Do Correlations Imply Causality?

       The literature discussed above conclusively demonstrates that children of poor or less

educated parents are in worse health on average than other children, even in a rich country like

the United States. But this does not necessarily imply that low SES causes poor child health.          It

is possible, for example, that a third factor causes both poverty and poor child health. Since

parents who are in poor health are likely to have lower earnings, and may have achieved less

education, perhaps parents’ poor health, rather than parents’ low earnings or education, is

causally related to poor child health.

       Alternatively, poor child health may reduce parental earnings. Several papers have

examined the relationship between maternal employment and child health. For example, Powers

(2001) investigates this relationship using whether a child has specific conditions as an instrument

for the child’s health status. The results are sensitive to the inclusion of maternal health status,

and do not establish that family income is significantly affected. Earlier work by Wolfe and Hill

(1995) shows that single mothers with disabled children are less likely to be employed. A

question raised by their results is whether child disability has effects on family income by

encouraging marital dissolution.

                                                  16
       It is important to identify causal effects because if parental SES does not affect child

health (at least when SES is above some minimum level) then interventions to increase parental

SES will not necessarily improve child health. However, the literature attempting to identify

causal impacts of parental SES on child health in a developed country context is small. It is

difficult to find interventions that affect parental SES, but that are not also likely to have a direct

effect on children’s health.

       In the developing country context, Desai and Alva (1998) look at Demographic and

Health Survey data for 22 countries, and show that the strong correlation between maternal

education and three measures of child health becomes much weaker when controls for husband’s

education and area of residence are included. Their point is not that SES does not matter, but

rather that it is difficult to know if maternal education is the most important aspect of SES.

       Thomas, Strauss and Henriques (1991) use data from Brazil and find a strong positive

effect of mother’s education on child height. They find evidence that much of the correlation can

be explained by measures of mother’s access to information, such as reading the newspaper and

listening to radio, and argue that this supports the idea that the effect is causal. Duflo (2000)

makes use of a pension reform in South Africa that brought black pensioners up to parity with

white pensioners. She finds that the reform had an effect on height-for-age of girls born after the

reform. Chou et al. (2007) find that in Taiwan increases in compulsory education from six to nine

years, coupled with an aggressive a school building program led to increases in parental schooling

that were associated with an 11 percent decline in the infant mortality rate.

       There is little work exploring the relationship between maternal education and child health

in developed countries. Currie and Moretti (2003) use the great expansion in the number of

                                                   17
colleges that occurred in the U.S. in the 1960s and 1970s as an instrument for college going

among American women. They show that the opening of a new college in the woman’s county of

birth in her 17th year is a significant predictor of her educational attainment. In turn, instrumental

variables models show that higher rates of college going improve infant health, as measured by

birth weight and gestational age. It also increases the probability that a new mother is married,

reduces parity, increases use of prenatal care, and substantially reduces smoking, suggesting that

these may be important pathways for the ultimate effect on health.

       On the other hand, McCrary and Royer (2006) use the law governing school entry ages in

Texas as an instrument for maternal education, and do not find an effect. Given a particular age

cutoff, children a few days younger than the cutoff must wait until the next year to start school.

These children will then be in a lower grade when they reach minimum school leaving age, and

McCrary and Royer show that they tend to get less education on average. A potential criticism of

their identification strategy is that those born after the cut-off enter school as the oldest children

in the class, while those born before the cut-off enter school as the youngest. Being consistently

the oldest child in ones class may have effects independent of the impact on school leaving (see

for example Bedard and Dhuey, 2007).3 Chevalier and O’Sullivan (2007) use a change in

minimum school leaving age in Great Britain to examine the effect of maternal education on birth

weight. They find that the law had differential effects by socioeconomic status, and that the most

impacted groups experienced the largest changes in infant birth weight.

       Carneiro, Meghir and Parey (2007) examine the effect of maternal education using data

from the NLSY. They instrument maternal education using local labor market conditions, and the


3 Dobkin and Ferreira (2007) argue that school entry laws are not good instruments for

                                                   18
presence of a four year college and college tuition at age 17 in the county where the mother

resided when she was 14 years old. Like the college openings used by Currie and Moretti

(2003), these instruments mainly identify the effect of college education rather than, for example,

an additional year of high school. They find strong initial effects on measures of cognitive

outcomes, and stronger medium terms on a measure of behavior problems, which, as discussed

further below, might be regarded as a proxy for or correlate of mental health conditions. They

also find strong effects of maternal education on the home environment, measured using variables

such as whether the child is read to, and whether the child has special lessons. They conclude

that the effects of increases in maternal education are large relative to the effects of other

interventions designed to affect child outcomes.

       A few papers attempt to look at the effects of exogenous changes in household income.

The problem here is to find exogenous sources of variation in household income that do not also

affect other conditions in the household. For example, some welfare-to-work experiments

increased household income, but these interventions also encouraged maternal employment, so

they cannot be regarded as purely income interventions.      The National Research Council and

Institute of Medicine (2003) summarize this literature and find that over all, welfare-to-work

interventions had surprisingly little impact on children, positive or negative.

       Berger, Paxson, and Waldfogel (2006) explore the relationship between family income,

home environments, and child mental health outcomes (and cognitive test scores) at age three in

the “Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing Study”. This study is following a cohort of 5,000

children born in several large U.S. cities between 1998 and 2000, and over-samples births to



educational attainment in wage equations because they affect wages by many causal pathways.
                                                   19
unmarried couples. Berger et al. show that all of the measures they examine (which include

measures of parenting skills as well as physical aspects of the home) are highly related to income.

Moreover, controlling for these measures reduces the effects of income on outcomes

considerably. This suggests that income affects child mental health via its effects on observable

health inputs. However, they present simulations based on their estimates (estimates which are

likely to over-state the effect of income given the likely direction of omitted variables bias) that

imply that even cash subsidies that brought every family up to the poverty line would not

eliminate the gaps in child outcomes that they observe. In other words, though the effect of

income is statistically significant, it is small.

        Burgess, Propper, and Riggs (2006) use a similar strategy and examine a cohort of

children born in the U.K. in the early 1990s. They also conclude that income has little direct

effect on child health, although the mother’s own health, and events in the mother’s early life

matter more. Doyle, Harmon, and Walker (2007) use data from the 1997-2002 Health Survey for

England, and instrument education and income using smoking of the grandparents, and a change

in compulsory schooling laws which increased the years of compulsory schooling for some

parents from 15 to 16 years. They find larger effects of income than previous studies using

English data, and also find that effects are larger in poorer households. But the assumption that

grandparent’s smoking (an indicator of grandparent social class) affects grandchildren’s outcomes

only through parental income and education is a strong one.

        There is some evidence that changes in family circumstances can affect childhood mental

health conditions.    In particular, the Moving to Opportunity experiment, which randomly

assigned some public housing residents to move to low poverty neighborhoods, found

                                                    20
improvements in the mental health of girls. Specifically, the experimental group experienced

reductions in generalized anxiety disorders and psychological distress. Curiously, there was no

such positive effect for boys (Orr et al., 2003).

       Costello et al. (2003) discuss the Great Smoky Mountains Study, a natural experiment

involving the opening of a casino on an Indian reservation. As a result of the opening, every

family on the reservation received a cash transfer. Before the opening, the poor children on the

reservation had higher levels of psychiatric symptoms. After the opening, children in families

who were raised above poverty had lower numbers of conduct and oppositional disorders (though

there was no effect on anxiety and depression). However, these families were also less likely to

be single headed, and reported that they were better able to supervise their children after the

change, suggesting that there may have been other factors in addition to income at work.

       Several papers attempt to control for unobserved family background characteristics that

might be associated with both low income and low birth weight by estimating models with sibling

fixed effects. Conley and Bennett (2000) use the Panel Study of Income Dynamics and examine

1,654 singleton births to sample mothers between 1986 and 1992. They find that income during

pregnancy has no effect on the risk of low birth weight when the mother’s birth weight is

controlled, or when family fixed effects are included in the model.          However, Conley and

Bennett (2001) find that if the mother was low birth weight, then income at the time of the birth

has a significant impact on the probability that the child is low birth weight in models that include

mother fixed effects. Hence, they suggest that there is an interaction between poverty at the time

of the child’s birth and maternal low birth weight in the production of child low birth weight.

Similarly, Johnson and Schoeni (2007) show in sibling fixed effects models also estimated using

                                                    21
the PSID that increases in income increase birth weight by much more if the mother was low birth

weight herself. Results based on the PSID cannot, however, be regarded as definitive given the

very small sample sizes available. The Conley and Bennett models for children of low birth

weight parents include only 179 children, and only a subset of these would have been born to

mothers who experienced a sizeable change in income between births.

       Currie and Moretti (2007) examine intergenerational transmission of low birth weight

using a much larger data set based on birth records from California. The data base is constructed

by starting with women who gave birth after 1989. If the mother was born in California, it is

possible to go back in time and locate the mother’s own birth certificate to find out her birth

weight. Moreover, given the mother’s mother’s name (i.e. the grandmother’s name), it is possible

to identify mothers who are sisters in the data. They define the mother’s birth socioeconomic

status by examining income in the zip code of the hospital where the mother was born. They find

that mothers who were born in poor areas were both more likely to be low birth weight, and about

6 percent more likely to eventually deliver a low birth weight baby themselves, even in models

with grandmother fixed effects.

       Van den Berg, Lindeboom, and Portrait (2005) ask whether economic conditions in utero

impact the health of affected cohorts. They use an extraordinary historical data set from the

Netherlands that covers about 14,000 randomly chosen people born in the Netherlands between

1812 and 1912, who were followed up to 2000. The data draws together all of the administrative

records of vital events (births, marriages, and deaths) for these people. They compare people who

were in utero during a recession to those who were in utero just before the recession.         If

economic conditions show a secular trend towards improvement, then this design will tend to

                                               22
under-estimate the effect of the recession. They use GNP to measure economic conditions, and

exclude time intervals that included epidemics, in order to focus on the effects of fluctuations in

economic activity. They find that those born in recessions suffer up to 7 percent higher mortality

rates after the first year of life compared to those born just prior to the recession. It is interesting

to speculate on whether this difference reflects the effects of absolute or relative deprivation, but

that question is not addressed. Relative deprivation might have an effect through maternal stress

responses, for example.

       In summary, while there is a strong and exceedingly robust correlation between various

measures of parental background and child health, it is difficult to prove that the relationships are

causal. The literature attempting to do so is small and still has many holes. There is however

evidence in support of the contention that maternal SES early in the child’s life matters, and that

child mental health may be particularly susceptible. I turn now to a discussion of whether

differences in child health are likely to affect future socioeconomic outcomes.



2. Effects of Child Health on Future Outcomes

a) Why Might Child Health Affect Future Outcomes?

       The idea that health is a “capacity” that affects production of a wide range of future

capacities fits very naturally into the framework proposed by Heckman (2007). Poor child health

is likely to affect future health, which in turn can affect labor supply and productivity. There is a

great deal of evidence that socioeconomic status is related to health more generally (see Adler and

Ostrove (1999), Marmot and Wilkinson (1999), and Cutler and Lleras-Muney (2006) for reviews)

and that low socioeconomic status in childhood is related to poorer future adult health even in

                                                  23
adults who are no longer of lower socioeconomic status (see for example, Power and Peckham

(1990), Davey Smith, et al. (1998), Poulton et al. (2002) and Marmot et al. (2001)). Elo and

Preston (1992) summarize some of this literature, and show that cohorts who suffered high death

rates in childhood also tend to show high death rates in adulthood, in part because of the direct

effects of childhood health conditions on future morbidity.4

        Bozzoli, Deaton, and Quintana-Domeque (2007) examine the relationship between the

disease environment in childhood and adult height, using cross-country data for birth cohorts.

They find that in rich countries, cohorts that suffered a higher disease burden in childhood have

higher adult death rates. In poor countries, however, selection causes the relationship to be the

reverse—in high disease environments only relatively strong people survive to become adults,

and they tend to live longer (see also Blackwell, Hayward, and Crimmins, 2001).

        The fetal origins literature discussed above strongly suggests that conditions in utero

affect not only birth weight but features such as basic metabolism, which in turn affect future

health outcomes. For example, Barker (1998) maintains that fetuses starved in utero may

develop more efficient metabolisms, which then place them at higher risk for future obesity, heart

disease, and diabetes. Since adult health is strongly linked to adult economic well-being, this

suggests a relationship between health in utero and future outcomes.5

        Poor fetal and child health can also have direct effects on the acquisition of skills. For


4 Elford, Whincup, and Shaper (1991) provide a critical review of the literature linking early SES and adult heart
disease and argue that most studies do not establish a causal relationship because the results are not very specific
(childhood SES affects other outcomes besides heart disease), they are not consistent (either within or across
studies), many studies do not adequately control for confounders, that there is little evidence of a dose-response
relationship, and that the estimated effects are often weak.
5 Currie and Madrian (1999) summarize the evidence linking health and labor market outcomes among working age
adults. The relationship between SES and outcomes may be weaker for older adults. For instance, Adams et al.
(2003) find no relationship between SES and mortality or sudden onset conditions among the elderly, though they do
find an association of SES with the incidence of gradual onset conditions.
                                                           24
example, maternal alcohol consumption can lead to permanent brain damage, as can trauma

during the birth itself. O’Conner et al. (2000) study Romanian orphans and find that those who

spent the longest time in deprived conditions had the worst cognitive outcomes. Thus, we know

that severe insults in utero or in early childhood can cause permanent cognitive impairments. The

question is really how sensitive these “sensitive periods” are and whether damage due to less

extreme deprivation is noteworthy or widespread.

       Among older children, some commentators have focused on school absences as a

mechanism for health to affect education (Grossman and Kaestner, 1997), though the mean

number of days absent (shown in Table 2) is quite small for both poor and non-poor children.

Hence, if poor health among school aged children has an effect on the acquisition of skills it is

more likely to come through impairing children’s ability to learn while they are in school.

Conditions such as anemia and lead poisoning (discussed below) would have this effect, though

they are now relatively rare in developed countries. Conditions such as dental caries and ear

infections are much more common so they might have a greater overall impact.

       As stressed above, mental health conditions may be a particularly important mechanism

because they are common, and because they may have particularly deleterious effects. For

example, Currie and Stabile (2006, 2007) argue that some mental health conditions have worse

effects on schooling attainment than most physical chronic conditions. Many of the “non-

cognitive” skills that Heckman (2007) emphasizes may in fact be interpreted as mental health

conditions.



b) Correlations Between Child Health and Future Outcomes

                                                 25
       There is a good deal of evidence from developing countries that children who are in poor

health also tend to have lower educational attainments. Behrman (1996) summarizes this

literature, but expresses some skepticism about whether the relationship can be said to be causal.6

       In developed countries, there has been relatively little examination of the question of

whether poor health in childhood is linked to lower future socioeconomic status (other than

through effects on future health status). One exception is a recent literature linking low birth

weight to negative future outcomes. Low birth weight has long been used as the leading indicator

of poor health among newborns. Its advantages are that it is widely available over long periods

of time, and is thought to be fairly accurately measured. Moreover, it is strongly linked to short

tem outcomes such as infant mortality: In 1996, the infant mortality rate for babies over 2,500

grams was 2.77 compared to 17.45 for babies between 1,500 and 2,500 grams, and 259.35 for

babies less than 1,500 grams (Conley and Bennett, 2001). Many follow ups indicate that low

birth weight babies have lower scores on average on a variety of tests of intellectual and social

development (see for example, Breslau et al. 1994, Brooks-Gunn, Klebanov, and Duncan, 1996).

       Linnet et al. (2006) use Danish registry data to show that children who were premature, or

low birthweight and/or whose mothers smoked in pregnancy, had a much higher risk of ADHD.

Currie and Hyson (1999) show that low birth weight children from the 1958 British birth cohort

have lower test scores, educational attainments, wages, and probabilities of being employed as of

age 33, even conditional on many measures of family background and circumstances. Case,


        6 In one of the strongest papers on this topic, Kremer and Miguel (2004) use an experimental
design and show that treatment for parasitic worm infections can increase schooling attendance
dramatically (though they do not find effects on test scores in their Kenyan sample). Bleakley
(2007) shows that the eradication of hookworm in the American south also had a significant
effect on school attendance, and that in addition, it affected literacy.
                                                 26
Fertig, and Paxson (2005) extend this research by showing that the same is true at age 42. They

also show that adults who suffered chronic conditions as children have worse educational and

labor market outcomes.

       In their study of the Health and Retirement Survey, a national survey of older adults, Luo

and Waite (2005) find that the effect of a retrospective measure of childhood SES on future

health, education, and income is attenuated by the inclusion of child health measures, suggesting

that child health may explain some of the impact of low childhood SES on future outcomes.

       But it is possible that these correlations are due to other characteristics of households that

are associated both with poor child health and poorer outcomes. In a 1997 paper, Grossman and

Kaestner summarized the existing evidence linking child health to future educational attainment

and concluded that while most studies had methodological weaknesses, it seemed more likely

than not that there was a connection. In the past 10 years there has been an explosion of research

on this topic, much of it paying careful attention to the causal question. Causality is obviously

key if one seeks to intervene to improve cognitive outcomes by improving health, or to determine

how much of the societal payoff to improving health might come from improving cognitive

functioning and future productivity. The discussion below is arranged by type of health measure.




c) Causal Effects of Child Health on Future Outcomes

i) Fetal Origins

       The most compelling examinations of the fetal origins hypothesis look for sharp

                                                 27
exogenous shocks in fetal health that are caused by conditions outside the control of the mother.

Doblhammer (2004) summarizes evidence that health shocks in early life due to wars, famines,

and other crises can have lasting effects on health. For example, researchers have focused on the

“Dutch Hunger Winter” of November 1944 to April 1945, when Dutch citizens were reduced to

starvation by the Nazi occupation. Adults in utero during the time of the famine are more likely

than those in the surrounding cohorts to suffer various health impairments, including disorders of

the central nervous system, heart disease, and antisocial personality disorders (Stein et al. 1975;

Roseboom et al. 2000; Neugebauer, Hoek, and Susser, 1999).

          Maternal disease can play a similar role. Almond and Mazumder (2005) use data from the

U.S. Survey of Income and Program Participation to follow cohorts who were affected by the

influenza epidemic of 1918. The epidemic struck suddenly in the fall of 1918 and was largely

over by January 1919. It is estimated that approximately a third of women of child bearing age

were infected. They show that compared to cohorts in utero either just before or just after the

epidemic, the affected cohorts were more likely to suffer from diabetes, stroke, activity

limitations, cancer, hypertension, and heart problems and reported poorer general health status as

adults.

          Almond (2006) examines the direct effects of the influenza epidemic on the education and

labor market outcomes of people affected by the disease in utero. He finds that children of

infected mothers were 15 percent less likely to graduate from high school, and that the wages of

affected men were lowered by 5 to 9 percent. Moreover, affected individuals were more likely to

be poor and to be receiving transfer payments (in part because they were more likely to be too

disabled to work).     Thus, this natural experiment provides compelling evidence that negative

28
shocks to health in utero can have very significant effects on future economic outcomes.

       Almond, Edlund, and Palme (2007) examine the effects of the Chernobyl disaster, which

sent a radioactive cloud over Sweden in April 1986. The amount of fallout varied substantially

across regions but was considered “low dose” everywhere. They find that children who were in

utero 8 to 25 weeks at the time of exposure were 3.6 percent less likely to qualify for high school

and had 5 percent lower grades. Restricting themselves to sibling comparisons increases the

estimated effects to 5.6 percent and 8 percent.

       Nilsson (2007) examines the effects of a temporary liberalization of alcohol policy in two

Swedish counties which led to a brief upsurge in binge drinking among young women in those

counties. The design allows him to compare cohorts immediately before and after the affected

cohort, and to use children born in other counties (excluding neighboring counties) as controls.

He finds that children who were in utero during the experiment have fewer years of schooling,

lower future earnings, and higher welfare dependence as adults.

       On the other hand, Cutler, Miller and Norton (2007) examine the long-term effects of the

economic upheaval on members of the Health and Retirement Study who were in utero during the

depression era “Dust Bowl”. Their specifications control for region, year of birth, and region

specific trends so that their models are identified by regional deviations from these trends. They

also control for economic conditions during the first five years after birth, in order to focus on

shocks in utero alone. They do not find any significant effects of negative economic shocks on

future health (measured using chronic conditions, difficulties with activities of daily living,

mortality, height, and body mass index). On the other hand, they do not find any effect of their

measure of economic distress on infant deaths, births, or the infant mortality rate. This suggests

29
that these income shocks did not translate into early life health shocks for these cohorts, and that

this is why there is no evidence of later life effects.



ii) Birth weight

        Many studies of the effects of birth weight use sibling/twin comparisons. Behrman and

Rosenzweig (2004) use data from the Minnesota Twins Registry to compare higher birth weight

infants to their own twins of lower birth weight. They find that the higher birth weight twin is not

only taller, but also goes on to get more schooling. They estimate that increasing birth weight by

a pound increases schooling by a third of a year. However, their sample is quite small, and they

do not investigate the question of how SES interacts with low birth weight in the production of

child outcomes.

        Using data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID), Conley and Bennett (2000)

find that low birth weight reduces the probability of high school graduation in models that include

mother fixed effects. Conley, Strully, and Bennett (2003) argue that low birth weight babies in

low income families are at particularly high risk of poor outcomes, though again, their sample is

quite small.

        Several recent studies conducted using large samples drawn from vital statistics records in

Scotland, Norway, Canada, the U.S. all show a link between low birth weight and lower

educational attainment, even among siblings or twins.      Lawlor et al. (2006) examine the birth

weights of Scottish siblings born between 1950 and 1956 and find that lower birth weight siblings

had lower scores on a test of intelligence at age 7. Black, Devereux, and Salvanes (2005)

examine a large sample of Norwegian twins and find, using twin fixed effects, that a 10 percent

30
increase in birth weight leads to a one percentage point increase in the probability of graduating

from high school and a one percent increase in earnings. Moreover, these effects are surprisingly

linear between about 1,500 grams and 3,500 grams, suggesting that an exclusive focus on the

2,500 gram cutoff for low birth weight is unwarranted. Oreopolous, Stabile, Wald and Roos

(2006) use similar data from the Canadian province of Manitoba. They find that children in the

1,500 to 2,500 gram range are 8 percent less likely to reach grade 12 by age 17 than siblings who

weighed over 3,500 grams. Although these studies emphasize sibling or twin comparisons, the

estimates obtained this way are remarkably similar to those obtained using Ordinary Least

Squares (OLS).

       It is difficult to conduct this exercise for the U.S. because of the paucity of data linking

health at birth to future outcomes. Almond, Chay and Lee (2004) use linked birth certificate and

infant death certificate data to examine the effect of low birth weight on the probability of infant

death in a sample of U.S. twins. They find that the effect of low birth weight is much smaller

than ordinary least squares estimates would suggest, though it is still large and significant: For

example, at the low end of the birth weight distribution, a one pound increase in birth weight from

540 to 1000 grams would reduce the probability of infant death by 0.15. At higher birth weights,

increases in weight have no effect on infant death, but still reduce hospital costs. For example,

moving from 2000 to 2500 grams is associated with a reduction of $2000 (year 2000 dollars) in

hospital costs.

       Royer (2005) uses birth certificate data for California (similar to that of Currie and

Moretti, 2007, which was described above) to examine longer term outcomes. Royer examines

mothers who were twins born over the 1960 to 1982 period, and finds that each 1,000 gram

31
increase in birth weight is associated with a gain of 0.16 years of education. There are of course,

issues involved with using a selected sample of women who have given birth, but Royer

addresses these and argues that they are unlikely to skew her results. This is a fairly small effect,

but then low birth weight is only one, imperfect, indicator of poor health. It is remarkable that

circumstances prior to one’s birth should have effects many years later.

       In addition to examining the effects of mother’s SES on birth weight, Currie and Moretti

(2007) use the California birth certificate data to examine the long term effect of maternal low

birth weight. They find that low birth weight has significant effects on later socioeconomic

outcomes. In particular, when they compare mothers who are sisters by conditioning on

grandmother fixed effects, they find that the sister who was low birth weight is three percent more

likely to live in a poor area at the time she delivers her own child, and three percent less likely to

be married when she gives birth. The low birth weight sister also has about a tenth of a year less

education on average.

       Johnson and Schoeni (2007) examine the long-term effects of low birth weight using data

from the PSID and sibling fixed effects models. They find that low birth weight is strongly

related to poorer adult health and lowers adult annual earnings by 17.5 percent. Siblings who are

low birth weight are less likely to have earnings (by 4.8 percentage points). A relatively small

part of this reduction in earnings is mediated by lower educational attainment—low birth weight

siblings are 4.8 percentage points more likely to drop out of school, and completed education is a

tenth of a year lower, an estimate that is remarkably similar to those of both Royer (2005) and

Currie and Moretti (2007). But in their models of earnings, controlling for education has little

effect on the estimated effect of low birth weight. It is possible that a larger fraction of the effects

32
of birth weight on earnings is accounted for by effects on cognition. Johnson and Schoeni find

that measures such as passage comprehension, reading ability and math achievement are strongly

affected by low birth weight. For example, passage comprehension is reduced by about 12

percent of the average test score at 3.3 pounds.

       There are several possible threats to identification in studies that rely on twin or sibling

differences. First, random measurement error in birth weight can bias estimated coefficients

towards zero. Studies based on birth certificate data will likely have some error, but not as much

as studies based on retrospective maternal reports of child birth weight. One could easily imagine

non-random measurement error in maternal reports as well. For example, a mother might tend to

report that both children were of what she considers to be an average birth weight. In this case,

controlling for mother fixed effects will increase the estimated coefficients by removing the

effects of the mother-specific measurement error.

       More fundamentally, fixed effects estimates implicitly assume that all of the relevant

omitted variables are the same for both members of the sibling pair. But siblings who are not

identical twins have some genetic differences, and parents may treat even identical twins

differently. For example, fixed effects may be biased if parents differentially invest in one sibling

or the other (Becker, 1991). If parents invest to compensate disadvantaged children, then sibling

fixed effects will tend to understate the true birth weight effect, whereas if parents favor the

stronger child, effects will tend to be overestimated.

       Rosenzweig and Zhang (2006) argue that in China, parents favor the stronger child. This

might be because many Chinese still expect to be supported by their children in old age. In the

U.S., the available evidence suggests that investments are often compensatory (Behrman, Pollak,

33
and Taubman, 1982, 1989; Ashenfelter and Rouse, 1998; Ermish and Francesconi, 2000,

McGarry 1999; McGarry and Schoeni 1995, 1997) so that the sibling comparisons discussed

above are likely to yield underestimates of the true effects of birth weight (especially given the

possibility of measurement error). It is, however, remarkable that significant effects are found

across so many different time periods and countries.

       Almond and Chay (2005) examine the effect of a mother’s health at birth (and in early

childhood) on the health of her children using a different identification strategy based on the

comparison of cohorts. They build on previous work showing that the Civil Rights movement

had a large effect on the health of black infants in certain southern states, especially Mississippi,

due to desegregation of hospitals and increased access to medical care (Almond, Chay, and

Greenstone, forthcoming). For example, there was a large decline in deaths due to infectious

disease and diarrhea in these cohorts. Because birth records include the mother’s state of birth, it

is possible to identify black women who benefited from these changes (the 1967 to 1969 cohorts),

and to compare the outcomes of their infants to the outcomes of infants born to black women in

the 1961-1963 birth cohorts. The birth outcomes of white women in the same cohorts are

examined as a control. Almond and Chay conclude that the infants of black women who had

healthier infancies as a result of the Civil Rights movement show large gains in birth weight

relative to the infants of black women born just a few years earlier, and that these gains are largest

for women from Mississippi – the most affected state. The estimates indicate that the black-white

gap in the incidence of very low birth weight was 40 percent lower in children of mothers from

the the 1967-1969 cohort compared to the earlier cohort.

       All of these studies suffer potential biases from “fetal selection.” The problem is that only

34
surviving fetuses are recorded in most of these data sets. Hence, shocks which tended to cull

weak fetuses might lead the population of surviving infants to be stronger than it would have been

otherwise. It is notable then, that there is such robust evidence of negative effects of health

shocks in utero and in infancy – the fetal selection argument suggests that these estimates

understate the true negative effects.7

       For birth weight then, there is a good deal of evidence that child health affects future child

outcomes. It is notable that the effects on education are smaller than those on future earnings. It

is also remarkable that the evidence is so consistent across countries and time periods, that the

effects appear to be roughly linear, and that the inclusion of maternal fixed effects (i.e. sibling

comparisons) produce estimates that are roughly similar to OLS estimates.

       There are fewer studies examining other health measures, or measures for older children.

The remainder of this section is organized by first discussing a paper by Smith (2007) that relies

on an overall health measure, and then drawing an example from each of several specific health

domains and discussing the evidence linking these domains with future outcomes. The chosen

domains are nutrition, mental health, chronic physical conditions, acute conditions, and toxic

exposures.



iii) Evidence from an Overall Health Measure

       Smith (2007) investigates the relationship between child health and future outcomes using

data from the 1999 Panel Study of Income Dynamics. The adult children of the Panel Study of


7 Dehejia and Lleras-Muney (2004) provide some evidence that in the U.S. black women are less
likely to give birth during recessions, which tends to raise mean birth weights. This might be due


35
Income Dynamics (PSID) respondents (who were 25 to 47 years old) were asked a retrospective

question about the state of their health when they were less than or equal to 16 years old:

Whether it was excellent, very good, good, fair or poor? In ordinary least squares regressions,

the answer to this question is highly correlated with 1999 outcomes. But Smith also exploits the

structure of the PSID to estimate models that control for sibling fixed effects.

       As shown in Table 3, in the fixed effects models, better health in childhood is related to

higher incomes, higher wealth, more weeks worked, and a higher growth rate in income. The

estimates imply that within families, a sibling who enjoyed excellent or very good health in

childhood earns 24 percent more than a sibling who was not in good health.

       A striking result is that aside from the models for education, the estimated effects are

generally larger in the fixed effects models than in OLS models, whereas one would expect that

controlling for omitted variables that were correlated both with health and with outcomes would

reduce the estimated effects. Smith argues that there is measurement error in the health measure

and that it is unlikely to be random. If siblings report similarly, then the difference in health

between siblings will be more accurately measured than the difference between random members

of the population. In this case, controlling for the measurement error by adding mother fixed

effects will increase the size of the estimated coefficients.

       The lower estimated effect on education suggests that perhaps health in childhood affects

outcomes such as adult income through mechanisms other than educational attainment, which is

consistent with the results of Johnson and Schoeni discussed above. For example, sickly children

may be less able to work hard as adults. Note that if health affects future wages through a


either to fetal selection, or to fewer planned pregnancies.
36
mechanism other than education, then this has the interesting implication that better health could

cause education to fall rather than rise (by increasing the opportunity cost of education).

       While retrospective self-reports about health are obviously imperfect measures, Smith

provides some assurance that the answers to such questions are not biased by subsequent health

shocks, using data on a similar question from the Health and Retirement Survey. He asks whether

HRS respondents who suffered a negative health shock between 1998 and 2004 were more likely

to downgrade their self-reported childhood health status than other respondents, but finds no

evidence of such a “coloring” effect. The HRS also provides some evidence regarding the

relationship between specific diseases that were suffered in childhood, and the respondent’s

overall retrospective rating of their health status in childhood. These data show sensible patterns:

Adults who had more severe ailments in childhood are more likely to report that they suffered

poor health status in childhood.



iv) Poor Nutrition

       Randomized trials in developing countries indicate that poor nutrition can harm cognitive

development. In one of the more famous studies, Pollitt et al. (1993) report on a randomized trial

of a nutritional supplementation program in Guatemala that had large impacts on the test scores

and schooling attainment of treated children. Maluccio et al. (2007) follow the same children into

adulthood and show effects on completed education. Grantham-McGregor (1991) reports on a

similar successful randomized trial of nutritional supplementation combined with psychosocial

stimulation among Jamaican children who were developmentally delayed.




37
       It is less obvious that nutritional supplementation is likely to have a large effect on the

cognitive achievement of children in richer countries. Several studies have found, however, that

prenatal participation in the U.S. WIC (Supplemental Nutrition for Women, Infants, and

Children) program is associated with higher test scores. WIC is a program that provides coupons

redeemable for specific foods to women, infants, and children deemed to be “nutritionally at

risk”. Rush et al. (1988) examine a large sample of WIC participants and a control group of

pregnant women who were also receiving prenatal care in clinic settings. When children were

followed up at age 4 and 5, the WIC children had better outcomes on cognitive tests, even though

the control women were on average higher income and better educated than the WIC women.

       Kowaleski-Jones and Duncan (2002) use data from the National Longitudinal Survey of

Youth and sibling fixed effects models to examine the effect of prenatal participation in WIC.

They find some evidence of positive effects on temperament, though not on motor or social skills.

These findings suggest that better nutrition could improve cognitive performance even in a

relatively well-nourished (or at least non-deprived) population.

       The pioneering work of Fogel and others has established that height is a good measure of

the average health of populations, and that there is a robust relationship between height and

economic well-being (c.f . Fogel, 1994; Floud, Wachter, and Gregory, 1990). Case and Paxson

(2006) use data from the British cohort studies to show that the well-established relationship

between adult height and earnings (as well as high-status occupations) disappears when controls

for cognitive test scores in early child hood are added to a regression model. Since much of the

variation in adult height is due to nutrition in childhood (particularly during the critical 0 to 3

phase), they argue that poor nutrition in childhood likely affects both future cognitive

38
performance and adult height, leading to the observed correlation between height and earnings,

even in countries where physical strength is no longer closely related to earnings potential.

       Given the trends in obesity, it is worth noting that even the obese are often badly

nourished. However, I am not aware of studies that have shown a direct causal relationship

between obesity in childhood and future educational or labor market outcomes, though there

could be a relationship from childhood obesity to adult obesity, and between adult obesity and

wages (Cawley, 2004).



v) Mental Health

       The prevalence and importance of child mental health problems have been increasingly

recognized. The MECA Study (Methodology for Epidemiology of Mental Disorders in Children

and Adolescents) cited in the 1999 U.S. Surgeon General’s Report on Mental Health finds that

approximately one in five children and adolescents in the U.S. exhibit some impairment from a

mental or behavioral disorders, 11 percent have significant functional impairments, and 5 percent

suffer extreme functional impairment (Shaffer et al., 1996; U.S. DHHS, 1999). These are very

large numbers of children.   Moreover, as Currie and Madrian (1999) discuss, mental health

problems are one of the leading causes of days lost in the work place, because they strike many

people of working age.

       It is surprising then that there is relatively little longitudinal research documenting the

long-term effects of children’s mental health problems. A few studies look at the longer term

consequences of behavior problems in relatively large longitudinal samples. Kessler et al. (1995)

uses data from the U.S. National Comorbidity Study, which surveyed 8,098 respondents 15 to 54

39
years old from 1990 to 1992, assessed their current psychiatric health, and collected information

about past diagnoses of mental problems. Using retrospective questions about onset, they find

that those with early onset psychiatric problems were less likely to have graduated from high

school or attended college.

       Farmer (1993, 1995) uses data from the 1958 British Birth Cohort Study to examine the

consequences of childhood “externalizing” behavioral problems on men’s outcomes at age 23.

She finds that children who fell into the top decile of an aggregate behavior problems score at

ages 7, 11, or 16 had lower educational attainment, earnings and probabilities of employment at

age 23. Gregg and Machin (1998) also use data from the 1958 cohort and find that behavioral

problems at age 7 are related to poorer educational attainment at age 16, which in turn is

associated with poor labor market outcomes at ages 23 and 33.

       A similar study of a cohort of all New Zealand children born between 1971 and 1973 in

Dunedin found that those with behavior problems at age 7 to 9 were more likely to be

unemployed at age 15 to 21 (Caspi et al., 1998). Miech et al. (1999) examine adolescents from

this cohort who met diagnostic criteria for four types of disorders (anxiety, depression,

hyperactivity, and conduct disorders) when they were evaluated at age 15, and who were followed

up to age 20. They find that youths with hyperactivity and conduct disorders obtained

significantly less schooling, while anxiety and depression had little effect on schooling levels.

       More recently, McLeod and Kaiser (2004) use data from the National Longitudinal

Survey of Youth (NLSY) to show that children who had behavior problems at ages 6 to 8 are less

likely to graduate from high school or to attend college, even after conditioning on maternal

characteristics. Like Miech et al. they find that in models that included both “internalizing” and

40
“externalizing” behavior problems, only the latter were significant predictors of future outcomes.

One limitation of this study is that it focuses on a relatively small number of children who, given

the design of the NLSY, were born primarily to young mothers.

       Several studies focus on particular “externalizing” mental health conditions. Perhaps the

most widely known studies of the long-term effects of aggression or conduct disorders are

associated with Richard Tremblay who tracked a group of 1037 boys from kindergarten to age 15

in Montreal, Canada. He found that boys who were highly aggressive in kindergarten were much

more likely to be persistently aggressive, and that this was most true of children of young or less

educated mothers (Nagin and Tremblay, 1999). Campbell et al. (2006) use data from the NICHD

Study of Early Child Care and Youth Development to track children from 24 months to 12 years

of age, and find that children who persist in moderate or high levels of physical aggression past

kindergarten have higher levels of externalizing problems as pre-teens. However, few

psychological studies go on to look at longer term outcomes such as educational attainment.

       Mannuzza and Klein (2000) review three studies of the long-term outcomes of children

with ADHD. In one study, children diagnosed with ADHD were matched to controls from the

same school who had never exhibited any behavior problems and had never failed a grade; in a

second study, controls were recruited at the 9-year follow up from non-psychiatric patients in the

same medical center who had never had behavior problems; and in a third study, ADHD children

sampled from a range of San Francisco schools were compared to non-ADHD children from the

same group of schools. These comparisons consistently show that the ADHD children had worse

outcomes in adolescence and young adulthood than control children. For example, they had

completed less schooling and were more likely to have continuing mental health problems.

41
However, by excluding children with any behavior problems from the control groups, the studies

might overstate the effects of ADHD.

       The longitudinal studies reviewed above establish important information about the

correlations between mental health in childhood and longer term outcomes. But beyond adding

available controls to regression models, they do not generally address the possibility that the

negative outcomes might be caused by other factors related to a diagnosis of mental health

problems, such as poverty, the presence of other learning disabilities, or the fact that many people

diagnosed with mental health problems end up in special education.

       Currie and Stabile (2006) address these problems in the context of ADHD using sibling

fixed effects models estimated on data from the NLSY and the (similar) Canadian NLSCY.            An

advantage of these data sets is that all children were administered “screener questions” that can be

used to form a scale for ADHD. Thus, their analysis is not dependent on the child having been

taken to a doctor for a diagnosis. They focus on children who were 4 to 11 years old in 1994 and

show that as of the end of the sample period, children with high scores on the ADHD screener

had lower cognitive test scores than other children for math and reading (by approximately 1/3 of

a standard deviation), and much higher probabilities of being in special education or having

repeated a grade.

       Currie and Stabile (2008) extend these results and show that ADHD appears to have larger

effects on academic outcomes than childhood depression, conduct disorders, or other mental

problems. Moreover, the effects are quite similar in the U.S. and in Canada, lending support to

the idea that they represent real impairments. The estimates are also robust to controlling for

other learning disabilities, and it appears that poor mental health at the beginning of the sample

42
period has an effect independent of the fact that it predicts poorer mental health as of the end of

the sample period. Finally, the effects of ADHD are large relative to those of physical chronic

conditions.

       A third strand of related research examines the importance of “non-cognitive skills”. For

example, Blanden, Gregg, and Macmillan (2006) ask whether rising returns to non-cognitive

skills can explain growing income inequality. In their analysis of the 1958 and 1970 British birth

cohort data sets, they include characteristics such as “hyper” and “anxious” as well as measures

such as “self esteem” and “extrovert” as measures of non-cognitive skills and find that rising

returns to positive mental characteristics does indeed account for some of the increase in

inequality between the two cohorts.

       Heckman, Stixrud, and Urzua (2006) conceptualize non-cognitive skills as innate traits

(similar to native ability) and measure them using the Rotter Locus of Control Scale and the

Rosenberg Self Esteem Scale. They conclude that such non-cognitive skills are important

determinants of academic and economic success. It seems clear that these measures of non-

cognitive skills are likely to capture some aspects of mental health (which could change over

time) as well as innate character traits.

       Ding et al. (2006) propose an innovative instrumental variables strategy, which is to use

genetic markers known to be associated with mental health conditions as instruments for these

conditions in models of educational attainment. In their preferred specifications, they find that

depression and inattention are associated with a one standard deviation reduction in Grade Point

Average. In order for genetic markers to be valid instruments, however, it is necessary that they

have no direct impact on cognitive functioning. It is not clear that we can be certain of this at this

43
point. Moreover, the results of Ding et al. (2006) are sensitive to the specification of the vector of

health conditions. This is a significant problem given that we do not have a good sense of what

vector of measures of health conditions is needed to fully account for the effects of health.

       In summary, because of their high prevalence and negative consequences, mental health

conditions are among the most important health problems impacting children’s outcomes. The

available evidence suggests that “externalizing conditions” such as ADHD or aggression have

more significant consequences for outcomes such as completed education and earnings than

internalizing conditions.



vi) Chronic Physical Conditions: The Example of Asthma

       We saw above that asthma was the most prevalent childhood chronic condition. The

literature regarding longer term consequences of asthma illustrates some of the many problems

involved in making links between childhood conditions and future outcomes. Asthma is more

common among the poor than among the non-poor, and the poor are much more likely to be

limited by their asthma. Still, the evidence linking asthma to child outcomes is inconclusive.

Part of the problem is that well controlled asthma should have little impact on the child. Yet

many of the studies examining the effect of asthma on cognitive outcomes or schooling

attainment compare children whose asthma is well controlled to those without asthma. For

example, Lindgren et al. (1992) compare siblings without asthma to siblings with asthma who

were receiving daily maintenance medication, and find no differences in achievement test scores.

The purpose of these studies was generally to see if the medication children took to control their




44
asthma affected their cognitive functioning, rather than to see whether asthma per se affected

outcomes.

       Several studies do indicate that children with asthma are more likely than other children to

have behavior problems, even when the asthma is well controlled. For example, Annett et al.

(2000) found that asthmatic children scored between 2/3 to one standard deviation below the

norm on a test of impulse control. Calam et al. (2003) conducted a prospective birth cohort study

of 663 children and found that children who had three or more attacks of wheezing by age three

had more behavior problems. Butz et al. (1995) studied 392 inner-city (predominantly African-

American) children with asthma and found that those with a high level of symptoms were twice

as likely to experience behavior problems as those with low levels of symptoms. Bussing et al.

(1995) use data from the 1988 NHIS, and find that after controlling for confounders, asthma

doubled the odds of having behavior problems. These changes in behavior may reflect relatively

subtle effects of childhood illness on parenting and family functioning.

       One large population based study does find an effect of asthma on school absences, the

probability of having learning disabilities, and grade repetition. Fowler et al. (1992) uses data

from the 1988 NHIS for children from grades one to twelve, and find that the asthmatic children

averaged 7.6 days absent compared to 2.5 days for well children. Nine percent of the asthmatic

children had learning disabilities, compared to 5 percent of the well children, and 18 percent had

repeated a grade, compared to 15 percent of the well children.

       In the only study to explicitly examine school readiness, Halterman et al. (2001) examine

1058 children entering kindergarten in urban Rochester and find that asthmatic children had lower

scores on a test of school readiness skills, and that their parents were three times more likely to

45
report that they needed extra help with learning. There were no differences, however, on tests of

language, motor, and socio-emotional skills. It is interesting to note that the negative effects of

asthma were concentrated among children whose asthma caused activity limitations (suggesting

that it was not adequately controlled) and that boys were more likely to be in this group than girls.

       A difficulty with all of these studies is that since asthma is more prevalent among poor

and minority children than among other children, the apparent connection between asthma and

outcomes could reflect omitted third factors.   However the fact that several of the studies

(Annett et al. (2000), Butz et al., (1995), Halterman et al. (2001)) use very homogeneous groups

of children and still find differences in behavior suggests that asthma when not properly

controlled probably does have a causal effect, at least on behavior problems and perhaps on

school readiness.



vii) Acute Conditions

       It is likely that the large gaps in maternally reported overall health reflect more than the

presence or absence of specific chronic conditions. In developing countries, children often suffer

from conditions such as parasitic infections. Poor children in developed countries are generally

much healthier, but as discussed above, are more likely to suffer from acute illnesses such as

dental caries and ear infections than richer compatriots. Ear infections (otitis media) affect most

young children at one time or another and are the most common reason children visit a doctor.

Like dental caries, they can be extremely painful, though more than 80 percent of infections

resolve themselves within three days if untreated. Among children who have had acute otitis

media, almost half have persistent effusion after one month, a condition that can cause hearing

46
loss. Researchers estimate that at any given time roughly 5 percent of two- to four-year-old

children have hearing loss because of middle ear effusion lasting three months or longer (O’Neill,

2003). Hearing loss can delay language development, but it is difficult to tell how important

these effects might be in explaining disparities in outcomes.



viii) Toxic Exposures

       Some scourges of childhood, such as lead poisoning, have seen huge improvement with

the adoption of public health measures such as banning lead in paint and gasoline. Lead has been

shown to decrease IQ by two to five points for each 10 to 20 microg/DL above the current

standard (Pocock et al., 1994), and the majority of affected children are low income. Indeed, the

government tracks lead poisoning by looking for areas with a combination of older housing stock

and low income households. Lead may also have negative effects on children’s mental health,

making them more prone to anti-social behavior (Needleman and Gastsonis, 1991).

       Before the regulation of lead, children were exposed to lead from paints, water pipes,

gasoline, and canned food. Evidence from the NHANES surveys showed that 88.2 percent of

children aged one to five had lead levels above10 microg/dl in 1976 to 1980, 8.6 percent had lead

levels above the threshold in 1988-1991, and only 2.2 percent had levels this high in 1999-2000.

These figures imply that the number of children with unsafe lead levels declined from 13.5

million to less than one half million over this period (U.S. Centers for Disease Control, 2003).

       There is little research on the question of whether exposure to toxic releases at the level

that now generally occurs in the population has negative health effects. Data on possible human

health effects generally comes either from animal studies, or from disastrous accidental releases.

47
Woodruff et al. (1998) run 1990 data from the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s Toxic

Release Inventory through a dispersion model and calculate that 90 percent of Census tracts have

concentrations of several chemicals greater than cancer benchmarks. This suggests that American

children (and others) may be at risk from toxic releases, but does not establish any direct

relationship between releases and health effects.

       Vriheid (2000) looks at the question of whether residence near a hazardous waste site has

health effects, and highlights some of the methodological weaknesses of existing studies.

Residents of areas near hazardous waste sites are more likely to be poor and have lower levels of

education than people in the remainder of the country (Currie and Neidell, 2005; Gallagher and

Greenstone, 2005) so that their children’s health outcomes are likely to differ even in the absence

of negative health effects from exposure. Some studies control for some observable confounding

factors, but there is still a possibility that there are unobservable characteristics of people who live

close to hazardous waste sites which would tend to cause bad outcomes. An additional problem

is that the number of hazardous waste sites analyzed in many of the previous studies is small, so

that some “results” may actually be due to sampling variability. These problems plague much of

the literature on toxic effects so that it is quite difficult to measure effects of pollution on health,

let alone show that there are long-term consequences of exposures.

       In two important and innovative works, Chay and Greenstone (2003a, b) used changes in

regulation to identify pollution’s effects on infant mortality. They argued that the 1970 and 1977

Clean Air Acts caused exogenous changes in pollution levels, and that the changes were different

in different areas. These changes can be used to examine pollution’s effects on housing markets

and infant mortality. They found that a 1µg/m3 reduction in total suspended particulates (a

48
common measure of overall pollution at that time) resulted in 5-8 fewer deaths per 100,000 live

births. Reyes (2005) uses variation in prenatal lead exposure caused by the Clean Air Acts on

infant health outcomes, and finds that even small amounts of lead are associated with adverse

outcomes.

       Currie and Neidell (2005) examine the effects of air pollution on infant deaths in the

1990s. They used individual-level data and within-zip code variation in pollution over time to

identify the effects of pollution. They included zip code fixed effects to account for omitted

characteristics like ground water pollution and socioeconomic status, and found that reductions in

two pollutants – CO and PM10 – in the 1990s saved over 1,000 infant lives in California.

Pollution may also have many negative health effects without causing deaths. Neidell (2004) also

uses within-zip code variation in pollution levels in California to provide evidence that air

pollution affects child hospitalizations for asthma.

       These studies show that pollution can have causal effects on child health, but there has

been little investigation of whether these negative health effects have long term consequences for

children’s outcomes. The National Children’s Study, which was authorized by the Children’s

Health Act of 2000, will attempt to remedy this situation by examining the effects of

environmental exposures on 100,000 children who will be followed from birth to age 21 (see

http://www.nationalchildrensstudy.gov).




3. Can Health Account for Gaps in Child Outcomes?




49
       Table 4 summarizes the evidence linking several different domains of child health to

outcomes. In order for the health problem to lead to disparities, the problem must either be more

prevalent among the poor or have a larger negative effect on the poor, and must also be associated

with negative child outcomes. The first row of Table 4 repeats the information regarding effects

of ADHD. It is almost twice as prevalent among the poor compared to the non-poor, and does

have large negative effects. Still, the overall incidence is low enough that if ADHD were the only

health problem that differentially afflicted low income children, it could not by itself explain

much of the disparity in outcomes.

       To see this, consider a typical standardized test with a mean score of 50 and a standard

deviation of 15 in the non-ADHD population. If ADHD lowers scores by a third of a standard

deviation, and 4 percent of non-poor children have ADHD while 6 percent of poor children have

it, then the mean score among the non-poor will be 49.8 (0.96*50 + 0.04*45) while the mean

score among the poor will be 49.7 (0.94*50 + 0.06*45).

       The same is true for many of the other specific conditions, while for some of the other

large categories, such as injuries and environmental exposures, we do not have accurate evidence

regarding the likely long-term effects, or the extent of the disparity in exposures. As we have

seen above, long-term effects of low birth weight on education are statistically significant and

found in many different settings, but are relatively small (on the order of a tenth of a year of

education, on average).

       Still, it is important to keep in mind that health is a multi-dimensional concept, and ideally

we would like to account for the effects of all of the health insults suffered by a child and the

possible interactions between them. Moreover, several studies suggest that health insults may

50
have large effects on future earnings and/or employment probabilities, even if they have relatively

little effect on completed education. Completed education is a crude proxy (with relatively little

variation) for the possibly more subtle effects of health in childhood on cognitive functioning.

And childhood health may affect adult outcomes by influencing non-cognitive skills, and through

effects on adult health.

        In contrast to the estimates for most conditions that have been routinely observed at birth

or later, the fetal injuries investigated by Almond and his collaborators appear to have very large

effects on future outcomes. Recall that children of U.S. mothers infected during the flu epidemic

were 15% less likely to graduate from high school, while the Swedish children exposed to low-

level radiation after Chernobyl were 5.6% less likely to qualify for high school. These results

raise the provocative idea that the best way to safeguard children’s health may be to start with

their pregnant (or pre-pregnant) mothers. They also suggest that our standard measures of child

health after birth (such as birth weight) are inadequate as they do not appear to fully capture the

effects of these fetal health insults.

        As discussed above, several studies have demonstrated that there are intergenerational

correlations in health status, and that there may be interactions between parental health status and

parental economic status in the production of child health. The fetal origins literature provides a

natural explanation of why this might be. But thus far, few researchers have attempted to directly

assess the extent to which intergenerational transmission of income might operate through the

effects of parental income on child health, and subsequent effects of poor child health on

children’s adult education and income.




51
       Eriksson, Bratsberg and Raaum (2005) have conducted one such study using data from

Denmark that began with 14 year olds in 1968, and followed them until 2001. In 2001, they had

measures of the original cohort’s current health conditions and their own earnings. They also had

retrospective reports about the parent’s health conditions as well as the parental report of income

in 1968. They show that children of poor parents are more likely to have serious health problems

as adults, and that adding measures of the adult child’s chronic conditions (e.g. heart disease,

hypertension, cancer etc.) to a typical Solon model of intergenerational correlations in earnings

reduces the estimated transmission of earnings by about a quarter. This finding is provocative,

though one might expect the addition of contemporaneous variables to reduce the estimated effect

of past ones such as parental income.



6. Conclusions

       This essay surveys literature focusing on two questions: Do parental circumstances affect

child health at early ages? And does child health matter for future educational and labor market

outcomes? The answer to both questions is “yes”, though it is too early to tell how important

these feedbacks between health and more conventional measures of human capital may be. The

available evidence suggests that fetal health may be particularly important, and hence that

protecting the health of mothers may be one of the most effective ways to improve child health.

       Much of this literature is extremely recent, suggesting that this is a new and fruitful area

of research in economics. Economists bring two new things to the table: A good sense of how

large effects have to be to be important (honed through many years of estimating human capital

earnings functions), and an emphasis on credible identification of causal effects rather than a

52
focus exclusively on description of correlations. These are potentially valuable additions to the

large epidemiological and medical literature on this subject.

        The research summarized here suggests that child health is important not only for its own

sake but because it affects children’s future prospects more broadly, as well as the prospects of

their future children. Investments in prevention may have a large payoff in terms of future human

capital accumulation, but it is important to learn what types of investments are most effective.

Even if we find that health problems associated with low income have large causal effects on

children’s outcomes, this does not necessarily imply, for example, that a program of cash

subsidies to parents is the most effective way to remediate the problem. Currie (2006) argues

that while many in-kind programs have effectively attacked the consequences of poverty for

children, there is relatively little evidence that modest cash transfers have large effects.8

Moreover, equalizing access to health care is not sufficient to eliminate gaps in health. We need

to understand more about the reasons why poor children suffer a higher incidence of negative

health events, even in utero, so that we can do more to prevent them.




8 However, see Dahl and Lochner (2005) for a recent study finding positive effects of cash transfers under the EITC
program.

53
Table 1: The Steepening of the Health-Income Gradient with Child Age
A Comparison of the U.S., Canada, and the U.K.
Ordered Probits (1=excellent, 5=poor health)

             Age:           0 to 3            4 to 8       9 to 12      13 to 17 (15)
U.S.: Case, Lubotsky, Paxson, NHIS
Ln(Income)                  -0.183           -0.244         -0.268         -0.323
                            [.008]           [.008]         [.008]         [.008]

Canada: Currie and Stabile, NLSCY
Ln(Income)                   -0.151           0.216         -0.259         -0.272
                             [.026]           [.019]        [.024]         [.040]

U.K.: Case, Lee, Paxson, HSE
Ln(Income)                 -0.143            -0.212         -0.203         -0.194
                           [.036]            [.026]         [.030]         [.034]

Notes: Standard errors in brackets. Regressions control for year
effects, family size, sex, mother age tat birth, father present, etc.
Table 2: Health of Poor and Non-Poor Children
NHIS 2001-2005 Sample Children Files, Children 2-17
                                                          Poor                Non-Poor
Maternal Assessment of Child Health
health is excellent/very good                             0.700               0.869
    AGE 2~3                                               0.746               0.901
    AGE 4~8                                               0.725               0.873
    AGE 9~12                                              0.682               0.870
    AGE 13~17                                             0.661               0.853
Health at Birth
Birth weight (grams)                                      3221                3348
Birth weight < 2500 grams                                 0.112               0.078
Ever Chronic Conditions
Ever told Asthma                                          0.159               0.131
                      a                                   0.119               0.079
Ever mental problem
Ever told ADHD, 2-17                                      0.071               0.060
Trouble hearing or seeing                                 0.076               0.053
Stuttering or stammering-past 12 mo.                      0.026               0.012
Ever told heart problems                                  0.018               0.014
Ever told diabetes                                        0.002               0.002
Ever told had arthritis                                   0.002               0.001
Any of the above                                          0.324               0.265
Activity Limitations
Limit b/c of chronic conditions                           0.114               0.070
    AGE 2~3                                               0.061               0.037
    AGE 4~8                                               0.097               0.062
    AGE 9~12                                              0.139               0.087
    AGE 13~17                                             0.141               0.078
Asthma/resp. prob causes limit                            0.019               0.006
Mental problem causes limitb                              0.062               0.035
ADHD causes limits                                        0.023               0.014
Hearing/vision causes limit                               0.008               0.005
Speech problem causes limit                               0.019               0.015
Illness and Medically Attended Injury
Days missed illness/injury past 12 mo.                    4.471               3.531
injured/poisoned requiring med.attention last 3 mo.       0.024               0.031
asthma attack past 12 m                                   0.073               0.057
ER due to asthma last 12 m                                0.032               0.016
resp. allergy last 12 m                                   0.115               0.135
frequent diarrhea last 12 m                               0.018               0.012
3+ ear infection last 12 m                                0.072               0.056
# Obs.                                                    7,363               36,858
# Obs. Representing                                       8,339,503           44,476,130
NOTES:
a. Ever told mental problem includes learning diabilities, developmental delays, mental
Down's syndrome and autism.
b. Mental problem causes limit includes limits due to learning disabilities, developmental
and other mental problems.
Table 3: Predicting Adult Education and Earnings Using Child Health
PSID 1999, 25-47 Year Old Children of Original Respondents

                                         Weeks                                             Growth
Ordinary Least Squares Education         Worked     HH Income       Wealth    Ln Earnings HH Income
Health in Childhood      0.353             2.33        0.13         1,847        0.123      0.052
 Excellent/Very Good     [4.28]           [3.36]      [5.03]        [2.05]       [3.90]     [1.78]
Ln Parent's Income 1-16  0.779            0.801       0.227         4,283        0.215      0.195
                         [10.8]           [1.30]      [9.79]        [5.18]       [7.67]     [7.30]

Sibling Fixed Effects        0.114          4.3         0.24        10,005        0.248           0.245
Health in Childhood          [1.15]       [4.05]       [4.98]       [2.29]        [3.66]          [4.07]
 Excellent/Very Good         0.363         4.62        0.011        11,647        -0.023          0.336
Ln Parent's Income 1-16      [1.14]       [1.37]       [.070]        [.83]        [.011]          [1.58]




Source: Smith (2007). Models also control for mother and father education, race/ethnicity, age,
age squared. T-statistics in brackets. Income is in $10,000 units. Growth is measured
as the percent change between houshold incomes at age 25 and 1999.
Table 4: Disease Prevalence and Effects.

                    Overall                      Poor vs.
                   Prevalence                 Non-Poor Rate                                           Effect
ADHD        4.19% boys, 1.77%          6.52 vs. 3.85%               .26 SD reduction in PIAT Math, .32 SD reduction in PIAT reading in
            girls (Cuffe et al., 2004) (Cuffe et al. 2004)          adolescent children (Currie and Stabile, 2007).
Asthma      13% diagnosed              15.8 vs.12% (Bloom, 2003)    Doubles odds of behavior problems (Bussing et al., 1995).
            6% attack in               33.2 vs. 20.8% have          7.6 days absent vs. 2.5 for non-asthmatic children, 9% have learning
            past 12 mo.                limitations                  disabilities vs. 5% non-asthmatic, 18% repeated grades vs. 12% non-
            (Bloom, 2003).             (Akinbami et al.)            asthmatic (Fowler et al., 1992). Are effects causal?

Lead        2.2% have blood           ~60% of children w            Increase from 10 to 20 microg/DL reduces IQ scores by 2-5 points
Poisoning   lead above CDC            confirmed high lead           (c.f. Pocock et al. 1994).
            standard in 99/00         levels are Medicaid
            (CDC web site).           eligible (Meyer et al.2003)
Other toxic Unknown                   Unknown                       Unknown
exposures
Obesity     31% at risk/overweight    BMI>85%tile 3.4 pp more       Higher rates of adult disease, but exact magnitudes controversial.
            16% overweight            likely on a base of 8.9%.     Effects on schooling attainment?
            (Hedley et al., 2004)     (Bhattacharya&Currie)
Anemia      9% toddlers iron          Poor children 50%             Long-term supplementation of anemic children improves cognitive
            deficient, 3%             more likely to be             functioning, but no evidence that supplementation of deficient children
            anemic (Looker            deficient (Looker             has effects. Given low rates of anemia, effects on disparities in school
            et al. 1997).             et al. 1997).                 readiness may be small.
Injuries    Unintentional=16.5 per    Poor children 2-5X            Unknown.
            100,000; Intentional=     more likely to die
            6.5 per 100,000 in 1998   (National Safe Kids
            all children 0-19.        Campaign, 1998).
            (Currie and Hotz, 2004)
References

Adams, Peter, Michael Hurd, Daniel McFadden, Agnela Merrill, Tiago Ribeiro.
“Healthy, Wealthy and Wise? Tests for Direct Causal Paths Between Health and
Socioeconomic Status,” Journal of Econometrics, 112, 2003: 3-56.

Adler, Nancy, and Joan Ostrove. “Socioeconomic Status and Health: What we Know and
What we Don't,” Socioeconomic Status and Health in Industrialized Nations. Annals of
the New York Academy of Sciences 896, 1999:3-15.

Almond, Douglas. “Is the 1918 Influenza Pandemic Over? Long-term Effects of In Utero
Influenza Exposure in the Post-1940 U.S. Population,” Journal of Political Economy,
114, August 2006: 672-712.

Almond, Douglas and Bhashkar Mazumder. “The 1918 Influenza Pandemic and
Subsequent Healht Outcomes: An Analysis of SIPP Data,” American Economic Review:
Papers and Proceedings, 95, 2005: 258-262.

Almond, Douglas, Kenneth Chay, and David Lee. “The Costs of Low Birth Weight,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120, August 2005: 1031-1084.

Almond, Douglas, and Kenneth Chay. “The Long-Run and Intergenerational Impact of
Poor Infant Health: Evidence from Cohorts Born During the Civil Rights Era,” Dept. of
Economics, Columbia University, July 2005.

Almond, Douglas, Kenneth Chay, and Michael Greenstone. “Civil Rights, the War on
Poverty, and Black-White Convergence in Infant Mortality in Mississippi,” American
Economic Review, forthcoming.

Almond, Doug, Lena Edlund, and Martin Palme. “Chernobyl’s Subclinical Legacy:
Prenatal Exposure to Radioactive Fallout and School Outcomes in Sweden,” NBER
Working Paper, September 2007.

Ashenfelter, Orley and Cecilia Rouse, “Income, Schooling and Ability: Evidence from a
New Sample of Identical Twins,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113, 1998: 253-284.

Baillargeon, R., Tremblay, R., Willms, J.D., “The Prevalence of Physical Aggression in
Canadian Children: A Multi-Group Latent Class Analysis of Data from the First
Collection Cycle (1994-1995) of the NLSCY,” Human Resources Development Canada,
Applied Research Branch, December 1999.

Barker, David. “In Utero Programming of Chronic Disease,” Clinical Science 95,
1998:115-28.

Barker, D.J.P. 1998. Mothers, Babies and Health in Later Life. 2d ed. Edinburgh, UK:
Churchill Livingston.
Bedard, Kelley and Elizabeth Dhuey. “The Persistence of Early Childhood Matruity:
Interntaional Evidence of Long-Run Age Effects,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
forthcoming.

Behrman, Jere. “The Impact of Health and Nutrition on Education,” World Bank
Research Observer, 11 #1, 1996: 23-37.

Behrman, Jere, Robert Pollak, and Paul Taubman. “Parental Preferences and Provision
for Progeny,” Journal of Political Economy, 90 #1, 1982: 52-73.

Behrman, Jere, Robert Pollak and Paul Taubman. “family Resources, Family Size, and
Access to Financing for College Education,” Journal of Political Economy, 97 #2, 1989:
398-419.

Behrman, Jere and Mark Rosenzweig. “Returns to Birthweight,” Review of Economics
and Statistics, 86 #2, 2004: 586-601.

Black, Sandra E., Paul J. Devereux, and Kjells G. Salvanes. “From the cradle to the labor
market? The effect of birth weight on adult outcomes,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
2007.

Blackwell, Debra, Mark Haward, Eileen Crimmins, "Does Childhood Health Affect
Chronic Morbidity in Later Life," Social Science and Medicine, 52, 2001: 1269-1284.

Blanden, Jo, Paul Gregg, and Lindsey Macmillan. “Explaining Intergenerational Income
Persistence: Non-Cognitive Skills, Ability, and Education,” CMPO Working Paper
#06/146, Dept. of Economics, University of Bristol, April 2006.

Bleakley, Hoyt. “Disease and Development: Evidence from Hookworm Eradication in
the American South,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Feb. 2007.

Bhattacharya, Jayanta and Janet Currie "Youths at Nutritional Risk: Malnourished or
Misnourished?," in Risky Behavior Among Youths: An Economic Analysis, Jonathan
Gruber (ed). Chicago: University of Chicago Press for NBER, 2001: 483-522.

Bonnie, R. J., C. E. Fulco, C. T. Liverman (eds.). 1999. Reducing the Burden of Injury.
Washington D.C.: Institute of Medicine.

Bozzoli, Carlos, Angus Deaton, and Climent Quintana-Domeque. “Child Mortality,
Income and Adult Height,” NBER Working Paper 12966, March 2007.

Breslau, N., J.E. DelDotto, G.G. Brown, S. Kumar, S. Ezhuthachan, K.G. Hufnagle, and
E.L. Peterson. 1994. A gradient relationship between low birth weight and IQ at age 6
years. Archives of Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine 148:377-83.

Brooks-Gunn, Jeanne, and Greg Duncan. “The Effects of Pverty on Children,” The
Future of Children, 7, 1997: 55-71.
Brooks-Gunn, Jeanne, Klebanov, Patricia, and Greg Duncan. “Ethnic differences in
children’s intelligence test scores: role of economic deprivation, home environment, and
maternal characteristics,” Child Development 67, 1996: 396-408.

Burgess, Simon, Carol Propper, and John Rigg. “The Impact of Low-Income on Child
Health: Evidence from a Birth Cohort Study,” Centre for Market and Public
Organization, University of Bristol Working Paper #98, March 2004
(www.bris.ac.uk/Depts/CMPO?workingpapers/wp98.pdf)

Carneiro, Pedro, Costas Meghir, and Matthias Parey. “Maternal Education, Home
Environments and the Development of Children and Adolescents,” (London: Institute of
Fiscal Studies) Working Paper #15/07. September 2007.

Case, Anne, Angela Fertig and Christina Paxson. “The lasting impact of childhood health
and circumstance,” Journal of Health Economics, March 2005.

Case, Anne, Diana Lee, and Christina Paxson. “The Income Gradient in Children’s
Health: A Comment on Currie, Shields and Wheatley Price,” NBER Working Paper
#13495, October 2007.

Case, Anne, Darren Lubotsky and Christina Paxson. “Economic status and health in
childhood: the origins of the gradient," American Economic Review 92 #5, 2002:1308-34.

Case, Anne and Christina Paxson. “Stature and Status: Height, Ability, and Labor Market
Outcomes,” NBER Working Paper 12466, August 2006.

Caspi, Avshalom, Bradley Wright, Terrie Moffitt, and Phil Silva. “Early Failure in the
Labor Market: Childhood and Adolescent Predictors of Unemployment in the Transition
to Adulthood,” American Sociological Review, 63, 1998: 424-451.

Caspi, Avshalom, K. Sugden, Terri E. Moffitt, A. Taylor, I. Craig, H. Harrington, J,
McClay, J. Mill, J. Martin, and A. Braithwaite, R. Poulton. “Influence of life stress on
depression: moderation by a polymorphism in the 5-HTT gene,” Science 301, 2003: 386-
99.

Cawley, John. “The Impact of Obesity on Wages,” Journal of Human Resources, 2004.

Chay, Kenneth Y. and Michael Greenstone. "The Impact of Air Pollution on Infant
Mortality: Evidence from Geographic Variation in Pollution Shocks Induced by a
Recession," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118 #3, 2003: 1121-67.

Chay, Kenneth Y. and Michael Greenstone, "Air Quality, Infant Mortality, and the Clean
Air Act of 1970," NBER Working Paper #10053, August 2003.

Chevalier, Arnaud, and Vincent O’Sullivan. “Mother’s Education and Birth Weight,”
IZA Discussion Paper #2640, February 2007.

Chou, Shin-Yi, Jin-Tan Liu, Michael Grossman, and Theodore Joyce. “Parental
Education and Child Health: Evidence from a Natural Experiment in Taiwan,” NBER
Working Paper #13466, October 2007.

Coleman, James. 1966. Equity of Educational Opportunity. Washington, DC: U.S.
Government Printing Office.

Conley, Dalton and Neil Bennett. “Is Biology destiny? Birth weight and life chances,”
American Sociological Review 65, June 2000: 458-67.

Conley, Dalton and Neil Bennett. “Birth weight and income: interactions across
generations,” Journal of Health and Social Behavior 42, December 2001: 450-65.

Conley, Dalton, Kate Strully, and Neil Bennett. 2003. The starting gate: birth weight and
life chances. Berkeley: University of California Press.

Costello, Jane E., Scott N. Compton, Gordon Keeler, and Adrian Angold. “Relationships
Between Poverty and Psychopathology: A Natural Experiment,” JAMA, 290 #15,
October 15, 2003: 2023-2028.

Cunha, F., J.J. Heckman, and S.M. Schennach. “Estimating the Technology of Cognitive
and Noncognitive Skill Formation,” Unpublished manuscript, University of Chicago,
Department of Economics. Presented at the Yale Conference on Macro and Labor
Economics, May 5-7, 2006.

Currie, Alison, M. Shields, and S. Price, “Is the Child Health / Family Income Gradient
Universal? Evidence from England,” IZA working paper no.1328 (2004).

Currie, Janet and V. Joseph Hotz. "Inequality in Life and Death: What Drives Racial
Trends in U.S. Child Death Rates?," in Social Inequality. New York: Russell Sage,
2004: 569-632.

Currie, Janet and Rosemary Hyson. “Is the impact of health shocks cushioned by
socioeconomic status? The case of low birth weight,” American Economic Review 2,
May, 1999: 19-22.

Currie, Janet and Wanchuan Lin. “Chipping Away at Health: More on the Relationship
Between Income and Child Health,” Health Affairs, 26 #2, Mar/Apr 2007, 331-344.

Currie, Janet and Bridget Madrian. 1999. Health, health insurance, and the labor market.
In Handbook of Labor Economics Volume 3, ed. Orley Ashenfelter and David Card.
Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Currie, Janet and Enrico Moretti. “Mother’s Education and the Intergenerational
Transmission of Human Capital: Evidence from College Openings,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, VCXVIII #4, Nov. 2003, 1495-1532.

Currie, Janet and Enrico Moretti, "Biology as Destiny? Short and Long-Run
Determinants of Intergenerational Transmission of Birth Weight," Journal of Labor
Economics, April 2007.

Currie, Janet and Matthew Neidell. “Air Pollution and Infant Health: What Can We
Learn From California’s Recent Experience?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, vCXX
#3, August 2005, 1003-1030.

Currie, Janet and Mark Stabile. “Socioeconomic status and health: why is the relationship
stronger for older children?.” American Economics Review 93 # 5, 2003:1813-23.

Currie, Janet and Mark Stabile. “Child Mental Health and Human Capital Accumulation:
The Case of ADHD,” Journal of Health Economics, 25 #6, Nov. 2006: 1094-1118.

Currie, Janet and Mark Stabile. “Mental Health in Childhood and Human Capital,” An
Economic Perspective on the Problems of Disadvantaged Youth, in Jonathon Gruber
(ed.) (Chicago: University of Chicago Press for NBER), forthcoming.

Cutler, David and Adriana Lleras-Muney. “Education and Health: Evaluating Theories
and Evidence,” NBER Working Paper # 12352, June 2006.

Cutler, David, Grant Miller and Douglas Norton. “Evidence on Early-Life Income and
Late-Life Health from America’s Dust Bowl Era,” Proceedings on the National Academy
of Sciences, 104 #33, August 14 2007, 13244-13249.

Cutler, David, Edward Glaeser, and Jesse Shapiro. “Why Have Americans Become More
Obese?,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 17 #3, 2003: 93-118.

Dahl, Gordon and Lance Lochner. “The Impact of Family Income on Child
Achievement,” NBER Working Paper 11279, April 2005.

Davey Smith, George, Carole Hart, David Blane, and David Hole. “Adverse
Socioeconomic Conditions in Childhood and Cause Specific Adult Mortality: Prospective
Observational Study,” British Medical Journal, 316, 1998: 1631-1635.

Dehejia, Rajeev and Adriana Lleras-Muney. "Booms, Busts, and Babies' Health," The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119 #3, August 2004: 1091-1130.

Desai, Sonalde and Soumya Alva. “Maternal education and child health: Is there a
strong causal relationship?,” Demography 35 #1, Feb. 1998:71-81.

Ding, Weili, Steven Lehrer, J. Niels Rosenquist, and Janet Audrain-McGovern. “The
Impact of Poor Helath on Education: New Evidence Using Genetic Markers,” NBER
Working Paper 12304, June 2006.

Doblhammer, G. The Late Life Legacy of Very Early Life (Springer, Berlin) 2004.

Dobkin, Carlos and Fernando Ferreira. “Do School Entry Laws Affect Educational
Attainmetn and Labor Market Outcomes?” July 2007, SSRN Working Paper
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1007492.

Dohrenwend, B.P., I. Levav, and P.E. Shrout, S. Schwartz, G. Naveh, B.G. Link, A.E.
Skodol, and A. Stueve. “Socioeconomic Status and Psychiatric Disorders: the Causation-
Selection Issue,” Science, 255, 1992: 946-952.

Doyle, Orla, Colm Harmon, and Ian Walker. “The Impact of Parental Income and
Education on Child Health: Further Evidence for England,” Warwick Economic Research
Papers #788, January 2007.

Duflo, Esther. “Child Health and Household Resources in South Africa: Evidence from
the Old Age Pension Program,” American Economic Review, 90 #2, May 2000: 393—
398.

Duncan, Greg and Lori Kowaleski-Jones. “Effects of Participation in the WIC Program
on Birth Weight: Evidence from NLSY Children,” American Journal of Public Health, 92
#5, May 2002: 799-804.

Elo, Irma T. and Samuel H. Preston. “Effects of Early Life Conditions on Adult
Mortality: A Review,” Population Index, 58, 1992: 186-212.

Elford, Jonathan, Peter Whincup, and A.G. Shaper. “Early Life Experience and Adult
Cardiovascular Disease: Longitudinal and Case-Control Studies,” International Journal of
Epidemiology, 20, 1991: 833-844.

Eriksson, Tor, Bernt Bratsberg, and Oddbjorn Raaum. “Earnings persistence across
generations: transmission through health?” Working Paper 35/2005. Department of
Economics, Oslo University.

Ermisch, John and Marco Francesconi. “Educational Choice, Families and Young
People’s Earnings,” Journal of Human Resources, 35 #1, 2000: 146-176.

Farmer, Elizabeth. “Externalizing Behavior in the Life Course: The Transition from
School to Work,” Journal of Emotional and Behavioral Disorders, 1, 1993: 179-188.

Farmer, Elizabeth. “Extremity of Externalizing Behavior and Young Adult Outcomes,”
Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 36, 1995, 617-632.

Floud, Roderick, Kenneth Wachter, and Annabel Gregory. Height, health, and history
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 1990.
Fogel, Robert, W. “Economic growth, population theory, and physiology: The bearing of
long-term processes on the making of economic policy,” The American Economic
Review 84 # 3, 1994: 369-95.

Fuchs, Victor, R. “Poverty and Health: Asking the Right Questions,” in D.E. Rogers and
E. Ginzberg (eds) Medical Care and the Health of the Poor (Boulder, CO: Westview
Press) 1993.

Gluckman, P.D., and M. Hanson. 2005. The Fetal Matrix: Evolution, Development, and
Disease. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

Gregg, Paul and Steven Machin. “Child Development and Success or Failure in the
Youth Labor Market,” Center for Economic Performance, London School of Economics
Discussion Paper 0397, July 1998.

Grantham, McGregor, S., C. Powell, S. Walker, J. Himes. “Nutritional Supplementation,
Psychosocial Stimulation, and Mental Development of Stunted Children: The Jamaican
Study,” Lancet, 383, 1991:1-5.

Grossman, Michael. The Human Capital Model. In The Handbook of Health Economics,
ed. Anthony Culyer and Joseph P. Newhouse (Amsterdam: North Holland) 2000.

Grossman, Michael and Robert Kaestner. “Effects of Education on Health,” in The Social
Benefits of Education, Jere Behrman and Nevzer Stacey (eds.) (University of Michigan
Press: Ann Arbor MI) 1997, 69-123.

Guo, Guang, and Kathleen Mullan Harris. “The Mechanisms Mediating the Effects of
Poverty on Children’s Intellectual Development,” Demography 37 #4, Nov 2000: 431-
447.

Heckman, James J. “The Technology and Neuroscience of Capacity Formation,”
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences (PNAS), 104 #33, August 8, 2007:
13250-13255.

Heckman, James, Jora Stixrud, and Sergio Urzua. “The Effects of Cognitive and
Noncognitive Abilities on Labor Market Outcomes and Social Behavior,” NBER
Working Paper #12006, January 2006.

Hedley, A., C.L. Ogden, C.L. Johnson, M.D. Carroll, L.R. Curtin, K.M. Flegal.
“Overweight and Obesity Among U.S. Children, Adolescents, and Adults, 1999-2002,”
Journal of the American Medical Association, 291, 2004: 2847-50.

Kessler, R., and P. Cleary. “Social Class Psychological Distress,” American Sociological
Review 45, 1980: 463-478.
Kessler, Ronald, Cindy Foster, William Saunders, and Paul Stang. “Social Consequences
of Psychiatric Disorders, I: Educational Attainment,” American Journal of Psychiatry,
152, 1995, 1026-32.

Korenman, Sanders and Jane Miller. “Effects of Long-term Poverty on Physical Health of
Children in the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth,” in Gregg Duncan and Jeanne
Brooks-Gunn (eds.) Consequences of Growing Up Poor (New York: Russell Sage
Foundation) 1997.

Kremer, Michael, and Edward Miguel. “Worms: Identifying Impacts on Education and
Health in the Presence of Treatment Externalities,” Econometrica, 72 #1, 2004: 159-217.

Linnet, Karen et al., “Gestational Age, Birth Weight, and the Risk of Hyperkinetic
Disorder,” Archives of Disease in Childhood, 2006: 1-6.

Lundberg, Olle. “Childhood Conditions, Sense of Coherence, Social Class and Adult Ill
Health: Exploring Their Theoretical and Empirical Relations,” Social Science and
Medicine, 44, 1997: 821-831.

Johnson, Rucker C., and Robert F. Schoeni, "The Influence of Early-Life Events on
Human Capital, Health Status, and Labor Market Outcomes Over the Life Course,"
Institute for Research on Labor and Employment. Population Studies Center Research
Report 07-616, January 2, 2007.

Lawlor, Debbie, Heather Clark, George Davey Smith, and David Leon. “Intrauterine
Growth and Intelligence Within Sibling Pairs: Findings from the Aberdeen Children of
the 1950s Cohort,” Pediatrics, 117 #5, May 2006: 894-902.

Luo, Ye and Linda J. Waite. “The Impact of childhood and Adult SES on Physical,
Mental and Cognitive Well-Being on Later Life,” Journals of Gerontology: Social
Sciences. 60B #2, 2005, S93-101.

Maluccio, John, John Hoddinott, Jere Behrman, Reynaldo Martorell, Agnes Quisumbing,
and Arveh Stein. “The Impact of Nutrition During Early Childhood on Education Among
Guatemalan Adults,” University of Pennsylvania Population Studies Center Working
Paper 06-04, 2006.

Mannuzza, Salvatore and Rachel Klein. “Long-Term Prognosis in Attention-
Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder,” Child and Adolescent Psychiatric Clinics of North
America, 9 #3, July 2000: 711-726.

Marmot, Michael, and Wilkinson, Richard (eds.). 1999. Social Determinants of Health.
Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.

Marmot, Michael, M. Shipley, E. Brunner, and H. Hemingway. “Relative Contribution of
Early Life and Adutl Socioeconomic Factors to Adult Morbidity in the Whitehall II
Study,” Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health, 55, 2001: 301-307.
McCrary, Justin, and Heather Royer. "The Effect of Female education on Fertility and
Infant Health: Evidence from School Entry Policies Using Exact Date of Birth,” NBER
Working Paper # 12329, June 2006.

McGarry, Kathleen. “Intervivos Transfers and Intended Bequests,” Journal of Public
Economics, 73 #3, 1999: 321-351.

McGarry, Kathleen and Robert Schoeni. “Transfer Behavior in the Health and Retirement
Study: Measurement and the Redistribution of Resources within the Family,” Journal of
Human Resources, 30, 1995: S184-S226.

McGarry, Kathleen and Robert Schoeni. “Transfer Behavior Within the Family: Results
from the Asset and Health Dynamics Study,” The Journals of Gerontology, 52B, 1997:
82-92.

McLeod, Jane D. and Karen Kaiser. “Childhood Emotional and Behavioral Problems and
Educational Attainment,” American Sociological Review, 69, October 2004: 636-658.

McLeod, J.D. and M.J. Shanahan. Poverty, Parenting and Children’s Mental Health,”
American Sociological Review, 58 #3, 1993, 351-366.

McLeod, Jane, and Michael Shanahan. “Trajectories of Poverty and Children’s Mental
Health,” Journal of Health and Social Behavior,” 37, 1996: 207-220.

Merrell, C. And P.B. Tymms. “Inattention, Hyperactivity and Impulsiveness: Their
Impact on Academic Achievement and Progress,” British Journal of Educational
Psychology, 72, 2000: 43-56.

Miech, Richard, Avshalom Caspi, Terrie Moffitt, Bradley Entner Wright, and Phil Silva.
“Low Socioeconomic Status and Mental Disorders: A Longitudinal Study of Selection
and Causation During Young Adulthood,” American Journal of Sociology, 104, 1999:
1096-1131.

Moffitt, Terrie E., Avshalom Caspi, Michael Rutter. “Strategy for investigating
interactions between measured genes and measured environments,” Archives of General
Psychiatry 62, 2005: 473-81.

Nagin, Daniel and Richard E. Tremblay. “Trajectories of Boys’ Physical Aggression,
Opposition, and Hypoeractivity on the Path to Physically Violent and Nonviolent
Juvenile Delinquency,” Child Development, 70, 1999: 1181-1196.

Needleman, H., and B. Gatsonis, “Meta-analysis of 24 Studies of Learning Disabilities
due to Lead Poisoning,” JAMA, 265, 1991: 673-678.

Neidell, Matthew. “Air Pollution, Health, and Socio-Economic Status: The Effect of
Outdoor Air Quality on Childhood Asthma,” Journal of Health Economics 23 #6.

Neugebauer, Richard, Hans Hoek, and Ezra Susser, “Prenatal Exposure to Wartime
Famine and Development of Antisocial Personality Disorder in Early Adulthood,”
Journal of the American Medical Association, 292, August 4, 1999: 455-462.

Newacheck, Paul. “Poverty and Childhood Chronic Illness,” Archives of Pediatric and
Adolescent Medicine, 148, 1994: 1143-1149.

Newacheck, Paul and Neil Halfon, “Prevalence and Impact of Disabling Chronic
Conditions in Childhood,” American Journal of Public Health, 88 # 4, 1988: 610-617.

Nilsson, Peter. “Does a Pint a Day Affect Your Child’s Pay?” Uppsala Universitet
working paper, summer 2007.

O’Connor, T. G., M. Rutter, C. Beckett, J.M. Kreppner, L. Keaveney, and the English
and Romanian Adoptees Study Team . “The Effects of Global Severe Privation on
Cognitive Competence: Extension and Longitudinal Follow-up,” Child Development, 71,
2000: 376-390.

O’Neill, Paddy, “Acute Otitis Media,” British Medical Journal (Sept. 25, 1999).
Thrasher, Richard, and Gregory Allen. Ear, Otitis Media with Effusion,
(http://www.emedicine.com/ENT/topic209.htm [Dec. 13, 2002]).

Oreopoulos, Phillip, Mark Stabile, Randy Walld, and Leslie Roos. 2005. Short, medium,
and long term consequences of poor infant health: An analysis using siblings and twins.
Working Paper no. 11998, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.

Orr, Larry, Judith Feins, Robin Jacob, Erik Beecroft, Lisa Sanbonmatsu, Lawrence Katz,
Jeffrey Liebman, and Jeffrey Kling. Moving to Opportunity: Interim Impacts Evaluation
(Washington D.C.: U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development) September
2003.

Pocock, S.J., M. Smith, P. Baghurst. “Environmental Lead and Children’s Intelligence: A
Systematic Review of the Epidemiological Evidence,” British Medical Journal, 309
#6963, Nov. 5, 1994: 1189-1197.

Pollitt, Ernesto, Kathleen Gorman, Patrice Engle, Reynaldo Martorell, and Juan Rivera.
“Early Supplementary Feeding and Cognition: Effects Over Two Decades,” Monographs
of the Society for Research in Child Development, #235, 58 #7, 1993.

Poulton, Richie, Avshalom Caspi, Barry Milne, W. Murray Thomson, Alan Taylor,
Malcolm Sears, and Terrie Moffitt. “Association Between Children’s Experience of
Socioeconomic Disadvantage and Adult Health: A Life-Course Study,” The Lancet, 360,
Nov. 23, 2002: 1640-1645.
Power, C. and C. Peckham. “Childhood Morbidity and Adulthood Ill Health,” Journal of
Epidemiology and Community Health, 44, 1990: 69-74.

Powers, Elizabeth T. “New Estimates of the Impact of Child Disability on Maternal
Employment,” The American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings of the Hundred
Thirteenth Annual Meeting of the American Economic Association, 91 #2, May 2001:
135-139.

Rauh, Virginia, Robin Garfinkel, Frederica Perera et al. “Impact of Prenatal Chlorpyrifos
Exposure on Neurodevelopment in the First 3 Years of Life Among Inner-City Children,”
Pediatrics, 118 #6, Dec. 2006: 1845-1859.

Reyes, Jessica. “The Impact of Prenatal Lead Exposure on Health,” Department of
Economics, Amherst College, Working Papers, 2005.

Roseboom, T.J. et al. “Coronary Heart Disease after Prenatal Exposure to the Dutch
Famine, 1944-45,” Heart, 83, Dec. 1, 2000: 595-598.

Rosenzweig, Mark and Junsen Zhang, “Do Population Control Policies Induce More
Human Capital Investment? Twins, Birthweight, and China’s ‘One Child’ Policy,”
Working paper #114, March 2006, Bureau for Research in Economic Analysis of
Development, Harvard University.

Royer, Heather. 2005. Separated at girth: estimating the long-run and intergenerational
effects of birthweight using twins. Ford School of Public Policy, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor MI.

Rush, D., J. Leighton, N. Sloan et al. “The National WIC Evaluation: Evaluation of the
Special Supplemental Food Program for Women, Infants, and Children, VI: Study of
Infants and Children,” American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 48, 1988: 484-511.

Rutter, M. 2006. Genes and Behavior: Nature-Nurture Interplay Explained. Oxford,
UK: Blackwell Publishers.

Shaffer, D., P. Fisher, M.K. Dulcan, M. Davies, J. Piacentini et al. “The NIMH
Diagnostic Interview Schedule for Children Version 2.3 (DISC-2.3): Description,
acceptability, prevalence rates, and performance in the MECA Study. Methods for the
Epidemiology of Child and Adolescent Mental Disorders Study,” Journal of the
American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 35, 1996: 865-877.

Smith, James P. “The Impact of Social Economic Status on Health over the Life Course,”
Journal of Human Resources, 42 #4, Fall 2007: 739-764.

Smith, James P. “Healthy Bodies and Thick Wallets: The Dual Relation between Health
and Economic Status,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 13 #2, Spring 1999: 145.
Smolensky, Eugene, and Jennifer A. Gootman. 2003. Working Families and Growing
Kids: Caring for Children and Adolescents, eds. Board on Children, Youth, and Families,
Division of Behavioral and Social Sciences Education. Washington, DC: The National
Academics Press.

Stein, Zena, M. Susser, G. Saenger, and F. Marolla. Famine and Human Development:
The Dutch Hunger Winter of 1944-1945 (New York: Oxford University Press) 1975.

Strohschein, Lisa. “Household Income Trajectories and Child Mental Health
Trajectories,” 46 #4, 2005: 359-375.

Thomas, Duncan, John Strauss, and Maria-Helena Henriques. “How Does Mother's
Education Affect Child Height?,” Journal of Human Resources, 26:2, Spring 1991: 183-
211.

U.S. Centers for Disease Control. Preventing Chronic Diseases: Investing Wisely in
Health, Preventing Dental Caries (Washington D.C.: U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services) April 6, 2004.

U.S. Centers for Disease Control. Children’s Blood Lead Levels in the United States,
http://www.cdc.gov/nceh/lead/research/kidsBLL.htm#Tracking BLL, March 12, 2003.

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Mental Health: A Report to the Surgeon
General (Rockville MD: U.S. Dept. Of Health and Human Services) (1999).

U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Indoor Environments Division Office of Air and
Radiation, “Asthma Facts,” EPA 402-F-04-019 (2006).

Van den Berg, Maarten Lindeboom, and France Portrait, “Economic Conditions Early in
Life and Individual Mortality,” American Economic Review, forthcoming.

Vrijheid, Martine. “Health Effects of Residence Near Hazardous Waste Landfill Sites: A
Review of Epidemiologic Literature,” Environmental Health Perspectives Supplements
108 #S1, 2000: 101-12.

Wolfe, Barbara L., and Steven C. Hill. “The Effects of Health on the Work Effort of
Single Mothers,” The Journal of Human Resources, 30 #1, 1995: 42-62.

Woodruff, Tracey J. “Public Health Implications of 1990 Air Toxics Concentrations
Across the United States,” Environmental Health Perspectives, 106 #5, 1998: 245-251.

The World Bank. 1993. World Development Report 1993: Investing in Health. New
York: Oxford University Press.
