NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHEN IS QUALITY OF FINANCIAL SYSTEM A SOURCE OF COMPARATIVE
ADVANTAGE?
Jiandong Ju
Shang-Jin Wei
Working Paper 13984
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13984

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2008

We are grateful to Eric Bond, Stijn Claessens, Jim Cassing, Elhanan Helpman, Haizhou Huang, Olivier
Jeanne, Kala Krishna, Andrei Levchenko, Peter Neary, John Romalis, Thierry Verdier, and Kenichi
Ueda for helpful discussions, and John Klopfer and Xuebing Yang for able research assistance. All
remaining errors are our own. ¸ The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Jiandong Ju and Shang-Jin Wei. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

When Is Quality of Financial System a Source of Comparative Advantage?
Jiandong Ju and Shang-Jin Wei
NBER Working Paper No. 13984
April 2008
JEL No. F1,F3,G3
ABSTRACT
Does finance follow the real economy, or the other way around? This paper unites the two competing
schools of thought in a general equilibrium framework. Our key result is that there are threshold effects
defined by a set of deep institutional parameters (cost of financial intermediation, quality of corporate
governance, and level of property rights protection) which can be used to separate economies of high-quality
institutions from those of low-quality institutions. On one hand, for economies with high-quality institutions,
the view that finance follows the real economy is essentially correct. Equilibrium output and prices
are determined by factor endowment. Further improvement in the institutions does not affect patterns
of output. On the other hand, for economies with low-quality institutions, the view that finance is a
key driver of the real economy is essentially correct. Not only is finance a source of comparative advantage,
but an increase in capital endowment has no effect on outputs and prices. Our model extends a standard
one-sector, partial equilibrium model of corporate finance to a multi-sector, general equilibrium analysis.
Surprisingly, but consistent with data, we show that the size of financial markets (relative to GDP)
does not change monotonically with either the quality of institutions or with the factor endowment.
Free trade may reduce the aggregate income of an economy with low-quality institutions. Financial
capital tends to flow from economies with low-quality institutions to those with high-quality institutions.

Jiandong Ju
Research Department
International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street NW
Washington, DC 20431
and University of Oklahoma
jju@imf.org
Shang-Jin Wei
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
Uris Hall, Room 619
3022 Broadway
New York, NY 10027-6902
and NBER
shangjin.wei@columbia.edu

Contents
1 Introduction
2 The
2.1
2.2
2.3

2

Model
Basic Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Entrepreneur’s Optimization Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Free Entry Condition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

7
8
10
11

3 Institutional Quality and Equilibrium Conditions
3.1 Equilibrium Properties with High-quality Institutions . . . . . . . .
3.2 What Defines High-quality Institutions? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.3 Equilibrium Properties with Low-quality Institutions . . . . . . . . .

13
13
16
19

4 Dependence on External Finance and Financial Development
4.1 Firm-level Dependence on External Finance . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.2 The Relative Size of Financial Markets - A Common Measure of
Financial Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.2.1 The Size of Financial Market with High-quality Institutions .
4.2.2 The Size of Financial Market with Low-quality Institutions .
4.2.3 The Size of Financial Market and Production Structure . . .

20
21

5 Free Trade and Capital Flows
5.1 Free Trade . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5.1.1 Trade Pattern and Relative Size of Financial Market
5.1.2 Aggregate Income . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5.1.3 Welfare . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5.2 Capital Flows . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5.2.1 Financial Capital Flow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5.2.2 Two-Way Capital Flows and the Bypass Eﬀect . . .

28
29
29
31
33
34
34
35

.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.

22
24
25
27

6 Conclusion

37

7 Appendix

41

1

1

Introduction

Dominant theories of international trade tend to ignore the role of finance as a source
of comparative advantage. For example, finance is absent in leading graduate level
textbooks by Dixit and Norman (1980), Bhagwati, Panagariya, and Srinvasan (1998)
and Feenstra (2004), in the recently revived Ricardian model of Eaton and Kortum
(2002) and Alvarez and Lucas (2005), and in a recent resurgence of empirical papers
on determinants of trade structure by Trefler (1993 and 1995), Harrigan (1997),
Davis and Weinstein (2001 and 2003), and Romalis (2004). The absence of a
role for finance in trade theories is in line with an influential view in economics
generally that financial development merely follows on the development of the
real economy. In other words, the observed level of financial development is an
endogenous consequence of a country’s factor endowment. This view is shared by
Robinson (1952) and Lucas (1988), among others.
On the other hand, an equally influential view regards financial development as
an independent source of comparative advantage and economic growth. This second
view is promoted by Schumpeter (1912), Goldsmith (1969), and Miller (1998). A
vast empirical literature, mostly in the field of finance, has sought to discover the role
of finance in determining production structure. Pioneered by Rajan and Zingales
(1998) and followed by Beck and Levine (2002), Carlin and Mayer (2003), Claessens
and Laeven (2003), and Fisman and Love (2004) among others, this body of work
demonstrates that, in countries with developed financial systems, those industries
reliant more on external finance are likely to grow faster relative to other industries.
An economy’s level of financial development is typically measured in the empirical
literature by the size of its financial market (the ratio of domestic credit to GDP, or
the ratio of stock market capitalization to GDP). Perhaps it is not surprising that
financial development should similarly reveal itself in trade patterns. Beck (2002
and 2003), Svaleryd and Vlachos (2005), and Manova (2008) report evidence that

2

countries with a higher level of financial development have a higher export share in
industries that use more external finance. Manova (2007) further investigates the
eﬀects of credit constraints on the observed zeros in a bilateral trade matrix, the
varieties of exports, and turnover in the product mix of exports over time.
Do and Levchenko (2007) cast doubt on the notion that financial development is
a genuinely independent source of comparative advantage, and present a model that
argues for reverse causality: the size of financial markets, an empirical measure of
financial development, is itself influenced by comparative advantage and international
trade. Suppose, for reasons unrelated to financial development, country A has a
comparative advantage in a sector that uses more external finance than country
B. As both countries move from autarky towards free trade, country A’s financial
market (and the sector that uses more external finance) should expand while that of
country B shrinks. This will generate the pattern identified by Rajan and Zingales
(1998), but the direction of causality goes from endowment, to the pattern of growth,
and to the size of financial markets (relative to GDP). In order to support this
competing interpretation, Do and Levchenko report evidence taken from a sample
of 96 countries between 1977 and 1999.
In this paper, we develop a general equilibrium theory to unify the two competing
schools of thought. We consider each view only partially correct, not just because
both finance and the real economy aﬀect each other. Our key result is that there
are threshold eﬀects defined by a set of deep institutional parameters (cost of
financial intermediation, quality of corporate governance, and level of property rights
protection). On one hand, for economies with high-quality institutions, the view that
finance follows the real economy is essentially correct. Equilibrium output and prices
are determined by initial endowments, and finance is not a source of comparative
advantage.

That is, an improvement in the quality of the financial system in

such an economy would not alter patterns of production and trade, contrary to
the arguments of Rajan and Zingales (1998). Because of these properties, such

3

economies can also be called endowment binding. On the other hand, for economies
with low-quality institutions, the view that finance is a key driver of the real economy
is essentially correct. Finance is a source of comparative advantage, and factor
endowments may fail to determine equilibrium outputs or prices at the margin.
That is, an infusion of capital into such an economy, holding institutional parameters
constant, would not change equilibrium output and trade patterns. Such economies
may be called institutionally binding. The Rajan-Zingales (1998) interpretation of
the finance-growth connection works in such economies.
In order to have a meaningful discussion of comparative advantage, we must
consider at least two sectors (something theoretical models in the finance literature,
do not commonly do with regards to this topic). In order to introduce the relevant
institutional parameters, we incorporate the financial contract model of Holmstrom
and Tirole (1997) into the standard Heckscher-Ohlin-Samuelson (HOS) framework.
Both production structure and the size of a financial market are endogenously
determined by deep institutional parameters and by factor endowment. The precise
definition of high and low-quality institutions, and the exact threshold that separates
the two types of economy, will be derived and made explicit later in this paper.
Our model implies two wedges between expected marginal returns to capital
and the financial interest rates received by financial investors: the first is the cost
of financial intermediation, and the second is agency cost. This suggests that,
due to ineﬃcient financial intermediation or to poor corporate governance, the
financial interest rate on savings could be low even if an economy were to have
a low capital-to-labor ratio. Indeed, if the quality of these institutions lies below a
certain threshold, the financial interest rate will remain at zero, and a portion of the
economy’s capital endowment will be unemployed in equilibrium. Therefore, in this
case, it is the quality of the financial system, rather than the capital endowment,
that determines equilibrium prices and output.
Economies with low-quality institutions have a few noteworthy features. First,

4

their comparative advantage is determined by institutions, rather than by factor
endowment. An improvement in financial intermediation or corporate governance
increases total capital usage in the country, thereby increasing the output of capital
intensive goods while reducing the output of labor intensive goods. This further
raises the total amount of external finance in the economy. Second, consider an
economy with a lower capital-to-labor ratio than the world average. Going from
autarky to free trade, such an economy exports labor intensive goods and imports
capital intensive goods.

As a result, more capital is left unemployed, so that

trade openness reduces aggregate income. Going from financial autarky to financial
openness, this economy generates capital flows from South to North in a pattern
known as the Lucas paradox.
An economy with high-quality institutions behaves as a textbook Heckscher-Ohlin
economy. In particular, standard results such as the Stolper-Samuelson theorem
and the Rybczynski theorem all hold. We provide additional comparative statics by
varying deep institutional parameters. For example, we show that a reduction in
the cost of financial intermediation would not aﬀect production and trade patterns.
Our paper makes another contribution to the literature. We distinguish the deep
institutional parameters (i.e. cost of financial intermediation, quality of corporate
governance, and protection of property rights) that are important to determine the
relative size of a financial market, from the relative size of the financial market
itself. We derive the latter to be a function of the former, and show that the two
do not always have a monotonic relationship, but instead depend crucially on the
quality of economic institutions. Rajan and Zingales (1998) popularized the notion
of intrinsic demands, by sector, for external finance. In this model, we derive the
demand for external finance as a function of deep institutional parameters. Across
sectors, diﬀerences in the use of external finance come primarily from diﬀerences in
the fixed costs a capitalist must pay to become an entrepreneur. Across countries,
diﬀerences in the use of external finance even in the same sector depend most heavily

5

on the quality of corporate governance.
For economies with high-quality institutions, we show that improved financial
systems increase the relative size of financial markets, while increased capital endowments
reduce financial interest rates, depress the incentive for capitalists to become financial
investors, and thereby reduce the relative size of financial markets. We also show
that the eﬀect of an improvement in the quality of financial systems on the relative
size of financial markets may not be monotonic. For economies with high-quality
institutions, improvements in the quality of financial systems increase the total
amount of external finance more than they increase GDP. Therefore, such improvements
raise the relative size of the financial market.

For economies with low-quality

financial institutions, however, the same improvements lead to smaller increases in
total amounts of external finance as a fraction of GDP. Such improvements therefore
reduce the relative size of financial markets in economies with low-quality financial
institutions. Our theory provides an explanation for the empirical finding reported
by Rajan and Zingales (2003), that financial markets did not grow in step with
income in many countries, but instead experienced what they call “great reversals”
over the past century. Our theoretical results are consistent with the empirical
finding of La Porta et al. (1997 and 1998) that investor protection is important for
determining the relative size of financial markets.
Our paper is related to a small but growing theoretical literature that models the
role of financial systems in determining patterns of production and trade. Kletzer
and Bardhan (1987), Baldwin (1989), Beck (2002), Matsuyama (2005), and Wynne
(2005) show that countries with a relatively well-developed financial systems have a
comparative advantage in industries that are reliant on external finance. Two recent
papers are particularly interesting to us. While our model discusses the role of the
financial system in an otherwise classical HOS form, Antras and Caballero (2007)
study the eﬀect of credit constraints on international trade and capital flows using
a specific-factor model form, and show that in less financially developed economies,

6

trade and capital mobility are complements.

Manova (2007) introduces credit

constraints to a monopolistic competition model with heterogeneous firms. None
of these papers studies threshold eﬀects in economies with high-quality institutions
versus low-quality institutions. Ju and Wei (2005) provide the first paper to discuss
threshold eﬀects in financial development. Except for that of Do and Levchenko
(2007), all these papers treat financial development as exogenous. Our paper is
also related to a body of literature on international trade and institutional quality.
See Levchenko (2007), and Costinot (2005) for applications of a transaction cost
approach, and Antras (2003), Antras and Helpman (2004), and Nunn (2007) for
applications of a property rights approach.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes the setup of our
model and discusses the microfoundation of internal and external finance. Section
3 studies equilibrium properties, with attention to diﬀerences between economies
with high-quality institutions or low-quality institutions. Section 4 discusses the
endogenous determination of both firm-level demand for external finance and country-level
size of financial market.

Section 5 studies the consequences of free trade and

capital flows. Section 6 concludes. An Appendix collects formal proofs of various
propositions introduced in the text.

2

The Model

In an otherwise standard HOS framework of two goods, two factors, and two countries,
we introduce a financial contract between entrepreneur and investors. There is
a large literature on agency models in corporate finance in which a contracting
problem is solved to implement a firm’s second-best demand for external finance
(see Diamond 1991, Berglof and von Thadden 1994, Hart and Moore 1998, and
Holmstrom and Tirole 1997). We modify the setup in Holmstrom and Tirole (1997)
from a one-good, one-factor model to a two-goods, two-factors model.

7

2.1

Basic Setup

We start with a closed economy with two factors, labor and capital, and two sectors
i = 1, 2. The production function for firms in industry i has constant return to scale
and is denoted by yi = Fi (li , ki ). The labor-capital ratio, li /ki , is assumed to be
fixed and denoted by ai . The real wage rate and the real financial interest rate are
represented by w and r, respectively. Let pi be the price of good i. Good 2 is taken
as the numeraire whose price is normalized to be 1. Without loss of generality, we
assume that good 1 is labor intensive, and good 2 is capital intensive.
The model features financial investors, entrepreneurs and (passive) financial
intermediation. The timing of events is described in Figure 1. K denotes both
the number of capitalists and the amount of capital in the economy. Each capitalist
is assumed to be born with 1 unit of capital and faces an endogenous choice, at
the beginning of the first period, of becoming either an entrepreneur or a financial
investor. If she chooses to be an entrepreneur, she would manage a project, investing
her 1 unit of capital (labeled as internal capital) and raising kiX amount of external
capital from financial investors through the financial system. The total investment in
the firm is the sum of internal and external capital, or ki = 1+kiX . Correspondingly,
ai ki amount of labor is hired.1
After the investment decision is made in the first period, production and consumption
take place in the second period. The return to one unit of capital if the project
succeeds, Ri , is defined by the firm’s zero profit condition

pi yi − wli = [pi Fi (ai , 1) − wai ] ki = Ri ki

(1)

We use a framework of moral hazard that is derived and simplified from Holmstrom
and Tirole (HT for short, 1997) to parameterize the quality of corporate governance.
1

Each variable in principle should have separate firm and sector subscripts. Since all firms
within a sector are identical, we abuse the notation a bit by using a single subscript to denote a
typical firm in sector i.

8

More precisely, entrepreneurs, whose own capital endowment is insuﬃcient for the
firm’s financial needs, obtain external financing from financial investors. We extend
the HT (1997) setup in two ways. First, the marginal return to capital, Ri , is
endogenously determined (whereas it is exogenous in the HT setup). Second, capitalists
make an endogenous career choice between being financial investors or entrepreneurs
(whereas this choice is also exogenous in HT (1997)).
For a representative firm, the final output depends in part on the entrepreneur’s
level of eﬀort, which can be low or high, but is not observable by the financial
investors or by the financial institution. The entrepreneur can choose among two
versions of the project. The “Good” version has a high probability of success, λH ,
while oﬀering no private benefit. The “Bad” version has a low probability of project
success, λL , but oﬀering a private benefit per unit of capital managed, b, to the
entrepreneur. We further assume that only the “Good” version is economically
¢
¡
¢
¡
viable. That is, 1 + λH Ri − (1 + r) > 0 > 1 + λL Ri − (1 + r) + b, so that only
the “Good” version is implemented. For simplicity, the probability of success and
private benefit are assumed to be identical across all entrepreneurs. In subsequent
discussions, we normalize λL = 0 and let λH = λ. The total expected return per
unit of capital in this two-period model is equal to

1 + λRi = 1 + λ [pi Fi (ai , 1) − wai ]

(2)

The quality of a financial system, depicted in Figure 2, is summarized by two
parameters: the cost of financial intermediation, c, and the agency cost (private
benefit), b. Investors collectively put kiX amount of external capital into a firm
through financial intermediation. In equilibrium, while the total return per unit of
capital is 1 + λRi , an entrepreneur receives a payment of λRiE per unit of capital
managed. The entrepreneur then pays 1 + λRi − λRiE per unit of capital to the
financial intermediaries, who retain c as the cost of intermediation, and pass on

9

1 + λRi − λRiE − c per unit of capital to the financial investors.
The equilibrium internal and external finance in the economy is determined by
two parts: (a) a representative entrepreneur’s optimization problem, and (b) a free
entry condition that governs the division of the capitalists into the entrepreneurs’
and financial investors’ groups. We discuss the two parts sequentially.

2.2

Entrepreneur’s Optimization Problem

The entrepreneur chooses the amount of external capital kiX , her own capital contribution
to the project kiN , the total investment in the project ki , and the marginal payment
to the entrepreneur’s eﬀort RiE to solve the following program:
max

kiX ,kiN ,ki ,RE
i

¡
¢
Ui = ki λRiE + (1 + r) 1 − kiN

(3)

subject to
kiN

≤ 1

ki ≤ kiN + kiX

¤
£
1 + λRi − λRiE − c ki ≥ (1 + r) kiX
λRiE ≥ b

(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)

The objective function (3) represents the entrepreneur’s expected income. The
first term represents the entrepreneur’s share in total capital revenue. The second
term is the gross return from investing her own 1−kiN capital in the market. Turning
to the constraints, inequality (4) specifies that entrepreneur’s internal capital is
lass than or equal to her capital endowment. Inequality (5) requires that total
investment does not exceed the sum of internal and external capital. Inequality (6)
is the participation constraint for outside financial investors, while inequality (7) is
the entrepreneur’s incentive compatibility constraint.

10

It is straightforward to show that all constraints must be binding in equilibrium.
The entrepreneur will invest all her endowment kiN = 1 in the firm. The total
investment ki equals the sum of internal and external capital, kiX + 1. The incentive
compatibility constraint (7) must be binding, which gives
RiE =

b
λ

(8)

The investors’ participation constraint (6) is binding. Substituting (8) into (6) gives
the firm’s optimal investment2

ki =

1+r
(r + c) + b − λRi

(9)

Therefore, the firm’s dependence on external finance, measured by the ratio of
external to total capital, is equal to

φi =

ki − 1
1 + λRi − c − b
=
ki
1+r

(10)

Substituting (8) and (9) into (3), the entrepreneur’s expected income becomes

Ui = ki b =

2.3

(1 + r) b
(r + c) + b − λRi

(11)

Free Entry Condition

We assume that a capitalist (a potential entrepreneur) needs to pay a fixed entry
cost of fi in units of numeraire goods to become an entrepreneur in sector i.3 With
free entry and exit, a capitalist is indiﬀerent between becoming an entrepreneur or
2

Following Holmstrom and Tirole (1997), we rule out the case that (1 + r + c) + bi − λRi < 0
in which the firm would want to invest without limit.
3
For expositional convenience, we assume that neither the entry cost for becoming an
entrepreneur, nor the cost of financial intermediation, reduces the amount of capital that can
be employed in the first period. Both costs have to be paid up in the second period, but their
present values in the first period are fi and c, respectively. For example, the entrepreneur’s entry
cost specifies that the payment in the second period is equal to fi (1+r)
if the project succeeds and
λ
zero otherwise, so that the expected present value in the first period is exactly fi .

11

a financial investor in equilibrium. A financial investor’s expected return per unit
of capital is 1 + r. Thus, an entrepreneur’s expected income net of the entry cost,
Ui − (1 + r)fi , should be equal to (1 + r). That is,
Ui − (1 + r)fi = 1 + r

(12)

Using (11), the free entry condition (12) implies that

1 + λRi = (1 + r) + c +

fi b
1 + fi

By combining equations (11) and (12), the last term in (13),

(13)
fi b
1+fi ,

can be easily

shown to be equal to [Ui − (1 + r)] /ki = fi (1+r)/ki , or the entrepreneur’s expected
return net of the opportunity cost of her own endowment per unit of capital invested.
We therefore refer to the last term as the average net pay to the entrepreneur,
denoted by bavg
i . That is,
bavg
=
i

fi b
,
1 + fi

(14)

Equation (13) is an important relationship and will be referred to later as a
capital revenue sharing rule (CRSR). It states that the expected marginal product
of physical capital is the sum of three terms: the financial interest rate paid to the
financial investors, (1 + r), the cost of financial intermediation, c, and the average
net pay to the entrepreneur, bavg
i . Following the literature, we assume that the fixed
entry cost in the capital intensive sector is larger than that in the labor intensive
sector4 . With f2 > f1 , it follows that bavg
> bavg
2
1 .
When c = b = 0, the marginal return to physical capital and the financial
interest rate coincide. On the other hand, ineﬃciencies in the financial system
due to either a high cost of financial intermediation, or a high level of corporate
agency cost, drive a wedge between the two. The poorer the quality of corporate
4

Antras and Caballero (2007) make a similar assumption. Manova (2006) reports a positive
cross-sectoral correlation between capital intensity and the dependence on external finance.

12

governance (represented by a higher value of b), or the lower the eﬃciency of financial
intermediation (represented by a higher value of c), the lower the financial interest
rate for a given level of marginal return to physical capital.

3

Institutional Quality and Equilibrium Conditions

We now examine how the nature of the economic equilibrium depends on the three
deep institutional parameters, c, b, and λ, and factor endowment. We start with an
economy with high-quality institutions. That is, relative to factor endowment, the
cost of intermediation, c, and the agency cost, b, are suﬃciently low, and the level of
property rights protection, λ, is suﬃciently high. While many standard results such
as the Stolper-Samuelson theorem and the Rybczynski theorem hold, we emphasize
some comparative statics results involving the deep institutional parameters that
have not been explored in the literature.
The second part of the section will then discuss equilibrium properties of an
economy with low-quality institutions, that is, when c or b is high, or λ is low,
relative to factor endowment. Standard results such as the Rybczynski theorem no
longer hold. A change in endowment does not aﬀect the equilibrium output. Indeed,
it is possible for some of the capital endowment to be unemployed in equilibrium.

3.1

Equilibrium Properties with High-quality Institutions

We start with the case of an economy with high-quality institutions. The exact
thresholds on c, b, and λ will be made precise in the next subsection. The first set
of equilibrium conditions are free entry conditions. Using (2) and rewriting CRSR
(13) in two sectors, we have:
g + λa1 w = λpF1 (a1 , 1) − bavg
1

(15)

g + λa2 w = λF2 (a2 , 1) − bavg
2

(16)

13

where g = r + c is the gross interest rate. Equations (15) and (16) resemble the
zero profit conditions in a Heckscher-Ohlin model. For given institutional variables
λ and bavg
i , it is immediately seen that factor prices (w, g) are uniquely determined
by product prices (p, 1) . The standard Stolper-Samuelson theorem holds here. That
is, an increase in the price of a good will increase the return to the factor used more
intensively in producing that good, and reduce the return to the other factor.
Let L and K be the country’s labor and capital endowments, respectively. Let
the number of firms in sector i be Ni . The expected output in sector i,

Yi = Ni yi = λFi (ai , 1)Ki ,

where Ki = Ni ki is the amount of capital used in sector i. Let zi = Yi /L, and
κ = K/L be the output and capital endowment per capita, respectively. The factor
endowment constraints can therefore be written as

a1L z1 + a2L z2 = 1

(17)

a1K z1 + a2K z2 = κ

(18)

where
aiL =

ai
1
and aiK =
λFi (ai , 1)
λFi (ai , 1)

(19)

are labor and capital usages to produce one unit of output in sector i.
The labor constraint (17) and the capital constraint (18) jointly determine
the equilibrium output per capita (z1 , z2 ). As can be verified, an increase in the
capital-labor ratio would increase the output of the capital intensive sector, but
would decrease the output of the labor intensive sector. This is a result familiar to
trade economists, known as the Rybczynski Theorem.
The third equilibrium condition requires that the product market clears. We
assume that the representative consumer’s preference is homothetic. The ratio of

14

the quantities consumed, D(p), depends only upon the relative product price. To
clear the product market, the relative supply equals the relative demand.
z1
= D (p)
z2

(20)

The five endogenous variables, w, r, z1 , z2 , and p are determined by five equations,
(15), (16), (17), (18) and (20). As in a standard HOS model, under an assumption
of a fixed labor-capital ratio, ai , the equilibrium conditions are simplified into a
block-recursive system. Outputs per capita (z1 , z2 ) are determined by endowment
(1, κ) through equations (17) and (18). The relative price p is then determined by
(z1 , z2 ) through (20). Given p, factor prices (w, g) can be solved by equations (15)
and (16). Because the labor-capital ratio ai is assumed fixed, this analysis produces
direct eﬀects.5 By combining the Rybczynski and the Stolper-Samuelson theorems,
we can easily show that r declines as κ increases.
We now study the consequences of an improvement in the quality of financial
institutions on the equilibrium output and prices. Because the equilibrium conditions
have a block-recursive structure, such an improvement (a reduction in c, or a
reduction in b) aﬀects only factor prices through (15) and (16), but not the equilibrium
output and product prices. There is some small diﬀerence between a reduction in c
and a reduction in b. Since the gross interest rate g is determined by equations (15)
and (16) and c appears only through g, a decrease in c must increase the financial
interest rate by the same amount (dr = −dc), but has no eﬀect on the wage rate.
On the other hand, a reduction in b increases g (therefore r) but decreases w.
Strengthening property rights protection (an increase in λ) changes both factor
prices and outputs. By inspecting equations (17) and (18), we see that a larger λ
raises output in both sectors (y1 , y2 ) proportionally, while maintaining the relative
5

If ai is recognized to depend on factor prices, there are additional feedback eﬀects. However,
as it has been proven by Jones (1965), as long as some stability conditions hold, there would be no
qualitative diﬀerence in the comparative statics if the feedback eﬀects are ignored.

15

price p unchanged. Using equations (15) and (16) again, we can show that an
increase in λ reduces the wage rate w, but raises the financial interest rate r.
Note that similar to Stopler-Samuelson theorem, a reduction in b, or an increase
in λ results in a conflict of interests between capital owners and labor owners. We
summarize the discussion by the following proposition and relegate a formal proof
to the Appendix.
Proposition 1 With high-quality institutions, the following comparative statics hold.
(1) Both the Stopler-Samuelson theorem and the Rybczynski theorem hold. (2) An
improvement in the eﬃciency of financial intermediation (a lower c), quality of
corporate governance (a lower b), or property rights protection (a higher λ) would
raise the equilibrium level of financial interest rate. (3) While an improvement in the
eﬃciency of financial intermediation has no eﬀect on the wage rate, an improvement
in either corporate governance or property rights protection would reduce the wage
rate. (4) An improvement in any of three institutional parameters has no eﬀect on
the equilibrium relative output and relative prices.
In other words, with high-quality institutions, the comparative advantage of
an economy is fully determined by its factor endowment. An increase in capital
endowment increases the output of the capital intensive good, but decreases the
output of the labor intensive good. In comparison, an improvement in the eﬃciency
of financial intermediation or corporate governance, while raising the financial interest
rate, has no eﬀect on the production pattern. Because of these features, an economy
with high-quality institutions is also referred to as an endowment-binding economy.

3.2

What Defines High-quality Institutions?

We now come to the task of defining the threshold values of the institutions that
separate high-quality institutions from low-quality institutions. Holding factor endowment
constant, since the level of the financial interest rate is aﬀected by the three institutional
16

parameters, c, b, and λ, the maximum amount of capital employed in an economy
is determined by them as well.
Using equilibrium conditions (17), (18), and (20), we solve for the relative price

p=D

−1

µ

a2K − κa2L
κa1L − a1K

¶

(21)

where D−1 (.) is the inverse function of demand. Applying (21) into equations (15)
and (16), and solving for g, we obtain

g =

∙
µ
¶
¸
a2K − κa2L
λ
a1 F2 (a2 , 1) − a2 D−1
F1 (a1 , 1)
(a1 − a2 )
κa1L − a1K
µ
¶
a2 f1
b
a1 f2
+
−
(a1 − a2 ) 1 + f1 1 + f2

(22)

g = c + r is a decreasing function of capital per capita, κ, the agency cost b
and the level of property rights protection λ. We denote it as g = I(κ, b, λ). Its
inverse, κ(g) = I −1 (g, b, λ), gives the maximum amount of capital per capita that
an economy employs at any given level of gross interest rate g.
The gross interest rate cannot be lower than the cost of intermediation c, since
otherwise the financial interest rate r would have to be negative.6 Letting g = c
and rewriting expression (22), we have
a2K − κmax a2L
κmax a1L − a1K

⎛

= D⎝

a1 F2 (.)
−
a2 F1 (.)

(a1 − a2 ) c + b

³

a1 f2
1+f2

a2 F1 (.)λ

−

a2 f1
1+f1

´⎞
⎠

(23)

Equation (23) gives the maximum amount of capital employed per capita, κmax , as a
function of c, b, and λ. Since demand D(.) decreases in its variable, we immediately
see that

dκmax (c,b,λ)
dc

< 0,

dκmax (c,b,λ)
db

< 0, and

dκmax (c,b,λ)
dλ

> 0. That is, a reduction

in the cost of intermediation, a reduction in the agency cost, or a strengthening of
6

The real (financial) interest rate could be negative in the real world due to inflation. However,
there is still a minimum real interest rate (a floor) below which households would not want to put
their savings in the formal financial system. As long as this is the case, the qualitative results of
our discussion carry through.

17

property rights protection increases the employment of capital in the economy.
If κ > κmax (c, b, λ), (κ − κmax (c, b, λ)) L number of investors exit from the financial
system. Financial investors are indiﬀerent between investing and not investing.
Given any two parameters among c, b, and λ, equation (23) defines a threshold curve
to determine whether an economy has high-quality institutions (endowment-binding)
or low-quality institutions (institutionally binding). For example, given b = b0 and
λ = λ0 , equation (23) defines a threshold curve in (κ, c) space, depicted in Figure
3 as cκ curve. The capital endowment per capita κ and intermediation cost c are
represented in horizontal and vertical axes, respectively. For all points to the left
side of the curve, all capital endowment is in full usage, and all values of c (relative
to a particular κ) correspond to high-quality institutions. For example, at point
D = (κ0 , c) where κ0 < κmax (c, b0 , λ0 ), the gross interest rate g 0 = I(κ0 ) > c so that all
capital in the country is employed. The points to the right side of cκ curve, however,
define low-quality institutions. At point B = (κ00 , c) where κ00 > κmax (c, b0 , λ0 ),
the gross interest rate is stuck at c and the financial interest rate r = 0. Since
¢
¡ 00
κ − κmax (c, b0 , λ0 ) L amount of capital is unemployed, the capital endowment is
no longer binding. Instead, the cost of financial intermediation, c, now determines

the equilibrium output and prices. Relative to a particular value of κ, these values
of c’s are too high.
Of course, we can also hold c and λ constant, and vary b, or hold c and b constant,
and vary λ. In general, a four-dimensional space of thresholds, (κmax , c, b, λ), given
by equation (23), separates high-quality from low-quality institutions.

18

3.3

Equilibrium Properties with Low-quality Institutions

For an economy with low-quality institutions, the capital revenue sharing rule in
two sectors (15) and (16) can be written as
f1 b
1 + f1
f2 b
c + λa2 w = λF2 (a2 , 1) −
1 + f2
c + λa1 w = λpF1 (a1 , 1) −

(24)
(25)

Two striking results in such an economy are that prices are stuck and that there is
unemployed capital. Given that the gross interest rate g = c, the capital revenue
sharing rule for good 2, equation (25), solves for the wage rate w. Given the gross
interest rate c and the wage rate w, the capital revenue sharing rule for good 1,
equation (24), solves for the product price p.
As long as the institutional parameters (c, b, λ) do not change, both factor and
product prices are stuck. Changes in market demand and supply do not aﬀect
product prices; instead, the reverse is true. Institutional parameters determine
product price p; product market clearing condition (20) then solves for relative
output z1 /z2 . Given z1 /z2 , factor market clearing conditions (17) and (18) determine
the amount of employed capital in the economy, K max (c, b, λ) = κmax (c, b, λ)L.
To summarize, a country’s use of capital is bound by κmax (c, b, λ). When the
capital-labor ratio is less than κmax (c, b, λ), the country behaves as a textbook
version of a neoclassical economy. When capital endowment is abundant in the sense
that κ > κmax (c, b, λ), however, the capital usage is stuck at κmax (c, b, λ). Beyond
that level, the financial interest rate becomes zero, and investors lose incentives to
supply capital. Any infusion of additional capital from abroad, for example, through
the World Bank, the IMF, or rich country governments, is not productive in such
an economy. An improvement in financial system, however, can alter equilibrium
output and prices.
To see the comparative statics, let us focus on cases in which the economy is
19

still institutionally binding after the changes. It is easy to see that an increase in c
has no eﬀect on net interest rate r since r = g − c = 0. Using (25), an increase in c
reduces the wage rate w. Substituting (25) into (24), we can show that the relative
price of labor intensive good p decreases, which raises the labor intensive output
z1 but reduces the capital intensive output z2 . Total investment in the economy,
κmax (c, b, λ), decreases as c increases. An increase in b has the same eﬀect as an
increase in c.
The eﬀect of a deterioration in the property rights protection (a decrease in
λ) reduces the wage rate. Its eﬀect on output is more complicated. Through
factor constraints (17) and (18), it reduces the expected output in the two sectors
proportionally. On the other hand, it also reduces the relative price p through
equations (24) and (25), which increases z1 , but reduces z2 . Thus, the overall eﬀect
of a worsening of the property rights protection is to reduce the capital intensive
output, while the eﬀect on the labor intensive output is ambiguous. We summarize
these results below and relegate a formal proof to the Appendix.
Proposition 2 In an economy with low-quality of institutions, the comparative
advantage is determined by the three institutional parameters, rather than by the
factor endowment. An increase in capital endowment has no eﬀect on the economy.
A reduction in the cost of financial intermediation or the agency cost, on the other
hand, increases the wage rate and total capital usage in the country, thereby increasing
the output of capital intensive good but reducing the output of labor intensive good.

4

Dependence on External Finance and Financial Development

The empirical literature reports that the level of dependence on external finance
varies dramatically across diﬀerent industries. Rajan and Zingales (1998) define
external finance as the amount of desired investment that cannot be financed through
internal cash flows generated by the same business. Using data from the United
20

States, they measure a firm’s dependence on external finance by capital expenditures
minus cash flow from operations divided by capital expenditures. An economy’s
financial development, on the other hand, is commonly measured by the size of
financial market (the ratio of domestic bank credit to GDP, or that plus the ratio
of stock market capitalization to GDP) in the empirical literature. To evaluate the
appropriateness of these measures, we now derive their counterparts in our model.

4.1

Firm-level Dependence on External Finance

Since allowing b1 6= b2 does not change any results in Section 2, we therefore let
private benefits diﬀer across sectors in this subsection. Substituting CRSR (13)
into (10) gives the firm’s dependence on external finance

φi (r, bi , fi ) = 1 −

bi
(1 + r) (1 + fi )

(26)

Expression (26) gives the equilibrium level of a firm’s use of external finance,
which increases in r and fi but decreases in bi . Here we oﬀer some intuition. First,
when the financial interest rate r increases, more capitalists choose to become
financial investors.

The economy-wide ratio of external capital (from financial

investors) to internal capital (from entrepreneurs) increases, and the external dependence
φi increases in every sector. Second, when the fixed cost in sector i, fi , increases,
fewer entrepreneurs enter sector i so that fewer firms are producing. The product
price and therefore the expected marginal value product of capital in sector i, λRi ,
increase. As a result, firms in sector i can raise more funding from outside investors.
Lastly, the marginal pay to the entrepreneur is equal to the private benefit in
equilibrium. If it is lower, the pay to outside investors in sector i, λRi − bi , is higher,
which results in more external investment in the project and therefore higher usage
of external finance. Summarizing we have:
Proposition 3 An industry is more dependent on external finance if the entrepreneur’s
21

entry cost is higher, or if the entrepreneur’s private benefit per unit of capital
managed is lower.
A key assumption in Rajan and Zingales (1998) is that the external dependence
in sector i, φi (r, bi , fi ), is the same across countries (measured by U.S. data). This
assumption can be examined here. The functional form of φi (r, bi , fi ) is indeed
the same across countries. However, in order for the value of φi (r, bi , fi ) to be the
same, one must assume that the financial interest rate r, the private benefit bi and
the entry cost fi are the same across countries. Within a country, the diﬀerence
in entry cost across sectors generates diﬀerences in actual use of external finance.
Across countries, the diﬀerence in the quality of corporate governance generates
diﬀerences in actual use of external finance even for the same sector. Of course,
with cross-country variations in bi , fi , and r, the realized dependence on external
finance in sector i, φi (r, bi , fi ), is country-specific in general.

4.2

The Relative Size of Financial Markets - A Common Measure
of Financial Development

In the empirical literature, a country’s financial development is often represented by
the size of a financial market (e.g., Rajan and Zingales 1998, La Porta et al. 1997
and 1998). Theoretical studies on the determinants of the size of financial markets
are limited. Shleifer and Wolfenzon (2002) show that as investor protection becomes
stronger, the financial markets becomes larger. Rajan and Zingales (2003) propose
an interest group theory to explain the evolution of financial market.
In our model, the size of a financial market (the ratio of total external finance
to GDP) is determined by intermediation cost c, agency cost b, level of property
rights protection λ, and capital-labor ratio κ. We can show that with high-quality
institutions, an improvement in the quality of financial system increases total external
finance, but leaves GDP unchanged, thereby increasing the relative size of the
financial market. However, an increase in capital-labor ratio κ reduces the financial
22

interest rate and depresses the incentive for capitalists to supply external finance,
thereby reducing the relative size of the financial market. In an economy with
low-quality institutions, on the other hand, an improvement in the quality of financial
system increases total external finance, but not by as much as it increases GDP,
thereby resulting in a smaller relative size of the financial market. These opposite
eﬀects provide a possibly non-monotonic relationship between income level and the
relative size of the financial markets, which is consistent with the evidence presented
by Rajan and Zingales (2003), without appealing to a political economy story. We
now move to a formal analysis.
As each capitalist owns one unit of capital, the total external finance in the
economy is equal to the number of active financial investors. Recall that Ni is the
number of entrepreneurs in sectors i. The capital endowment constraint (18) can
be rewritten as
(a1K Y1 − N1 ) + (a2K Y2 − N2 ) = K max − N1 − N2 ⇔
φ1 a1K Y1 + φ2 a2K Y2 = K X

(27)
(28)

The right hand side of (28), K X = K max − N1 − N2 , is the total supply of external
finance, while each component of the left hand side, aiK Yi − Ni = (ki − 1) Ni =
φi Ki = φi aiK Yi , represents the demand for external fund in sector i.
Equation (28) highlights two channels in determining total external finance: an
interest rate channel and a relative output channel. First, a change in φi (r, b, fi )
aﬀects K X . When the financial interest rate is higher, more capitalists choose to
become financial investors rather than entrepreneurs. Therefore, φi (r, b, fi ) is higher
as indicated by equation (26) so that K X becomes larger. That is denoted as the
interest rate channel. A reduction in either intermediation cost c or agency cost
b, or a strengthening of property rights protection (i.e. a rise in ) would raise the
financial interest rate r. As a result, realized external finance φi (r, b, fi ) rises in

23

every sector and therefore total external finance K X also rises.
Second, a change in output (Y1 , Y2 ) aﬀects K X . Recall that kiX and li are external
finance and labor employed by the firm in sector i, respectively. We define sector i
to be more external finance intensive if
kjX
φj
kiX
φi
=
>
= (i, j = 1, 2).
li
ai
lj
aj

(29)

Since φ2 > φ1 and a1 > a2 , it must be the case that φ2 /a2 > φ1 /a1 . That is, the
capital intensive sector is more external finance intensive. It is easy to show that
an increase in relative output

Y1
Y2

raises total external finance K X . That is referred

to as the relative output channel.
The size of a financial market is represented by

Ω=

KX
φ a1K Y1 + φ2 a2K Y2
φ a1K z1 + φ2 a2K z2
= 1
= 1
Y
pY1 + Y2
pz1 + z2

(30)

where Y denotes GDP. As we will show next, the comparative statics involving
Ω diﬀers between the case of high-quality institutions and that of the low-quality
institutions, sometimes with opposite signs.
4.2.1

The Size of Financial Market with High-quality Institutions

We first consider the comparative statics with high-quality institutions. Proposition
1 shows that a reduction in c increases the financial interest rate, and therefore
increases K X , but leaves Y unaﬀected. This results in a higher Ω. A reduction in
b raises φi (r, bi , fi ) by equation (26). It also increases the financial interest rate,
and again increases φi (r, bi , fi ). Since a reduction in b unambiguously raises K X ,
while leaves Y unaﬀected, it also results in a higher Ω. The eﬀect of an increase
in λ is somewhat diﬀerent. First, through the relative output channel, it increases
K X and Y proportionally, which has no eﬀect on Ω. Second, through the interest
rate channel, it increases the financial interest rate and therefore increase K X , while
24

leaves Y unaﬀected. The net eﬀect is a higher Ω. To summarize, an improvement
in any of the three institutional parameters would lead to a bigger financial market
relative to GDP (i.e., a higher Ω).
We now consider the eﬀect of an increase in capital to labor ratio, κ. By the
Rybczynski Theorem, this increases the output of the good that uses more external
finance, Y2 , but reduces the output of the other good, Y1 . By a change in the
composition of the output (the relative output channel ), this raises K X . On the
other hand, an increase in κ (or an increase in K while holding L fixed) raises GDP
Y, too. At the same time, however, the increase in κ reduces the financial interest
rate r. Through the interest rate channel, it reduces K X . In general, the eﬀect of
an increase in κ on Ω is ambiguous. We formally prove in the Appendix that as
long as the relative demand for the good less intensive in external finance, D(p), is
inelastic, an increase in κ reduces Ω. From equation (30), we can see that a change
in the relative price p aﬀects Y but not K X . When D(p) is inelastic, the decline in
relative output Y1 /Y2 raises p significantly. Thus, an increase in κ increases Y more
than K X . Note that the assumption that D(p) is inelastic is plausible if the good
less intensive in external finance is a composite of necessary goods.
4.2.2

The Size of Financial Market with Low-quality Institutions

In an economy with low-quality institutions, an increase in κ has no eﬀect on either
K X , Y (Proposition 2), or Ω. When the quality of institution improves, on the other
hand, both K X and Y change. First, through the interest rate channel, a reduction
in the agency cost raises φi (0, b, fi ) and therefore increases K X . A reduction in
the cost of financial intermediation or an improvement in property rights protection
has no eﬀect on φi (0, b, fi ). Second, an improvement in any institutional parameter
increases the maximum amount of capital employed in the economy, κmax (c, b, λ),
which in turn increases both K X through the relative output channel and GDP Y
as well. The eﬀect on Ω thus is ambiguous. We prove in the Appendix that if the

25

relative demand, D(p), is inelastic, an improvement in any institutional parameter
increases Y more than it does K X , thereby reducing Ω. This discussion can be
summarized by the following proposition:
Proposition 4 Suppose that the relative demand for the good less intensive in
external finance is inelastic. a) An improvement in the quality of institutions increases
the size of the financial market in an economy with high-quality institutions, but
reduces it in an economy with low-quality institutions. b) An increase in capital
endowment, on the other hand, reduces the size of the financial market in an economy
with high-quality institutions, but has no eﬀect with low-quality institutions. c) An
improvement in the quality of institutions has no eﬀect on GDP in an economy with
high-quality institutions, but increases GDP with low-quality institutions. d) On the
other hand, an increase in the capital endowment increases GDP in an economy with
high-quality institutions, but has no eﬀect on the GDP with low-quality institutions.
A visual representation of the comparative statics is described in Figure 4, where
vertical axis represents the size of the financial market Ω, and the horizontal axis
represents the quality of financial intermediation 1/c, respectively. Given b = b0
and λ = λ0 , c represents the threshold that separates economies with high-quality
institutions (1/c > 1/c) from the ones with low-quality institutions (1/c ≤ 1/c).
When 1/c ≤ 1/c, the economy is in the range of low-quality institutions. For
comparison, the eﬀect on Y is also depicted.

Figure 5 depicts the eﬀect of an

increase in capital-labor ratio κ, with the horizontal axis representing κ. When
κ < κmax , the economy is in the range of high-quality institutions; an increase in κ
reduces Ω. When κ ≥ κmax , an increase in κ has no eﬀect on Ω.
Rajan and Zingales (2003) report an intriguing (and somewhat surprising) pattern
in the data: the relative size of financial markets in the United States and most
other countries was lower in 1980 than in 1913, and only in more recent years does
it tend to surpass the 1913 value. The apparent non-monotonic relationship between
26

income (or institutional development) and the relative size of financial markets can
be rationalized by our model. The relative size of financial market is a function of
the capital-labor ratio and of institutional parameters. That is,

Ω = Ω(κ, 1/c, 1/b, λ) ⇔
∙
¸
∂Ω
∂Ω
∂Ω
∂Ω
dΩ =
dκ +
d (1/c) +
d (1/b) +
dλ
∂κ
∂ (1/c)
∂ (1/b)
∂λ

(31)

Take the United States as an example of an economy with high-quality institutions.
Over the last century both its capital-labor ratio, κ, and its quality of institutions
(1/c, 1/b, λ) have been improving. Using Proposition 4, the first term (the endowment
eﬀect) in the right hand side of (31) is negative, while the second term (the institutional
eﬀect) is positive.

If from 1913 to 1980, the endowment eﬀect dominated the

institutional eﬀect, then it would not be surprising, according to our model, that the
relative size of the financial market in the U.S. actually declined. This is plausible if
regulatory measures such as the Glass-Steagall Act (restricting cross-state banking
and universal banking) and Regulation Q (imposing a ceiling on bank interest
rates) may have increased the cost of financial intermediation. If, since the 1980s,
the institutional eﬀect began to dominate the endowment eﬀect, perhaps through
financial deregulation, then the relative size of the financial market may exhibit a
revival. Of course, our model is only suggestive. To truly explain the evolution
of financial development over a century, we need to extend this static model to a
dynamic one, which is left for future research.
4.2.3

The Size of Financial Market and Production Structure

With low-quality institutions, Proposition 2 points out that the country with a
better financial system (a lower c or b) produces more goods in the external finance
intensive sector (sector 2). The most common proxy for financial development
in the empirical literature—the ratio of total external finance to GDP, Ω,—may be

27

misleading. As indicated by Figure 4 and Proposition 4, when financial intermediation
improves, Ω declines even though the country produces more of the external finance
intensive good. Thus, the ratio of total external finance to GDP and the relative
output of external finance intensive good could be negatively correlated.
For an economy with high-quality institutions, Proposition 1 shows a lack of
monotonic mapping between the quality of financial systems and production structure.
However, as the capital to labor ratio increases, the relative size of a financial market
can also be negatively correlated with the relative output of the external finance
intensive good.
In summary, we recognize the endogenous nature of the relative size of financial
markets, and show that its relationship with deep parameters representing the cost
of financial intermediation or the quality of corporate governance is not monotonic.
The common empirical measure that uses the relative size of financial markets as a
proxy for the level of financial development may be unreliable.

5

Free Trade and Capital Flows

Using the comparative statics derived above, we are now ready to study the consequences
of free trade in goods and of international capital flows. Consider two countries
with identical and homothetic tastes and identical technologies, but with diﬀerent
endowments and diﬀerent financial systems. To simplify the analysis, we assume
that the extent of property rights protection, λ, and entrepreneurs’ entry costs fi ,
are the same in the two countries. Labor is immobile across countries by assumption.
To organize our discussion, we start with the case of free trade in goods without
international capital flows. We then discuss the case with international capital flows.

28

5.1

Free Trade

Let two countries, “South” and “North”, be open to free trade. In the case when
both South and North have high-quality institutions, the trade pattern and welfare
eﬀect of moving from autarky to free trade are identical to the Heckscher-Ohlin case:
the country will export the good using its abundant factor intensively and import
the other good; free trade enhances welfare for both countries. We therefore choose
to focus on a more interesting (and less familiar) case in which South has low-quality
institutions and North has high-quality institutions.
5.1.1

Trade Pattern and Relative Size of Financial Market

We use superscripts (S, N ) to denote countries, and a and f to denote autarky and
free trade, respectively. Let pSa and pNa be relative prices of good 1 in South and
North under autarky, respectively. The pattern of trade is determined by comparing
pSa and pNa . We assume that South is both poorer in capital endowment (i.e.
¢
¡
¢
¡
κS < κN ) and inferior in financial system (i.e. cS , bS > cN , bN ). The factor
endowment constraints in South in autarky are:
a1L z1S + a2L z2S = 1

(32)

a1K z1S + a2K z2S = κmax (cS , bS )

(33)

where κmax (cS , bS ) is the maximum amount of capital employed per capita in South
and is less than the capital endowment per capita, κS =

KS
, since
LS

South is institutionally

binding. Thus, κmax (cS , bS ) ≤ κS < κN . Comparing equations (32) and (33) in
South and (17) and (18) in North and using the Rybczynski theorem, we immediately
see that in autarky z1Sa /z2Sa > z1Na /z2Na so that pSa < pNa .
Let pf be the price after free trade. It must be the case that pSa ≤ pf ≤ pNa .
Compared with autarky, therefore, South produces more of the labor intensive good
and exports it, and imports the capital intensive good. Since free trade raises
29

the relative price of the labor intensive good in South, by the Stopler-Samuelson
theorem, the gross interest rate in South would decline. Therefore, the financial
interest rate in South is still stuck at zero, and South must remain institutionally
binding after free trade. On the other hand, free trade raises North’s gross interest
rate so it remains endowment- binding. The factor endowment constraints in North,
(17) and (18), do not change, which implies that the equilibrium output remains
the same as that in autarky. That is, ziN f = ziN a .
The free trade price pf must be equal to the autarky price in South, pSa , if South
is diversified. To see this, note that since the gross interest rate is stuck at c, as
equation (25) indicates, the wage rate in South under free trade remains unchanged.
If pf > pSa , the profit in sector 1 would be positive and factors would flow from
sector 2 to 1, so pf would decline. Therefore in free trade equilibrium we must have
pf = pSa as long as South is diversified. In that case, the world market clearing
condition is
z1Sf + z1Nf
z2Sf

+ z2Nf

=

z1Sf + z1Na
z2Sf

+ z2Na

¡ ¢
= D pSa

(34)

The labor endowment constraint in South is the same as before:
a1L z1Sf + a2L z2Sf = 1

(35)

´
³
Equations (34) and (35) solve for the output in South under free trade, z1Sf , z2Sf .
³
´
Given output z1Sf , z2Sf , the amount of capital usage per capita is determined by
the following equation:

a1K z1Sf + a2K z2Sf = κSf

(36)

It is straightforward to show that the South produces more of the labor intensive
good and less of the capital intensive good in free trade than in autarky; hence,
z1Sf > z1Sa but z2Sf < z2Sa . It is then easy to show that κSf < κmax (cS , bS ). That is,
South uses less capital in free trade than in autarky. The boundary condition for

30

South to be diversified is
¡ ¢
z1 + z1Na
= D pSa
Na
z2

(37)

where z1 = LS /a1L is the maximum amount of good 1 that South could produce.
Note that the output in North is a function of its labor endowment and the capital-labor
¡
¢
ratio. That is, ziNa = ziNa LN , κN . So equation (37) defines the boundary conditions
¡
¢
in North, L∗N , κ∗N , by which South remains diversified in free trade. If LN > L∗N ,
or κN > κ∗N , South must completely specialize in producing good 1. In that case,

the total amount of capital employed in South is fixed at κSf = LS /a1 .
Suppose that South remains diversified. Free trade increases the relative size of
the financial market in North. To see this, note that pf = pSa < pN a and ziNf = ziNa
so the GDP (in units of good 2) in North declines, while its financial interest rate and
therefore the amount of its total external finance increase. With these two eﬀects,
the ratio of total external finance to GDP in North must increase. The eﬀect on
South is mixed. On one hand, as South produces less of the good that is relatively
intensive in external finance (the capital intensive good) after free trade, its total
external finance declines. On the other hand, as will be shown below, its GDP also
declines. As a result, the ratio of the two may either increase or decrease.
5.1.2

Aggregate Income

Assume that total cost of financial intermediation, cK max , and all entry costs paid
by entrepreneurs, (1 + r) (f1 N1 + f2 N2 ), are distributed to labor. The aggregate
income, W, is the sum of expected labor income, entrepreneurs’ net income, and
investors’ net income. Note that the income for a typical entrepreneur (net of entry
cost), and that for a typical active financial investor are both equal to 1+r. K−K max
of capitalists do not invest (and eat their capital at the end of period 2). The total

31

investment, K max = K1 + K2 . Combining these results, we have:
= [λwL + cK max + (1 + r) f1 N1 + (1 + r) f2 N2 ] + (1 + r) K max + (K − K max )
¸
2 ∙
X
(1 + r)fi
r+c+
Ki
= K + λwL +
(38)
ki

W

i=1

Using (11) and (13), we have Ui = (1 + r) (1 + fi ) = bki , which implies that
fi b
1+fi

(1+r)fi
ki

=

= bavg
i . Using this result, expression (38) can be written as
avg
max
W = K + λwL + (r + c) K max + bavg
+ (bavg
1 K
2 − b1 ) K2

(39)

Since South is institutionally binding, its aggregate income is
avg
St
St
W St = K S + λwSt LS + cK St + bavg
+ (bavg
1 K
2 − b1 ) K2

(40)

for t = a in autarky and f in free trade, respectively. Expression (40) highlights a
possible income loss in South due to free trade. As discussed earlier, wSa = wSf as
long as South remains diversified. K Sa = K max > K Sf since the South produces
more of the labor intensive good under free trade and therefore uses less capital. The
avg
avg
St
last term, (bavg
> bavg
and the capital
2 − b1 ) K2 , also becomes smaller since b2
1

usage in sector 2 is smaller under free trade than in autarky. Free trade, by reducing
both the total capital usage and the pay to entrepreneurs, without changing the wage
rate, must reduce the aggregate income in South. If South completely specializes in
producing good 1 under free trade, the wage rate may go up, and hence make up
for some of the lost capital income.

32

5.1.3

Welfare

Using (13), the aggregate income (38) can also be written as the sum of the capital
endowment and GDP

W = K + λ [pF1 (L1 , K1 ) + F2 (L2 , K2 )]

(41)

As capital endowment K is exogenous, the decrease in aggregate income W implies a
decrease in GDP. Let the utility function for a representative consumer be u(c1 , c2 ).
The indirect utility function becomes

V (p, L, K) = max{u(c1 , c2 ) : pc1 + c2 ≤ W }

(42)

c1 ,c2

Note that K1 + K2 = K max . Diﬀerentiating V (p, L, K) with respect to p and
using the envelope theorem,7 we obtain
∂V (p, L, K)
∂F2 ∂K max
= μ (Y1 − c1 ) + μ
∂p
∂K2 ∂p

(43)

where μ is the marginal utility of income.
p increases and Y1Sf − cSf
1 > 0 in South since it exports good 1. Thus the first
term captures the traditional gain from trade. The second term, however, represents
a negative eﬀect due to a loss of capital income. On the other hand, p decreases
max = K N , which
and Y1Sf − cSf
1 < 0 in North and the second term vanishes since K

implies that North always gains from free trade. Summarizing we have:
Proposition 5 (1) South (with low-quality institutions) exports a labor intensive
good and imports a capital intensive good. (2) If South remains diversified, free
trade increases North’s size of the financial market. (3) While North always gains
from free trade, South exhibits a decline in aggregate income (and potentially welfare)
7

We allow labor-capital ratio ai to vary now, and use firms’ first order conditions
p∂F1
∂F2
and ∂K1 = ∂K
.
2

33

p∂F1
∂L1

=

∂F2
∂L2

if it remains diversified.

5.2

Capital Flows

We consider two types of international capital flows. Financial capital is assumed to
go where the financial interest rate is the highest; it occurs when a financial investor
decides to take her endowment out of the country and places it in a foreign financial
system. Foreign direct investment (FDI) is assumed to go where the expected return
to physical capital is the highest; it takes place when an entrepreneur decides to take
her project to a foreign country and combine the capital under her management
with foreign labor in the production. We first study financial capital movement by
assuming FDI is disallowed. We then go on to allow both types of capital flows.
5.2.1

Financial Capital Flow

Suppose South is diversified after free trade. The gross interest rate in South is
equal to its cost of financial intermediation, g S = cS , while the gross interest rate in
North, g N = rN + cN , is determined by equations (15) and (16). Since rS = 0 < rN ,
financial capital must flow from South to North. As long as South is diversified,
the financial interest rate in South remains at zero. This means financial capital
will keep leaving South until it becomes completely specialized in producing the
labor intensive good. If capital continues to flow from South to North after that,
South produces less of the labor intensive good; North produces more of the capital
intensive good and less labor intensive good. So the world relative price of good 1,
p, increases, reducing rN in North in accord with the Stopler-Samuelson theorem.
The financial interest rate in South rS , however, increases as p increases, and is
determined by equation (24) which we rewrite as follows:
¡ S
¢
f1 bS
c + rS + λS a1 wS = λpf F1 (a1 , 1) −
1 + f1

34

(44)

In equilibrium we must have rS = rN . Equation (44) then solves for the wage rate
wS . The following proposition summarizes our discussion:
Proposition 6 Allowing financial capital flow (but disallowing FDI), financial capital
tends to flow from South to North. As a result, South must completely specialize in
producing the labor intensive good.
5.2.2

Two-Way Capital Flows and the Bypass Eﬀect

We now allow for both types of capital flow. We assume that the entrepreneur who
takes her project to a foreign country still uses her home financial system to obtain
external finance. In other words, if a U.S. multinational firm operates in India, the
firm still uses a US bank or stock market for its financing needs. Note that South
specializes in producing good 1 due to financial capital flow, so FDI takes place in
sector 1 initially. When a Northern entrepreneur in sector 1 directly engages in FDI
in South, using (11), her expected income becomes
U1Nd

=

¡
¢
1 + rN bN

(rN + cN ) + bN − λS R1S

(45)

The entrepreneur engages in FDI in South if and only if U1Nd > U1N , which holds in
turn if and only if λS R1S > λN R1N .
Rewriting condition (13) in both countries, we have:
λS R1S = (rS + cS ) + bavg,S
= rS + ρS1
1
λN R1N

= (rN + cN ) + bavg,N
= rN + ρN
1
1

(46)
(47)

¢ ¡
¢
¡
Since cS , bS > cN , bN by assumption, ρS1 = cS +bavg,S
> ρN = cN +bavg,N
where
1
1

ρji (i = 1, 2; j = S, N ) is the sum of the financial intermediation cost and the average
net pay to an entrepreneur in sector i. Since rS = rN due to financial capital flow,
we must have λS R1S > λN R1N . Therefore, FDI flows from North to South.

35

South sends out financial capital to escape the low financial interest rate at
home, and at the same time, receives inward FDI due to higher domestic return to
physical capital. As financial capital flows from South to North, South produces
less of the labor intensive good and North produces more of the capital intensive
good. So p increases, which reduces rN in North by the Stolper-Samuelson theorem
and increases rS because of a complete specialization in South. As a result, λN R1N
decreases but λS R1S increases, driving more FDI flowing from North into South. On
the other hand, as FDI flows into South, North produces less of the capital intensive
good and South produces more of the labor intensive good. So p decreases, which
increases rN and reduces rS , which in turn drives more financial capital to flow from
South to North. In summary, financial capital and FDI tend to move in the opposite
directions and reinforce each other. So in equilibrium all financial capital owned by
South leaves the country in the form of financial capital outflow, and reenters in the
form of FDI. The equilibrium can be summarized by the following proposition:
Proposition 7 Allowing both for FDI and financial capital flow, the unique equilibrium
features a complete bypass: all capital endowment in South leaves the country in the
form of financial capital outflow, and all physical investment in South takes place
through FDI; the low quality financial institutions in South are completely bypassed.
The above proposition is a two-sector generalization of Ju and Wei (2007).
Welfare eﬀects of capital flows in South are mixed. First, the world output of
capital intensive good increases when financial capital flows from South to North,
which improves terms of trade in South. Second, investors in South earn higher
interest rate. Both eﬀects benefit South. On the other hand, the bypassing of the
ineﬃcient financial system transfers the revenue of South’s financial intermediation
and management from South to North. The welfare impact on South, therefore, is
determined by a trade-oﬀ between an eﬃciency gain from capital mobility and a
revenue loss in financial intermediation and entrepreneurial pay.
36

6

Conclusion

While dominant trade theories and leading textbooks on trade ignore the role of
finance in determining production and trade patterns, recent empirical literature
based in financial economics (pioneered by Rajan and Zingales, 1998) has recognized
a possibly prominent role for financial development in determining patterns of trade.
However, whether the role of finance is a reflection of underlying factor endowment
or an independent source of comparative advantage has not been clearly worked
out in theory. This paper provides a unified general equilibrium model in which
both the quality of a financial system and the underlying factor endowment jointly
determine patterns of production and trade.
Our model does more than merely suggest that finance and the real economy
aﬀect each other; it yields dichotomous economic equilibria. On one hand, for
economies with low-quality institutions (relative to endowment) the quality of financial
systems plays a decisive role, and an increase in factor endowment does not alter
output or trade patterns. On the other hand, for economies with high-quality
institutions, factor endowment plays the customary role in determining output and
trade patterns, just as in a textbook version of the HOS model; additionally, a
further reduction in the cost of financial intermediation does not alter output and
trade patterns (although it raises financial return to financial investors).
In terms of modeling innovations, we adapt a standard partial equilibrium corporate
finance model from Holmstrong and Tirole (1997) to a multi-sector, general equilibrium
model. This framework allows us to endogenize both firm-level dependence on
external finance, and a measure of economy-wide financial development (the size of
a financial market relative to GDP). An interesting implication of our formulation
is that the deep parameters of a country’s financial system eﬃciency or corporate
governance do not have a simple, monotonic relationship with the conventional
measure of a country’s level of financial development or income level. Indeed, it

37

is possible for an economy’s financial development to experience a “great reversal”
(Rajan and Zingales, 2003) as it gets richer or as its institutions improve.
This is a static model in the tradition of the classic Heckscher-Ohlin-Samuelson
theory. This analysis could be enriched considerably if recast into a dynamic setting.
For example, unemployed capital in an economy with low-quality institutions may
manifest itself in discouraged savings (in a closed economy) or in capital flight (in a
financially open economy). The cost of a dynamic setting is that some simple and
intuitive results from the HOS setup could become substantially more complicated.
We leave this extension for future research.

References
[1] Alvarez, Fernando and Robert Lucas (2005) “General Equilibrium Analysis of
the Eaton-Kortum Model of International Trade,” NBER Working Paper,
No. 11764.
[2] Antras, Pol (2003), “Firms, Contracts, and Trade Structure,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 118(4), 1374-1418.
[3] Antras, Pol and Ricardo J. Caballero (2007), “Trade and Capital Flows: A
Financial Frictions Perspective,” Working Paper.
[4] Antras, Pol and Elhanan Helpman (2004), “Global Sourcing,” Journal of
Political Economy, 112, 552-580.
[5] Baldwin, Richard (1989), “Exporting the Capital Markets: Comparative
Advantage and Capital Market Imperfections,” In The Convergence
of International and Domestic Markets, edited by Audretsch, D., L.
Sleuwaegen, and H. Yamawaki, North-Holland, Amsterdam.
[6] Beck, Thorsten (2002), “Financial Development and International Trade: Is
There a Link?” Journal of International Economics, 57, 107-31.
[7] Beck, Thorsten (2003), “Financial Dependence and International Trade,”
Review of International Economics 11, 296-316.
[8] Beck, Thorsten and Ross Levine (2002), “Industry Growth and Capital
Allocation: Does Having a Market- or Bank-based System Matter?” Journal
of Financial Economics, 64, 147-180.
[9] Berglof, Erik, and E. von Thadden (1994), “Short-Term versus Long-Term
Interests: Capital Structure with Multiple Investors,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 109, 1055-84.
[10] Bhagwati, Jagdish, Arvind Panagariya and T.N. Srinvasan (1998), Lectures on
International Trade, The MIT Press.
38

[11] Carlin, Wendy and Colin Mayer (2003), “Finance, Investment, and Growth,”
Journal of Financial Economics, 69, 191-226.
[12] Claessens, S. and L. Laeven (2003), “Financial Development, Property Rights,
and Growth,” Journal of Finance, 58: 2401-36.
[13] Costinot, Arnaud (2007), “Contract Enforcement, Division of Labor, and the
Pattern of Trade,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122 (2), 569-600.
[14] Davis, D. and David Weinstein (2001), “An Account of Global Factor Trade,”
American Economic Review, 91(5), 1423-1453.
[15] Davis, D. and David Weinstein (2003), “The Factor Content of Trade,” in
Kwan Choi and James Harrigan, eds., Handbook of International Trade,
Basil Blackwell.
[16] Diamond, Douglas (1991), “Debt Maturity Structure and Liquidity Risk,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 106, 709-37.
[17] Do, Quy-Toan and Andrei Levchenko (2007), “Comparative Advantage,
Demand for External Finance, and Financial Development,” Journal of
Financial Economics, 86:3, 796—834.
[18] Dixit, A.K. and V. Norman (1980), Theory of International Trade, Cambridge
University Press.
[19] Eaton, Jonathan and Samuel Kortum (2002), “Technology, Geography, and
Trade,” Econometrica, 70(5), 1741-1779.
[20] Feenstra, Robert (2004), Advanced International Trade, Princeton University
Press.
[21] Fisman, Raymond and Inessa Love (2004), “Financial Development and Growth
in the Short and Long Run,” NBER Working Paper 10236.
[22] Goldsmith, R. W. (1969), Financial Structure and Development, New Haven,
CT: Yale University Press.
[23] Hart, Oliver and John Moore (1998), “Default and Renegotiation: A Dynamic
Model of Debt,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113(1), 1-41.
[24] Holmstrom, Bengt and Jean Tirole (1997), “Financial Intermediation, Loanable
Funds, and the Real Sector,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(3),
663—691.
[25] Harrigan, James (1997), “Technology, Factor Supplies, and International
Specialization: Estimating the Neoclassical Model,” American Economic
Review, 87, 475-94.
[26] Jones, Ronald (1965), “The Structure of Simple General Equilibrium Models,”
Journal of Political Economy, 73(6), 557-72.
[27] Ju, Jiandong and Shang-Jin Wei (2005), “Endowment versus Finance: A
Wooden Barrel Theory of International Trade,” CEPR Discussion Paper
5109.

39

[28] Ju, Jiandong and Shang-Jin Wei (2007), “Domestic Institutions and the Bypass
Eﬀect of Financial Globalization," NBER working paper 13148.
[29] Kletzer, Kenneth and Pranab Bardhan (1987), “Credit Market and Patterns of
International Trade,” Journal of Development Economics, 27, 57-70.
[30] La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer and Robert
Vishny (1997), “Legal Determinants of External Finance,” Journal of
Finance, 52 (3), 1131-50.
[31] La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer and Robert
Vishny (1998), “Law and Finance,” Journal of Political Economy, 106(6),
1113-55.
[32] Levchenko, Andrei (2007), “Institutional Quality and International Trade,”
Review of Economic Studies, 74:3, 791-819.
[33] Levine, Ross (2005), “Finance and Growth: Theory and Evidence,” in Philippe
Aghion and Steven Durlauf, eds. Handbook of Economic Growth, The
Netherlands: Elsevier Science.
[34] Lucas, R. E. (1988), “On the Mechanics of Economic Development,” Journal
of Monetary Economics, 22: 3-42.
[35] Manova, Kalina (2007), “Credit Constraints, Heterogeneous Firms, and
International Trade,” Working Paper.
[36] Manova, Kalina (2008), “Credit Constraints, Equity Market Liberalizations
and International Trade,” Working Paper.
[37] Matsuyama, Kiminori (2005), “Credit Market Imperfection and Patterns of
International Trade and Capital Flows”, Journal of the European Economic
Association, 3: 714-23.
[38] Miller, M. H. (1998), “Financial Markets and Economic Growth,” Journal of
Applied Corporate Finance, 11: 8-14.
[39] Nunn, Nathan (2005), “Relationship-Specificity, Incomplete Contracts, and the
Pattern of Trade,” mimeo.
[40] Rajan, Raghuram and Luigi Zingales (1998), “Financial Development and
Growth,” American Economic Review, 88(3), 559-586.
[41] Rajan, Raghuram and Luigi Zingales (2003), “The Great Reversals: The
Politics of Financial Development in the Twentieth Century,” Journal of
Financial Economics, 69, 5-50.
[42] Robinson, J. (1952), “The Generalization of the General Theory,” In: the Rate
of Interest and Other Essays, London: MacMillan.
[43] Romalis, John (2004), “Factor Proportions and the Structure of Commodity
Trade,” American Economic Review, 94(1), 67-97.
[44] Schumpeter, J. A. (1912), The Theory of Economic Development, translated
by R. Opie, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1934.

40

[45] Shleifer, Andrei, and D. Wolfenzon (2002), “Investor Protection and Equity
Markets,” Journal of Financial Economics 66, 3-27.
[46] Svaleryd, H. and J. Vlachos (2005), “Financial Markets, the Pattern of
Industrial Specialization and Comparative Advantage: Evidence from
OECD Countries,” European Economic Review 49, 113-44.
[47] Trefler, Daniel (1993), “International Factor Price Diﬀerences: Leontief was
Right!” Journal of Political Economy, 101(6), 961-987.
[48] Trefler, Daniel (1995), “The Case of the Missing Trade and Other Mysteries,”
American Economic Review, 85(5),1029-1046
[49] Wynne, J. (2005), “Wealth As a Determinant of Comparative Advantage,”
American Economic Review 95(1), 226-54.

7

Appendix

1. Proof of Proposition 1:
By diﬀerentiating equations (15), (16), (17), and (18), it is straightforward to
prove the Stolper-Samuelson theorem and the Rybczynski theorem. We therefore
show only the eﬀects of a change in the institutional parameters. Solving equations
(15) and (16), we obtain:
∙
¶ ¸
µ
b
f2
f1
1
pF1 (a1 , 1) − F2 (a2 , 1) +
(48)
−
w =
(a1 − a2 )
1 + f2 1 + f1 λ
∙
µ
¶¸
a2 f1
1
a1 f2
g =
λ [a1 F2 (a2 , 1) − a2 pF1 (a1 , 1)] + b
−
(49)
(a1 − a2 )
1 + f1 1 + f2
Note that
R1 = pF1 (.) − wa1 > 0

(50)

Substituting (48) into (50), we have
R1 > 0 ⇒ a1 F2 (.) − a2 pF1 (.) > 0

(51)

Noting that f2 > f1 , a1 > a2 , and that increasing λ does not change p, we have
dg
dg
dw
dw
db > 0, dλ < 0, db < 0, and dλ > 0. This proves Proposition 1.
2. Proof of Proposition 2:
We first derive the eﬀects of a change in c, b, or λ on p. Total diﬀerentiating
(24), we have:
dw = −

f2
(F2 (.) − a2 w)
dc
−
db +
dλ
λa2 (1 + f2 ) λa2
λa2

41

(52)

Total diﬀerentiating (24) and using (52), we obtain:
¶
¶
µ
µ
f1
a1
a1 f2
db
dc +
1−
−
λF1 (.)dp =
a2
1 + f1 a2 (1 + f2 )
[a1 F2 (.) − a2 pF1 (.)]
+
dλ
a2

(53)

dp
dw
dw
Applying (51) to (53), we obtain that dw
dc < 0, db < 0, and dλ > 0, while dc < 0,
dp
dp
db < 0, and dλ > 0.
To study the eﬀect of a change in p on z1 and z2 , we diﬀerentiating (17) and
(20),
µ
¶
1
a1 F2 (.)
D0 (p)
dp
(54)
dz1 =
+
z1 a2 F1 (.)z2
D(p)
a1 F2 (.)
dz2 = −
dz1
(55)
a2 F1 (.)
dz2
1
Therefore, dz
dp < 0 and dp > 0. A reduction in c or b, or an increase in λ, all raises
p, which in turn reduces z1 but increases z2 .
Finally let us consider the eﬀect on κmax (c, b, λ) . Given z1 and z2 , κmax (c, b, λ)
is determined by equation (18). Using (55) and diﬀerentiating (18), we obtain
µ
¶
a1
1
max
dκ
1−
=
(56)
dz1
λF1 (.)
a2

Thus, dκmax > 0 since dz1 < 0.
3. Proof of Proposition 4:
We first consider an institutionally binding economy. Using (30) and noting that
r = 0, we have
¶
µ
dz1
dz2
2 dΩ
= (φ1 a1K − pφ2 a2K ) z2
− z1
(pz1 + z2 )
dc
dc
dc
£
¤
dp
− φ1 a1K z12 + φ2 a2K z1 z2
(57)
dc
Since

dz1
dc

> 0,

dz2
dc

if φ1 a1K − pφ2 a2K
algebra, we have

dΩ
< 0, and ³dp
dc < 0 as
´ we have proved in Proposition 2, dc > 0
= φ2 a2K φφ1 FF21 − p ≥ 0. If φφ1 FF21 − p < 0, with a little bit of

dΩ
=
dc
Note that
dΩ
dc

> 0 if

dp
dc <
D0 (p)P
D(p)

2

³
z2 +

φ1 F2 z1
φ2 F1

2

´

z1 φ2 dp
F2 dc
2

(pz1 + z2 )

⎡

⎣−1 +

³

´ 0
⎤
(p)P
− p DD(p)
´ ⎦
³
p 1 + φφ1 FF21 zz12

φ1 F2
φ2 F1

2

0 and the elasticity of relative demand,
> −1. Similarly we can show that

42

dΩ
db

D0 (p)P
D(p)

> 0 and

, is negative. Thus,
dΩ
dλ

> 0.

Turning to the eﬀect on GDP, we have
´
³
⎤
⎡
a1 F2 D0 (p)P
p
−
a2 F1
D(p)
dY
z1 dp ⎣
´ ⎦
³
=
1+
a
F
z
Ldc
dc
1 2 1
p 1+
a2 F1 z2

So

0

(p)P
< 0 if DD(p)
> −1.
We now consider an endowment-binding economy.

dY
dc

dΩ
(pz1 + z2 )
dκ
2

µ
¶
dφ1
dφ2
=
a1K z1
+ a2K z2
(pz1 + z2 )
dκ
dκ
¶
µ
dz1
dz2
+ (φ1 a1K − pφ2 a2K ) z2
− z1
dκ
dκ
£
¤ dp
− φ1 a1K z12 + φ2 a2K z1 z2
dκ

Similar to the case for an institutionally binding economy, we have, after a bit of
algebra,

dΩ
dκ

´
³
dφ2
1
a1K z1 dφ
+
a
z
2K 2 dκ
dκ

=

+

Since

dz1
dκ

(pz1 + z2 )
³
´
³
D(p)
z2 + φφ1 FF2 1z1 Fφ22 D
1+
0 (p)
2

a1 F2 z1
a2 F1 z2

(pz1 + z2 )2

< 0, so

dΩ
dκ

< 0 if

D0 (p)P
D(p)

´

dz1
dκ

⎡

⎣−1 +

> −1. Finally,
´
³
⎤
⎡
a1 F2 D0 (p)P
p
−
a2 F1
D(p)
dY
z1 dp ⎣
´ ⎦
³
=
1+
a1 F2 z1
Ldκ
dκ
p 1+
a2 F1 z2

So

dY
dκ

> 0 if

D0 (p)P
D(p)

³

> −1.

43

´ 0
⎤
(p)P
− p DD(p)
´ ⎦
³
φ1 F2 z1
p 1 + φ F1 z2

φ1 F2
φ2 F1

2

Date 1

Career decision
by capitalists
Financial
contract

Date 2

Investment Ki

Outcome
or 0

Effort level

λ Ri K i

Figure 1

Financial
intermediate

k iX

Investor

k iX

Entrepreneur

1 + λ R i − λ R iE

1 + λ Ri − λ RiE − c
Figure 2

c

c

D

c

A

B

κ
O

κ'

κ (c )

κ"

Figure 3

44

κ

Ω, Y

A

Y
A

B

B

Ω
O
Low-quality Institutions 1 / c

High-quality Institutions 1 / c

Figure 4

Ω,Y

Y

C

C

D

Ω
D

O
High-quality Institutions

κ max

Low-quality Institutions

Figure 5

45

κ

