NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ECONOMICALLY SENSIBLE SOLUTIONS FOR
LINEAR RATIONAL EXPECTATIONS MODELS WITH
FORWARD AND BACKWARD LOOKING DYNAMIC PROCESSES

Michael Mussa

Working Paper No. 1398

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCh
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 198)4

research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the
The

author

and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #1398
July 1984

Economically Sensible Solutions for Linear Rational Expectations Models
with Forward and Backward Looking Dynamic Processes

ABSTRACT

Using variants of a modified version of Dornbusch's model of price level
and exchange rate dynamics, it is demonstrated that satisfaction of the formal
condition for existence of a unigue non—explosive solution of a linear rational
expectations model with forward and backward looking dynamic processes (equality

of the number of stable roots with the number of independent backward looking
processes) does not guarantee the economic sensibility of this solution, even
if one accepts the usual arguments for excluding "speculative babbles" from

the solutions of such models. Moreover, satisfaction of the formal condition
for existence of an infinity of non—explosive solutions for such rational
expectations models (more stable roots than independent backward looking
processes) does not assure that any of these solutions is economically sensible.

Michael Mussa
Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago
1101 East 58th. Street

Chicago, Illinois 60637
(312) 962—7143

Economically Sensible Solutions for Linear Rational Expectations Models
with Forward and Backward Looking Dynamic Processes

by
Michael Mussa
I.

Introduction

Rational expectations models applied in monetary and macro economics
commonly include both forward looking dynamic orocesses in which current
variables are linked to their expected future values and backward looking
dynamic processes in which past values of these variables affect their current
behavior.1 These models generally admit an infinity of solutions consistent

with initial conditions on the predetermined variables. Studies of the characteristics of these solutions have concluded that a unique non-explosive
solution exists when the number of stable roots of the dynamic system is equal
to the number of independent backward looking dynamic processes, and that an
infinity of non—explosive solutions exists when the number of stable roots is

greater than the number of independent backward looking processes.2 This
paper argues that even when there exists one or more non—explosive solutions
to such rational expectations models, there is no general presumption that
this solution is economically sensible.

This argument is related to, but is different from, the much discussed
controversy over the justification for eliminating self-generating speculative
3

bubbles from the solutions of rational expectations models. Here, we will show
that even when the arguments for eliminating such bubbles are accepted as

economically justifiable, the formal conditions for existence of non—explosive
solutions in rational expectations models do not assure the economic sensibility

of such solutions. This will be established by considering variants of a

2

generalized version of Dornbusch's (1976) model of exchange rate and price

dynamics. In this model, as described in section 2, there is a forward looking
dynamic process linking the equilibrium exchange rate and price level to expected
future economic conditions, and a backward looking dynamic process linking
adjustment of the actual price level to existing deviations from purchasing

power parity. The stability properties of solutions of this model are determined
by its characteristic roots,

and X2, which are equal, respectively, to the

inverse of the absolute value of the interest semi—elasticty of money demand
=

1/h) and to minus the speed of response of the price level to deviations

from purchasing power parity (X2

-

b).

This identification of characteristic roots with specific parameters is

a virtue of this simple model because it enables clear perception of the economic
sensibility of various solutions of the model under alternative assumptions

about parameter values. When the parameters have economically sensible values
(h and b are both positive), as assumed in section 3, there is one stable and
one unstable root, and the unique non-explosive solution of the model is the
economically sensible solution (under the usual argument that excludes specula—

tive bubbles). When h and b are both negative, as assumed in section 4, the
model is economic nonsense, but it still has one stable and one unstable root

and, hence, a unique non—explosive solution. This solution, however, is not
economically sensible. When h is negative and b is positive, as assumed in
section 5, the model has two stable roots and an infinity of non-explosive

solutions. None of these solutions is economically sensible.
These examples establish a general proposition valid in complicated models

where the economic interpretation of characteristic roots may be murky. The
relationship between the number of stable roots and the number of backward
looking processes (or predetermined variables) is not enough to determine the
stability Properties of economically sensible solutions of the model.

3

2. A Model of Price and Exchange Rate Dynamics
Following Dornbusch (1976) ,

consider

a small open economy where the

condition of money market equilibrium is expressed by

m=k+p-h.i

(1)

where m is the logarithm of the nominal money supply, k represents all exog—
enous factors affecting money demand, p is the logarithm of the domestic price
level, i is the domestic nominal interest rate, and h measures the semi—elasticity of money demand with respect to i.

The domestic nominal interest rate

is linked to the fixed world interest rate, i*, through the interest parity
condition,
i =

+ De(),

(2)

where e is the logarithm of the exchange rate (defined as the domestic money
price of a unit of world money) , and De(e) is the expected rate of change of

the exchange rate which is assumed to equal the forward premium on foreign

exchange. In the continuous time model, with certainty, De(e) is the right
hand derivative of e with respect to time.
uncertainty, De(e)

E(e(t+l);t) —

e(t)

In a discrete time model, with

is the expected forward difference

of e, where E(x(s);t) denotes the expectation of x(s) conditional on informa-

tion available at time t. In either the continuous or the discrete time model,
the current exchange rate, e(t), is assumed to be a freely adjustable variable
that jumps immediately to the momemtary equilibrium value consistent with (1)
-

e

and (2), for given values of m, k, P 1* and D (e)
The domestic price level, in contrast, is assumed to be a slowly adjusting

variable whose current value is predetermined by past events. The equilibrium
value of p is determined by purchasing power parity to be e + p*, where p is

the logarithm of the world price level. Employing the simplifying assumption

4

that p' =

0, the rule governing the adjustment of p is assumed to be given by
b(e — p) + De(e)

D(p)

(3)

where D( ) is the forward differential or difference operator. The first term
is this price adjustment rule, b.(e -

p),

describes the backward baling process

of adjustment of the sticky domestic price level to the existing state of disequilibrium, as measured by the current deviation from purchasing power parity.

The second term in the price adjustment rule, De(e), prescribes a forward looking
adjustment of the price level to expected changes in its equilibrium value.4
Under the assumption of rational expectations, De(e) may be replaced by D(e)

in describing the dynamic system that characterizes the expected future paths

of the exchange rate and the price level. Solving equation (1) for i, and
substituting the result into (2), it follows that
D(e) =

where w =

rn

k +

-

(1/h)

[p —

w]

(4)

hi* summarizes the exogenous factors that will influence the

course of the exchange rate and the price level in future periods. Using (4)
to eliminate De(e) in (3), it follows that
D(p) =

(1/h)• [p

-

w] + b•

[e - pJ

(5)

The dynamic system consisting of (4) and (5) determines the expected future
paths of e and p, starting from an initial time t = 0, conditional on the
expected path of w(t) for t . 0 and on the initial price level D(0).

This dynamic system contains a forward looking process arising from the
influence of the expected rate of change of the exchange rate on money demand
and on the rate of adjustment of the price level, and a backward looking process
5

reflecting adjustment of the price level to deviations from purchasing power parity.
The stability properties of this system are determined by its characteristic roots:
=

-b

and

=

1/h.

(6)

5

The differential equation form of this system has a unique non-explosive Solution
if

and A2 are opposite in sign, and a one—dimensional infinity of non-explosive

solutions if A] and A2 both have negative real parts. The difference equation
form of the system has a unique non-explosive solution if the modulus of one plus
one of the characteristic roots is > 1 and the modulus of one plus the other
characteristic root is <

1, and a One—dimensional infinity of non—explosive solu-

tions if the modulus of one plus each of the characteristic roots is < 1.
The next three sections will discuss the economic significance of alternative solutions of the dynamic system (4) and (5) under different assumptions

about the parameters b and h. Since the results are essentially the same for
the differential and difference equation forms of this system, attention will

focus on the differential equation form where the solutions can be more easily
expressed.

As a preliminary to this discussion, it is important to establish the
relationships between the characteristic roots A1 =

-b

and A2 = 1/h and the

dynamic processes governing the evolution of the deviation from purchasing power
parity, v = e -

p,

and the determination of the equilibrium path of the price

level and the exchange rate. Taking the difference between equation (4) and
equation (5), it follows that
D(v) =

- b.v.

(7)

Appearance of the characteristic root A1 =

-b

in this dynamic equation indicates

the role of this root in controlling the process of adjustment of the

deviation

from purchasing power parity. The solution of the differential equation form of (7)

v(t)

= v(O).exp[—b ti

indicates why A1 =
adjustment

-b

<

(8)

0 is necessary for stability of the process governing

of the deviation from purchasing power parity; clearly, if A1 was >

6

0. This

v(t) would explode at a positive exponential rate whenever v(0)

is a sensible stability condition because the process of adjustment of p in
response to deviations from purchasing power parity is a backward looking process
in which the coefficient b measures the speed of response of the price level to
the existing divergence from purchasing power parity.

The relationship between the characteristic root

=

1/h

and the process

governing the behavior of the equilibrium price level and exchange rate is
established by considering the process that would govern the common value of

p and e if the price adjustment rule (3) were replaced by the assumption that
p is a freely flexible variable that adjusts immediately to maintain purchasing

power parity. Defining q as the common equilibrium value of p and e, equations
(1) and (2) reduce to a single differential or difference equation that is

essentially identical to the equation obtained when rational expectations are
imposed on Cagan's model of inflationary dynamics;6
m =

k + q

-

h.[i*

+

D(q)J.

(9)

Rewriting this equation in the form
D(q)

=

(l/h).[q

where w = m - k +

h.i*,

—

w]

(10)

it is apparent that characteristic root A2 =

1/h is the

root that is involved in the dynamic process determining the behavior of the
equilibrium price level and exchange rate.
From an economic perspective, the dynamic process described by (9) or (10)

is

forward looking since it arises from an economic relationship in which the

equilibrium price level depends on the forward looking expected inflation rate.
For such a forward looking process to have an economically sensible solution,
the associated characteristic root must be unstable; that

X2

=

1/h

must

be positive. When this condition is satisfied, the solution for q(t) that is

7

consistent with (9) or (10) can be written as
q(t) =

F(t)

+

C.exp[(l/h)t]

(11)

where C is an undetermined constant and F(t) is a weighted average of future
economic 'fundamentalst' represented by future w's,
cxD

F(t)

=

Whenever C

ft (l/h)•w(s).exp[(-l/h).(s-t))

ds.

(12)

0, the term C•exp[(1/h).t] contributes an explosive 'speculative

bubble" to the path of q(t). This bubble term appears in the general solution
of (9) or (10) because it is the solution to the homogenous form of these differential equations (obtained by setting w = m - k + h.i* equal to zero). Since

the initial price level is a freely adjustable variable in Cagan's model, it is
clear that the speculative bubble can be eliminated from the path of q(t) by

choosing q(0) to equal F(0), which amounts to setting C = 0.

Beyond this, it

is frequently argued that setting C = 0 is the economically appropriate choice
of C.

One argument is that this assumption makes the price level depend only

on the economic fundamentals that ought to influence its behavior, rather than
having q(t) blast off to plus or minus infinity regardless of the behavior of
these fundamentals.

7

For present purposes, it is not essential that this or other arguments
for setting C = 0 be accepted as universally valid. It is essential, however,
that the nature of the economic assumption that is made in excluding speculative

bubbles from the solution of Cagan's model be clearly understood. It is also
essential that this be distinguished from the absence of any economic rationale
for assuming that v(0) = 0 in order to suppress explosive behavior of v(t) when
the backward looking adjustment process for deviations from purchasing power
parity is unstable due to a negative value of the adjustment speed, b.

S

3. The Economically Sensible Solution in the Normal Case
In the normal, economically sensible version of the model of price and
exchange rate dynamics, the speed of adjustment of the price level in response
to divergences from purchasing power parity is positive (b > 0)
semi-elasticity of rrcney demand is negative (h >

-b

the characteristic roots A1 =

and A2 =

0).

,

and the interest

Under these assumptions,

1/h are real and opposite in sign,

implying that the differential equation form of the dynamic system (4) and (5)
has a unique non-explosive solution, and a one dimensional infinity of explosive

solutions, that are consistent with a given initial price level p(O). The same
conclusion applies for the difference equation form of (4) and (5) under the
additional economically reasonable assumption that the price level does not

over respond to the current divergence from purchasing power parity, as it would
in a discrete time model if b were > 1.

8

Focusing on the differential equation form (4) and (5), the general solution
for the paths of e(t) and p(t) can be written as
e(t) =

A.exp[-b.t]

+

C.exp[(l/h).t]

p(t) = — hb.A.exp[—b.t] +

+

F(t)

C.exp[(l/h).t]

+

(13)

F(t)

(14)

where F(t) is defined by (12) and where the constants A and C must be consistent
with the initial condition
—

hb.A +

By inspection,

it

C

is

= p(O)

-

F(0) .

(15)

apparent that the first term in these solutions is associa-

ted with the characteristic root A1 =

-b

and describes the evolution of the

divergence from purchasing power parity, and the second and third terms are
associated with the characteristic root A2 =

1/h

and describe evolution of the

common equilibrium value of the exchange rate and the price level.

9

Given the initial price level p(O), there is one degree of freedom in
the solutions for e(t) and p(t), the degree of freedom associated with the
choice of the constants A and C consistent with the initial condition (15)
This degree of freedom allows for a free choice of the initial exchange rate,

A +

e(O)

C

+

F(O),

for any given p(O) .

Choice of the initial exchange rate

determines the initial divergence from purchasing power parity, v(O) = e(O)
-

p(O), but does not affect the stability of the process governing the subse-

quent evolution of this divergence. Specifically, taking the difference between
(13) and (14), it follows that v(t) follows the path of exponential decay

described by (8), with v(O) = (1 +

hb)A.

Choice of the initial exchange rate does critically affect the stability
of the path of the equilibrium price level and exchange rate, q(t) =

Cexp[(l/h)'t]

÷ F(t). Specifically, to exclude the explosive term Cexp[(l/h)t] from the
equilibrium path of p and e it is necessary to set C = 0, implying that A must
equal -

(l/hb)fp(0)
e(0)

-

F(OYI and that the initial exchange rate must be

F(0) —

(1/hb){p(O)

—

e(0)].

(16)

The argument for choosing this initial exchange rate is the same as the argument
for choosing q(t) =

F(t)

as the solution for the equilibrium price level in the

rational expectations version of Cagan's model of inflationary dynamics--it is
economically sensible that the equilibrium price level should depend on an
exponentially weighted average of future w's, but not that it should explode to

plus or minus infinity regardless of the behavior of w. If one accepts this
argument, then the economically sensible solution for the paths of e(t) and p(t)
corresponds to the unique non-explosive solution of the dynamic system (4) and
(5) that is obtained by setting C = 0 and A =

- (l/hb)

[p(0) -

F(0)

9
1.

10

4. A Nonsense Model with a Unique Non-Explosive Solution
When the speed of adjustment of the price level in response to deviations
from purchasing power parity is negative (b <

0),

the price adjustment rule is

not economically sensible and the dynamic process governing the evolution of

the divergence from purchasing power parity is not stable. When the interest
semi-elasticity of money demand is positive (h <

0),

there is no economically

sensible forward-looking expression for the equilibrium price level in the
rational expectations version of Cagan's nodel of inflationary dynamics.
Nevertheless, when the assumption that b is < 0 is combined with the assumption

0,

that h is <

the differential equation form of the dynamic system (4) and (5)

has a unique non-explosive solution. This conclusion also applies for the
difference equation form of this dynamic system under the additional assumption
that Il/hi <

1.

Focusing again on the differential equation form of (4) and (5), the

general solution for the paths of e(t) and p(t) when b and h are negative can
be written as
e(t) =

Aexp[-b•t]

p(t)

-

+

Cexp[(l/h)t]

hbA•exp[-btJ

+

+

B(t)

Cexp[(l/h).tJ

+

(17)

B(t)

(18)

where B(t) is a backward looking weighted sum of past w's,
0

B(t) =

ft (l/h)•w(s)•exp[(1/h).(t—s)]

ds

(19)

and where the constants A and C must be consistent with the initial condition
—

hb•A +

C

=

p(0)

-

3(0)

=

Pc0).

(20)

Taking the difference between (17) and (18), it is apparent that the first
terms in the solutions for e(t) and p(t) are still the terms that are associated

11

with the dynamic process governing the evolution of the divergence from pur-

chasing power parity. Only now, with b < 0, this process is explosively unstable.
The only way to eliminate the effect of this explosive instability on the paths
of e(t) and p(t) is by setting A =

0

and C

p(O) .

This

is equivalent to

choosing the initial exchange rate so that there is no initial divergence from
purchasing power parity; that is, setting
e(0) =

p(O).

(21)

This choice of e(0) selects the unique non—explosive solution for e(t)
and p(t) out of the class of solutions defined by (17) through (20) ,

just

as

choice of e(0) in accord with (16) selects the unique non-explosive solution
for e(t) and p(t) out of the class of solutions defined by (12) through (15)

The argument for imposing (16) when b and h are > 0, however, does not justify
imposing (21) when b and h are <

0.

Imposition of (16) when b and h are > 0

removes a speculative bubble from the solution path of the equilibrium
exchange rate and equilibrium price level on exactly the same basis as the
argument for excluding such a speculative bubble from the solution for the

price level in Cagan's model. Imposition of (21) when b and h are K 0 suppresses
an explosive, backward looking adjustment process by assuming that there is no

initial deviation from purchasing power parity. The economic specification of
the model of price and exchange rate dynamics provides no justification for
suppressing this genuine source of instability.

The difference between imposing (16) when b and h are positive and imposing
(22) when b and h are negative is illustrated in the phase diagrams shown in
figures 1 and 2 under the assumption that w is constant at some w.

In both

diagrams, the vertical line along which p = w shows the combinations of p and e
for which D(e) =

(1/h)

[p -

w

=

0; and the line along which e = p

shows the combinations of p and e for which D(p) =

(l/h)

[p -

-

(l/hb)

wi + b [e - p1

[p -

0.

wi

e

e =p
D(e) = 0

7
=0

w

e =

- (1/hb)

0

•1

Fig.--1: The Dynamics of p and e with b > 0,

h>

, and

w = w.

e

e =p
D(e) = 0

D(p) = 0

w

e =p - (1/hb)[p - wi

p
0

1

Fig.--2: The Dynamics of p and e with b < 0, h < 0, and w = w.

12

The difference between the two diagrams is in direction of adjustment of e
and p for points off of the D(e) = 0 line and the D(p) = 0 line. In figure 1,

where b and h are positive, D(e) is > 0 to the right of the D(e) = 0 line and
D(e) is < 0 to the left of this line, while D(p) is > 0 above the D(p) = 0 line

and D(p) is < 0 below this line. Exactly the reverse is true in figure 2 where
b and h are negative.

The stable branch in figure 1 is the line along which e = w -

(l/hb)

[p -

w).

Given p(O), when e(O) is set in accord with (16), the initial point (p(0), e(O))
is on this stable branch; and subsequently the point (p(t), e(t)) moves toward
the point (w, w) at an exponential rate equal to - b.

For any other choice of

e(O), the divergence from purchasing power parity decays at the exponential rate
-

b,

as indicated by convergence of the path of (p(t), e(t)) toward the line

p,

along which e =
=

Cexp[(l/h)t]

but the common equilibrium component of p(t) and e(t), q(t)

+ w, explodes to plus or minus infinity because of a non—zero

value of c. Thus, imposition of (16) aircunts to choice of the stable branch in
figure 1 and is justified by the argument for excluding a speculative
bubble from the solution for the equilibrium price level and exchange rate.
In contrast, the stable branch in figure 2 is the line along which e = p.
Setting e(0) =

p(0)

places the initial point (p(0) ,

e(0)) on this stable branch.

Subsequently, the point (p(t), e(t)) converges to (w, w) at an exponential rate
10

equal to 1/h.

When e(0)

p(0), the point (p(t), e(t)) converges toward the

line that is the stable branch in figure 1 and moves away from the point (w, w)

at an exponential rate equal to -

b.

This divergent behavior is not caused by

explosive behavior of the common element, C'exp[(l/h).t] + B(t), in the solutions
for p(t) and e(t), but rather by explosive behavior of the divergence from purchasing power parity.

Thus, choice of the stable branch in figure 2 is not

justified by the argument for excluding a speculative bubble from the solution
for the equilibrium price level and exchange rate.

13

Lack of an adequate justification for choosing the unique non-explosive
solution from the class of solutions defined by (17) through (20) is not the

only serious problem with these solutions. There is also an important difficulty with the economic interpretation of the term that represents the common
equilibrium value of e(t) and p(t) in these solutions; namely, the term
q(t) =

Cexp{(1/h)t]

--

B(t).

(22)

It is easily verified that (22) provides the general backward looking solution
to the differential equation (9) or (10) that governs the behavior of the equilibrium price level in the rational expectations version of Cagants model of

inflationary dynamics. When h is < 0, it is necessary to use this backward
looking solution, rather than the forward looking solution q(t) =

Cexp[(1/h)t]

4- F(t), because the integral defining F(t) does not converge, for reasonable

assumptions about w, when h is < 0. The mathematical argument for using this
backward looking solution, however, does not provide an economic justification
for using this solution. In the backward looking solution given in (22) ,

depends on the past w's between 0 and t, not on future W'S between t and

q(t)
.

This does not make economic sense because the economic condition that determines
the equilibrium price level is one in which the current price level is linked

to the forward looking expected inflation rate. For this reason, the economically
appropriate solution for q(t) is the forward looking solution where q(t) depends
on the exponentially weighted average of future w's defined by F(t) .

From an

economic perspective, failure of the integral F(t) to converge when h is < 0

does not justify using the backward looking solution for q(t). Rather, it
indicates that there is no economically sensible expression for the equilibrium
price level and exchange rate when the interest semi—elasticity of money demand
is positive.

14

5. A Case Where Every Solution Is Non-explosive
When the speed of adjustment of the price level in response to divergences
from purchasing power parity is positive (b >

of money demand is positive (h < 0)
=

,

the

0),

and the interest semi—elasticity

characteristic roots

=

-b

and A2

1/h are both negative. In this case, every solution of the differential

equation form of the dynamic system (4) and (5) is non-explosive. This conclusion also applies to the difference equation form of this system provided

that 1/h < 1.
When b is > 0 and h is <

0, the solutions for the paths of e(t) and p(t)

are described by equations (17) through (20) of the preceding section. The
only difference is that with b > 0, the first term in the solutions for e(t)
and p(t), which involves the factor A.exp[-b.tI, is no longer explosive for

non—zero values of A. Since the terms that describe the equilibrium price

level and exchange rate, Cexp[(l/h)t] +

3(t),

are also non-explosive, as they

were in the preceding section, it is apparent that for any initial price level

any choice of the initial exchange rate e(0) implies a non-explosive

p(O) ,

solution for e(t) and p(t). However, because h is < 0, the backward looking
solution q(t) =
q(t) =

C.exp[(l/h).t]

C.exp[(l/h).t}

+

F(t),

+

3(t),

rather than the forward looking solution

must be used to represent the equilibrium price

level and exchange rate. Since this backward looking solution is not consistent with the economic meaning of the forward looking dynamic process (9) or
(10) that determines the behavior of the equilibrium price level and exchange
rate, none of the solutions for e(t) and p(t) that are described by (17)
through (20) is economically sensible.
It is interesting to note that this difficulty with the economic interpre-

tation of the solutions for e(t) and p(t) seems to vanish when w is constant

at some w. In this special case, B(t) =

w[l - exp((l/h)t)I.

Hence, the

15

solutions for e(t) and p(t) given by (17)

(18) can be written as

G.exp[(l/h).t]

e(t) =

A.exp[-b•tI

p(t) =

- hb.A.exp[-b.tJ

+

and

+

+ w

(23)

G.exp[(1/h).t}

+ w

(24)

where G = C - w, and where A and G must be consistent with the initial condition
-

The

hb.A +

behavior

G

= p(O)

-

w.

(25)

of e(t) and p(t) when w is constant at w is illustrated in

the phase diagram shown in figure 3. The vertical line along whid-i e w shows
the combinations of p and e for which D(e) =

(1/h) [p
.

—

w] =

0.

Since h is < 0,

D(e) is < 0 to the right of this line, and D(e) is > 0 to the left of this line.

p -

The line along which e

for which D(p) = (1/h)

.

(1/hb) . [p

[p — w]

+

b.

[e —

-

w] shows the combinations of p and e

p] = 0.

Since b is > 0, D(p) is > 0

above this line, and D(p) is < 0 below this line. The initial position in the

phase diagram is determined by the predetermined initial price level p(0) and

the freely chosen initial exchange rate e(O). From this initial position, the
point (p(t), e(t)) moves in accord with the dynamic laws indicated by the arrows
in the phase diagram and converges to the equilibrium point (w, w) with at most
a half cycle rotation around this equilibrium.

The behavior of e(t) and p(t) described in this phase diagram (or by

equations (23) and (24)) appears to be economically sensible when w is regarded

as the equilibrium value of the price level and exchange rate. This apparent
sensibility, however, conceals a fundamental difficulty. When h < 0, even with
w constant at w, the forward looking dynamic process that determines the behaviof
of the equilibrium price level and exchange rate has no convergent forward

looking solution. Hence, while w appears to be a sensible measure of the
equilibrium price level arid exchange rate, there is in fact no such measure.

e

D(e) = 0

D(p) = 0

e =p

/

w

p

I
Fig.—-3: The Dynamics of p and e with b > 0, h < 0, and w = w.

16

6. Conclusion
In this paper, a modified version of Dornbusch's model of price and exchange
rate dynamics has been used to establish two general principles concerning solutions to rational expectations models that incorporate both forward and backward

looking dynamic processes. First, existence of a unique non—explosive solution
for such a model, which is implied by equality of the number of stable char-

acteristic roots with the number of backward looking dynamic processes does not

necessarily imply that this solution is economically sensible. Second, existence
of a multiplicity of non-explosive solutions for such a model, which is implied

by a greater number of stable roots than backward looking dynamic processes,
does not necessarily imply that any of these solutions is economically sensible.
The validity of these conclusions is clearly not limited to the relatively

simple model that has been used to demonstrate them. The virtue of this model
is that there is a clear economic interpretation for each of its characteristic

roots and for the dynamic processes with which they are associated. This makes
it possible to ascertain, with comparative ease, whether a specific solution for

the model is economically sensible. For more complicated models, this task is
likely to be both more difficult and more important. In a complicated model
with a number of interacting dynamic processes, the economic meaning of specific
characteristic roots tends to become obscure, making it difficult to determine

whether a particular solution of the model is economically sensible. It is
precisely in this situation that comparison of the number of unstable characteristic roots with the number of forward looking dynamic processes is not likely
to provide a reliable guide to the economic sensibility of alternative solutions
of the model.

17

Footnotes

1. This structure is characteristic of models in which prices of goods
or assets depend on expected inflation rates or expected rates of capital gain
and in which asset stocks or contract wage rates depend on past economic
decisions; see, for example, Lucas (1975), Dorribusch (1976) ,
Taylor (1980) ,

Buiter

and Miller (1981) ,

Blinder

Wilson

(1979)

and Fischer (1981) , Mussa

(1981 and 1982), and Basevi and Calzonari (1984)

2. The formal conditions for the existence of non-explosive solutions
to linear rational expectations models with forward and backward looking

Also

processes are examined in Blanchard and Kahn (1980) and Buiter (1982a) .
see Calvo (1978 and 1979) ,
Lipton, et. al. (1980) ,

Blanchard

Dixit

(1980) ,

(1979) ,

Burmeister

(1980) ,

Buiter

(l982b)

and Taylor (1977)

3. An insightful discussion of this controversy and references to the
relevant literature are given in McCallum (1983)

4. The price adjustment rule (3) is somewhat different from the rule used
by Dornbusch (1976), but it does incorporate in the term b (e - p) the same
essential mechanism of correction for existing disequilibrium as appears in

Dornbusch's price adjustment rule. The additional term De(e) in the price
adjustment rule (3) can be justified economically on the grounds discussed by

Mussa (1981 and 1982). Inclusion of this term also allows for very convenient
expressions of the characteristic roots of the dynamic system implied by the
model of price and exchange rate dynamics in terms of the parameters b and h.

5. It is preferable to speak of the distinction between forward looking
and backward looking dynamic processes, rather than forward looking and backward

looking variables, or freely flexible and predetermined variables. In the present model, the price level is predetermined, hut its dynamic behavior is

18

influenced by both forward and backward looking dynamic processes. The exchange
rate is a freely flexible variable, but at least in the economically sensible
solution of the model of section 3, the initial exchange rate depends on the

predetermined price level. Moreover, the model of price and exchange rate
dynamics (or any other linear dynamic model) can always be written in terms of

independent linear combinations of the original variables. This rewriting
can usually be done so that no variable is wholly controlled by either a for'iard

or a backward looking dynamic process, and so that no variable is either wholly

predetermined or completely flexible. Such a rewriting, however, does not alter
the mathematical or economic properties of the model.

6. For analysis of Cagans model under rational expectations, see especially
Sargent and Wallace (l973a and 1973b) .

Also

see Mussa (1975 and 1978)

7. In some cases, it is possible to eliminate the explosive bubble on the
grounds that it is inconsistent with maximizing behavior of individual economic
agents, but this is not possible in all such cases even when the theoretical
model deals explicitly with individual maximizing behavior; see Brock (1974 and
1975), Erock and Scheinkman (1980), Calvo (1979) and Scheinkman (1980) .

In

the

case of the German hyperinflation, the empirical evidence examined by Flood and
Garber (1980) appears to justify exclusion of an explosive bubble from the solution
for the path of the price level.
8.

In a discrete time model, if we allow the length of the period to become

shorter and shorter, the constraint that b must be < 1 can be made consistent with
an arbitrarily speed of adjustment of the price level, in real time, in response

to deviations from purchasing power parity. Thus, there is no important difference

19

between the constraint that needs to be imposed on this adjustment speed in the
discrete and continuous time versions of the model of price and exchange rate
dynamics.

9. This is essentially the same as the solution that Dornbusch uses in his
analysis. As Dornbusch explains, when the price level is below its long run
equilibrium level, the interest rate must be below its long run equilibrium level

in order to maintain momentary equilibrium in the money market. To maintain
interest parity with this low interest rate, there must be the expectation of

a decrease in the exchange rate. For this expectation to be rational, the
current exchange rate must be above its long run equilibrium level by exactly
the right amount, given the speed of convergence of the exchange rate toward its
long run equilibrium level.

10. No sensible economic explanation can be given for why the speed of
convergence of the price level and the exchange rate toward the common value w
should depend on the inverse of the interest semi-elasticity of money demand,

or, even more peculiar, why this speed of convergence should be independent of
the coefficient b in the price adjustment rule.

20

References

Basevi, Giorgio and Caizonari, Michele, 1982, "Multilateral Exchange Rate
Determination," a paper presented at the Bellagio Conferecne on Exchange

Rates: Theory and Practice.
Blanchard, Olivier, 1979, "Backward and Forward Looking Solutions for
Economies with Rational Expectations," American Economic Review, 69, no. 1
(March), 114—118.

Blarichard, Olivjer and Kahn, Charles, 1980, "The Solution of Linear Difference
Equation Models under Rational Expectations," Econometrica, 48, no. 5
(July), 1305—1311.

Blinder, Alan and Fischer, Stanley, 1981, "Inventories, Rational Expectations
and the Business Cycle," Journal of Monetary Economics, 8, no. 3
(November), 277—304.

Brock, William, 1974, "Money and Growth: The Case of Long—Run Perfect
Foresight," International Economic Review, 15, no.

(October), 750—777.

__________ 1975, "A Simple Perfect Foresight Monetary Model," Journal of
Monetary Economics, 1, rio. 2 (April), 133—150.

Brock, William, and Scheinkman, Jose, 1980, "Some Remarks on Monetary Policy
in an Overlapping Generations Model," in John Kareken and Neil Wallace,

eds,, Models of Monetary Economies. Minneapolis, Federal Reserve Bank of
Minneapolis, 211—232.

Buiter, Willem, 1982a, "Saddle Point Problems in Continuous Time Rational

Expectations Models: A General Method and some Macroeconomic Examples,"
NBER Technical Working Paper No. 20. (February).

__________

1982b, "Predetermined and Non-Predetermjnod Variables in Rational

Expectations Models," Economic Letters, 10, 49—54.

21

Buiter, Willein, and

Miller,

J. Marcus, 1981, "Monetary Policy and

International Competitiveness: The Problems of Adjustment," Oxford
Economic Papers, 143—175.

Burmeister, win, 1980, "On Some Conceptual Issues in Rational Expectations
Modeling," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 12, no. 4, Part II
(November), 800—816.

Calvo, Guillermo, 1978, "On the Indeterminacy of Interest Rates and Wages with
Perfect Foresight," Journal of Economic Theory, 19, rio. 2 (December), 321—
327,

__________ 1979, "On Models of Money and Perfect Foresight," International
Economic Review, 20, no. 1 (February), 83—103.

Dixit, Avinash, 1980, "A Solution chnique for Rational Expectations Models
with Applications to Exchange Rate and Interest Rate Determination,"
Discussion Paper, Department of Economics, University of Warwick
(November).

Dornbusch, Rudiger, 1976, "Expectations and Exchange Rate Dynamics," Journal
of Political Economy, 84, rio. 6 (December), 1161—1176.

Flood, Robert and Garber, Peter, 1980, "Market Fundamentals Versus Price Level
Bubbles: The First Tests," Journal of Political Economy, 88, rio. 4
(August), 745—770.

Lipton, David, et. al., 1980, "Multiple Shouting in Rational Expectations
Models," NEER Technical Working Paper No. 3 (August).

Lucas, Robert E., 1975, "An Equilibrium Model of the Business Cycle," Journal
of Political Economy, 83, no. 6 (December), 1113—1144.
McCallum, Bennett) 1983, "On Non—Uniqueness in Rational Expectations Models,"

Journal of Monetary Economics, 11, no. 2 (March), 139-168.

22

Mussa, Michael, 1975, "Adaptive and Regressive Expectations in a Rational
Model of the Inflationary Process," Journal of Monetary Economics, 1, no. 4
(October), 423—442.

__________ 1978, "On the Inherent Stability of Rationally Adaptive
Expectations, Journal of Monetary Economics, 4, no. 3 (July), 307—313.

__________ 1981, "Sticky Prices and Disequilibrium Adjustment in a Rational
Model of the Inflationary Process," American Economic Review, 71, no. 5
(December), 1020—1 027.

__________ 1982, "A Model of cchange Rate Dynamics," Journal of Political
Economy, 90, no. 1 (February), 74—104.
Sargent, Thomas and Wallace, Neil, 1973a, "Rational cpectations and the

Dynamics of Hyperinflation," International Economic Review, 14, no. 2
(June), 328—350.

___________

1973b, "The Stability of Models of tkney and Growth with

Perfect

Foresight," Econometrica, 41, no. 6 (November), 1043—1048.

Scheinkman, Jose, 1980, "Discussion," in John Kareken and Neil Wallace, eds.,

Models of Monetary Economies. Minneapolis: Federal Reserve Bank of
Minneapolis, 91-96.

Taylor, John B., 1977, "Conditions for Unique Solutions in Stochastic
Macroeconomic Models with Rational Expectations," Econometrica, 45, no.
(September), 1377—1385.

__________

1980, "Aggregate Dynamics and Staggered Contracts," Journal of

Political Economy, 88, no. 1 (February), 1—23.

