NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY THROUGH AN ECONOMIC LENS
Forest L. Reinhardt
Robert N. Stavins
Richard H. K. Vietor
Working Paper 13989
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13989

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2008

Reinhardt is the John D. Black Professor of Business Administration at Harvard Business School;
Stavins is the Albert Pratt Professor of Business and Government at the John F. Kennedy School of
Government, Harvard University, University Fellow of Resources for the Future, and Research Associate
of the National Bureau of Economic Research; and Vietor is the Senator John Heinz Professor of Environmental
Management at Harvard Business School. Exceptionally valuable research assistance was provided
by Matthew Ranson, and our research benefited greatly from conversations with William Alford, Max
Bazerman, Robert Clark, Joshua Margolis, and Mark Roe. The authors are grateful to Suzanne Leonard,
Charlie Kolstad, and an anonymous referee for valuable comments on a previous version of the manuscript,
but all remaining errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Forest L. Reinhardt, Robert N. Stavins, and Richard H. K. Vietor. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Corporate Social Responsibility Through an Economic Lens
Forest L. Reinhardt, Robert N. Stavins, and Richard H. K. Vietor
NBER Working Paper No. 13989
May 2008
JEL No. L51,M14,Q50
ABSTRACT
Business leaders, government officials, and academics are focusing considerable attention on the concept
of "corporate social responsibility" (CSR), particularly in the realm of environmental protection. Beyond
complete compliance with environmental regulations, do firms have additional moral or social responsibilities
to commit resources to environmental protection? How should we think about the notion of firms
sacrificing profits in the social interest? May they do so within the scope of their fiduciary responsibilities
to their shareholders? Can they do so on a sustainable basis, or will the forces of a competitive marketplace
render such efforts and their impacts transient at best? Do firms, in fact, frequently or at least sometimes
behave this way, reducing their earnings by voluntarily engaging in environmental stewardship? And
finally, should firms carry out such profit-sacrificing activities (i.e., is this an efficient use of social
resources)? We address these questions through the lens of economics, including insights from legal
analysis and business scholarship.

Forest L. Reinhardt
Harvard Business School
Boston, Massachusetts
freinhardt@hbs.edu
Robert N. Stavins
JFK School of Government
Harvard University
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
robert_stavins@harvard.edu

Richard H. K. Vietor
Harvard Business School
Boston, Massachusetts
rvietor@hbs.edu

CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY
THROUGH AN ECONOMIC LENS
Forest L. Reinhardt
Robert N. Stavins
Richard H. K. Vietor*

1.

Introduction
Business leaders, government officials, and academics are focusing more and more attention

on the concept of “corporate social responsibility” (CSR). The central issue is the appropriate role
of business. Everyone agrees that firms should obey the law. But beyond the law -- beyond full
compliance with environmental regulations -- do firms have additional moral or social
responsibilities to (voluntarily) commit resources to environmental protection?
One of the challenges of examining the concept of CSR is simply identifying a consistent and
sensible definition from among a bewildering range of concepts and definitions that have been
proposed in the literature.1 We adopt a simple definition originally offered by Elhauge (2005):
sacrificing profits in the social interest. This definition has the merit of being consistent with some
of the most useful prior perspectives (Graff Ziven and Small 2005; Portney 2005; Reinhardt 2005),
while focusing the discussion on the most interesting normative and positive questions.
Of course, questions regarding sacrificing profits in the social interest apply beyond the
environmental sphere. The academic debate over the legality of sacrificing profits in the public
*

Reinhardt is the John D. Black Professor of Business Administration at Harvard Business School; Stavins is the Albert
Pratt Professor of Business and Government at the John F. Kennedy School of Government, Harvard University,
University Fellow of Resources for the Future, and Research Associate of the National Bureau of Economic Research;
and Vietor is the Senator John Heinz Professor of Environmental Management at Harvard Business School.
Exceptionally valuable research assistance was provided by Matthew Ranson, and our research benefited greatly from
conversations with William Alford, Max Bazerman, Robert Clark, Joshua Margolis, and Mark Roe. The authors are
grateful to Suzanne Leonard, Charlie Kolstad, and an anonymous referee for valuable comments on a previous version of
the manuscript, but all remaining errors are our own.

1

See reviews by Wood and Jones (1996) and Mohr, Webb, and Harris (2001).

iii

interest appears to have begun in 1932 with opposing articles (Dodd 1932, Berle 1932) in a Harvard
Law Review symposium on “For Whom Are Corporate Managers Trustees?” The debate in
economics began more recently, with Milton Friedman’s 1970 article, “The Social Responsibility of
Business Is to Increase Its Profits,” in the New York Times Magazine. Since then, the debate has
continued, and CSR has received considerable attention from both scholars and the public, especially
in the environmental protection area.
The purpose of this article, which is part of a three-article symposium on Corporate Social
Responsibility and the Environment,2 is to introduce and provide an overview of the major issues
related to CSR, synthesize what is known about CSR in the environmental arena, and thereby
identify where the greatest uncertainties remain. To this end, we address four key questions about
the issue of firms sacrificing profits in the social interest.3 May they do so within the scope of their
fiduciary responsibilities to their shareholders? Can they do so on a sustainable basis, or will the
forces of a competitive marketplace render such efforts and their impacts transient at best? Do
firms, in fact, frequently or at least sometimes behave this way, reducing their earnings by
voluntarily engaging in environmental stewardship? And finally, should firms carry out such profitsacrificing activities? In other words, is this an efficient use of social resources?
This article is organized as follows. We begin by examining legal thinking about whether
firms may sacrifice profits to benefit individuals other than their shareholders, and then look at the
legality of CSR in the United States and other countries. Next, we draw on theories of industrial
organization and management to identify circumstances under which firms can sacrifice profits
without being punished by market forces. We then turn to positive questions about whether firms

2

The other two articles in the symposium, by Lyon and Maxwell (2008) and Portney (2008), discuss CSR from the
theoretical and empirical perspectives, respectively.
3
These four questions were originally identified by Hay, Stavins, and Vietor (2005).

4

actually do engage in CSR. Here we review and synthesize empirical evidence to assess whether
some firms truly exceed full compliance with the law, and if so, whether their “socially responsible”
actions actually sacrifice profits. To address our fourth question, should firms -- from a societal
perspective -- be carrying out such activities, we examine CSR in a normative light and consider
economic arguments on both sides of the issue. The final section summarizes our findings and offers
some conclusions.

2.

May Firms Sacrifice Profits in the Social Interest?
The prevailing view among most economists and business scholars is that corporate directors

have a fiduciary duty to maximize profits for shareholders. While this view underlies many
economic models of firm behavior, its legal basis is actually not very strong. The judicial record,
although supportive of a duty to maximize profits for shareholders, also leaves room for the
possibility that firms may sacrifice profits in the public interest. The courts’ deference towards the
judgment of businesspeople -- the “business judgment rule” -- prevents many public-minded
managerial actions from being legally challenged.
2.1

The Legal Purpose of the Corporation
The most widely accepted position on the legal purpose of the corporation – known as

shareholder primacy (Springer 1999; Fisch 2006; Ehrlich 2005) -- was articulated by Milton
Friedman in 1970:
In a free-enterprise, private-property system, a corporate executive is an employee of
the owners of the business. He has direct responsibility to his employers. That
responsibility is to conduct the business in accordance with their desires, which
generally will be to make as much money as possible while conforming to the basic

5

rules of the society, both those embodied in law and those embodied in ethical
custom (Friedman 1970).
A more subtle version of the shareholder primacy argument is the “nexus of contracts”
approach (Jensen and Meckling 1976; Easterbrook and Fischel 1991), which views the corporation
as a nexus of legal contracts between the suppliers of various factors of production, who agree to
cooperate in order to generate monetary returns. These agreements specify that in exchange for their
contributions, the owners of most factors of production -- labor, land, intellectual property rights,
etc. -- will receive set payments with little risk. Shareholders -- the suppliers of capital -- accept the
residual financial risk of doing business, and in return receive the residual profits.

Since

shareholders have no contractual guarantee of a fixed payment from the firm’s activities, any profits
that are diverted towards other activities, such as pursuit of “the social good,” come directly out of
their pockets (Butler and McChesney 1999). Thus, from this perspective, CSR is close to theft.
A second view of the role of the corporation is found in the team-production model (Blair
and Stout 1999), which views the corporation as the solution to the moral hazard problem that arises
when the owners of factors of production must make firm-specific investments but fear they will not
be rewarded ex post. To solve this problem, the board of directors of the corporation functions as a
neutral “mediating hierarch” that allocates residual profits to all of the factors of production (team
members) according to their relative contributions.4 Under the team-production model, sacrificing
profits in the social interest is legal, as long as the profits are allocated to a deserving factor of
production.
A third view of the purpose of the corporation is the “operational discretion” model, which
holds that the law grants corporate managers discretion to comply with social and moral norms, even

4

For example, many U.S. states have enacted statutes that permit corporate directors to consider the interests of
stakeholders other than shareholders.

6

if doing so reduces shareholder profits (Elhauge 2005). The judiciary’s unwillingness to secondguess matters of business judgment has the practical effect of shielding managers who choose to
sacrifice profits in the public interest.
A fourth and final position is the “progressive view” that the corporation is organized for the
benefit of society at large, or at the very least, corporate directors have fiduciary responsibilities that
extend to a wide variety of stakeholders (Sheehy 2005; Gabaldon 2006). Under this view,
sacrificing profits in the public interest is entirely legal. The progressive view, however, is not wellrooted in either statutes or case law (Clark 1986).
2.2

The Legality of CSR in the United States
In the United States, a variety of legal requirements define the responsibilities of the

corporation (and its board of directors) to shareholders and other stakeholders. However, as
discussed below, these requirements are limited in practice.
2.2.1

Corporate Responsibilities to Shareholders and Other Stakeholders
Although corporations in the United States are granted the “legal fiction of separate

corporate personality,” a corporation’s decisions are made by its board of directors, or by executives
who have been delegated decision-making authority (Clark 1986). To ensure that directors and
managers do not act negligently or subvert corporate resources for their own benefit, the legal
system imposes fiduciary duties of care and loyalty.
The duty of loyalty requires directors to act “in good faith and in the best interests of the
corporation” (Scalise 2005), and places limitations on the motives, purposes, and goals that can
legitimately influence directors’ decisions (Cox and Hazen 2003). The duty of care complements the
duty of loyalty by requiring managers to “exercise that degree of skill, diligence, and care that a
reasonably prudent person would exercise in similar circumstances” (Clark 1986, p.123). Violation
of fiduciary duties can result in personal liability for directors (Scalise 2005). Legal formulations of
7

fiduciary duties typically refer to the “best interests of the corporation”, but whether the
corporation’s “best interests” include only its shareholders or a wider set of constituents is not
immediately clear (Cox and Hazen 2003). The prevailing opinion is that fiduciary duties are owed
to shareholders (Blomquist 2006), but a minority supports the view that corporations can be
managed in part for the benefit of other stakeholders (Lee 2005).
Every U.S. state recognizes the right of businesses to make charitable contributions. Seven
states allow charitable donations regardless of corporate benefit, and nineteen other states allow
donations that benefit the business or advance the public welfare (Choper, Coffee, and Gilson 2004).
Statutes in the remaining 24 states (including Delaware) include similar language, but without legal
clarification about whether donations are permitted when they do not benefit the firm (Donohue
2005).5
State corporate statutes grant corporations legal powers similar to those of people, and allow
corporations to participate in lawful activities (Clark 1986). As a result, corporations presumably
have the power (but not necessarily the right) to undertake CSR activities (Donohue 2005).
Corporations can write their own corporate charters to explicitly authorize themselves to participate
in CSR. For example, the New York Times is incorporated to pursue objectives other than profit
maximization (Donohue 2005).
These statutory requirements and judicial precedents place limits on the actions of
corporations and their boards. But an important judicial construct -- the business judgment rule -creates substantial deference to firms’ managerial decisions.

5

In addition, 29 states have statutes that allow managers to consider the interests of non-shareholders such as employees,
customers, suppliers, creditors, and society at large (Springer 1999).

8

2.2.2

The Business Judgment Rule
The business judgment rule “acts as a presumption in favor of corporate managers’ actions”

(Branson 2002). It requires courts to defer to the judgment of corporate managers, as long as their
decisions satisfy certain basic requirements related to negligence and conflict of interest. The basic
premise is that since corporate managers are far more skilled at making business judgments than
courts, allowing courts to second-guess managers’ decisions would create potentially large
transactions costs (Elhauge 2005).
The business judgment rule makes fiduciary duties difficult to enforce, and it effectively
grants managers discretion to “temper business decision making with their perceptions of social
values” (Clark 1986; Fisch 2006; Scalise 2005; Blair and Stout 1999).6 As a practical matter, as
long as managers can plausibly claim that their actions are in the long run interests of the firm, it is
almost impossible for shareholders to challenge the actions of managers who act in the public
interest.
The business judgment rule also offers managers protection from accusations of conflict of
interest, primarily because it does not recognize most non-financial incentives as conflicts (Elhauge
2005; Branson 2002). Corporate managers’ decisions can be regarded as irrational -- and thus not
protected by the business judgment rule -- only if they “go so far beyond the bounds of reasonable
business judgment that their only explanation is bad faith” (Blomquist 2006, p.699). Donohue
(2005) cites the extreme example of a Delaware court that ruled that the business judgment rule
protected the 1989 decision by Occidental Petroleum to spend $120 million, slightly less than half of

6

For example, Clark cites the 1968 case of Shlensky v. Wrigley, in which the Illinois Court of Appeals allowed William
Wrigley, Jr., the president and majority shareholder of the Chicago Cubs, to refuse to install lights at Wrigley Field
because of his belief that night games would be bad for the surrounding neighborhood (1986).

9

the company’s yearly net profit, on an art museum named after its 91 year old CEO, Armand
Hammer.
So, are firms in the United States prohibited from sacrificing profits in the public interest?
And if so, is the prohibition enforceable? The answers to these two questions appear to be “maybe”
and “no,” respectively. “While case law falls short of unequivocally mandating shareholder wealth
maximization, it also falls short of unambiguously authorizing the pursuit of non-shareholder
interests other than instrumentally for the benefit of the shareholders” (Lee 2006, p. 557). And as
long as managers claim some plausible connection to future profitability, the business judgment rule
grants them substantial leeway to commit corporate resources to projects that benefit the public.
2.3

The Legality of CSR in Other Countries
With their cultural traditions of social democracy or firm loyalty to employees, most

European countries and Japan have legal systems that differ from the system in the United States.
The legal systems in these other countries place a greater emphasis on stakeholder participation, and
sometimes codify this by legalizing various forms of profit-sacrificing behavior. Europeans have
sought to incorporate CSR into their investment climate, both at the institutional and individual level
(Sutton 2004), and in strong social democracies, such as Germany and France, stakeholders
(particularly employees) have much stronger legal positions than in the U.S. (Roe 2000).
Corporations in Europe and Asia are also more likely to have a few large shareholders, who may
take social responsibilities seriously, particularly those towards employees (Roe 2000). This
contrasts with the pattern of highly dispersed share ownership in the United States.
2.3.1

Industrialized Countries
Common law industrialized countries, primarily former British possessions, share many legal

features with the United States. Corporations in these countries have similar board structures, face
similar legal requirements, and even share some legal precedents. In such countries, CSR is
10

discouraged, but permitted. Under Australian corporate law, for example, corporate managers are
required to make decisions in the best interest of the corporation, while a statutory business
judgment rule grants managers considerable discretion (Corfield 1998). Likewise, Canadian law
requires that directors and officers of corporations act in the best interests of the corporation, but the
director is not permitted to ignore the collective interests of shareholders (Borok 2003). The United
Kingdom’s legal system permits corporate managers to engage in socially beneficial activities, as
long as there is a plausible rationale that the activities are in shareholders’ interests (Lynch-Fannon
2007).
In contrast with common law jurisdictions, countries with civil law systems tend to place a
greater emphasis on stakeholder participation in corporate governance. Corporate boards often
include employee representatives, and cultural traditions emphasize loyalty to employees. In these
countries, more forms of CSR are permissible. In France, corporate directors have both a duty of
care and a duty of loyalty (Fanto 1998). Although there has been a shift towards more investor
friendly laws, the French legal code explicitly allows directors to make decisions based on the
interests of all constituencies. German law does not even give management an explicit obligation to
maximize shareholder value (Marinov and Heiman, 1998), and large German corporations have a
two-tiered board structure that encourages the board to consider the interests of parties other than
shareholders (Corfield 1998).
Japanese corporate law is similar to corporate law in the United States, in that directors have
duties of care and loyalty, which, if violated, can be grounds for shareholder lawsuit. But Japanese
corporations have a strong tradition of CSR oriented towards their employees. In years with high
profits, large corporations usually retain their earnings and reinvest them for the benefit of
employees (Miwa 1999). The shares of many firms are owned by banks who handle firms’ credit or
by important business partners (Corfield 1998). These shareholder-creditors have financial goals
11

that are similar to those of long-term employees, particularly in terms of corporate stability and
minimizing risk (Roe 2000).
2.3.2

Developing Countries and Multinational Enterprises
Corporate law in developing countries has a number of special characteristics. First, the

corporate legal system is often new. As a result, businesses have little experience complying with
the law, and there are fewer judicial precedents mapping out the law’s boundaries. Second, legal
institutions in developing countries are often weak. Regulations can go unenforced; agency
problems can be a serious issue; and members of the judiciary may be corrupt. Third, the operations
of multinational corporations in these countries can lead to conflicts between the interests of home
and host states.
Thus, both the laws governing CSR and the degree to which those laws are enforced may
vary substantially across developing countries. Assuming that the laws in most developing countries
allow some scope for managerial activity that may sacrifice profits, the question remains whether
firms can do so in view of competitive pressures in the markets for their outputs and inputs. It is to
this question that we now turn.

3.

Can Firms Sacrifice Profits in the Social Interest?
Simply because the legal system may allow firms to sacrifice profits in the social interest

does not mean that firms can do so on a sustainable basis in the face of competitive pressures.
Under what conditions is it economically feasible for firms to sacrifice profits in the social interest?
Before turning to this question, we address a somewhat broader question: under what conditions
might it be sustainable for firms to produce goods and services, such as public goods, that benefit
individuals other than their customers (Lyon and Maxwell 2004; Vogel 2006)?

12

We identify six conditions that would facilitate the production of such goods and services.
All six of these conditions involve government intervention, imperfect competition, or both. First is
the imposition of regulatory constraints that require a firm as well as its competitors to carry out
some socially beneficial actions. Second is the possibility that such production is not costly to the
firm. For example, restaurants frequently donate leftover food to homeless shelters. The third
condition is that the socially beneficial actions may reduce a firm’s business expenses by an amount
greater than the cost of the actions themselves. For example, installation of energy-saving (climate
friendly) technologies may generate long-term cost savings that outweigh upfront costs. Fourth, in
some cases socially beneficial actions may yield an increase in revenue. It is easy to think of goods
and services that are differentiated along environmental lines, such as clothing made of organic
cotton, or wood from forests managed in accordance with some principles of sustainability.
Socially beneficial actions could also generate goodwill, improving reputation and sales. Fifth, firms
may choose to go beyond full compliance with environment, health, or safety laws in order to
improve their position in current or future regulatory negotiations. By doing so, they may be able to
deflect or influence future regulation or deflect enforcement of existing regulation. Sixth, some
firms may use over-compliance to spur future regulation, which would provide a competitive
advantage over less adaptable firms
We now turn to our more restrictive definition of CSR and address the question raised above:
under what conditions is it economically feasible for firms to sacrifice profits in the social interest?
3.1

When Is it Feasible for Firms to Engage in Profit-Sacrificing CSR?
In some cases firms undertake CSR actions voluntarily, while in others they engage in CSR

only under pressure from market participants or other social forces. In practice, it is difficult to
discern voluntary from “reluctant” CSR. Whether CSR initiatives are voluntary or reluctant, their

13

economic sustainability depends on the market pressures and social expectations confronted by the
firm (Borck, Coglianese, and Nash 2006).
3.1.1

Voluntary CSR
The first possibility -- that stakeholders voluntarily sacrifice profits -- is what some observers

would think of as the “purest form” of CSR. The primary economic agents who could fund such
activities are shareholders and employees.
Some shareholders may be willing to subsidize firms’ profit sacrificing behavior. Stock
issued by socially responsible firms is a composite commodity which combines a financial
investment product with a charitable giving vehicle (Graff Zivin and Small 2005). When investors
purchase the stock, they may be motivated by self-interest or by altruistic motives. As long as
investors are willing to fund CSR activities, firms can participate in them. But whether investors are
willing to accept lower returns may depend on whether the firm already enjoys an economic position
that allows it to obtain rents, such as through natural monopolies, niche markets, imperfect
information, regulatory distortions, anti-takeover laws, and other market imperfections.5 In this
case, investors sacrificing profit may still earn returns above the market norm.
Willingness to accept below market returns may depend on whether investors hold stakes in
publicly- or privately-held companies. Investors with large private holdings are more likely to take
an interest in their companies’ activities and be able to influence the companies’ actions. Whether
this additional interest and influence would have a positive or negative influence on CSR is an open
question.

5

Firms have strong economic incentives to take advantage of any market power available to them. If a firm maintains
market power, it can -- in principle -- pass on the costs of CSR to its suppliers and/or customers. For example, regulated
public utilities, which are granted geographic monopolies on specific conditions such as provision of universal service,
may decide to engage in CSR activities and use the firm’s monopoly power to pass resulting costs on to consumers.

14

Evidence suggests that some individuals are willing to pay more for socially responsible
goods (Jensen et al. 2002). The existence of such “ethical investors” could -- in principle -- have
consequences for firms that do not participate in CSR activities (Heinkel, Kraus, and Zechner 2001).
For example, if ethical investors’ choices increase the cost of capital for “irresponsible” firms, some
of these firms might be forced to adopt more socially responsible practices. If the share price
differential becomes sufficiently large, these firms may decide to participate in CSR activities to
increase their own stock price (Heinkel, Kraus, and Zechner 2001; Graff Zivin, and Small 2005).
But the effect of green investors on the cost of capital may be small. Because irresponsible firms
will generate higher returns (relative to their stock price), investors in these firms will accumulate
capital more quickly than socially responsible investors, and over time may dominate the capital
market. This would lead to a decrease in the cost of capital for irresponsible businesses (Heinkel,
Kraus, and Zechner 2001).
Employees may sacrifice part of the returns to labor to further the social good. This could
occur explicitly if employees are given the opportunity to use their own salary and benefits to fund
CSR projects. For example, some executives may be able to channel part of their compensation
towards the cost of CSR activities, or lawyers may be able to donate their time to pro bono work.
Employees may also fund CSR implicitly, such as when a firm works in a field that employees
perceive as socially responsible (e.g., providing services to the elderly, remediating oil spills).
Employees may be willing to accept less than the fair market value of their labor (as determined by
the wage they would receive for working in a less-socially responsible industry), because they are
compensated in other ways through the knowledge that their work benefits society at large (Frank
1996).
Unfortunately, empirical evidence on CSR and wages is inconclusive. Most revealed
preference studies show that wages are lower at non-profit firms than at for-profit firms, but this
15

non-profit wage penalty disappears in econometric analyses that control for worker and firm-specific
characteristics (Francois 2004). If non-profit status is a proxy for social responsibility, then socially
responsible firms may not enjoy a significant discount on labor prices. This conclusion is supported
by findings that CEO compensation at firms listed in the Domini Social Index (DS 400) is not
significantly different from CEO compensation at other firms in similar industries (Frye, Nelling,
and Webb 2006).
3.1.2

Reluctant CSR
Corporate decisions are actually made by individual managers and directors, not by the

“firm” per se. Those decisions often further the interests of profit-minded shareholders, but not
always. Investors may have little choice but to accept some degree of CSR profit-sacrificing
activities. It may be less costly to accept a degree of principal-agent “slack” than to eliminate it
completely, because managers who are excessively constrained may be ineffectual.
Investors may also be forced to accept profit-sacrificing activities that are the result of
external constraints.

This may be particularly relevant in the developing world, where

environmental regulatory standards lag behind those of industrialized countries. For example,
equipment purchased from industrialized countries may incorporate pollution control technology
that meets standards considerably stricter than those in effect in a developing country (Jaffe,
Peterson, Portney, and Stavins 1995).
The magnitude of the profits that managers can sacrifice against investors’ wishes depends
on the structure of managers’ compensation and the strength of shareholder oversight.
Principal/agent problems can be costly. Managers have been observed to “satisfice” profits, that is,
seek to achieve an adequate rate of return for shareholders and then divert the firms’ resources to
their personal ends (Choper, Coffee, and Gilson 2004; Clotfelter 1985).

16

3.1.3

Unsustainable CSR
Under many conditions, firms that participate in costly CSR activities will have to raise

prices, reduce wages and other costs, accept smaller profits, or pay smaller dividends -- and accept
the economic consequences. For example, a firm’s stock price may decline until it is proportional to
returns, and attracting new capital may be difficult because returns are below market averages.
Other short-term economic consequences may include loss of market share, increased insurance
costs, increased borrowing costs, and loss of reputation. In the long term, the firm may face
shareholder litigation, corporate takeover, or closure. Such consequences simply illustrate the
general proposition and observation that (financially) inefficient firms tend to disappear (Alchian
1950; Altman 1999).
This process of economic survival of the fittest suggests that firms that engage in
unsustainable CSR may find themselves being pushed out of business. The forces of globalization
only increase this pressure. Given the seemingly inevitable outcome of this process, why would any
firm choose to participate in unsustainable CSR activities? First, principal/agent problems may lead
managers to make decisions that commit the firm to short-term CSR actions, even if those activities
will not be continued in the long run. Second, managers may misjudge the potential profitability of
certain actions, leading them to invest in actions that benefit society but harm the firm’s bottom line.
Neither the managers’ probability assessments nor their motivations are transparent to outside
observers, making it very difficult to distinguish between them (Baron 2006).
3.2

Economic, Structural, and Organizational Constraints
A variety of factors influence the economic actors who make decisions about engaging in

CSR activities. These factors include managerial incentive and monitoring constraints, and
organizational structure and culture.

17

Whether or not firms are able and likely to engage in CSR depends on managers’ incentives
and constraints, which in turn are determined by managers’ preferences, ethical beliefs, contracts,
and goals. The most direct incentives managers face are their employment agreements. For
managers whose compensation is designed to align their incentives with those of shareholders,
sacrificing profits means reducing their own compensation. In the United States, chief executive
officers (CEOs) are usually paid in a mixture of stocks, stock options, and salary, with their
compensation linked to explicit measures of the firm’s performance (Prendergast 1999). But the
relationship between compensation and firm performance may be close to flat at some levels of firm
performance, which means CEOs may be able to trade off compensation against CSR activities at a
rate they judge acceptable.
Organizational culture may also be significant (Howard-Grenville, Nash, and Coglianese
2006). Organizational identity influences how individuals within the firm view the purpose of the
firm, what it stands for, and its future goals. Organizational self-monitoring affects how an
organization interacts with outside stakeholders. Firms that are more self-conscious about their
image may expend greater effort to communicate and interact in “socially appropriate” ways than
other firms, even if their core values related to socially beneficial behavior are similar.
Other factors may also affect whether firms can sacrifice profits in the social interest. For
example, firm size appears to matter, with evidence that larger firms can sacrifice proportionately
more profits (Adams and Hardwick 1998). Further, public visibility may increase pressure on firms
to participate in CSR activities: firms in notoriously “dirty” industries may find themselves under
heavy pressure from public advocacy groups to reduce their emissions or to participate in offsetting
activities (Brown et al. 2006). Finally, firms cannot participate in CSR if their work provides no
scope for it. CSR activities are simply much more plausible for firms in certain industries (Porter
and Kramer 2006).
18

4.

Do Firms Sacrifice Profits in the Social Interest?
As described above, there are specific circumstances in which firms can sacrifice profits in

the social interest without suffering serious adverse economic consequences. Whether they actually
do so is another matter. This section discusses empirical evidence about the existence of such profitsacrificing behavior.
Before interpreting the evidence, it is important to be aware of several challenges to making
inferences about CSR. First, it is difficult to test whether firms’ actions actually go beyond ordinary
compliance with environmental regulations. Data on environmental performance are typically very
limited, and because of the difficulty of observing appropriate counterfactuals, it is difficult to
demonstrate that firms sacrifice profits. Whole industries often engage in CSR together, leaving
behind no comparison group. Even when firms act individually, it is difficult to know whether
unobservable characteristics explain differences in both socially responsible activity and
profitability. Studies that link profitability to CSR practices are particularly vulnerable to this
problem. For example, because many high-technology companies have low pollutant emissions (in
contrast with firms engaged in electricity generation, heavy manufacturing, or resource extraction),
the high-tech boom in the 1990s created a perceived but spurious correlation between market
measures of “socially responsible business practices” and stock returns. Furthermore, as discussed
above, there are a variety of ways in which firms can profit from investments in socially beneficial
projects. Many actions also have effects on profitability that differ in the short versus the long term,
with a short-term decrease in profits followed by a more-than-compensatory increase in long-term
profits. Thus, demonstrating that an action has truly sacrificed profits in the social interest is
exceptionally difficult.

19

Of course, distinguishing between motivations and outcomes is even more difficult.
Although most firms are likely motivated by a combination of social and financial concerns,
managers may cite social responsibility as the motive for actions that were actually driven by
profitability. Or managers may use profitability to justify socially responsible business choices,
even when those choices result in smaller profits (Baron 2006).
4.1

Do Firms Over Comply?

A first step in evaluating whether firms participate in CSR is to determine whether they over
comply with regulations or participate in other costly activities that benefit society. We consider
five sources of evidence: voluntary government programs, voluntary industry initiatives, voluntary
action by individual firms, corporate charitable donations, and shareholder resolutions.
4.1.1

Voluntary Government Programs
In principle, the willingness of a firm to participate in a voluntary government program could

be evidence of CSR activity. A variety of studies have evaluated the determinants of participation in
voluntary government programs (Borck, Coglianese, and Nash 2006). Several patterns emerge.
First, larger firms are more likely to participate in voluntary programs. Second, participation is more
likely for firms that either produce final goods or experience more pressure from NGOs and
consumers. Third, firms with higher emissions or poor compliance records are more likely to
participate in voluntary programs. And fourth, participation may be positively influenced by factors
such as industry association membership, R&D expenditures, organizational culture, and managerial
discretion. However, there is no consensus that voluntary government programs have generated
environmental benefits net of the opportunity cost of the resources required to implement them.
4.1.2

Voluntary Industry Initiatives
In addition to voluntary programs administered by governments, industry associations have

created voluntary initiatives. For example, the Responsible Care program, established in 1989 by
20

the U.S. Chemical Manufacturers Association, requires participating facilities to adopt ten guiding
principles and six codes of management practices related to the environmental and social dimensions
of community interactions, facility management, and customer and supplier interactions. By and
large, the program was ineffective because it did not provide strong incentives for compliance (King
and Lenox 2000). Similarly, the Institute of Nuclear Power Operations (INPO) was created in the
wake of the 1979 reactor meltdown at Three Mile Island, a nuclear power plant in Harrisburg,
Pennsylvania. A third example is Sustainable Slopes, a voluntary program for reporting and
encouraging improved environmental performance at ski resorts. The evidence indicates that firms
took advantage of positive publicity, although the actual environmental benefits are debatable
(Rivera and de Leon 2004).
In general, industry-sponsored programs exhibit the same kinds of participation patterns as
government-administered voluntary programs. That is, larger firms, more prominent firms, and
firms with poorer environmental records are more likely to participate. Again, there is no systematic
evidence of positive environmental impacts net of social costs.
4.1.3

Voluntary Action by Individual Firms
An indicator of firm participation in independently developed CSR activities is whether firms

adopt CSR plans, environmental management systems, or other plans that seek to encourage
socially-beneficial decision making within the firm. These plans often have the nominal goal of
taking a holistic management approach towards compliance with environmental and safety laws,
contractual and voluntary environmental obligations, management of environmental and social
impacts and risk, and other issues (Clark 2005). These systems may benefit firms by allowing them
to manage the business aspects of environmental and social issues, but they may also serve as a
mechanism for firms to improve environmental quality or otherwise benefit society.

21

One such mechanism is ISO 14001, an international standard that provides guidelines for
monitoring environmental outputs, controlling environmental processes, and improving
environmental performance (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 2006). To demonstrate that its
environmental management system complies with the standard, a business (or any other
organization) must be audited by a third-party auditor. Capital intensity, intensity of competition,
and dependence on overseas markets are all positively associated with voluntary compliance with
the standard (Chapple et al. 2001).
The best source of evidence about whether firms participate in CSR activities on their own
initiative is independent studies of socially responsible actions. Perhaps surprisingly, many studies
of individual beyond-compliance behavior analyze firms in developing countries (Hartman, Huq,
and Wheeler 1995; Hettige et al. 1996; Pargal and Wheeler 1996; Blackman and Bannister 1998;
and Dasgupta, Hettige, and Wheeler 2000). One possible reason for this focus is that firms in
industrialized countries are subject to a wide range of environmental regulations that make it
difficult to judge whether their actions are legally required, risk-averting, or voluntarily beyond
compliance. In contrast, in the developing world, pollution regulations may be poorly enforced or
even nonexistent, making it easier to identify individual beyond-compliance behavior.
4.1.4

Corporate Charitable Contributions
Evidence of corporations making financial contributions to charity supports the general

hypothesis that corporations can and do commit corporate resources to CSR. Average contributions
as a percent of net income before taxes increased, from less than 0.5 percent in the 1930s to 1.1
percent in the 1960s and 1970s (Harris and Klepper 1976). In general, CEOs and other high-level
corporate officers have a high degree of control over the amount and destination of corporate
charitable contributions, even if their company has established a separate charitable foundation
(Kahn 1997). But charitable giving can be curtailed by debtholders (Brown et al. 2006; Adams and
22

Hardwick 1998). Overall, the evidence shows that charitable giving is more likely when financial
and monitoring constraints are weak. Corporate charitable giving is also sensitive to firm income
and marginal tax rates (Clotfelter 1985).
4.1.5

Shareholder Resolutions
Shareholders sometimes request that corporations comply with ethical or other requirements.

In 2005, the shareholders of public U.S. corporations proposed 348 resolutions on social and
environmental issues, of which 177 reached a proxy vote (Social Investment Forum 2006). On
average, these resolutions have received support from 10 to 12 percent of all votes cast. Of the 25
social policy resolutions in the U.S. that gained the highest percentage of votes during the years
2003 to 2005, only six gained a majority of all votes cast. But winning even a modest share of votes
in a shareholder resolution can influence management policies.
4.2

Is There Evidence of Profit-Sacrificing Behavior?
According to our strict definition of CSR, beyond-compliance behavior is a necessary but not

sufficient condition for CSR because, under some conditions, such behavior can be profitable. One
way to measure the profit sacrificed by socially responsible companies would be to calculate the
difference in profitability between firms that do and do not participate in socially responsible
activities. In fact, a large literature, consisting of at least seventeen review articles, has explored this
relationship.8
The most recent and comprehensive review is by Margolis, Elfenbein, and Walsh (2007). In
a meta-analysis of the results from 167 studies of the relationship between financial performance and
socially responsible business practices (ignoring the mechanism and direction of causality), they
find that 27 percent of the analyses show a positive relationship, 58 percent show a non-significant
8

See, for example, Aupperle, Carroll, and Hatfield 1985; Wood and Jones 1996; Griffin and Mahon 1997; Orlitzky,
Schmidt, and Rynes 2003.

23

relationship, and 2 percent show a negative relationship.6 Margolis, Elfenbein, and Walsh argue that
the evidence indicates that CSR, in general, has little effect on profitability, but note that there is
stronger evidence to suggest that some causality does operate in the opposite direction: companies
that are profitable are more likely to engage in more CSR activities.
The finding that there is little relationship between CSR and profitability is consistent with a
market equilibrium in which firms invest in socially responsible projects until the marginal returns
decline to the overall market rate of return. In this situation, investing in CSR is not profitable (in
the sense that it does not generate economic rents), but neither is it a losing proposition. Instead it
means that for most firms, CSR “pays for itself.”
These conclusions require a number of caveats. First, when evaluating studies of the
relationship between social responsibility and stock returns, it is important to keep in mind that not
all companies that are classified as socially responsible actually sacrifice profits. Many operate in
industries, such as software development, that by their very nature have little environmental or social
impact. Second, many of the measures of CSR used in such studies are not consistent with CSR as
we define it in this article. Thus, measured effects on profitability may have more to do with
advertising, charitable contributions, or other tangentially relevant factors than with CSR.
In summary, evidence on sacrificing profits in the social interest is lacking. The bulk of the
available evidence suggests that most firms view socially responsible actions in the same way that
they view more traditional business activities, such as advertising and R&D. Instead of altruistically
sacrificing profits, they engage in a more limited -- but more profitable -- set of socially beneficial
activities that contributes to their financial goals. Hence, although proponents of sustainable
business practices may argue that being environmentally responsible will inevitably lead to higher
profits in the long term, the relationship between socially responsible activities and profitability may
6

Thirteen percent did not report a sample size that could be used to test significance.

24

be best characterized as some firms will generate long-term profits from some socially responsible
activities some of the time (Reinhardt 2000).

5.

Should Firms Sacrifice Profits in the Social Interest?
Even if firms may, can, and do sacrifice profits in the social interest, an important normative

question remains, namely, should they? In other words, is it really in the broadly defined social
interest for firms to carry out such activity? There are two main approaches to answering this
question. First, we can compare firms’ actual CSR choices with the CSR alternatives available to
them. For any firm, such alternatives include a broad range of projects addressing various private
and public issues, costing different amounts, and resulting in varying degrees of environmental
protection and profitability. For example, a power plant could reduce its emissions of carbon
dioxide, sulfur dioxide, or particulate matter; switch to a renewable source of fuel; implement a job
training program to benefit local community members; make a donation to a charitable organization;
or take any number of other “socially responsible” actions. The question of interest here is whether
firms’ actual CSR choices are likely to be optimal relative to available alternatives.
A second approach takes a public policy perspective, where a comparison is made between
allowing CSR (i.e., permitting firms to sacrifice profits in the social interest) and prohibiting CSR
(i.e., requiring firms exclusively to maximize profits for shareholders). To evaluate these two
approaches, we employ a variety of criteria, including social welfare and legal, political and social
considerations.
5.1

Social Welfare
In the context of CSR, the social welfare criterion suggests that: (1) firms should invest in

projects that produce the highest level of social welfare; and (2) it is preferable to allow CSR if
aggregate welfare is likely to be higher when CSR is allowed than when it is prohibited.

25

The benefits of CSR include direct welfare gains to individuals, such as asthmatics living
near a power plant that voluntarily reduces its emissions. More broadly, if firms voluntarily
internalize externalities, a more efficient allocation of resources may result. Of course, there is no
reason, ex ante, to anticipate that firms will reduce externality-producing activities to efficient levels.
The direct costs of CSR are the loss of consumer surplus resulting from firms producing less
output at higher cost and hence at higher prices. In addition, shareholders receive reduced financial
returns. On the other hand, some shareholders may gain utility from the knowledge that their profits
have been invested in socially responsible projects.
There are a number of reasons to believe that firms do not make socially optimal CSR
investments, in the sense of choosing activities that generate the greatest net social benefits, subject
to budgetary constraints. This is because firms’ CSR decisions are influenced by a number of
factors that are unrelated to social benefits and costs.
First, firms’ CSR investment choices are influenced by managers’ personal preferences and
by firm characteristics. For example, some managers may favor building art museums, while others
favor the provision of affordable housing. This idiosyncratic element of personal preference is
particularly likely if principal/agent issues drive CSR (Butler and McChesney 1999). Similarly,
firms’ choices about CSR activities are affected by the nature of their industry, firm size, technical
capabilities, and relevant expertise, geographic location, and existing regulatory limits. To the
extent that these factors are unrelated to the social benefits and costs of CSR, their influence on firm
decisions about CSR may result in social inefficiency.
Second, although firms may be well informed about the private costs of CSR, they may have
little experience evaluating its social benefits, leading them to choose inefficient levels of
environmental protection effort. Third, firms may fail to consider alternative mechanisms to achieve
26

their social goals. For example, firms may be able to achieve higher social returns by donating
profits to charities, which are dedicated exclusively to the task of improving social welfare and thus
presumably are well-suited to the task. If this is the case, then firms that fund CSR activities
effectively “crowd out” their own donations to more efficient charities (Graff Zivin and Small 2005).
Finally, choice of CSR activity is affected by the firm’s ability to sacrifice profits. Firms that are the
most profitable are also the most able to sacrifice profits in the public interest. However, the
opportunity cost of sacrificing profits may also be greatest for these firms, assuming they could
otherwise invest the resources in their businesses and earn similarly high returns.
Although there are reasons to doubt the optimality of firms’ decisions about CSR, there are
also reasons to believe that firms’ CSR investment decisions may increase welfare. First, firms have
access to private information about their current and future pollution activities, including control
costs. Such information can lead firms to identify better policies than less well-informed government
agencies. Second, firms have relevant expertise and operational capacity. Third, government
policies are driven by a variety of objectives, only one of which may be maximizing social welfare.
Hence, compared with the counterfactual of prohibiting CSR but leaving government policy
otherwise unchanged, allowing CSR may generate higher net social benefits.
Many types of potential CSR activities -- from reducing particulate emissions to preserving
open space -- are mandated to some degree by federal, state, or local laws and regulations. To the
extent that such regulations require a level of environmental protection that is below the socially
optimal level, additional corporate investment in these activities can increase social welfare (if
incremental social benefits exceed incremental social costs). In addition, there may be socially
responsible activities that address environmental issues that are unregulated but of significant
scientific or political concern (e.g., global climate change). In such cases (i.e., in the absence of
government policies), CSR activities may lead to positive net social benefits. However, given that it
27

appears to be relatively rare for firms to actually sacrifice profits in the social interest, the overall net
welfare flow from CSR, whether positive or negative, is unlikely to be large.
5.2

Legal, Political, and Social Considerations
Although legality is not synonymous with social desirability (as evidenced by the legality of

many socially undesirable activities), some observers would surely identify legality as a normative
criterion by which to judge many actions. In the second section, we argued that in the United States
and other common law countries, sacrificing profits in the social interest is not strictly legal,
although in practice CSR is not prohibited because of the business judgment rule and problems of
enforcement.
One argument that can be made against CSR is that it is not a democratic process. There is
no particular reason to believe that society should prefer firms’ choices and priorities over the
choices and priorities of a democratic government. Some observers might also argue that
corporations already dominate too many aspects of modern life, and that it would be undesirable for
them to control the supply of public goods as well.
Under a broader interpretation of the idea of social responsibility, however, it can be argued
that businesses have a moral commitment to hold themselves to higher ethical standards and to
engage in activities that benefit society. In fact, in a poll of citizens’ attitudes towards the
responsibility of businesses in 23 developed and developing countries, public opinion seems to
support the notion that corporations in the West should “set higher ethical standards and help build a
better society.” In countries such as China and Kazakhstan, however, the notion that corporations
should “make profits, pay taxes, create jobs, and obey all laws” dominates (Environics International
Ltd. 1999).

28

5.3

The Special Case of Developing Countries
Given that economic, social, and environmental conditions in developing countries are so

different from those in industrialized countries, one would expect the answers to normative
questions about CSR to also be different. For example, environmental regulations in the developing
world are often not well-enforced. Hence, many relatively cost-effective interventions that have
already been implemented in industrialized countries may still be available to businesses that operate
in the developing world. This suggests that CSR could lead to significant gains in net social welfare.
Other concerns about CSR arise in the developing country context. Precisely because legal
and contractual systems often operate poorly in developing countries, it is important to prevent
activities that could erode the basis for future economic growth. Thus, strong investor protections
may be particularly desirable in developing economies (Marinov and Heiman 1998) to help buttress
the political viability of privatization and market-based systems. Allowing managers to divert
profits to socially responsible projects means giving managers substantial discretion. However,
there is also the risk that this discretion could tempt managers to use corporate resources for personal
gain.

6.

Summary and Conclusions
This article has examined the concept of firms sacrificing profits in the social interest in the

environmental realm. This section summarizes our answers to the four questions posed at the outset:
May they do so within the scope of their fiduciary responsibilities to their shareholders? Can they
do so on a sustainable basis? Do firms behave this way? And, finally, should firms carry out such
profit-sacrificing activities?
Our starting point for examining the first question -- may they -- was the prevailing view
among economists and business scholars that corporate directors have a fiduciary duty to maximize

29

profits for shareholders. Surprisingly, the legal basis for this view is not very strong. Although the
judicial record is supportive of a duty to maximize profits for shareholders, it leaves room for firms
to sacrifice profits in the public interest. The deference that courts show towards the judgment of
businesspeople -- the “business judgment rule” -- effectively protects many public-minded
managerial actions from successful legal challenge.
Are firms in the United States prohibited from sacrificing profits in the public interest? And
if so, is the prohibition enforceable? The answers to these two sub-questions appear to be “maybe”
and “no”, respectively. U.S. corporate law is consistent with the shareholder primacy model, but as
long as managers claim some plausible connection to future profitability, the business judgment rule
grants them leeway to commit corporate resources to projects that benefit the public.
Simply because the legal system may permit firms to sacrifice profits in the social interest
does not mean that firms can do so on a sustainable basis in the face of competitive pressures. Under
many conditions, firms that participate in costly CSR activities will have to raise prices, reduce
wages and other costs, accept smaller profits, or pay smaller dividends -- and accept the economic
consequences. After taking such measures, a firm’s stock price may decline until proportional to
returns, and attracting new capital may be difficult because returns are below market averages.
Other short-term economic consequences may include loss of market share, increased insurance
costs, increased borrowing costs, and loss of reputation. In the long term, the firm may face
shareholder litigation, corporate takeover, or closure.
This process of economic survival of the fittest would suggest that firms that engage in
unsustainable CSR will find themselves being pushed out of business. Given the seemingly
inevitable outcome of this process, why would any firms choose to participate in unsustainable CSR
activities? First, the firms that engage (or say they engage) in CSR are often active in markets that
are imperfect or distorted by government intervention, so that they are buffered from Friedman’s
30

evolutionary imperatives. Second, principal/agent problems may lead managers to make decisions
that commit the firm to short-term CSR actions, even if those activities will not be continued in the
long run.
Despite a large and growing literature, evidence of firms actually sacrificing profits in the
social interest is lacking. The bulk of the available evidence suggests that most firms treat socially
responsible actions the same way they view more traditional business activities. Instead of
altruistically sacrificing profits, they engage in a more limited -- but more profitable -- set of socially
beneficial activities that contribute to their financial goals.
Although proponents of sustainable business practices and the “triple bottom line” may argue
that being environmentally responsible inevitably leads to higher profits in the long term, the
relationship between socially responsible activities and profitability may be more accurately
characterized as some firms generate long-term profits from some socially responsible activities
some of the time.
Is it in the social interest for firms to carry out CSR activity? More to the point, should
governments allow such activity? Allowing CSR may be preferable to realistic alternatives. To the
extent that existing regulations require a level of environmental protection below the socially
optimal level, additional corporate investment can increase social welfare. In this context, CSR
should be seen as a complement to increasingly effective government regulation and not as a
substitute for it.

31

REFERENCES
Adams, Mike, and Phillip Hardwick. 1998. “An Analysis of Corporate Donations: United Kingdom Evidence”.
Journal of Management Studies 35(5): 641-654.
Alchian, AA. 1950. “Uncertainty, Evolution, and Economic Theory”. Journal of Political Economy LVIII: 211-221.
Altman, Morris. 1999. “The Methodology of Economics and the Survivor Principle Revisited and Revised: Some
Welfare and Public Policy Implications of Modeling the Economic Agent”. Review of Social Economy 57(4):
427-449.
Aupperle, Kenneth, Archie Carroll, and John Hatfield. 1985. “An Empirical Examination of the Relationship Between
Corporate Social Responsibility and Profitability”. Academy of Management Journal 28(2): 446-463.
Baron, David P. 2006. Business and its Environment, Fifth Edition. New York: Pearson Prentice Hall.
Berle, Jr., A.A. 1932. “For Whom Corporate Managers Are Trustees: A Note”. Harvard Law Review 45(8):
1365-1372.
Blackman, Allen, and Geoffrey Bannister. 1998. ACommunity Pressure and Clean Technology in the Informal Sector:
An Econometric Analysis of the Adoption of Propane by Traditional Mexican Brickmakers.@ Journal of
Environmental Economics and Management 35(1): 1-21.
Blair, Margaret M., and Lynn A. Stout. 1999. “A Team Production Theory of Corporate Law”. Virginia Law Review
85(March): 247.
Blomquist, Robert. 2006. “Six Thinking Hats for the Lorax: Corporate Responsibility and the Environment”.
Georgetown International Environmental Law Review 18(4): 691-705.
Borck, Jonathan, Cary Coglianese, and Jennifer Nash. 2006. “Why Do They Join? An Exploration of Business
Participation in Voluntary Environmental Programs”. In “Beyond Compliance: Business Decision Making and
the U.S. EPA’s Performance Track Program”. Regulatory Policy Program Report RPP-10. Cambridge, MA:
John F. Kennedy School of Government, Harvard University.
Borok, Tuvia. 2003. “A Modern Approach to Redefining In the Best Interests of the Corporation”. Windsor Review of
Legal and Social Issues 15(March): 113.
Branson, Douglas M. 2002. “The Rule That Isn’t a Rule - The Business Judgment Rule”. Valparaiso University Law
Review 36(Summer): 631.
Brown, William, Eric Helland, and Janet Kiholm Smith. 2006. “Corporate Philanthropic Practices”. Journal of
Corporate Finance 12(5): 855-877.
Butler, Henry N., and Fred S. McChesney. 1999. “Why They Give at the Office: Shareholder Welfare and Corporate
Philanthropy in the Contractual Theory of the Corporation”. Cornell Law Review 84(July): 1195.
Chapple, Wendy et al. 2001. “The Determinants of Voluntary Investment Decisions”. Managerial and Decision
Economics 22(8): 453-63.
Choper, Coffee, and Gilson. 2004. Cases and Materials on Corporations 39.
Clark, Matthew. 2005. “Corporate Environmental Behavior Research: Informing Environmental Policy”. Structural
Change and Economic Dynamics 16(3): 422-431.

32

Clark, Robert. 1986. Corporate Law. Boston, MA: Little, Brown, and Company.
Clotfelter, Charles. 1985. Federal Tax Policy and Charitable Giving. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Corfield, Andrea. 1998. “The Stakeholder Theory and Its Future in Australian Corporate Governance: A Preliminary
Analysis”. Bond Law Review 10(2): 213.
Cox, James, and Thomas Hazen. 2003. Corporations. New York, NY: Aspen Publishers.
Dasgupta, Susmita, Hemamala Hettige, and David Wheeler. 2000. AWhat Improves Environmental Compliance?
Evidence from Mexican Industry.@ Journal of Environment Economics and Management 39(1): 39-66.
Dodd, Jr., E. Merrick. 1932. “For Whom Are Corporate Managers Trustees?” Harvard Law Review 45(7):1145-1163.
Donohue, John. 2005. “Does Greater Managerial Freedom to Sacrifice Profits Lead to Higher Social Welfare?”
Environmental Protection and the Social Responsibility of Firms. Bruce Hay, Robert Stavins, and Richard
Vietor, editors. Resources for the Future: Washington, D.C.
Easterbrook, Frank, and Daniel Fischel. 1991. The Economic Structure of Corporate Law.
Ehrlich, Craig. 2005. “Is Business Ethics Necessary?” DePaul Business & Commercial Law Journal 4(Fall): 55.
Elhauge, Einer. 2005. “Corporate Managers= Operational Discretion to Sacrifice Corporate Profits in the Public
Interest.” Environmental Protection and the Social Responsibility of Firms. Bruce Hay, Robert Stavins, and
Richard Vietor, editors. Resources for the Future: Washington, D.C.
Environics International Ltd. 1999. “The Millennium Poll on Corporate Social Responsibility: Executive Briefing”.
http://www.globescan.com/news_archives/MPExecBrief.pdf. Accessed 9/16/2007.
Fanto, James A. 1998. “The Role of Corporate Law in French Corporate Governance”. Cornell International Law
Journal 31: 31.
Fisch, Jill E. 2006. “Robert Clark’s Corporate Law: Twenty Years of Change: Measuring Efficiency in Corporate Law:
The Role of Shareholder Primacy”. The Iowa Journal of Corporation Law 31(Spring): 637.
Francois, Patrick. 2004. “Making a Difference: Labor Donations in the Production of Public Goods”. CMPO,
University of Bristol, Working Paper Series No. 04/093.
Frank, Robert. 1996. “Can Socially Responsible Firms Survive in a Competitive market?” In Codes of Conduct:
Behavioral Research into Business Ethics. David Messick and Ann Tenbrunsel, ed. New York, NY: Russel
Sage Foundation. p.214-227.
Friedman, Milton. 1970. “The Social Responsibility of Business is to Increase its Profits”. The New York Times
Magazine. September 13.
Frye, Melissa B., Edward Nelling, and Elizabeth Webb. 2006. “Executive Compensation in Socially Responsible
Firms”. Corporate Governance: An International Review 14(5): 446-455.
Gabaldon, Theresa A. 2006. “Like a Fish Needs a Bicycle: Public Corporations and Their Shareholders”. Maryland
Law Review 65: 538.
Graff Zivin, Joshua, and Arthur Small. 2005. “A Modigliani-Miller Theory of Altruistic Corporate Social
Responsibility”. B.E. Journals in Economic Analysis and Policy: Topics in Economic Analysis and Policy 5(1):
1-19.

33

Griffin, Jennifer, and John Mahon. 1997. “The Corporate Social Performance and Corporate Financial Performance
Debate: Twenty-five Years of Incomparable Research”. Business and Society 36(1): 5-31.
Harris, James and Anne Klepper. 1976. Corporate Philanthropic Public Service Activities. New York, NY: The
Conference Board.
Hartman, Raymond, Mainul Huq, and David Wheeler. 1995. AWhy Paper Mills Clean Up: Determinants of Pollution
Abatement in Four Asian Countries.@ World Bank Policy Research Department Working Paper 1710.
Hay, Bruce L., Robert N. Stavins, and Richard H.K. Vietor. 2005. “The Four Questions of Corporate Social
Responsibility: May They, Can They, Do They, Should They?” Environmental Protection and the Social
Responsibility of Firms. Bruce Hay, Robert Stavins, and Richard Vietor, editors. Resources for the Future:
Washington, D.C.
Heinkel, Robert, Alan Kraus, and Josef Zechner. 2001. “The Effect of Green Investment on Corporate Behavior”.
Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 36(4): 431-449.
Hettige, Hemamala, Mainul Huq, Sheoli Pargal, and David Wheeler. 1996. ADeterminants of Pollution Abatement in
Developing Countries: Evidence from South and Southeast Asia.@ World Development 24(12): 1891-1904.
Howard-Grenville, Jennifer, Jennifer Nash, and Cary Coglianese. 2006. “Constructing the License to Operate: Internal
Factors and their Influence on Corporate Environmental Decisions”. In Beyond Compliance: Business
Decision Making and the U.S. EPA=s Performance Track Program. Regulatory Policy Program Report RPP-10.
Cambridge, MA: John F. Kennedy School of Government, Harvard University.
Jaffe, Adam B., Steven R. Peterson, Paul R. Portney, and Robert N. Stavins. 1995. "Environmental Regulation and the
Competitiveness of U.S. Manufacturing: What Does the Evidence Tells Us?" Journal of Economic Literature
33(1995):132-163.
Jensen, Kim, Paul Jakus, Burt English, and Jamey Menard. 2002. “Willingness to Pay for Environmentally Certified
Hardwood Products by Tennessee Consumers”. University of Tennessee, Department of Agricultural
Economics, Study Series No. 01-02.
Jensen, Michael, and William Meckling. 1976. “Theory of the Firm: Managerial Behavior, Agency Costs and
Ownership Structure”. Journal of Financial Economics 3(4): 305-360.
Kahn, Faith Stevelman. 1997. “Pandora’s Box: Managerial Discretion and the Problem of Corporate Philanthropy”.
UCLA Law Review 44(February): 579.
King, Andrew, and Michael Lenox. 2000. “Industry Self-Regulation without Sanctions: the Chemical Industry’s
Responsible Care Program”. Academy of Management Journal 43(4): 698-716.
Lee, Ian B. 2006. “Efficiency and Ethics in the Debate about Shareholder Primacy”. Delaware Journal of Corporate
Law 31: 533.
Lee, Ian B. 2005. “Corporate Law, Profit Maximization, and the Responsible Shareholder”. Stanford Journal of Law,
Business, and Finance 10(Spring): 31.
Lynch-Fannon, Irene. 2007. “The Corporate Social Responsibility Movement and Law’s Empire: Is There a Conflict?”
Northern Ireland Legal Quarterly 58(1).
Lyon, Thomas, and John Maxwell. 2004. Corporate Environmentalism and Public Policy. Cambridge University Press:
Cambridge.

34

Margolis, Joshua, Hillary Elfenbein, and James Walsh. 2007. “Does It Pay To Be Good? A Meta-analysis and
Redirection of Research on the Relationship Between Corporate Social and Financial Performance”. Working
paper, Harvard Business School.
Marinov, Boris, and Bruce Heiman. 1998. “Company Law and Corporate Governance Renewal in Transition
Economies: The Bulgarian Dilemma”. European Journal of Law and Economics 6: 231-261.
Miwa, Yoshiro. 1999. “CSR: Dangerous and Harmful, Though Maybe Not Irrelevant”. Cornell Law Review 84(July):
1227.
Mohr, Lois, Deborah Webb, and Katherine Harris. 2001. “Do Consumers Expect Companies to Be Socially
Responsible? The Impact of Corporate Social Responsibility on Buying Behavior”. Journal of Consumer
Affairs 35(1): 45-72.
Orlitzky, Marc, Frank Schmidt, and Sara Rynes. 2003. “Corporate Social and Financial Performance: A Meta-analysis”.
Organization Studies 24(3): 403-441.
Pargal, Sheoli, and David Wheeler. AInformal Regulation of Industrial Pollution in Developing Countries: Evidence
from Indonesia.@ Journal of Political Economy 104(6): 1314-1327.
Porter, Michael, and Mark Kramer. 2006. “The Link Between Competitive Advantage and Corporate Social
Responsibility”. Harvard Business Review 84(12): 78-92.
Portney, Paul. 2005. “Corporate Social Responsibility: An Economic and Public Policy Perspective”. Environmental
Protection and the Social Responsibility of Firms. Bruce Hay, Robert Stavins, and Richard Vietor, editors.
Resources for the Future: Washington, D.C.
Prendergast, Candice. 1999. “The Provision of Incentives in Firms”. Journal of Economic Literature 37(March): 7.
Reinhardt, Forest. 2005. “Environmental Protection and the Social Responsibility of Firms: Perspectives from the
Business Literature”. Environmental Protection and the Social Responsibility of Firms. Bruce Hay, Robert
Stavins, and Richard Vietor, editors. Resources for the Future: Washington, D.C.
Reinhardt, Forest. 2000. Down to Earth. Harvard Business School Press: Boston.
Rivera, Jorge and Peter de Leon. 2004. “Is Greener Whiter? Voluntary Environmental Performance of Western Ski
Areas”. Policy Studies Journal 32(3): 417-437.
Roe, Mark. 2000. “Political Preconditions to Separating Ownership from Corporate Control”. Stanford Law Review
53(December): 539.
Scalise, Elisa. 2005. “The Code for Corporate Citizenship: States Should Amend Statutes Governing Corporations and
Enable Corporations to be Good Citizens”. I 29(Fall): 275.
Sheehy, Benedict. 2005. “Scrooge The Reluctant Stakeholder: Theoretical Problems in the Shareholder-Stakeholder
Debate”. University of Miami Business Law Review 14(Fall/Winter): 193.
Smith, M. 1996. “The Duty to Obey the Law”. In Companion to the Philosophy of Law and Legal Theory. D.
Patterson, ed. Blackwell: Oxford.
Social Investment Forum. 2006. “2005 Report on Socially Responsible Investing Trends in the United States: Ten Year
Review”. Social Investment Forum, Washington, DC.
Springer, Jonathan. 1999. “Corporate Law, Corporate Constituency Statues: Hollow Hopes and False Fears”. New
York University School of Law Annual Survey of American Law 1999: 85.

35

Sutton, Michele. 2004. “Between a Rock and a Judicial Hard Place: Corporate Social Responsibility Reporting and
Potential Legal Liability Under Kasky v. Nike”. University of Missouri-Kansas City School of Law Review
72(Summer): 1159.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 2006. “Environmental Management Systems / ISO 14001 - Frequently Asked
Questions”. http://www.epa.gov/owm/iso14001/isofaq.htm. Accessed 8/14/2007.
Vogel, David. 2006. The Market for Virtue. Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press.

Wood, Donna, and Raymond Jones. 1996. “Research in Corporate Social Performance: What Have We Learned”. In
Corporate Philanthropy at the Crossroads. Dwight Burlingame and Dennis Young, eds. Bloomington, IN:
Indiana University Press.

36

