                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       MINIMUM WAGES AND FIRM PROFITABILITY

                                           Mirko Draca
                                          Stephen Machin
                                         John Van Reenen

                                       Working Paper 13996
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w13996


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2008




We would like to thank Charles Brown, Alan Manning, Steve Pischke, the Editor, two anonymous
referees and participants at seminars in the Low Pay Commission, LSE, the Society of Labour Economists
conference in Boston and the Department of Work and Pensions conference at the University of York
for a number of helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Mirko Draca, Stephen Machin, and John Van Reenen. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Minimum Wages and Firm Profitability
Mirko Draca, Stephen Machin, and John Van Reenen
NBER Working Paper No. 13996
May 2008
JEL No. J23,L25

                                             ABSTRACT

Although there is a large literature on the economic effects of minimum wages on labour market outcomes
(especially employment), there is much less evidence on their impact on firm performance. In this
paper we consider a very under-studied area - the impact of minimum wages on firm profitability.
The analysis exploits the changes induced by the introduction of a national minimum wage to the UK
labour market in 1999, using pre-policy information on the distribution of wages to construct treatment
and comparison groups and implement a difference in differences approach. We report evidence showing
that firm profitability was significantly reduced (and wages significantly raised) by the minimum wage
introduction. This emerges from separate analyses of two distinct types of firm level panel data (one
on firms in a very low wage sector, UK residential care homes, and a second on firms across all sectors).
We find that net entry rates have fallen, but that the changes in exit and entry rates are statistically
insignificant.


Mirko Draca                                         John Van Reenen
London School of Economics                          London School of Economics
Centre for Economic Performance                     Centre for Economic Performance
Houghton Street                                     Houghton Street
London WC2A 2AE                                     London WC2A 2AE
ENGLAND                                             ENGLAND
m.draca@lse.ac.uk                                   and NBER
                                                    j.vanreenen@lse.ac.uk
Stephen Machin
London School of Economics
Centre for Economic Performance
Houghton Street
London WC2A 2AE
ENGLAND
and University College London
s.machin@ucl.ac.uk
I. Introduction

In debates on the economic impact of labour market regulation, much work has focused

on minimum wages. Although standard economic theory unambiguously implies that

wage floors raise the wages of the low paid and have a negative impact on employment

(Borjas, 2004; Brown, 1999), the existing empirical literature is not so clear. Whilst many

studies have shown that minimum wages significantly affect the structure of wages by

increasing the relative wages of the low paid (e.g. DiNardo et al, 1996), empirical

evidence on the effect on jobs is considerably more mixed (see the recent comprehensive

review by Neumark and Wascher, 2007). Some studies have found the expected negative

impact on employment1, yet others have found no impact or, in occasional cases, a

positive effect of minimum wages on jobs.2

        In the light of this, one may wonder how firms are able to sustain the higher wage

costs induced by the minimum wage. One possibility is that firms simply pass on higher

wage costs to consumers in the form of price increases. However, there is scant evidence

on this score (exceptions are Aaronson, 2001, and Aaronson and French, 2007).3 An

alternative is that the higher wage costs are not fully passed on to consumers and the

minimum wage eats directly into profit margins.4 Since there is a complete absence of

any study directly examining the impact of minimum wages on firm profitability, this is

the focus of this paper.




1
  See the discussion of time series studies in Brown, Gilroy and Kohen (1982) and Brown (1999) or the US
cross-state panel evidence of Neumark and Wascher (1992) and the recent longer run analyses of Neumark
and Nizalova (2007).
2
  Examples here are Dickens, Manning and Machin (1999) and Card and Krueger (1994).
3
  See also the recent survey on minimum wages and prices by Lemos (2005).
4
  A third possibility is that minimum wages may “shock” firms into reducing managerial slack and
improving efficiency. We examine this hypothesis below but fail to find evidence in its favour.


                                                   1
        Our identification strategy uses variations in wages induced by the introduction of

the national minimum wage (NMW) in the UK as a quasi-experiment to examine the

impact of wage floors on firm profitability. The introduction occurred in 1999 after the

election of the Labour government that ended seventeen years of Conservative

administration. There is evidence that the NMW increased wages for the low paid, but

had little impact on employment5 and so this provides a ripe testing ground for looking at

whether profitability changed. We use the fact that the intensity (or “bite”) of the NMW

is higher for firms with many low paid workers relative to firms with fewer low paid

workers in order to construct treatment and comparison groups. We then compare

outcomes in terms of wages, profitability and firm exit and entry using difference in

differences methods.

        Our work does uncover a significant negative association between the minimum

wage introduction and firm profitability. This association is robust across two very

different panel data sources, namely a specialized UK data source on workers in

residential care homes (a very low wage sector) and an economy-wide firm level database

FAME (Financial Analysis Made Easy) that covers all registered firms in the UK.6 In

both data sets, firm profit margins fall in relatively low wage firms following the

introduction of the minimum wage. These effects correspond to about a fifteen percent

fall in profit margins for the average care home and an eight to eleven percent reduction

in profit margins for the average affected firms in FAME. Moreover, for both data

sources, we are not able to find any evidence that this resulted in a higher probability of

5
  See Machin, Manning and Rahman (2003) and Stewart (2004).
6
  UK firm-level panel data on company accounts is more easily available than in the US. UK firms have to
lodge accounting information centrally at Companies House even if they are not listed on the stock




                                                   2
closure for low wage firms. Examining entry, however, there is some evidence of a

small, but insignificant, negative impact of the minimum wage on net entry.

        The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Section II we discuss the scope

for minimum wages to impact on profitability and describe our modelling approach.

Section III implements this empirical strategy using data for the UK residential care

homes sector. This is a competitive, low wage sector where the minimum wage “bit hard”

when it was introduced to the UK labour market. Importantly our care homes data

features detailed firm level measures of treatment intensity in response to this policy

change as we have data on the wage distribution within homes. Section IV reports results

from analysing the other data source, FAME. This has the twin advantages that it (i)

covers many small, low wage service sector firms and (ii) contains direct measures of

gross profits. The disadvantage is that FAME only has a measure of the average wage

within the firm. The FAME analysis therefore serves as a useful point of comparison and

corroboration for the estimates based on the care homes data. Section V offers some

concluding comments.



II. Motivation and Modelling Strategy

A. The Scope for Minimum Wages to Impact on Profitability

        The usual rationale given for the existence of minimum wages is their ability to

increase the earnings of low paid workers in order to prevent “exploitation” and reduce

poverty.7 When introduced at a binding level, and so long as workers keep their jobs, a



exchange. Further, this information includes profits and wages (the latter are not a mandatory reporting
item in US company accounts even for publicly listed firms).
7
  Neoclassical exploitation occurs when wages are below the value of the worker’s marginal revenue
product (Hicks, 1932). Whether poverty rises or falls after the minimum wage is ambiguous. Poverty could


                                                   3
minimum wage results in wage gains for workers who would have otherwise been paid

beneath the level of the minimum wage. There may of course be unintended effects of

labour market regulations that could produce harmful side effects.

        Until the national minimum wage was introduced in April 1999, there had never

been a nationwide wage floor in operation in the UK labour market. The system that had

existed prior to then, and that was abolished in 1993, was an industry-based system

known as the Wages Councils.8 The 1999 introduction seemed to have a significant

impact on wages, albeit a smaller one than was predicted ex-ante, with around 4% to 5%

of workers benefiting and receiving average wage gains of the order of about 10%.9

        Most UK studies have not found large negative employment effects associated

with these wage gains. Stewart (2004) presents evidence, from a range of longitudinal

data sources, appearing to show that there have been no reductions in the employment

probabilities of minimum wage workers as compared to workers slightly higher up the

wage distribution. Even in the very low wage labour market for care assistants, a sector

one can view as being highly vulnerable to minimum wage legislation, Machin, Manning

and Rahman (2003) report only moderate disemployment effects.

        So, if employment does not fall much in the face of large rises in wage costs, then

presumably “something else has to give” and so it is important to ask how employers do

respond to the introduction of the NMW? Following Ashenfelter and Smith (1979)

consider a typical profit maximizing firm employing a quantity of labour (L) at wage rate

(W), using other factors at price r and selling its output at price p. Profits are maximized



rise if many low wage workers lost their jobs. See Besley and Burgess (2004) for an example of how
tougher labour market regulation in India appeared to increase poverty levels.
8
  See Dickens, Machin and Manning (1999) or Machin and Manning (1994).
9
  See Dickens and Manning (2004) and Metcalf (2002)


                                                4
at Π* ( W,r,p ) given the values of W, r and p. The derivative of the profit function with

respect to the wage rate is ∂Π ∂W = -L ( W,r,p ) , the negative of the demand for labour. In

                                        2
turn, the second derivative is ∂ 2 Π ∂W = - ∂L ∂W . The introduction of a minimum wage

(M) at a level above that of the prevailing wage therefore reduces firm profits by

Π ( W,r,p ) -Π ( M,r,p ) . Using a second-order Taylor series this can be approximated as:

             Π ( W,r,p ) − Π ( M,r,p ) ≅ L ( M-W ) − 1 2 ( ∂L ∂W )( M-W )                    (1)
                                                                            2




where the terms on the right-hand side correspond to wage bill and labour demand effects

on profits respectively. The wage bill effect is the direct impact of higher wages holding

employment constant. The second term (labour demand) offsets this profit loss to the

extent that firms can substitute away from low wage workers into other factors (e.g.

capital). This illustrates the inverse relationship between a firm’s initial wage and the

post-policy change in its profits. That is, the lower the initial wage, then the greater the

fall in profits associated with the imposition of a minimum wage. Our difference-in-

difference models operationalize this idea by defining treatment groups of more affected

firms, and comparison groups of less affected firms, based on their wages prior to the

policy introduction.

       This model focuses on the short-run responses when the number of firms is fixed,

rather than in the long run when the number of firms is allowed to vary.10 We believe that

this is interesting as researchers cannot be sure how long is the long run (we look up to

three years after the introduction of the minimum wage, so to our minds this is reasonably

long run). When the product market is perfectly competitive, profits are zero. Firms




                                             5
which employ low wage workers may well exit the market, so the relevant margin of

adjustment will be more exit and less entry. We examine this explicitly in sub-section

IV.I below.

        When the product market is imperfectly competitive there may also be effects of

the minimum wage on profitability in both the short-run and the long run. Appendix A

discusses these models in some detail, but it is sufficient to note that positive price cost

margins are an equilibrium phenomenon in standard industrial organization models such

as Cournot or differentiated product Bertrand. For example, consider a Cournot oligopoly

where firms have heterogeneous marginal costs and constant returns to scale. Introducing

a minimum wage has a differential impact on the firm employing more low skilled

workers causing this firm to lose market share and suffer a fall in its price cost margin.

However, so long as profits do not fall below the exit threshold it will remain in the

market with lower profitability.

        It may be surprising that there is so little evidence on the association between

minimum wages and firm profitability. Card and Krueger (1995) provide the most

notable related study of financial performance effects. They first develop a hypothetical

example of a firm heavily affected by a 15% increase in the minimum wage and show

that such firms face potentially large profit effects of 45% reductions in annual profits

and 5% fall in market value. The remainder of their study then focuses on the shareholder

value of firms.      They report mixed evidence – while no systematic relationship is

apparent for the major US uprating of the federal minimum wage in 1989, subsequent

news about possible minimum wage increases coincided with one to two percent

10
  Note that the short-run negative impact on profits will be larger in competitive labour markets than
monopsonistic labour markets (see Card and Krueger, 1995). In the latter model there is an offsetting



                                                  6
variations in shareholder wealth. Crucially, Card and Krueger examine profitability

effects indirectly through investor expectations (which are problematic if stock market

prices are erratic). In contrast, our current study considers the direct impact of the

minimum wage on firm profit margins.11 Furthermore, since firms on the stock market

tend to be the larger firms (especially in the UK) a focus on market value will miss out

the small and medium sized firms who may be most affected by minimum wages.

B. Modelling Strategy

         The approach we take to identify minimum wage effects is in line with some of

the other work that looks at the impact of national minimum wages, by looking at a group

of firms that were more affected by the NMW introduction than a comparison set of

firms.12 By “more affected”, we mean where wages potentially rose by more due to the

imposition of the minimum wage floor. This quasi-experimental setting enables us to

compare what happened to profitability before and after NMW introduction in low wage

firms as compared to what happened to profitability across the same period for a

comparison group of firms whose wages were not affected so much (or at all) by the

NMW introduction.

         For ease of exposition, we begin our discussion of modelling by thinking in terms

of a discrete indicator of treatment by the minimum wage policy for a set of low wage

firms with a pre-policy introduction wage beneath a certain wage threshold W* (where


positive effect on profitability when wages increase as worker turnover declines.
11
   This is important since it is well known that stock market prices may not reflect the fundamental value of
the firm. Bubbles can exist both at the macro or micro level (e.g. Bond and Cummins, 2000). Furthermore,
it is very difficult to know when the “news” of the National Minimum Wage first reaches the market as
investors will form expectations of the level of the NMW and this will be reflected in the stock price long
before the official rate is announced.
12
    See, amongst others, Card’s (1992) analysis of state variations in low pay incidence to identify the
employment impact of the US federal minimum wage, or Stewart’s (2002) similar analysis of regional
variations in the UK NMW.


                                                     7
W* may or may not equal the minimum wage, M). A treatment indicator variable can be

coded as T = 1 for low wage firms (where Wpre < W*) and T = 0 for a set of firms whose

pre-policy wage exceeds the threshold.13

           We can evaluate the impact of minimum wages on firm profitability by

comparing what happens before and after minimum wage introduction across these

treatment and control firms. For this procedure to be valid, we first need to establish that

our choice of affected firms behave as we would expect in response to NMW

introduction. The expected response would be that wages rise by more in the T = 1 firms

before and after introduction as compared to the T = 0 firms.

           A difference-in-difference estimate of the wage impact of the NMW

        =1        T =1           T =0       T =0
is (w TNMW =1 − w NMW = 0 ) − (w NMW =1 − w NMW = 0 ) , where w = ln(W), NMW is a dummy


variable equal to 1 for time periods when the NMW was in place (and 0 for pre-policy

                                                    =1
periods) and a bar denotes a mean. For example, w TNMW =1 is the mean ln(wage) for the


treatment group in the post-policy period. This is just the simple difference in means

unconditional on other characteristics of firms. It can easily be placed into a regression

context. If T = 1 for firms with a pre-policy ln(wage), wi,t-1, less than the ln(minimum

wage), mwt, and 0 otherwise, we can enter the indicator function I(wi,t-1< mwt) into a

ln(wage) equation for firm i in year t as follows:

          w it = α1 + β1X it + δ1Yt + θ1I(w i,t-1 <mw t ) + ψ1[I(w i,t-1 <mw t )*NMWt ] + ε1it   (2)

where X is a set of control variables, Y denotes a set of year effects (hence a linear term

in NMWt does not enter the equation since it is controlled for by these) and ε is a random

error. Here the regression corrected difference-in-difference estimate of the impact of


13
     We also consider various continuous measures of treatment intensity discussed below.


                                                      8
NMW introduction on the ln(wage) is the estimated coefficient on the low wage

treatment dummy in the periods when the NMW was in operation, ψ1.

         After ascertaining whether the NMW impacts on wage in the expected manner we

can move on to consider whether profitability was affected differentially between the

treatment group firms (T = 1) and comparison group firms (T = 0). We can do so by

looking at unconditional and conditional difference-in-difference estimates in an

analogous way to the wage effects. Thus, we can estimate the unconditional difference-

in-difference in profit margins, defined as the ratio of profits to sales Π/S, as

⎡⎛ Π ⎞ T=1   ⎛Π⎞
                   T=1   ⎤ ⎡⎛ Π ⎞ T=0   ⎛Π⎞
                                              T=0   ⎤
⎢⎜ ⎟        -⎜ ⎟         ⎥ - ⎢⎜ ⎟      -⎜ ⎟         ⎥
⎢⎝ S ⎠ NMW=1 ⎝ S ⎠ NMW=0 ⎥ ⎢⎝ S ⎠ NMW=1 ⎝ S ⎠ NMW=0 ⎥
                                                        and the conditional difference-in-difference, ψ2,
⎣                        ⎦ ⎣                        ⎦


from the regression model:

     ⎛Π⎞                                                                                              (3)
     ⎜ ⎟ = α 2 + β 2 Zit + δ 2 Yt + θ 2 I(w i,t-1 <mw t ) + ψ 2 [I(w i,t-1 <mw t )*NMWt ] + ε 2it
     ⎝ S ⎠it

where the controls are now Z (which may perfectly overlap with X – see below) and ε 2it

is the error term in the profitability equation.

C. Modelling Issues

         Two main issues arise with this modelling approach. The first is potential

misclassification of the treatment group; the second is whether the quasi-experimental

design is valid. On the first of these, it is evident that the binary treatment-control

indicator risks misclassifying some of the treatment group in the comparison group (as

there may be some minimum wage workers even in high average wage firms). However,

we show below using a variety of methods that any such bias is likely to be small (for

example, by looking at the wage impact at every percentile of the pre-policy wage

distribution). In any event, it is useful to point out that such a bias will mean that we are



                                                            9
underestimating the causal effect of the NMW on firm profits, as some of firms in the

comparison group will have lower profits due to the NMW. Also, where a continuous

measure of treatment intensity, say CT, is available (as it is for one of our data sources

that has matched worker-firm data) we can re-specify the above framework to incorporate

CTi,t-1, a treatment indicator based on firm wages at time t-1.

       On the second question, the main issue with any non-experimental evaluation of

treatment effects is, of course, whether the comparison group constitutes a valid

counterfactual. The key conditions are that there are common trends and stable

composition of the two groups (see Blundell et al, 2004). Much of our robustness analysis

below focuses on whether these two conditions are met: for example, by examining pre-

policy trends and carrying out pseudo-experiments in the pre-policy period.

D. Implementation

       Our analysis uses two different data sources to examine these potential wage and

profitability effects of the minimum wage. Each of these data sets has different

advantages and disadvantages for analysing these issues. Firstly, we use the UK care

homes data used in recent studies of minimum wages and employment14 to look at

profitability effects in a low wage sector where the minimum wage “bit hard”. An

important advantage of this care homes data is that it has firm-level indicators of

treatment intensity (derived from worker level wage data) that allow us to quantify the

minimum wage related shock to the cost structures of individual firms using a continuous

treatment indicator.

       Secondly, we use the Financial Analysis Made Easy (FAME) database of UK

firms to examine the profitability effects of the minimum wage across a range of low




                                             10
wage industries. In this firm-level data it is only possible to define treatment-control

indicators based on average wages or on matched industry-region wage data from the

Labour Force Survey as we do not know the full within firm wage distribution. However,

FAME does cover a larger section of the economy and contains direct measures of profit

margins.



III. Minimum Wages and Profitability in UK Residential Care Homes

A. Data

In this section we look at the wage and profitability effects of the minimum wage in UK

residential care homes. Historically the care homes sector has been a very low wage

sector. As a result it offers a good testing ground for studying minimum wage effects on

profitability since it is a sector that is highly vulnerable to minimum wage legislation.

Table 1 shows this very clearly. Prior to the minimum wage introduction in April 1999

average hourly wages were very low in the sector (at around £4 per hour). On average,

32.2% of workers were paid below the incoming minimum wage with this figure falling

to 0.4% after the introduction of the policy.

           The UK care homes data was collected in surveys conducted in 1992 (prior to the

general election in that year) and 1993 for homes on the South Coast of England; in 1998

(before the introduction of the NMW) and in 1999 (after the introduction of the NMW in

April) for all homes across the country. Finally, there was some more data collected in

2000 and 2001 for South Coast homes only. The data is in the form of an unbalanced

panel so that the same homes are followed over time. The sector was chosen because it is

characterized by a large concentration of non-unionized, low wage employees working in

14
     Machin, Manning and Rahman (2003); Machin and Wilson (2004).

                                                 11
small firms with an average employment level of fifteen to twenty. There was also

product market regulation in this sector insofar that an important fraction of home

residents had their care paid for by the government through the Department of Social

Security (DSS).15 The Department of Social Security paid a capped price for beds, which

were not increased when the minimum was introduced. As a result, many homes had a

limited scope to increase prices in response to the minimum thereby leaving more room

for employment or profitability effects to manifest themselves.

           A more comprehensive account of features of the data is given in Machin,

Manning and Rahman (2003). The two most important features for our analysis are the

definition of the treatment variable and the characteristics of our profitability variable.

The treatment indicator we mostly use is the initial firm wage gap relative to the

minimum, that is the proportional increase in a firm’s wage bill required to bring all of its

workers up to the minimum wage. Specifically, the wage gap in home i is calculated as:

                                          ∑h
                                           j
                                               ji   max(Wjimin -Wji )                             (4)
                                 GAPi =
                                                    ∑h
                                                     j
                                                              ji   Wji


where hji is the weekly hours worked by worker j in firm i, Wji is the hourly wage of

worker j in firm i, and Wjimin is the minimum wage relevant for worker j in firm i (this

might be the age-specific or the adult minimum, although for this sector it makes little

difference if only the adult minimum is used).

           Importantly, this wage gap provides a continuous treatment intensity indicator that

varies at the firm-level thereby quantifying the wage shock to the cost structures of

individual firms. The profit variable we study is a derived one based on total revenues

15
     The average percentage of such residents was 52.7% before the minimum wage introduction and 57.6%


                                                         12
less total costs. Total revenue of each home is measured directly as the product of the

number of beds, the home-specific average price of beds and the home occupancy rate.

Total costs are calculated by dividing the total firm wage bill by the share of labour in

total costs.16 Gross profitability is then defined as the ratio of profits to revenue.

B. The Impact of the Minimum Wage on the Structure of Wages

         As already noted, the care homes sector had the potential to be heavily affected by

the introduction of the NMW.17 Table 2 presents estimates of home-level wage change

equations for the period surrounding NMW introduction (1998-99) and as a falsification

exercise for an earlier pre-policy period (1992-93). The upper panel of Table 2 reports

results for a ln(wage) change equation that employs the initial wage gap variable as a

measure of treatment intensity.

                                    ∆w it = λ0 + λ1GAPi,t −1 + υit                                         (5)

         The results in Table 2 show that wages clearly rose by more in homes with a

larger initial wage gap when the minimum wage was introduced. The 0.861 coefficient on

the Initial Wage Gap variable indicates that workers in a firm that required a 10%

increase in its wage bill to comply with the minimum wage experienced an 8.6% increase

in average wages relative to workers in a firm already paid at least the minimum. This

coefficient rises slightly to 0.886 once controls are added (specification (4))).




after. We always condition on this variable in the regressions.
16
   Total sales and profits are not reported directly in the care homes data. We calculated them from the
underlying home-specific components. Sales (S) is calculated as Occupancy Proportion* Number of Beds *
Average Price (all reported in the survey). The wage bill (WB) and the share of labor in total costs (SHARE)
are also reported directly in the data. We can then calculate total costs (TC) as the ratio of the wage bill to
the labor share (WB/SHARE). Profits are then simply sales less total costs (S - TC). Profitability is the ratio
of profits to sales, (S - TC)/S.
17
   To date these data have most been used for study of minimum wage effects (e.g. Machin, Manning and
Rahman, 2003) but see also Machin and Manning’s (2004) test of competitive labour market theory.


                                                      13
         The second point of note is that this correlation was much less marked in earlier

time periods. Defining a counter-factual minimum wage at the same percentile of the

wage distribution as the real 1999 minimum, we can compute a GAP measure for the

earlier pre-policy time period.18 Whilst wages did rise more in the pre-policy period in

homes with a bigger initial wage gap the estimated relationship is much weaker, as shown

by the estimated coefficient of 0.240 for the specification with controls. The gap between

the two estimates is statistically significant and large in magnitude (at 0.678) showing a

much more marked impact, corresponding to a significant shift in the relationship

between wage changes and the initial wage gap in the minimum wage introduction

period.19

C. Care Home-Level Estimates of Profitability Effects

         The previous sub-section established a significant and sizable impact of the NMW

introduction on the structure of care home wages. This is a pre-requisite before studying

the impact on profitability. Table 3 reports estimates of regression-corrected profitability

specifications. We report reduced form models that relate changes in profit margins to

the initial wage gap measure as follows:

                               ⎛Π⎞                                                                         (7)
                             ∆ ⎜ ⎟ = η0 + η1GAPi,t-1 + η2 Zi,t-1 + ξ it
                               ⎝ S ⎠it

where ξit is the equation error.

         The coefficient on the wage gap variable is estimated to be negative and

significant, as shown in columns (1) and (2) of Table 3. The two reported specifications

18
   Note that this is the only previous wage change information that exists, as the data was not collected in
other (non-election) years.
19
   This is the “trend adjusted” difference in difference estimator discussed in Blundell et al (2004). The pre-
policy wage trend could be due to mean reversion and we discuss this in detail when analysing the FAME
data below.


                                                      14
differ in whether or not they include the control variables, Z.                   In the column (2)

specification with controls the coefficient is -0.492, indicating that a firm facing a 10%

wage gap before the introduction of the minimum experienced a reduction in their profit

margin of about 0.049. However, note that the mean of the wage gap variable is 0.037

(see Table 1). Therefore, the average firm in the sample would be facing reductions in

profit margins of about 0.018 (=0.037*0.492), which given the initial average profit

margin of 0.119 (see Table 1) translates into a substantial 15.1% cut in profit margins.20

        It is important to assess the plausibility of the magnitudes of these effects. There

a few ways we can do this. The first is to compare and contrast results across different

data sources. We do this below, when we compare the care homes results with those

from the FAME data. The second is to offer a plausibility check by carrying out a

calibration exercise. In Appendix (Section A4) we detail a simple model where

employment and prices do not change as a result of the minimum wage which predicts an

estimate of the impact of the pre-minimum wage bill that is in line with the estimates we

report. The simple exercise reported there shows that the coefficient on the initial wage

gap measure should equal the ratio of the wage bill to sales. The (trend adjusted) point

estimate on the wage gap term in the margins equation turns out to be -0.396 for the

model with controls (and -0.343 for the non controls baseline), which in absolute terms is

very close to (but just under) the wage bill to sales ratio in our sample of care homes

(0.398) as reported in Table 1. Hence, the magnitude of the estimated impact is in line

with what we would expect from one simple model where there is no employment or

price adjustment.


20
  Using a trend adjusted version based on the past wage changes would reduce the implied effect to (lower
bound) of 12.3%. ( = 0.037*0.396//0.119). See Appendix A for more details of calculations.


                                                   15
D. Home Closures

        The negative estimated profitability effects also raise the possibility that homes

may have had to close because of the minimum wage. Following Machin and Wilson

(2004) we look at closures over a reasonably long window by using 1998 and 2001

samples of South Coast homes. We find that, of the 487 homes with clean survey data

from 1998, 126 shut down over the 1998-2001 period. This corresponds to a high closure

rate of 22.6%, as one would expect in this high turnover sector. However, when we

formally test whether the firms most heavily affected by the introduction of the NMW

were more likely to exit the effects are very weak. Table 4 shows this using a probit

model relating the probability of closure to the pre-introduction wage gap. Although the

positive coefficient does indicate that firms most “at risk” from the NMW are more likely

to close, the coefficient is insignificant and the implied magnitude of the effect is very

small. Since the wage gap increased on average by 0.037 (see Table 1) the implied impact

of the NMW was to increase the probability of exit by only 0.1 ( = 0.037*0.393)

percentage points over the base exit rate of 22.6%.



IV. Minimum Wages and Profitability in a Firm Panel Across Many Sectors

A. Data

        Accounting regulations in the UK require private firms (i.e. those unlisted on the

stock market) to publicly report significantly more accounting information than their US

counterparts. For example, even publicly quoted firms in the US do not have to give total

employment and wage bills whereas this is required in the UK.21 Accounting information


21
  The lack of publicly available information on private sector firms and on average remuneration may be a
reason for the absence of US studies in this area.


                                                   16
on UK companies is stored centrally in Companies House. It is organised into electronic

databases and sold commercially by private sector data providers such as Bureau Van

Dijk from whom we obtained the FAME (Financial Analysis Made Easy) database.22

        The great advantage of this data is that is covers a much wider range of companies

than is standard in firm level analyses and, in particular, it covers non-stock market listed

firms. This means we are able to include many of the smaller and medium sized firms

that may be disproportionately affected by the NMW. Furthermore, the data also covers

non-manufacturing firms where many low wage workers are employed. By contrast, plant

level databases in the UK and US typically cover only the manufacturing sector23 and do

not have as clear a measure of profitability as exists in the (audited) company accounts.

However, UK accounting regulations do have reporting exemptions for some variables

for the smaller firms so our analysis is confined to a sub-sample who do report the

required information.24

        Since FAME contains annual accounting information, we have firms reporting

accounts with different year-end dates. Since the NMW was introduced on April 1st

1999, we therefore consider the sub-set of firms who report their end of year accounts on

March 31st of each year (these are firms who report in the UK financial year). The

accounting period for these firms will match exactly the period for which the NMW was




22
   FAME is the UK part of the AMADEUS dataset of European company accounts used by many authors .
See, inter alia, Bloom and Van Reenen (2007).
23
   The Annual Business Inquiry (ABI) database does cover non-production sectors, but this database is not
available until the late 1990s. The US Longitudinal Research Database (LRD) only covers manufacturing.
24
   These firms will tend to be larger than average as the very smallest firms have the least reporting
requirements.


                                                   17
in force. Around twenty-one percent of firms in FAME who have the accounting data we

require report on this day, which corresponds to the end of the tax year in the UK.25

         We use gross profits from the FAME database and model profitability in terms of

the gross profit to sales ratio. There is a long tradition in firm-level profitability studies

to use this measure, as it is probably the best approximation available in firm-level

accounts data to price-cost margins.26 Specifically, the measure of price-cost margin we

calculate is the ratio of gross profits to sales revenue, which measures profits before

taking account of tax, interest or depreciation.27 To allow for capital intensity differences

we also control for firm-specific capital sales ratios.28

B. Defining Treatment and Comparison Groups

         Unlike the care homes data, FAME does not provide measures of the within firm

distribution of wages. It has a total remuneration figure that can be divided by the total

number of employees to calculate an average wage. This creates a challenge in terms of

defining our treatment and comparison groups since any given level of average wages is,

in principle, compatible with a range of different within-firm wage distributions. This

makes it hard to measure accurately how exposed each firm’s cost structures are to the


25
   We have checked whether the sample who report their accounts on March 31st were representative of the
whole FAME sample and in Appendix Table B1 we report the results from this exercise. It shows that our
focus on firms reporting at the end of March is not likely to be a problem in that they are very similar to the
full sample of FAME firms with respect to their average profit margins, wages and employment levels.
26
   For example, see Machin and Van Reenen (1993) and Slade (2004) for a more recent discussion.
Although there are many reasons why accounting and economic profits may diverge (Fisher and
McGowan, 1983), there is much evidence that they are on average highly positively correlated. The
relationship between the profit-sales ratio and price-cost margins will also break down if there are not
constant returns to scale. In this case, controlling for capital intensity is important in allowing for
differential fixed costs across firms that is what we do empirically in the regression-corrected difference in
difference estimates.
27
   The apparently relatively high level of the profit margins is a function of the fact that we are using gross
margins pre-tax and deductions rather than net margins.
28
   We also checked that dropping the capital sales ratio did not change the results as some of the effect of
the NMW may have come from firms substituting away from more expensive labour towards capital
equipment.


                                                      18
wage shock brought about by the minimum wage. For example, any continuous measure

of treatment intensity based on the firm average wage is inevitably coarse.

         We have used information from FAME, the Labour Force Survey (LFS) and the

Workplace Employment Relations (WERS) to both construct and validate our treatment

group indicators. Specifically, we combine information on low wage industry and regions

from the individual level LFS with average firm wages from FAME to define our

treatment and comparison groups. We also use within-establishment information from

matched worker-establishment data in WERS to consider the association between low

pay incidence and average wages to assess the effectiveness of this empirical strategy.29

         To investigate the impact of the minimum wage we have defined our treatment

group, T, in two ways. First, we use average remuneration information from FAME and,

as a starting point, define T = 1 for firms with average remuneration of less than £12,000

in the accounting year prior to minimum wage introduction (“low wage firm”). Average

remuneration in the treatment group for this threshold is £8,400 which, after allowing for

a deduction for non-wage costs (such as employers’ payroll tax, pension contributions,

etc), is equivalent to a £3.90 hourly wage for a full-time worker and is close to the NMW

(introduced at £3.60 per hour). For our research purposes, the key issue is that the wages

of firms beneath the threshold we choose have a significant wage boost from the NMW

relative to higher wage firms and we consider this in detail. One aspect of this is that we

have extensively experimented with the threshold cut-off and we discuss this in detail

below.




29
   Unfortunately, direct linking of data of WERS and FAME is not possible due to confidentiality
restrictions.


                                              19
        The second route is to combine the low wage firm information with industry-

region “cell” data on the proportion of workers beneath the minimum wage in the year

before it came in. Using LFS data, we define a low wage industry-region cell if more than

10% of workers in the given firm’s two-digit industry by region cell in the pre-policy

period are paid below the minimum wage.30 We thus adopt a second definition of T = 1

if a firm has an average wage below £12,000 and is in a regional by two digit industry

cell that has more than 10% of workers paid below the minimum (“low wage firm and

industry”).

        As with the care homes analysis we also look at associations with the pre-policy

average wage in the firm. This gives a continuous indicator that we can use to compare

with the binary treatment variables based upon being beneath a particular wage threshold.

C. The Usefulness of Average Wages to Define Treatment

        Given the issues outlined above, then it is important and necessary to ask how

accurate these treatment group definitions are at identifying firms most affected firms by

the minimum wage regulation. This hinges on how segregated low wage workers are

within firms. That is, our threshold-based definition will be more effective if sub-

minimum wage employees are concentrated in particular firms at the lower end of the

wage distribution.

        To assess the usefulness of the approach we adopt we look at segregation and

wages in the 1998 cross-section of the British Workplace Employment Relations Survey




30
  We experimented with a number of ways of defining the treatment based on cells including finer levels
of industry aggregation and alternative thresholds to 10%.


                                                  20
(WERS)31. This contains matched worker and establishment data that allows us to look at

within-workplace wage distributions and explore the association between average wages

and the intensity of low-wage workers. For 26,509 workers in 1,782 WERS workplaces

we computed the proportion of workers paid less than £3.60 per hour (the value of the

minimum wage when introduced in 1999) and the average hourly wage in the workplace.

There is a strong, negative association between the two variables (a correlation

coefficient of -0.61, p-value < 0.001). In Figure 1 we plot the proportion of workers paid

at or below the minimum wage against the establishment’s average annual wage. This

proportion of minimum wage workers tapers off rapidly after an average annual wage of

£10,000, supporting the idea that exposure to the minimum wage can be proxied by using

an average wage threshold that is around this level. Workplaces with average annual

wages of £12,000 or less (our main threshold defining the treatment group) contain 87%

of all minimum wage workers. These patterns give some support to our idea that “at risk”

group of minimum wage workers are concentrated in firms that pay low average wages.

D. Changes in FAME Wages Before and After NMW Introduction

        Following on from this, it is important to see whether changes in the firm wage

distribution in the FAME data are consistent with these patterns. In particular, it is

important see whether we can pick up a clear change or “twist” in the firm average wage

distribution as the minimum wage was being introduced. To this end, we calculate the

change in average wages in the year immediately before and immediately after the NMW

was introduced for every firm at each percentile of the pre-policy firm wage distribution.

If the firms in the FAME data exhibit some of the low pay patterns outlined above for

31
   WERS is a stratified random sample of British establishments and has been conducted in several waves
since 1980. It has been extensively used by economists and industrial to study a range of issues. Culley et



                                                    21
WERS, the minimum wage introduction should raise average firm wages by more in low

wage firms. Thus, we would expect there to be larger changes in firm wages for the

lowest percentiles of the distribution.

         The results given in Figure 2 confirm this idea. The post-NMW year “Policy On”,

labelled 1999-2000, for the financial year April 1 1999 to March 31 2000, the wage

change tapers off steadily as we move up from the lowest decile of the firm average wage

distribution. After the 15th percentile, all firms appear to have had a similar increase in

nominal wages of about 5% (or about 2.5% in real terms). Importantly, there is no

evidence of faster wage growth for the bottom decile in the pre-policy year (in fact wage

growth in the bottom fifteen percentiles was on average 1.8% in the 1998-1999 financial

year compared to 7.7% in 1999-2000). There is a spike for the bottom first and second

percentiles of the wage distribution for both years, which is consistent with the notion of

some transitory measurement error at the bottom end of the wage distribution generating

mean reversion in all periods. Reassuringly, the general picture follows a similar pattern

to that found for individual-level wage data (Dickens and Manning, 2004) and again

provides encouraging evidence that our definition of the treatment group is useful.

         The critical thing in terms of the definition of the treatment group T, as noted

before, is that we identify wage effects from the treatment group definitions, so that our

analysis of profitability consequences is validated by the minimum wage introduction

having a bigger ‘bite’ on low wage firms. To make this a tighter definition we have also

defined the comparison group to be those firms with average wages above the £12,000

threshold but less than £20,000 (the median firm wage) by removing any firms with

above £20,000 average wages from the main analysis. We do so since these firms are


al. (1999) give details of the survey

                                            22
likely to be quite different in terms of their characteristics and therefore subject to

different unobservable trends from the treatment group. We are careful to test for the

sensitivity of the results to definitions of these thresholds.

E. Other Data

         We have also matched to the firm-level FAME data various industry-level

variables aggregated up from the Labour Force Survey (similar to the US CPS). These

are used as control variables in the analysis and include (at the three-digit industry level)

the proportion of (a) part-time workers, (b) female workers and (c) union members. We

also include skills proxied by the proportion of all workers who have college degrees in a

particular region by two-digit industry cell. The control variables in the regression

models also include a set of regional, one-digit industry and time dummies. Variable

definitions are given in the Data Appendix. Appendix Table B2 shows the characteristics

of the treatment and comparison groups for each model.32

         Finally, the magnitude of the minimum wage increases over our “Policy On”

period should be clarified. This period lasts from April 1st 1999 until March 31st 2002

(the end of our sample). Along with the introduction of the minimum wage, there were

two upratings of the minimum during this time. The first occurred in October 2000 and

saw the minimum wage rise by 10p to £3.70. The second uprating a year later was more

substantial taking the minimum up to £4.10. Together these upratings constitute a 13.9%




32
   Interestingly the profitability of low wage firms is higher at the median and mean than comparison group
firms. This is not true for firms as a whole where there is a positive correlation between average firm wages
and profits per worker (e.g. Van Reenen, 1996). It is because we are focusing on the lower part of the wage
distribution that this correlation breaks down.


                                                     23
increase in the minimum between 1999 and 2002.33 Small cell sizes prevent us from

estimating separate models for the 2000 and 2001 upratings.34

F. Descriptive Analysis

        The statistical analysis of the FAME dataset begins in Table 5(a) where we

present unconditional difference-in-differences in the mean ln(wage) for the two different

categorizations of treatment and comparison groups. It is evident from column (1) that

wages rose significantly amongst the low wage firms when the minimum wage became

operational. Wage growth across the pre- and post-NMW time periods35 was higher at

21.4 percent in the low initial wage group (T = 1) as compared to wage growth of 12.3

percent in the higher initial wage group (T = 0). The difference-in-difference of 9.1

percent is strongly significant in statistical terms. This is consistent with the hypothesis

that the NMW significantly increased wages for low wage firms. Similar patterns are

seen in column (2) for the combined low wage firm and low wage industry treatment

group definition.

        An analogous set of descriptive results is given for profitability in Table 5(b).

The Table is structured the same way as the wages showing unconditional difference-in-

difference estimates of the effects of NMW on firm profitability. In column (1) it is clear

that, whilst profit margins fell by 0.021 between the pre- and post-NMW periods in the

low wage firms (T = 1), they rose by 0.006 in the higher wage firms (T = 0). Thus, there

is a negative difference-in-difference of -0.027. This difference is statistically significant

and shows preliminary evidence that profit margins were squeezed in firms that were “at

33
  By contrast, the consumer price index grew by 6.3% over the same period.
34
  For example, less than 9% of firms report annually on September 30th (i.e. the 12 months immediately
before the October upratings).




                                                 24
risk” from the introduction of the minimum wage. Again, as column (2) shows, use of

the combined low wage firm and industry treatment group definition produces a similar

outturn with, if anything, the difference-in-difference profitability effect being slightly

larger (in absolute terms).

        Table 5 supports the notion that the minimum wage introduction in the UK

resulted in falls in profit margins. However, as noted above, it is important to also

control for other changes that may have occurred at the same time by embedding the

difference-in-difference approach into a regression framework that can factor out other

confounding influences

G. Firm-Level Estimates of the Impact of the Minimum Wage on Wages and Profitability

        Table 6(a) reports the difference-in-difference wage regression results, for three

initial wage measures, the (negative of the) pre-policy average wage and two binary

treatment indicators. The regressions control for a range of time-varying factors (see the

notes to Table 6) and it is clear that the pattern of significantly higher wage growth in

pre-policy low wage firms is robust to the inclusion of the other variables in the

regressions. In the first column we estimate a model that uses the negative of the average

firm wage in the 1998-1999 financial year as a continuous measure of treatment intensity.

According to column (1), firms with lower pre-policy average wages experienced

significantly higher wage growth in the minimum wage period. In column (2) the firm

level binary treatment indicator shows that growth was around 5.7 percent higher in

initially low wage firms. Similarly, in column (3) the effect of being a low wage firm in



35
  Note that we are looking across the six financial years from April 1 1996 to March 31 2002 (three years
before the policy and three years afterwards). In Figure 2, we simply looked one year before and after the
policy introduction.


                                                   25
a low wage industry in the pre-policy period is estimated to be significant, positive and of

much the same magnitude as the estimate in column (2).

       Having established that significant wage effects from the NMW exist in the firm-

level FAME data, we next look at the evolution of firm-level profit margins in the

regression framework. The estimates are given in Table 6(b), with the same structure as

for the wage models. First, column (1) shows that margins rose by more in firms with

higher pre-policy wage levels, so that the minimum wage introduction dampened margins

in the low wage firms more affected by the policy change. The low wage firm and low

wage firm and industry models, in columns (2) and (3) respectively also show this very

clearly. The conditional difference-in-difference estimate is negative and statistically

significant for each, with there being a slightly higher impact of -0.042 in the low wage

firm and industry model compared to -0.031 in the low wage firm model. Hence, the

evidence seems to be show that profitability fell in firms that were more affected by

NMW introduction. When compared to average profits in the low-wage firms in the pre-

policy period with the results for the low-wage firm model they imply a 7.7 per cent (-

0.031/0.403) fall in profit margins compared to a 10.7 per cent fall for the combined

model (-0.042/0.389 = 0.107).

       It is important to reconcile these more modest FAME effects with the bigger

percent reductions in profitability in the care homes analysis reported in the previous

section of the paper. The first observation here is that results are qualitatively the same,

showing negative effects on profitability in very different dataset. Second, we would

expect there to be stronger effects in the care homes sector since the effects on wages are

bigger and the spike in the wage distribution at exactly the minimum wage reveals that

minimum wages matter more in such a vulnerable sector with large numbers of low paid


                                            26
workers. This is, in fact, what we see. Third, if we carry out a calibration exercise as we

did for the care homes estimates above we confirm that the magnitudes are sensible. The

exercise here is a little different owing to the fact that we are not able to use a measure of

the initial wage gap in the FAME data. Appendix A shows that under the assumption of

no disemployment effects, the profitability effect of minimum wages should be a scaled

up version of the effect of the minimum wage on average wages (where the scaling factor

is the ratio of the wage bill to gross profits, which is 1.4 in our data). The results in Table

6 (column (2)) suggest a 6 percent increase in wages, which translates through to a 7.9

percent fall in profit margins (holding employment and sales constant). As noted above,

the -0.031 impact on profit margins in the lower panel of Table 6 amounts to a 7.7

percent fall in margins (compared to the mean profit margin in low wage firms before

minimum wage introduction). The difference (7.9% vs. 7.7%) is not large, however,

suggesting (as with the care home results) that much of the effect is borne by lower

profitability and the estimated magnitudes are very much in line with those predicted by a

simple model.36

H. Robustness Tests

        There are several reasons why one might want to probe these results further, and

in several directions. The first, and obvious, reason is to judge the sensitivity of our

definition of pre-policy low wages. Because we do not have data on the individual

workers within our FAME firms, we rely on pre-policy low wage status as being a

36
   As noted in the Section II, a condition for the existence of long-run effects of minimum wages on
profitability is that there is some degree of imperfect competition in the product market. To examine this
idea we split industries into “high” and “low” competition industries based on a proxy for the Lerner Index
(constructed as in Aghion et al, 2005). Consistently with this idea, the effects of the policy were
numerically stronger in the less competitive sectors (above median value of three-digit industry Lerner
index). For example, in our baseline Low Wage Firm model in column (2) of Table 6 the coefficient




                                                    27
function of the average wage in the firm. This is less than ideal, even though we have (at

least partially) validated its use with the WERS data, and it is important to study whether

the results are robust to alternative ways of defining the threshold between treatment and

comparison groups.

          Table 7 shows conditional difference-in-difference estimates of the impact of

NMW introduction on profitability for a range of different wage thresholds, running from

an average wage of £10,000 at £1,00o intervals up to £15,000. The results are reassuring

in that they all establish a significant NMW effect of reducing profit margins, with

magnitude of the impact varying and becoming slightly larger (in absolute terms) for

lower thresholds as we would expect (so there is a bigger impact on the very low wage

firms).

          The second main reason why one may worry is if our results are simply picking

up a relationship between changes in profit margins and initial low wage status that

exists, but has nothing to do with the NMW introduction. We have thus looked at

estimates, structured in the same way, from periods before the NMW was introduced to

benchmark the findings against non-NMW periods. One such ‘pseudo experiment’ or

falsification test is reported in Table 8 where we examine an imaginary introduction of

the NMW on April 1st 1996 (instead of three years later) and repeat our analysis of wage

and profit changes. Table 8 reinforce the results reported to date, as we are unable to find

any difference in margins between low and high wage firms in the period when the policy

was not in place. This is consistent with the NMW introduction being the factor that

caused margins to fall in low wage firms.


(standard error) in the industries with an above median Lerner Index was -0.042 (0.017) compared to -
0.010 (0.020) in the other (below median) sectors.


                                                 28
       A related issue is the possibility of pre-sample trends (possibly due to mean

reversion) in the wage model. If initially low wage firms had faster than average wage

growth even in the absence of the policy then this would be conflated with the NMW

impact on wages. Although there was some evidence for this in the Care Homes results of

Table 2, we saw there that the trend-adjusted difference in difference estimated still

identified a strong and positive impact of the NMW. In the FAME data of Table 8 there is

no evidence of mean reversion for wages (or profitability as discussed above) in the pre-

policy period. Therefore, the positive pre-sample trend for low-wage firms seems specific

to the care homes industry rather than a general feature of UK firms.

       Nevertheless, we investigated this issue in detail by estimating the wage model of

Table 6 with a rolling threshold from £10,000 to £15,000 for both the policy and pseudo-

experiment periods. That is, we estimate the model for thresholds at each £100 interval in

this range and plot the coefficients (see Figure 3). In the pre-policy period, defining the

treatment group at our chosen cut-off (£12,000) has an implied effect of zero, which is

what the first rows of Table 8 revealed. There is some evidence of a slight downward

slope of the line before this point, however, which is consistent with the idea that there

was some faster wage growth for firms in the lower tail of the wage distribution

consistent with some mean reversion (recall that as we move closer to the origin along the

horizontal axis the treatment group is composed of increasingly low-paying firms). More

importantly, however, the downward sloping line is also evident in the “Policy On”

period, so the vertical distance between the two lines gives the trend-adjusted difference

in difference estimate (triple differenced) of the NMW at different cut-off points. This is

approximately constant over the relevant range and statistically significant.




                                             29
        We repeat the same exercise for profit margins in Figure 4. There is no evidence

of any pre-policy trend in profitability regardless of how the thresholds are defined.37 We

conclude that, although there may be some evidence of mean reversion for wages in the

lower part of the distribution (as is also evident in Figure 3), this generates no substantial

bias in our estimate of the causal impact on the minimum wages on firm profits.

        Table 9 considers a number of further robustness tests of our main results. The

first column reports the baseline estimates from Table 6 for reference. The second

column implements a statistical matching technique by trimming the sample according to

the propensity scores of the treatment and comparison groups.38 As discussed earlier our

sample seems well chosen with relatively few observations needing to be trimmed to

ensure common support. More importantly, the estimated effect of the policy on wages

and profitability are similar to those in column (1).39

        Since our sample is unbalanced, it is also important to test whether our results are

robust to potential compositional effects. To evaluate this issue in column (3) we estimate

our model using the balanced panel (that is, for firms that report information for all six

years of the panel). This sample comprises 2,052 observations that represent 54% of the

overall sample. The results show significant effect of the NMW on wages and profits in



37
   This suggests that the mean reversion identified at the lowest part of the wage distribution in Figure 3
may simply be measurement error in wages, rather than genuine transitory shocks.
38
   The basic method used is that of Heckman, Ichimura and Todd (1997) where propensity scores are
estimated and the sample then trimmed to exclude poorly matched observations without common support.
To generate the propensity scores, we used a probit model that included all the control variables used in
Table 6. We trim at the 1st percentile of the treatment group and the 99th percentile of the control group.
39
   Few observations are lost under propensity score matching because the comparison group is already
chosen to be of relatively low wage firms (under £20,000 average annual wages). If we had used the entire
FAME sample (including firms with average wages of over £20,000) we would have had to lose the vast
majority of the sample to ensure that the comparison group had common support with the treatment group.
Results are not presented for the pre-policy average wage since that is a continuous variable. If, however,
the specification including that variable was estimated on the trimmed sample from columns (2) or (3) this
produced very similar results to the baseline estimates.


                                                    30
the balanced panel and, although the estimated magnitudes of the profitability effects are

a little smaller, they remain strongly significant.

         Column (4) of Table 9 includes a full set of three-digit industry time trends. These

trends were jointly insignificant, but even so, the treatment effects appear to be slightly

stronger when they are included. Column (5) includes a full set of firm fixed effects. Of

course, in the case of a balanced panel with no covariates the “T*Policy On” parameters

would be orthogonal to the firm fixed effects.                   However, our models do contain

covariates and we use an unbalanced panel. Nonetheless, the estimates are qualitatively

similar to the baseline results showing a significant effect of the introduction of a national

minimum wage on both wages and profitability.

I. Entry and Exit

         The FAME database identifies four categories of inactive firms, namely firms that

are dissolved, liquidated, in receivership or currently non-trading.40 Hence, we have

defined all firms in these categories as “exiting” firms. Furthermore, the longer period

available in FAME allows us to compare exit patterns before and after the minimum

wage. We do so in the same difference-in-difference setting as for the wage and

profitability models based upon probit models of exit.

         The results are reported in Table 10 (Table B3 in Appendix B reports some

descriptive statistics). The upper panel of the Table shows descriptive statistics on exit

rates for treatment and control firms before and after minimum wage introduction. For

both classifications of treatment and control firms, changes in the exit rate before and



40
  So exits by takeover are not coded to be unity in this definition as takeovers may be regarded as a sign of
success rather than failure. Re-defining the dependent variable to be unity if the exit is to a takeover does
not change the qualitative nature of the results.


                                                     31
after minimum wage introduction are very similar.             The difference-in-difference is

statistically indistinguishable from zero in both cases.

        The lower panel of the Table shows the probit model estimates. As with the wage

and profitability models, there are three specifications. The first enters the negative of

the pre-policy average wage and the other two are the two binary treatment-control

comparisons. There is no evidence of any faster increase in exit rates in initially low

wage firms following the minimum wage introduction.

        There are two possible problems with the firm-level analysis of exit. First, we

ignore the possible entry-deterring effect of the minimum wage may, and second, there

may be pre-policy trends. Table 11 takes both of these into account. Obviously, we

cannot fully implement this at the firm level, as entrants do not have a pre-policy wage

for the entrants. However, we can examine an alternative dataset containing all entrants

and exits in each three-digit sector (from the DTI’s VAT Registration Database). Unlike

the firm data, we cannot distinguish between exit due to takeover and exit due to

bankruptcy (the focus of Table 10).

        Panel A of Table 11 contains the entry results. In column (1) we examine how

entry rates have changed after the policy. Perhaps surprisingly, entry rates in low wage

industries appear to be higher following the minimum wage introduction. Column (2)

repeats the analysis but for a period prior to the introduction of the policy (comparing a

pseudo policy in 1998-1996 with the 1993-1994 period). We see that entry into low wage

industries was already increasing prior to the policy as many low wage service sectors

(retail, hospitality, etc.) have been expanding. When we control for the pre-policy trend in

the final column, we estimate a fall in entry rates of 3.6 percentage points, as we might

theoretically expect (although this is statistically insignificant).


                                               32
        Panel (B) conducts the same analysis but for industry exit rates with similar

findings. Exit rates perversely seemed to fall as a result of the policy column (1) (as they

did in Table 10). But again there was a trend towards lower exit in low wage industries,

regardless of the policy (see column (2)). Consequently, the trend-adjusted difference in

difference of column (3) finds an imprecisely estimated increase in exit of 1.5 percentage

points. Panel (C) puts these together for net entry. The trend-adjusted difference in

difference is a fall of 5.1 percentage points.

        We should be cautious in over-interpreting these results as the standard errors

around all these estimates are wide and the effects are not significant at conventional

levels. Nevertheless, the magnitudes are not trivial. The entry rate pre-NMW was 9.3%,

so the estimated fall in entry due to the minimum wage of 3.6% implies a fall of over a

third in entry rates.

J. Employment and Labour Productivity

        Finally, we examined other outcomes, in particular whether there was a NMW

effect on firm employment. Table 12, in line with other UK evidence, suggests no

significant effect of the minimum wage. The estimated effects are positive in panels A

and B and negative in Panel C, but all are insignificantly different from zero.

        We also looked at productivity to see if there were any positive “shock” effects on

firm efficiency. For the Low Wage Firm and Industry definition of T we obtained a

positive, but statistically insignificant, coefficient of 0.054 on T*Policy On in a

ln(Sales/Employment) regression). We did not therefore find any evidence of minimum

wage effects on productivity.




                                                 33
V. Conclusions

       Despite there being a large literature on the economic effects of minimum wages

on labour market outcomes (especially individual’s employment/unemployment and firm

labour demand), there is a surprising lack of evidence on the impact of minimum wages

on firm performance. In this paper, we consider the impact of minimum wages on firm

profitability. Studying profitability is important because the empirical evidence suggests

that minimum wages do raise the earnings of low wage workers, but there is the paradox

that in some research there are not negative employment consequences. Models of

imperfect competition in the product market suggest that the cost of minimum wages may

be partly born by firms in terms of lower profit margins.

       Using the quasi-experiment of the introduction of a national minimum wage to the

UK labour market in 1999, we considered what happened to profit margins in firms

whose wages were ex ante more likely to be affected by the minimum wage. We

examined these firms before and after introduction and compared them to a comparison

group of firms whose wage costs were ex ante less likely to be less affected. We used

two firm-level panel datasets: one on the low wage care homes sector and another

covering a range of private sector firms. Across both datasets our results we show robust

results that that profitability was significantly reduced by the introduction of the

minimum wage. With respect to other outcomes, wages rose significantly, but neither

employment nor productivity seemed to change.

       Finally, we could not find any evidence that low wage firms were forced out of

business by the higher wage costs resulting from the minimum wage. Our analysis of an

industry level panel dataset suggested that there was some fall in net entry rates following

the minimum wage, hinting at a longer run negative effect on the number of firms. These


                                            34
results were rather imprecise, however, and not significant at conventional levels. The

dynamics effect of labour market regulations, working through entry and exit of firms, is

an area which calls out for future work.

        There are, of course, a number of caveats to our results. It would also be useful to

have better data on prices and quality to see if this margin has also adjusted.41 It would

also be useful to have more information on the within firm distribution of workers in

other sectors besides care homes. A better integration of theory and empirical work in the

context of imperfect competition in both product and labour markets would be another

fruitful research area. Indeed, it is somewhat of a puzzle that our results are consistent

with a simple model where firms do not seem to adjust their employment and prices in

response to the minimum wage in the way we would expect.

        Overall, though, we believe this study is an important contribution to looking at

the impact of labour market regulation on firms as well as on individuals.




41
  Although there is no evidence for these effects in the care homes sector, as it is heavily regulated (see
Machin, Manning and Rahman, 2003).


                                                    35
References

Aaronson, Daniel (2001) ‘Price Pass Through and the Minimum Wage’, Review of
      Economics and Statistics, 83, 158-169.

Aaronson, Daniel and French, Eric (2006) “Product Market Evidence on the Employment
      Effects of the Minimum Wage” Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Working Paper
      No. 21

Aaronson, Daniel and French, Eric (2007) “Product Market Evidence on the Employment
      Effects of the Minimum Wage” Journal of Labour Economics, 25 (1) 167-200

Aghion, Philippe, Nick Bloom, Richard Blundell, Rachel Griffith and Peter Howitt
      (2005), “Competition and Innovation: An inverted U relationship”, Quarterly
      Journal of Economics,120, 701-728.

Ashenfelter, Orley and Robert Smith (1979) ‘Compliance with the Minimum Wage Law’,
      Journal of Political Economy, 87, 333-50.

Besley, Tim and Robin Burgess (2004) ‘Can Labour Regulation Hinder Economic
       Performance? Evidence from India’, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119, 91-
       134.

Bloom, Nicholas and Van Reenen, John (2007) ‘Measuring and Explaining Management
      practices across firms and nations’, Quarterly Journal of Economics 122, 1351–
      1408

Blundell, Richard, Monica Costa Dias, Costas Meghir and John Van Reenen (2004)
      ‘Evaluating the Employment Impact of a Mandatory Job Search Assistance
      Programme’, Journal of the European Economics Association, 2, 569-606.

Bond, Stephen. and Jason Cummins (2000) ‘The Stock Market and Investment in the
      New Economy: Some Tangible Facts and Intangible Fictions’, Brookings Papers
      on Economic Activity, 1, 61-124.

Borjas, George (2004) Labor Economics, McGraw-Hill (2nd edition).

Brown, Charles (1999) ‘Minimum Wages, Employment, and the Distribution of Income’,
      Chapter 32 in Orley Ashenfelter and David Card (eds.) Handbook of Labour
      Economics, North Holland Press.

Brown, Charles, Curtis Gilroy and Andrew Kohen (1982) ‘The Effect of the Minimum
      Wage on Employment and Unemployment’, Journal of Economic Literature, 20,
      487-528.

Card, David (1992) ‘Using Regional Variation in Wages to Measure the Effects of the
       Federal Minimum Wage’, Industrial and Labour Relations Review, 46,: 22-37.


                                         36
Card, David and Alan Krueger (1994) ‘Minimum Wages and Employment: A Case Study
       of the Fast Food Industry in New Jersey and Pennsylvania’, American Economic
       Review, 84, 772-793.

Card,    David    and   Alan     Krueger  (1995)    Myth     and     Measurement:
        The New Economics of the Minimum Wage, Princeton University Press.

Culley, Mark, Woodland, Stephen, O’Reilly, Andrew and Dix, Gill (1999) Britain at
       Work, London: Routledge

Dickens, Richard, Stephen Machin and Alan Manning (1999) 'The Effects of Minimum
      Wages on Employment: Theory and Evidence From Britain', Journal of Labour
      Economics, 17, 1-22

DiNardo, John, Nicole Fortin and Thomas Lemieux (1996) ‘Labour Market Institutions
      and the Distribution of Wages’, Econometrica, 64, 1001-44.

Dickens, Richard and Alan Manning (2004) ‘Has the National Minimum Wage Reduced
      UK Wage Inequality?’ Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series A, 167,
      613-626.

Fisher, Franklin and John McGowan (1983) ‘On the misuse of the profits-sales ratio to
        infer monopoly profits’ American Economic Review, 73, 82-97

Freeman, Richard and James Medoff (1984) What do Unions do?, New York: Basic
      Books.

Heckman, James, Hide Ichimura and Petra Todd (1997) ‘Matching as an Econometric
     Evaluation Estimator’, Review of Economic Studies, 65, 261-294.

Hicks, John (1932) A Theory of Wages, London: Macmillan

Kreps, David and Scheinkman, J. (1983) “Quantity Precommitment and Bertrand
       competition yield Cournot outcomes” Bell Journal of Economics, 14, 326-227

Lemos, Sara (2005) ‘A Survey of the Effects of Minimum Wages on Prices’, University
      of Leicester mimeo.

Machin, Stephen and Alan Manning (1994) ‘Minimum Wages, Wage Dispersion and
      Employment: Evidence from the U.K. Wages Councils’, Industrial and Labour
      Relations Review, 47, 319-29.

Machin, Stephen and Alan Manning (2004) ‘A Test of Competitive Labour Market
      Theory: The Wage Structure amongst Care Assistants in the South of England’,
      Industrial and Labour Relations Review, 57, 371-85



                                         37
Machin, Stephen, Alan Manning and Lupin Rahman (2003) ‘Where the Minimum Wage
      Bites Hard: The Introduction of the UK National Minimum Wage to a Low Wage
      Sector’, Journal of the European Economic Association, 1, 154-80.

Machin, Stephen and John Van Reenen (1993) ‘Profit Margins and the Business Cycle:
      Evidence from UK Manufacturing Firms’, Journal of Industrial Economics, 41,
      29-50.

Machin, Stephen and Joan Wilson (2004) ‘Minimum Wages in a Low Wage Labour
      Market: Care Homes in the UK’, Economic Journal, 114, 102-109.

Metcalf, David (2002) ‘The National Minimum Wage: Coverage, Impact and Future’,
       Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, 64, 567-82.

Menezes-Filho, Naercio (1997) ‘Unions and Profitability Over the 1980s: Some
      Evidence on Union-Firm Bargaining in the United Kingdom’, Economic Journal,
      107, 651-70.

Metacalf, David (2003) ‘Unions and productivity, financial performance and investment:
      international evidence’ in Addison, John and Schnabel, Claus (eds), International
      Handbook of Trade Unions, London: Edward Elgar

Neumark, David and Olena Nizolava (2007) ‘Minimum Wages in the Longer Run’,
     Journal of Human Resources, 42, 435-52.

Neumark, David and William Wascher (1992) ‘"Employment Effects of Minimum and
     Sub-minimum Wage Laws", Industrial and Labour Relations Review, 46, 55-81.

Neumark, David and William Wascher (2007) “Minimum Wages and Employment”,
     Foundations and Trends in Microeconomics, 3, 1-182

Slade, Margaret (2004) ‘Models of Firm-Level Profitability’, International Journal of
       Industrial Organization, 22, 289-308

Stewart, Mark (2002) ‘Estimating the Impact of the Minimum Wage Using Geographical
       Wage Variation’, Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, 64, 583-605.

Stewart, Mark (2004) ‘The Impact of the Introduction of the UK Minimum Wage on the
       Employment Probabilities of Low Wage Workers’, Journal of the European
       Economic Association, 2, 67-97.

Tirole, Jean (1989) The Theory of Industrial Organization, Cambridge: MIT Press


Van Reenen, John (1996) ‘The Creation and Capture of Economic Rents: Wages and
      Innovation in a Panel of UK Companies’, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111,
      195-226.


                                          38
Varian, Hal (1986) Microeconomic Analysis, Second Edition New York: Norton




                                        39
  Figure 1: Proportion of Sub-Minimum Wage Workers and the Establishment’s Average
          Annual Wage, WERS 1998 Cross Section of Matched Workers and Workplaces




NOTES:- These figures are derived from the worker-establishment data (23,319 workers in 1,782 workplaces) from the
1998 Workplace Employee Relations Survey (WERS). The y-axis shows the proportion of workers paid below the
minimum wage (£3.60 per hour) in the establishment. The x-axis shows the average annual wage at the workplace. This
is divided into bins for of five percentiles from lowest (left) to highest (right) - a total of twenty bins.
We mark the relevant thresholds for our analysis with vertical lines. The £12,000 line represents the main treatment
group threshold used in our analysis of the FAME data. The £20,000 line is the cut-off for the upper bound of the
comparison group used in the FAME analysis.




                                                        40
                                     Figure 2: Change in Ln(Average Wage) by Percentile, FAME.
                  .15


                                           £12,000
    Change in log Average Wage
                         .1




                                                                                    £20,000
            .05   0




                                 0           13           25                        50                 75
                                                     Percentiles of Initial Wage Distribution

                                                  1998-1999 Change                  1999-2000 Change



NOTES:- The data is taken from the FAME database of company accounts. The horizontal axis indicates
the percentile in the firm wage distribution for a given firm in the initial period, the pre-policy financial
year up to March 31st 1999. The vertical axis shows the proportionate change in average firm wages
(between the pre-policy financial year and the post policy financial year) for each firm ranked by where it
began in the wage distribution. Pre-Policy is defined as the financial year April 1st 1998 to March 31st 1999;
Policy On is defined as the financial year April 1st 1999 to March 31st 2000.




                                                                       41
  Figure 3: Treatment Effect Coefficients From Different Thresholds and Pseudo-
           .1
           .08      Experiments, Ln(AverageWage), FAME
   Treatment Effect




                                             Policy On
     .04     .06
           .02




                            Pre-Policy
           0




              £10,000   £11,000         £12,000     £13,000              £14,000          £15,000
                                    Firm Average Wage Threshold

                                        Policy On                Pre-Policy


NOTES:- Data taken from is the FAME database of company accounts. The baseline models are as per
Low Wage Model, Table 6 column (2) for the Policy On period; and Table 8 column(2) for the Pre-Policy
period. . The vertical axis shows the estimated treatment effects. The horizontal axis shows thresholds are
shifted in units of £100 to define treatment group (T=1) as firms with pre-policy wages of under the
threshold and comparison group with firms with average wages over the threshold and under £20,000. The
baseline model is then re-defined and re-estimated using 50 successive treatment group wage thresholds
between £10,000 and £15,000.The Policy On sample period covers the six financial years from April 1st
1996 to March 31st 2002, NMW introduction on April 1st 1999. The Pre-Policy (pseudo-experiment) period
covers the six financial years April 1st 1993 to March 31st 1999, with an ‘imaginary’ NMW introduction on
April 1st 1996.




                                                    42
  Figure 4: Treatment Effect Coefficients From Different Thresholds and Pseudo-
                   Experiments, Gross Profit Margins, FAME
               .01
               0




                                                                 Pre-Policy
       Treatment Effect
          -.02    -.01
               -.03




                                Policy On
               -.04




                  £10,000   £11,000        £12,000     £13000                £14,000         £15,000
                                       Firm Average Wage Threshold

                                            Policy On                Pre-Policy



NOTES:- Data taken from is the FAME database of company accounts. The baseline models are as per
Low Wage Model, Table 6 column (2) for the Policy On period; and Table 8 column(2) for the Pre-Policy
period. . The vertical axis shows the estimated treatment effects. The horizontal axis shows thresholds are
shifted in units of £100 to define treatment group (T=1) as firms with pre-policy wages of under the
threshold and comparison group with firms with average wages over the threshold and under £20,000. The
baseline model is then re-defined and re-estimated using 50 successive treatment group wage thresholds
between £10,000 and £15,000.The Policy On sample period covers the six financial years from April 1st
1996 to March 31st 2002, NMW introduction on April 1st 1999. The Pre-Policy (pseudo-experiment) period
covers the six financial years April 1st 1993 to March 31st 1999, with an ‘imaginary’ NMW introduction on
April 1st 1996.




                                                    43
            Table 1: The “Bite” of the National Minimum Wage (NMW) in UK Care
                                     Homes, 1998-1999

                                                                Pre-Minimum             Post-Minimum
                                                                    Wage                    Wage
                                                              Introduction, 1998      Introduction,1999

  Average hourly wage (£)                                            3.98                      4.22
  % Paid Less Than Adult Minimum Wage                                0.322                     0.004
  Initial Wage Gap                                                   0.037                     0.001
  (Profits/Sales)                                                    0.119                     0.126
  (Wage Bill/ Sales)                                                 0.398                     0.410
  Average Age of Employees (years)                                   40.17                     40.26
  Occupancy Rate (proportion)                                        0.894                     0.900
  Female Employees (proportion)                                      0.927                     0.928
  Nursing Qualifications (proportion)                                0.103                     0.106
  DSS (proportion)                                                   0.527                     0.576


  NOTES:- These figures are based on the 454 care homes for which we have complete data on wages,
  profits and control variables. “DSS” is the proportion of residents who have their care paid for by the
  government (Department of Social Security); occupancy rate is measured by the number of beds currently
  in use over the total number of beds.

     Table 2: The Impact of the National Minimum Wage Introduction on Average
                                Wages in Care Homes

Dependent variable: ∆lnW , Change in Average Wage

                   Change         Change in       Difference        Change         Change in       Difference
                Surrounding       Earlier Pre-                   Surrounding       Earlier Pre-
                    NMW             Policy                           NMW             Policy
                Introduction,       Period,                      Introduction,       Period,
                 1998-1999        1992-1993                       1998-1999        1992-1993
                     (1)              (2)             (3)             (4)              (5)               (6)

Initial Wage        0.861            0.225           0.636           0.886            0.240             0.678
Gap (t-1)          (0.045)          (0.103)         (0.111)         (0.052)          (0.104)           (0.113)

 Controls            No                No             No              Yes              Yes              Yes

Number of            454              225                              454             225
Homes


  NOTES:- Coefficients estimated by Ordinary Least Squares, robust standard errors in parentheses
  underneath coefficients. The pre-policy period (1993-1992) is used because it is the only other time period
  for which data on care homes was collected. The sample for 1998-1999 is based on the 454 care homes for
  which we have complete data on wages, profits and control variables. Control variables include proportion
  female, mean worker age, proportion with nursing qualifications, region dummies and month dummies.



                                                      44
 Table 3: The Impact of the National Minimum Wage Introduction on Profitability
                            in Care Homes, 1998-1999


               Dependent variable:              ∆(Π/S) , Change in Profitability

                                          Change Surrounding        Change Surrounding
                                          NMW Introduction,         NMW Introduction,
                                              1998-1999                 1998-1999
                                                 (1)                       (2)

               Initial Wage Gap (t-1)             -0.433                    -0.492
                                                 (0.173)                   (0.202)

               Controls                            No                        Yes

               Number of Firms                     454                       454


NOTES:- Coefficients estimated by Ordinary Least Squares. Robust standard errors in parentheses under
coefficients. Initial pre-minimum wage period (t-1) controls include workforce characteristics (proportion
female, mean worker age, proportion with nursing qualifications), the proportion of residents paid for by
the government (“DSS”), region dummies and month dummies.




          Table 4: The Impact of the National Minimum Wage Introduction on Care
                          Home Closures (by August 2001)


                                                  Pr[Home Closure], 1998-2001

                                                    (1)                       (2)

              Initial Wage Gap (t-1)               0.357                    0.393
                                                  (0.356)                  (0.380)

              Controls                              No                       Yes

              Number of Firms                       487                      487


NOTES:- The proportion of homes that were alive in 1998 (year before minimum wage) but closed by
August 2001 is 0.226. We report the marginal effects from probit ML estimates with standard errors
underneath in parentheses. Control variables are the proportion of female workers, and the proportion of
workers with nursing qualifications, average age of employees, the proportion of DSS local authority
residents, region dummies and month dummies.




                                                   45
       Table 5: Firm Wages and Profitability Before and After National Minimum Wage
        Introduction, FAME (Six Financial Years From April 1 1996 to March 31 2002)

      (a) Difference- in-Difference - ln(Average Wage)

                                 T = Low Wage Firm                          T = Low Wage Firm and Industry
                         (1)            (2)                (3)              (4)          (5)           (6)

                     Pre-NMW         Post-NMW          Difference       Pre-NMW          Post-NMW          Difference
                                                      (Post – Pre)                                        (Post – Pre)

T=1                    2.137            2.351             0.214            2.119            2.343            0.224


T=0                    2.753            2.876             0.123            2.674            2.813            0.139

Difference-in-                                            0.091                                              0.085
Difference                                               (0.022)                                            (0.027)


      (b) Difference-in-Difference – Gross Profit Margins

                                 T = Low Wage Firm                           T = Low Wage Firm and Industry
                          (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)              (5)              (6)

                      Pre-NMW          Post-NMW         Difference       Pre-NMW         Post-NMW          Difference
                                                       (Post – Pre)                                       (Post – Pre)

T=1                      0.403            0.382           -0.021            0.389           0.359            -0.030


T=0                      0.300            0.306            0.006            0.316           0.319            0.003

Difference-in-                                             -0.027                                            -0.033
Difference                                                (0.012)                                           (0.013)


      NOTES:- Pre-NMW corresponds to the financial years April 1st 1996-March 31st 1999 and Post-NMW to
      the financial years April 1st 1999–March 31st 2002. T = 1 indicates the treatment Group and T= 0 indicates
      the comparison group. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered by firm. Low Wage Firm – the treatment
      group is defined as firms with an average wage equal to or below £12,000 per annum in the pre-policy
      financial year up to March 31st 1999; the comparison group is defined as firms with average wages between
      £12,000 and £20,000 in the pre-policy financial year up to March 31st 1999. Low Wage Firm and Industry -
      treatment group is defined as firms with average wages equal to or below £12,000 in the pre-policy
      financial year up to March 31st 1999 and being in a low wage industry (defined as a firm located in a region
      and three-digit industry LFS cell with 10% or more sub-minimum wage workers in the same period). The
      sample size is 3820.




                                                          46
 Table 6: National Minimum Wage Difference-in-Difference Regression Estimates,
       Change in ln(Average Wage) and Gross Profit Margins Models, FAME,
               Six Financial Years From April 1 1996 to March 31 2002

                                           (1)                         (2)                        (3)
                                         T=                        T=                          T=
                                     Pre-Policy               Low Wage Firm               Low Wage Firm
                                 -ln(Average Wage)                                         and Industry


(a) ∆lnW , Change in
ln(Average Wage)
                                          0.139                      0.057                       0.054
T*Policy On                              (0.032)                    (0.020)                     (0.023)


T                                         -0.888                     -0.527                      -0.458
                                         (0.015)                    (0.021)                     (0.029)

(b) ∆(Π/S) , Change in
Gross Profit Margin
                                          -0.039                     -0.031                      -0.042
T*Policy On                              (0.016)                    (0.013)                     (0.014)


T                                         0.013                      0.015                       0.002
                                         (0.023)                    (0.018)                     (0.023)

Controls                                   Yes                        Yes                         Yes


Sample Size                               3,820                      3,820                       3,820


 NOTES:- Coefficients estimated by Ordinary Least Squares and standard errors in parentheses below
 coefficients are clustered by firm. Policy On = 0 for the pre-policy financial years April 1st 1996-March 31st
 1999 and Policy On =1 for the financial years April 1st 1999–March 31st 2002. T = 1 indicates the treatment
 Group and T= 0 indicates the comparison group. ln(Average Wage) - indicates that we use a continuous
 measure of the wage (in the pre-policy year up to March 31st 1999) is used for treatment intensity. Note that
 we multiply this by -1 to facilitate the comparison with estimates based on the discrete definition. Low
 Wage Firm - treatment group is defined as firms with an average wage equal to or below £12,000 per
 annum in the pre-policy financial year up to March 31st 1999; the comparison group is defined as firms
 with average wages between £12,000 and £20,000. Low Wage Firm and Industry - treatment group is
 defined as firms with average wages equal to or less than £12,000 in the pre-policy financial year up to
 March 31st 1999 and being in a low wage industry (defined as a firm located in a region and three-digit
 industry LFS cell with 10% or more sub-minimum wage workers in the same period). Controls include one
 digit industry division; regional dummies (18 government office regions); the firm capital-sales ratio; the
 proportion of workers who are graduates (by region and two-digit industry); and union membership, part-
 time work and female employment rates (by three-digit industry classification).




                                                      47
                     Table 7: Alternative Definitions of Treatment Group –
                            Change in Gross Profit Margin Models


                             T =1 if       T =1 if      T =1 if        T =1 if       T =1 if      T =1 if
                              Wpre          Wpre         Wpre           Wpre          Wpre          Wpre
                            <£ 10,000     <£ 11,000    <£ 12,000      <£ 13,000     <£ 14,000    <£ 15,000


T = Low Wage Firm

T*Policy On                   -0.031        -0.034          -0.031      -0.026        -0.024        -0.023
                             (0.015)       (0.014)         (0.013)     (0.011)       (0.010)       (0.010)


No. of Observations in
Treatment group                664           819            985         1,201         1,515         1,846


T = Low Wage Firm and
Industry

T*Policy On                   -0.039        -0.041          -0.042      -0.033        -0.031        -0.026
                             (0.015)       (0.015)         (0.014)     (0.013)       (0.012)       (0.011)


No. of Observations in
Treatment group                423           514            585          686           825           935



  NOTES:- Each column shows the results from a separate difference in differences regression where the
  treatment and comparison groups are defined according to different thresholds as indicated at the head of
  the relevant column. For example when threshold is £10,000 the treatment group (T=1) is defined as all
  firms with average wages below £10,000 and the comparison group (T=0) is defined as all firms with
  average wages equal to or above £10,000 and less than £20,000 (the £20,000 upper bound in the financial
  year up to March 31st 1999 is kept fixed). The Low Wage Firm models are directly comparable to column
  (2) of Table 6. The Low Wage Firm and Industry models are directly comparable to column (3) of Table 6.
  The sample size is 3820. Other notes as for Table 6.




                                                      48
  Table 8: Difference-in-Difference Pseudo-Experiment of Introducing a National
  Minimum Wage in April 1996, Change in Ln(Average Wage) and Gross Profit
 Margins Models, FAME, Six Financial Years From April 1 1993 to March 31 1999

                                            (1)                       (2)                      (3)

                                            T=                     T=                       T=
                                        Pre-Policy            Low Wage Firm            Low Wage Firm
                                       -ln(Average                                      and Industry
                                          Wage)

(a) ∆lnW , Change in
ln(Average Wage)

T*Pseudo-Policy On                         0.014                     0.013                    0.009
                                          (0.033)                   (0.031)                  (0.031)

T                                         -0.875                    -0.572                    -0.481
                                          (0.020)                   (0.028)                  (0.022)


(b) ∆(Π/S) , Change in
Gross Profit Margin

T*Pseudo-Policy On                         0.005                     0.004                    0.008
                                          (0.012)                   (0.010)                  (0.018)

T                                          0.006                     0.006                    -0.003
                                          (0.016)                   (0.015)                  (0.013)

Controls                                    Yes                       Yes                      Yes

Sample Size                                4,914                     4,914                    4,914


NOTES:- This table reports a pseudo-experiment of introducing a National Minimum Wage on April 1st
1996 for financial years April 1st 1996 and March 31st 1999, compared to a pseudo “pre-policy period”
(financial years April 1st 1993 – March 31st 1996). T = 1 indicates the treatment Group and T= 0 indicates
the comparison group. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered by firm. ln(Average Wage) - indicates a
continuous measure of the wage (in the pseudo pre-policy financial year up to March 31st 1996) is used for
treatment intensity. .Note that we multiply this by -1 to facilitate the comparison with estimates based on
the discrete definition. Low Wage Firm - treatment group is defined as firms with an average wage equal to
or below £12,000 per annum in the pseudo pre-policy financial year up to March 31st 1996; the comparison
group is defined as firms with average wages between £12,000 and £20,000. Low Wage Firm and Industry
- treatment group is defined as firms with average wages equal to or less than £12,000 in the pseudo pre-
policy financial year up to March 31st 1996 and being in a low wage industry (defined as a firm located in a
region and three-digit industry LFS cell with 10% or more sub-minimum wage workers in the same
period). Controls include one digit industry division; regional dummies (18 government office regions); the
firm capital-sales ratio; the proportion of workers who are graduates (by region and two-digit industry); and
union membership, part-time work and female employment rates (by three-digit industry classification).



                                                     49
              Table 9: Alternative Models of National Minimum Wage Impact, ln(Average Wage)
              and Profit Margins Models, FAME data, Six Financial Years From April 1st 1996 to
                                               March 1st 2002

                                     (1)               (2)                 (3)              (4)                 (5)
                                 Unbalanced         Propensity          Balanced          Industry         Fixed Effects
                                    Panel             Score              Panel            Trends           (Unbalanced
                                  (Baseline)                                                                  Panel)

(1) Average Wage 1999

(a) ∆lnW
      T = 1*Policy On                0.139              n.a.              0.107             0.157               0.128
                                    (0.032)         (see notes)          (0.036)           (0.034)             (0.032)
(b) ∆(Π/S)
     T = 1*Policy On                -0.039                               -0.037            -0.049              -0.026
                                    (0.016)                              (0.013)           (0.018)             (0.011)
(2) Low-Wage Firm

(a) ∆lnW                             0.056             0.061              0.065             0.063               0.075
      T = 1*Policy On               (0.021)           (0.025)            (0.022)           (0.023)             (0.020)

(b) ∆(Π/S)                          -0.031            -0.029             -0.028            -0.038              -0.019
     T = 1*Policy On                (0.013)           (0.015)            (0.010)           (0.014)             (0.010)

(3) Low Wage Firm and
Industry
                                     0.057             0.069             -0.073             0.069               0.073
(a) ∆lnW                            (0.024)           (0.030)            (0.027)           (0.027)             (0.025)
      T = 1*Policy On
                                    -0.044            -0.040             -0.031            -0.053              -0.022
(b) ∆(Π/S)                          (0.014)           (0.017)            (0.012)           (0.017)             (0.011)
     T = 1*Policy On


Industry Trends                       No                No                No                 Yes                 No
Firm Fixed Effects                    No                No                No                 No                  Yes
Controls                              Yes               Yes               Yes                Yes                 Yes
Sample Size                          3,820          3,287 (Low           2,052              3,820               3,820
                                                    wage firm);
                                                    3,500 (Low
                                                    Wage Firm
                                                   and Industry)

              NOTES:- See notes to Table 6. The baseline model in column (1) is taken from Table 6 column (1). The
              propensity score model in column (2) trims the sample of firms using a probit model estimated using the
              initial firm and industry characteristics that appear as controls in the baseline model. We trim on the 99%
              percentile of the control and the first percentile of the treatment to obtain common support. Note that the
              propensity score model cannot be estimated for the continuous wage model since this is not a binary
              variable. Column (4) includes three digit industry-specific trends. Column (5) includes firm fixed effects.



                                                                   50
              Table 10: Firm Exits and the National Minimum Wage, FAME data,

     (a) Firm Exit Rates (Proportions) Before and After the National Minimum Wage.

                                   (1)                                               (2)
                            T = Low Wage Firm                           T = Low Wage Firm and Industry

                 Pre-NMW          Post-NMW           Difference      Pre-NMW        Post-NMW         Difference
                                                    (Post – Pre)                                    (Post – Pre)

T=1                 0.036           0.053              0.017          0.032            0.040              0.008


T=0                 0.019           0.038              0.019          0.021            0.040              0.019

Difference
-in-                                                  -0.002                                             -0.011
Difference                                            (0.013)                                            (0.016)


     (b) Difference-in-Difference Probit Estimates of firm exit.

                                              (1)                        (2)                       (3)
                                            T=                          T=                      T=
                                         Pre-Policy                Low Wage Firm           Low Wage Firm
                                     ln(Average Wage)                                       and Industry



 T*Policy On                                 0.002                     -0.005                     -0.008
                                            (0.014)                   (0.010)                    (0.010)

 T                                           0.000                     0.006                      0.001
                                            (0.008)                   (0.009)                    (0.010)


 Controls                                     Yes                       Yes                        Yes


 Sample Size                                 2,268                     2,268                      2,268


     NOTES:- Definition of treatment and control groups as per Table 6. Models estimated on the Pre-NMW
     and Post-NMW. Standard errors clustered by firm in parentheses. Controls include: one digit industry
     division; eighteen government office regions; firm capital-sales ratio; firm age; firm age squared,
     proportion of graduate qualifications (by region and two-digit industry); and union membership, part-time
     work and female employment rates by three-digit industry classification.




                                                         51
                   Table 11: Firm Entry and Exit Rates by Three-Digit Industry

                                             (1)                           (2)                           (3)
                                        NMW Policy On                 Pseudo-Policy                Trend- adjusted
                                          1996-2001                    1994-1998              Difference in Differences

(A) Industry Entry Rates

Lowpay*Policy On                                                           0.057                         -0.036
                                              0.021
                                                                          (0.032)                       (0.038)
                                             (0.015)

                                                                           -0.095
Lowpay                                        0.010
                                                                          (0.048)
                                             (0.066)

(B) Industry Exit Rates
                                                                           -0.028
                                              -0.013                                                     0.015
Lowpay*Policy On                                                          (0.018)
                                             (0.016)                                                    (0.024)

                                                                           -0.011
Lowpay                                        -0.005
                                                                          (0.039)
                                             (0.025)

(C) Industry Net Entry Rate

Lowpay*Policy On                              0.034                        0.085                         -0.051
                                             (0.025)                      (0.027)                       (0.037)

Lowpay                                        0.015                        -0.084
                                             (0.072)                      (0.060)


Sample Size                                   1,020                         850



    NOTES:- Data taken from Value-Added Tax (VAT) Registrations and Deregistration Data, Department of
    Trade and Industry (DTI). Entry rate is the proportion of firms who are newly registered in a year in a
    three-digit industry. Exit rate is the proportion of firms who are deregistered in the year. Net entry is entry
    rate – exit rate. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered by three-digit industry. In column (1) we
    define the usual definitions of policy (Policy-On = 1 for 1999-2001 and zero for 1996-1999). In column (2)
    we conduct a pseudo-experiment to measure the pre-policy trend. Here, Policy On = 1 for 1996-1998 and
    zero for 1994-1995 (we do not have consistent data for 1993). “Lowpay” is defined as the proportion of
    workers with an hourly wage less than £3.60 in the three-digit industry in real terms over the pre-policy
    period (the minimum wage threshold of £3.60 is deflated by the retail price index for the years 1994-1998).
    Column (3) is the trend-adjusted estimator. All columns include controls for two digit dummies, time
    dummies, and the proportion of employees in the three-digit industry that are female, part-time and
    unionized.




                                                          52
                           Table 12: Employment Effects in FAME

                                       (1)                    (2)                         (3)
                                  Pseudo-Policy           NMW Policy On               Difference

(A) Continuous Wage
T*Policy On                             0.065                   0.191                    0.126
                                       (0.124)                 (0.121)                  (0.173)

T                                       0.286                   0.488                       -
                                       (0.170)                 (0.217)

(B) Low-Wage Firm
T*Policy On                             0.137                   0.200                    0.063
                                       (0.093)                 (0.090)                  (0.129)

T                                       -0.005                  0.389                       -
                                       (0.143)                 (0.160)

(C) Low wage firm and
industry
T*Policy On                             0.201                   0.166                   -0.035
                                       (0.134)                 (0.106)                  (0.171)

T                                       0.220                   0.701                       -
                                       (0.215)                 (0.220)

Controls                                Yes                      Yes

Sample Size                            4,914                    3,820


NOTES:- As per Table 6. This table replaces wages and profits with log employment as the dependent
variable in the baseline model. Column (8) reports results for the pseudo-experiment period analysed in
Table 8 while Column (9) reports results for the actual NMW policy period (i.e. analogous to Table 6). A
trend-adjusted difference-in-difference is reported in column (3).




                                                  53
Appendices

        Appendix A: Theoretical Models of Profitability and Minimum Wages

A1. Introduction

In order to obtain a long-run effect of the minimum wage on profitability we need to have
some degree of imperfect competition in the product market. We therefore consider
several industrial organization models. Aaronson and French (2007) consider in detail the
effects on the minimum wage on prices and costs in a competitive and monopsonistic
labour market model. However, in these models firms do not have positive price-cost
margins so profits remain zero by assumption, regardless of the minimum wage.

We separate our analysis into the short-run and long-run, where we define the short run
as the period where all variables are able to change (including capital, labour, prices, etc)
but the number of firms is held fixed. In the long run entry and exit can occur and the
number of firms can change. Our analysis of exit and entry is directly applicable to the
long-run results.

A2. Imperfect Competition in the Product market

Short-run effects with symmetric and asymmetric costs

Consider a two-stage game where firms pay a sunk entry cost (K) and, conditional on
entering engage in competition with other firms (total number of firms in market is
denoted N). The instruments of competition can be price or quantity.

We begin with the workhorse industrial organization model of an asymmetric Cournot
model42 where firms have heterogeneous marginal costs. Below we discuss alternative
imperfect competition models that lead to similar qualitative results.

The non-cooperative Nash equilibrium in quantities gives a well-know expression for the
price-cost margin:

                                     p − ci (qi ) MS i
                                                 =                                                (A1)
                                         p         η

Where η is the (absolute value of the) price elasticity of product demand, p is output
price, ci is marginal cost of firm i, qi is firm output and MSi is the market share


42
   Cournot competition can be considered the reduced form of a two-stage game where firms set capacities
in the first stage and then compete in prices in the first stage (Kreps and Scheinkman, 1983).


                                                  54
            Si
( MS i =         ) with Si denoting firm sales. Note that equation (A1) nests the special
           ∑iS i
cases of monopoly (N = 1). If we assume constant returns then marginal costs do not
depend on output (ci = ci ' (qi ) ) so the price-cost margin can be characterised by the ratio
of profit ( Π ) to sales (S):

                                    ⎛Π⎞    MS i
                                    ⎜ ⎟ =                                                          (A2)
                                    ⎝ S ⎠i  η

Firm i’s market share will depend on its marginal costs relative to the marginal costs of
other firm’s in the industry. If firm i’s marginal costs rise relative to those of other firms
it will lose market share (see Tirole, 1989, Chapter 5 for example).

Consider the effect of an increase in the minimum wage. If we assume that demand is iso-
elastic (we will relax this below) then the impact of the minimum wage on the firm’s
price-cost margins will be reflected in its market share. If a firm employs a greater
proportion of minimum wage workers, it will face a larger increase in marginal costs and
therefore a larger fall of its price-cost margins.

This is our key comparative static result: the introduction of a minimum wage will reduce
the profitability of firms who are more “at risk” because they employ a higher share of
minimum wage workers.

If we also relax the assumption the demand elasticity is constant, there will also likely be
a fall in profitability. To see this clearly assume that firms are symmetric so that they all
face identical marginal costs. In this case, the equilibrium condition of (A1) simplifies to

                                               Π 1 1
                                                =                                                  (A3)
                                               S Nη

It is clear from equation (A3) that the impact of the minimum wage will on profitability
  Π
( ) will depend on its impact on the demand elasticity (η ). In particular if demand
  S
becomes more elastic, profitability will fall. For most commonly used demand curves, a
minimum wage will make the demand curve more elastic because price has risen. For
example, consider the case of linear industry demand (Q) for where Q = A – bp, b > 0, A
                        p
> 0. In this case, η = b . Following the introduction of a minimum wage prices will be
                        Q
higher and quantity sold lower unless demand is perfectly elastic. The elasticity of
demand is therefore higher and profitability will fall. This will reinforce the effects on
market share discussed in the more general model with asymmetric firms.43

43
    We cannot rule out the possibility that the aggregate demand curve may become more elastic as wages
rise even if the labour market is perfectly competitive. Micro-economic theory places few restrictions on


                                                   55
Under differentiated products Bertrand equation (A3) should be interpreted as a firm-
specific elasticity.

This result differs from Aaronson and French (2006) who consider a model of
monopolistic competition. This generates an equilibrium condition like (A3). The
minimum wage has no effect on price cost margins in their model because they assume
that the elasticity of demand is constant. This guarantees no effect of the minimum wage
on price-cost margins as all costs are passed through completely to the consumer.
Additionally, the “large number of firms” assumption underlying monopolistic
competition rules out strategic interactions that generate the market share effects in
equation (A3)

Long-run effects

After the minimum wage is imposed, absolute profits in the industry will be lower. This
will mean that there is less of an incentive to enter the industry. Consequently, we might
expect to see fewer firms in the industry (from exit and/or less entry) in the long run. The
short run fall in profits for the incumbent firms in the industry will therefore be greater
than the long-run change as N will fall (e.g. see equation (A3)).

An important caveat to this is that the number of firms in the industry may not fall due to
an “integer” effect. Since there will always be an integer number of firms in the industry
all firms will usually earn some economic profit. Firms will enter and pay the sunk cost
up until the point that a marginal firm entering the industry would not make a profit net of
the sunk cost. For example, consider a symmetric duopoly in long-run equilibrium. If a
third firm entered the industry a firm’s profits (net of the sunk cost, K) would be negative
i.e. Π *(3) − K ≤ 0 ≤ Π *( 2 ) − K , where Π *(3) is equilibrium profits with three firms and
 Π *( 2 ) equilibrium profits with two firms.

Now, except in the special case when profits in the market exactly covers the sunk cost
( Π *(3) − K < 0 and Π *( 2) − K = 0 ) the minimum wage could reduce Π *( 2) , but not by so
much that Π *( 2) − K <0 and one firm was forced to exit the industry. Consequently, for
small increases in the minimum wage firms could have lower profits without a change in
the equilibrium number of firms.

This caveat aside, in a dynamic setting we would expect that a minimum wage would
increase exit and reduce the entry rate.


A3. Perfect Competition in the Product Market



industry demand curve aggregated from consumer preferences (e.g. see Varian, 1984, chapter 3.16). Thus,
it is still ultimately an empirical issue whether profitability rises or falls after the minimum wage.



                                                  56
Now consider the case of perfectly competitive product markets. Comparative statics of
prices and factor demands following a minimum wage increase have been
comprehensively analyzed by Aaronson and French (2007). Here, we will briefly contrast
the usual case of perfect competition in the labour market with some alternative models.
It worth emphasizing two preliminary points. First, as we discussed above that these are
in the short-run as in the long run firms earn zero profits by assumption. Second, the
short-run effect of the introduction of a minimum wage will be larger in the competitive
model than in the monopsony model.

Perfect competition in the labour market

If labour markets are perfectly competitive, the short run effects of the minimum wage on
profits are composed of two components (see Ashenfelter and Smith, 1979, and the main
text). First, there is fall in profits due to the increased wage for the current number of
workers paid below the minimum wage. This fall in profits is offset by a second effect to
the degree that firms can substitute minimum wage workers for other factors of
production (including non minimum wage workers). In the limiting case of perfect
substitutability of minimum wage workers there will be no effect on profits.

Of course these are only short-run effects as there can be no economic profits under
perfect competition and in equilibrium industry prices will rise and quantity will fall (so
there will either be fewer firms or the average firm size will shrink).

Imperfect Competition in the labour market

There have been a variety of models proposed in recent years where firms have some
power to set wages because of efficiency wages, monopsony, search or other reasons. In
these models, over a certain range of values a binding minimum wage can increase
employment.

Considering profits, we would expect the negative short-run effects of a minimum wage
on profitability to be muted in such models. This is because, unlike the competitive
model the first order effect on profits is zero as an increase in the wage has a beneficial
effect on profits through making it easier to recruit, retain and/or motivate workers. There
will be a second effect because the firm is being shifted away from its optimal level of the
wage so overall we would still expect a decline in profits. However, this is likely to be
much less severe than in the competitive model.

To see this consider a simple representation of the monopsony model. We model the
firm’s wage setting power in a reduced form way (following Card and Krueger, 1995)
and assume that the production function, F (W , L) , is increasing in the wage as well as
labour, L. The firm chooses wages and labour to maximize profits

                               Π = max W , L pF (W , L) − WL

Which lead to the standard first order condition:


                                             57
                                           ∂F (W , L)
                                       p              =W *
                                               ∂L

where an asterix denotes the optimized value. We also have an additional non-standard
condition from optimizing wages of:
                                    ∂F (W , L)
                                  p            = L*                              (A4)
                                       ∂W

If we consider the effect of a small increase in wages on profits in the neighbourhood of
the optimized level of wages and employment ( W * , L* ) this is given by:

                                   dΠ    ∂F (W * , L* )
                                      =p                − L*
                                   dW        ∂W

Note that this is equal to zero by the first order condition with respect to wages, equation
(A4).

Long-run effects

In this setting, there are no long-run effects on profits.

Considering exit, unlike the model with imperfect competition firm size is not tied down.

In the competitive model, prices will be higher and output lower. In our constant returns
set-up a zero profit equilibrium can be restored either by all firms becoming smaller or by
some firms exiting.

A4. Quantification of effects assuming no disemployment or price effects

In this section, we consider the assumption is that there is no firm response after the
imposition of a minimum wage except to increase workers’ pay to the minimum (i.e.
neither prices, employment, output, etc. change). We then take the implication of this
simple behavioural assumption to the coefficients that we have estimated, first in Care
Homes then in FAME (whole economy). Surprisingly, this fits the results reasonably well
for care homes and is not too bad for the FAME dataset.

Care Homes

Given the definition of the wage GAP in equation (4) it immediately follows that

                                       ∆Π = WL * GAP

Where WL is the wage bill (average wages, W, multiplied by the number of workers, L)
which is the denominator of the GAP. Consequently,



                                                58
                                               ⎛ WL ⎞
                                  ∆ (Π / S ) = ⎜    ⎟ * GAP
                                               ⎝ S ⎠

Therefore, under this model, the estimated coefficient on the GAP in the profitability
equation should be equal to the ratio of the wage bill to sales.

A complication is that there is a pre-sample trend in cares home data. We do not observe
profitability in the pre-sample period, so we cannot directly estimate this as we do for
wages. However, we can analytically calculate an upper bound on this bias. We can
write:
               ∂[∆ (Π / S )]t ∂[∆(Π / S )]t ∂∆ ln Wt −1 ∂[∆(Π / S )]t
                             =                         =              β ∆ ln W ,GAP
                  ∂GAPt −1     ∂∆ ln Wt −1 ∂GAPt −1      ∂∆ ln Wt −1

Where β ∆ lnW ,GAP is the coefficient on the GAP term in the wage growth regression in the
pre-sample period (see equation (5) in the text). This equals 0.240 (with covariates) or
0.225 (without covariates) according to Table 2.

The impact of this adjustment will depend on the assumptions we make over how firms
respond to the wage trend (since we do not have pre-policy information on profitability).
Let us continue to make the assumption that all quantities and prices are fixed when the
wage changes, so this will make the profitability change as large as possible and make it
hard for us to reject the null of no profit change. Under this assumption:

                  ∂[∆ (Π / S )]t         ∂[(Π / S )]t Wt −1 ∂Π t     W L
                                 = Wt −1             =            = − t −1 t
                   ∂∆ ln Wt −1              ∂Wt −1     S t ∂Wt −1     St

So, since L is unchanged by assumption between t and t-1:

                             ∂[∆(Π / S )]t                   ⎛ WL ⎞
                                           = − β ∆ ln W ,GAP ⎜    ⎟                    (A5)
                               ∂GAPt −1                      ⎝ S ⎠t −1

In the care homes data the ratio of the wage bill to sales is 0.398. So the product on the
right hand side of equation (A5) is -0.096 (= 0.398*0.240) for the model with controls
and -0.090 (=0.398*0.225) for the model without controls. In other words, the upper
bound on the expected profitability change in the absence of the minimum wage are -
0.096 (with controls) and -0.090 (without controls) respectively. Since the estimated
coefficient in Table 3 is 0.492 with covariates or 0.433 without covariates, we still have a
big effect. However, the trend-adjusted effects are -0.396 (= 0.096 - 0.492) and -0.343 (=-
0.433 + 0.09) . This is almost the same as the wage bill share. Thus, the care home
estimates are consistent with this simple model where care homes do not adjust their
employment in response to a minimum wage change.


FAME


                                                59
In the specifications for FAME it is easier to work with proportionate changes. Under the
assumption of no change to employment or sales

                                          ⎛L⎞      ⎛ WL ⎞ ∆W
                             ∆(Π / S ) = −⎜ ⎟∆W = −⎜    ⎟
                                          ⎝S⎠      ⎝ S ⎠ W

Dividing both sides by profitability

                                   ∆ (Π / S )    ⎛ WL ⎞ ∆W
                                              = −⎜    ⎟
                                    (Π / S )     ⎝ Π ⎠ W

Or, in natural logarithms:

                                                ⎛ WL ⎞
                                ∆ ln(Π / S ) = −⎜    ⎟∆ ln W                              (A6)
                                                ⎝ Π ⎠

So under this model we would expect that the effects of the minimum wage on margins to
be proportional to the effect on wages (scaled up by the ratio of the wage bill to profits).

In our data, the minimum wage is estimated to have increased average wages by 5.7%
(Table 6, panel (a), column (2)). Given the average ratio of the wage bill to profits in the
data is 1.4 this means that the implied profitability effect is 8% ( = 6*1.4), slightly larger
than the estimated effect of 7.7%.

A5. Summary

In models of imperfect product market competition, we would generally expect to
observe negative effects on the profitability of firms where the minimum wage bites,
even after firms have adjusted all factors of production. In such models, some of the
increase in costs is borne by shareholders rather than just consumers and unemployed
low-wage workers as in the standard competitive model.

It is worth emphasizing that employment will still fall in these models. So oligopoly
could explain only why employment responses could be more muted than one would
expect from a competitive model. Of course, employment changes can be positive if
firms with market power in the product market also have market power in the labour
market.

The final section (A4) showed a very simple model that assumes no change in sales or
jobs following a minimum wage hike. This model does surprisingly well in rationalizing
the results.

Additional References



                                              60
61
                                    Appendix B: Data

B1 Care Homes Data

The care homes data is discussed in the text and in more detail in Machin et al (2003).
Homes were surveyed in the year before and after General Elections: in 1992, 1993, 1997
and 1998.

We observe individual worker data so we can construct various measures of the internal
wage structure of the firm.

Total revenue and profits are not reported directly in the care homes data. We calculated
them from the underlying home-specific components. Sales (S) is calculated as
Occupancy Proportion* Number of Beds * Average Price (all reported in the survey).
The wage bill (WB) and the labour cost share (SHARE) are also reported directly in the
data. We can then calculate total costs (TC) as the ratio of the wage bill to the labour
share (WB/SHARE). Profits are then simply sales less total costs (S - TC). Profitability is
the ratio of profits to revenues, (S - TC)/S.

B2 FAME Data

The FAME (Financial Analysis Made Easy) dataset contains information on firm
company accounts of publicly listed and private firms in the UK economy. It is supplied
under licence as part of the AMADEUS database from BVD (Bureau Van Dijk). Our
sample begins with data on all firms in the six financial years from April 1st 1996 to
March 31st 2002 including those who had entered and exited. We select firms who report
on the 31st March (see Table B1). We drop firms with missing data on our key variables
(profits, wages, sales, employment, industry, and region). We use information on
consolidated accounts at the lowest level that exists (i.e. we use subsidiary level
information if this exists).

 In the main results, we condition on the cohort of firms who were alive on March 31st
1999 when the minimum wage introduced. We also present results where we examine the
impact of including firms who entered after this date (and exited before this date)
including a dummy variables for entrant and exiting firms (and interactions of these
dummies with the NMW policy period).

Profits/Sales: Gross profits (prior to deductions for tax, interest and dividends) over
turnover (sales).

Average Wages: Total remuneration divided by total number of employees

Capital / Sales: Tangible assets over turnover (sales).



                                             62
Sales / Employment: Total turnover (sales) over the number of employees.


B3 LFS Variables

The Labour Force Survey (LFS) is a large-scale household interview-based survey of
individuals in the UK that has been carried out on varying bases since 1975.44 Around
60,000 households have been interviewed per survey since 1984. Annual proportions
calculated relative to firm reporting year rather than calendar year (i.e. April 1998 –
March 1999).

Union membership: Defined at the three-digit UKSIC industry level, annual values 1993-
2002.

Part-Time Work: Proportion of employed workforce classified as part-time, annual
values 1993-2002. Defined at the three-digit industry level.

Female Workforce: Female workers as a proportion of total employed workforce, annual
values 1993-2002. Defined at the three-digit industry level.

Graduate Qualifications: Proportion of graduate qualified workers per region and two-
digit industry cell.

Region: Government Office Region of Workplace (“gorwk”). These include Tyne and
Wear, Rest of the North East, Greater Manchester, Merseyside, Rest of the North West,
South Yorkshire, West Yorkshire, Rest of Yorkshire and Humberside, West Midlands
and Met Country, Rest of West Midlands, Eastern, Inner London, Outer London, South
East, South West, Wales, Rest of Scotland, Northern Ireland.

B4 DTI VAT Registration and De-registration Database

The UK Department of Trade and Industry (DTI) publish data on births and deaths of
companies at the three-digit level on a consistent basis from 1994 (see
http://stats.berr.gov.uk/ed/vat/). These are based on Value Added Tax (VAT) Registration
numbers that every incorporated firm in Britain is legally obliged to have. (This is the
same as the aggregated FAME date).

We used this data to calculate for each three-digit sector the proportion of firms who
entered in a year (entry rate). Entry rates calculated as the number of new VAT (Value-
Added Tax) registrations as a proportion of the beginning of year stock. Exit rate
calculated as the number of VAT deregistrations over the beginning-of-year stock. Net
entry calculated as entry rate minus exit rate. We also calculated the net entry rate as
the difference between the entry and exit rates.

44
  Between 1975 and 1983, the survey was conducted every two years. From 1984 until 1991, it was
conducted annually. Since 1992, the Labour Force Survey has been conducted every three months in a five-
quarter rolling panel format.


                                                  63
We then matched information form the LFS at the same level of aggregation to calculate
the proportion of workers in each industry paid below the minimum wage in the pre-
policy period.




                                          64
          Table B1: FAME Sample Summary Statistics by Reporting Month,
               Six Financial Years from April 1 1996 to March 31 2002


                                           Report at End of         Report in Other
                                               March                   Months

               Profit/Sales                      0.321                    0.317


               Average Wage (£‘000s)             15.07                    14.64


               Average Employment                1,409                    1,453


               % Total Sample                     20.7                    79.3


               Number of Observations            3,820                   18,426


NOTES:- These are descriptive statistics from the FAME database of company accounts for all firms with
average wages equal to or less than £20,000.




                                                  65
      Table B2: Characteristics of Treatment and Comparison groups (FAME),
              Six Financial Years from April 1 1996 to March 31 2002

                                                                 (1)                    (2)
                                                          T = Low Wage Firm       T = Low Wage
                                                                                 Firm and Industry

                                                           T=0         T=1       T=0        T=1

         Average Wage (£’000s)                             16.87       9.90      16.04       9.70

         Profit/Sales                                      0.298      0.388      0.311      0.378

         Capital / Sales                                   0.222      0.279      0.225      0.304

         Wage Bill / Gross Profits                         1.314      1.519      1.356      1.423

         Proportion part-time employees                    0.163      0.294      0.166      0.367

         Proportion female employees                       0.385      0.543      0.395      0.593

         Proportion union members                          0.208      0.179      0.213      0.159

         Proportion Degree                                 0.145      0.124      0.132      0.095

          Proportion of firms in:

         Agriculture, Forestry and Fishing                 0.006      0.011      0.007      0.014

         Mining                                            0.053      0.033      0.051      0.031

         Manufacturing                                     0.313      0.122      0.300      0.067

         Construction and Electricity                      0.064      0.020      0.066      0.011

         Wholesale, Retail Trade and Hospitality           0.238      0.350      0.219      0.477

         Transport and Communications                      0.087      0.043      0.091      0.015

         Business Services                                 0.207      0.245      0.216      0.167

         Education and Health                              0.021      0.066      0.019      0.076

         Personal Services                                 0.070      0.117      0.065      0.143

         Observations                                      2,835       985       3,235       585

NOTES:- T= 0: Comparison group; T = 1: Treatment Group; Part-time and female employees based on Labour
Force Survey (LFS) and calculated as proportion of total workers per two-digit industry by regional cell. Low
Wage Firm - treatment group is defined as firms with an average wage equal to or below £12,000 per annum in
the pseudo pre-policy financial year up to March 31st 1996; the comparison group is defined as firms with
average wages between £12,000 and £20,000. Low Wage Firm and Industry - treatment group is defined as firms
with average wages equal to or less than £12,000 in the pseudo pre-policy financial year up to March 31st 1999




                                                     66
and being in a low wage industry (defined as a firm located in a region and three-digit industry LFS cell with
10% or more sub-minimum wage workers).




                                                     67
   Table B3: Firm Entry and Exit Rates by Three digit Industry, 1996-2001 (DTI
                     VAT Registrations and Deregistration)

                                    (1)                        (2)                         (3)
                              All Industries           High Wage industries         Low Wage Industries
                                                          (below median               (above median
                                                             Lowpay)                     Lowpay)
Entry Rate                         0.089                        0.087                        0.091

Exit Rate                          0.082                        0.083                        0.081

Net Entry                          0.007                        0.003                        0.011

Lowpay                             0.126                        0.051                        0.201

Union                              0.287                        0.350                        0.189

Female                             0.343                        0.274                        0.411

Part-time                          0.143                        0.076                        0.209

No. of Industries                   170                           85                           85

No. of Observations                1,020                         510                          510


          NOTES: Entry rates calculated as the number of new VAT (Value-Added Tax) registrations as a
         proportion of the beginning of year stock. Exit rate calculated as the number of VAT
         deregistrations over the beginning-of-year stock. Net entry calculated as entry rate minus exit rate.
         The variables lowpay, union, female, part-time are all sourced from the UK Labour Force survey
         (LFS). The “Lowpay” variable is defined as the proportion of workers with hourly wage below
         £3.60 in the pre-minimum wage period (1994-1998). “Below Median Lowpay” indicates all those
         industries where the proportion of lowpay workers ranges from 0 to 0.092. “Above Median
         Lowpay” indicates all of those industries where the proportion of lowpay industries ranges from
         0.095 to 0.557.




                                                     68
