NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SUPERPOWER INTERVENTIONS AND THEIR CONSEQUENCES FOR DEMOCRACY:
AN EMPIRICAL INQUIRY
William Easterly
Shanker Satyanath
Daniel Berger
Working Paper 13992
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13992

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2008

The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by William Easterly, Shanker Satyanath, and Daniel Berger. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Superpower Interventions and their Consequences for Democracy: An Empirical Inquiry
William Easterly, Shanker Satyanath, and Daniel Berger
NBER Working Paper No. 13992
May 2008
JEL No. O1
ABSTRACT
Do superpower interventions to install and prop up political leaders in other countries subsequently
result in more or less democracy, and does this effect vary depending on whether the intervening superpower
is democratic or authoritarian? While democracy may be expected to decline contemporaneously
with superpower interference, the effect on democracy after a few years is far from obvious. The absence
of reliable information on covert interventions has hitherto served as an obstacle to seriously addressing
these questions. The recent declassification of Cold War CIA and KGB documents now makes it possible
to systematically address these questions in the Cold War context. We thus develop a new panel dataset
of superpower interventions during the Cold War. We find that superpower interventions are followed
by significant declines in democracy, and that the substantive effects are large. Perhaps surprisingly,
once endogeneity is addressed, US and Soviet interventions have equally detrimental effects on the
subsequent level of democracy; both decrease democracy by about 33%. Our findings thus suggest
that one should not expect significant differences in the adverse institutional consequences of superpower
interventions based on whether the intervening superpower is a democracy or a dictatorship.

William Easterly
Department of Economics
New York University
19 West 4th Street, 6th Floor
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
william.easterly@nyu.edu
Shanker Satyanath
New York University
Department of Politics
19 West 4th Street
New York, NY 10012
ss284@nyu.edu

Daniel Berger
Department of Politics
New York University
19 West 4th Street
New York NY 10012
db1299@nyu.edu

1) Introduction-

Do superpower interventions to install and prop up political leaders in other countries
subsequently result in more or less democracy, and does this effect vary depending on
whether the intervening superpower is democratic or authoritarian? While democracy
may be expected to decline contemporaneously with superpower interference, the effect
on democracy after a few years is far from obvious. The absence of reliable information
on covert interventions has hitherto served as an obstacle to seriously addressing these
questions. The recent declassification of Cold War CIA and KGB documents now makes
it possible to systematically address these questions in the Cold War context, which is
what we do. Aside from being of considerable historical importance in its own right, a
study of Cold War interventions is of great interest because it speaks directly to whether
and how outside forces may alter the path of institutional evolution, in contrast to the
usual focus on domestic actors. This, of course, is an issue of special policy relevance to
our time.

As implied in the questions above, our interest is not in the contemporaneous effect of
superpower interventions but rather on the effects after the passage of a few years.1 Our
ex ante theoretical expectations on this issue are far from clear. From one theoretical
perspective one may reasonably expect the effects of superpower interventions to differ
depending on whether the intervening superpower is a democracy or not. For instance,
superpower governments might have a preference for spreading their own form of
government. If the benefits of establishing democracies overseas exceed the costs for a
1

Unsurprisingly democracy does decline contemporaneously with superpower interventions.

2

democratic but not for an authoritarian superpower, interventions by a democratic
superpower could subsequently result in more democratic environments than
interventions by a non-democratic superpower. However, one may also reasonably adopt
the theoretical perspective that interventions by democratic and authoritarian
superpowers alike are primarily driven by considerations of repressing opponents
overseas. Crony authoritarian regimes overseas offer less checks and balances against
repression of opponents, which may cause democratic and non-democratic superpowers
alike to favor the presence of crony dictators overseas. If so we may expect interventions
by a democratic and an authoritarian superpower to have similar adverse consequences
for democracy in intervened countries. The goal of this paper is to check which of these
perspectives finds greater support in the Cold War data.

In order to answer this question we develop a new panel dataset of superpower
interventions during the Cold War. Our goal is to examine the effects of a superpower
intervention in a given five year period on the average level of democracy in the
following five year period. We find that superpower interventions are followed by
significant declines in democracy and that the substantive effects are large. Perhaps
surprisingly US and Soviet interventions have equally detrimental effects on democracy;
both decrease democracy in the subsequent five year period by about 33%. Our findings
thus indicate that one should not expect significant differences in the adverse institutional
consequences of superpower interventions based on whether the intervening superpower
is a democracy or a dictatorship.

3

This paper relates to literatures in both political science and economics. In political
science, our paper builds on recent work by Bueno de Mesquita and Downs (2006) on the
effects of interventions in wars and other militarized disputes. Our paper extends this
work in three ways. First, we do not focus exclusively on military interventions, but
extend our examination to behind the scenes efforts by the secret services of the
superpowers to install and prop up leaders in office. Second, we do not limit ourselves to
studying countries which are experiencing violent conflict, but also consider
interventions with limited and no casualties. This difference is significant because wars
and militarized disputes are relatively rare events. Third, we offer instruments for
addressing questions of endogeneity, which is a serious concern because interventions
may be driven by the anticipated state of the institutional environment.

As far as economics is concerned, a large literature on the effect of institutions on
economic development has begun to explore the first-stage determinants of institutions,
including variables such as inequality, ethnic fractionalization, and colonizing strategies.
Our paper differs from these in focusing on a relatively time varying determinant of
institutions.

In the next section of the paper we offer a brief review of the previous literature on
interventions. In Section 3 we describe our hypotheses relating interventions to
institutions. In Section 4 we describe our new panel data set of interventions and outline
the rationale and sources for our control variables. Section 5 describes how we address
issues of identification. In Section 6 we present our results, while Section 7 concludes.

4

2) Literature review-

The literature that specifically focuses on the institutional effects of interventions is
concentrated in political science. Bueno de Mesquita and Downs (2006) have recently
provided an excellent survey of this literature and we summarize some of the highlights
below. One group of studies focuses on military interventions and finds that
interventions by democratic countries have a positive effect on democratic reform in the
short term, but generate political instability in the long term. (Kegley and Hermann,
1997 and Gleditsch et al., 2004). Another group of political scientists focuses more
narrowly on cases of interventions by the US. Some of the case study literature finds that
US interventions are not associated with democratization and attributes this to US
military and economic interests (Karl, 1990 and Rueschmeyer et al., 1992). Other studies
focus on the difficulty of imposing democracy from above. (Herman and Broadhead,
1984, O’Donnell et al., 1986, Whitehead, 1991.) Yet another group of scholars finds
that US interventions have a positive effect on democracy under some limited
circumstances. (Meernik, 1996, Wantchekon and Nickerson, 1999, Enterline and Greig,
2003.)

Bueno de Mesquita and Downs’ paper is the latest contribution to the interventions
literature. Their paper focuses on military interventions in wars and militarized interstate
disputes and finds that this genre of interventions “lead to little if any improvement, and
all too often erosion in the trajectory of democratic development.2” They argue that this
is because democratic and authoritarian leaders alike share a common interest in

5

preferring to deal with non-democratic target states. In the case of authoritarian regimes,
which they are argue are primarily concerned with providing private goods to
government insiders, non-democratic target regimes facilitate the transfer of resources to
insiders. In the case of democratic regimes, which they argue are primarily concerned
with providing public goods to their country’s citizens, non-democratic regimes in the
target state facilitate policy concessions that benefit the intervener’s citizens.

This paper advances the above literature in two ways. First, the widespread availability
of datasets on war and military interventions has led previous econometric studies to
focus almost exclusively on interventions in the context of wars, to the neglect of behind
the scenes interventions that were conducted by the secret services of the superpowers.
Second, while undeniably insightful, the literature on interventions has hitherto not
seriously addressed issues of reverse causality. This paper seeks to advance our
understanding of interventions by filling these gaps in the literature.

This paper also attempts to advance the literature on institutions in economics. This
literature is growing rapidly, partly of interest in its own right and partly as a side effect
of searching for instruments for institutions to use in empirical exercises assessing the
effects of institutions on other variables. Engerman and Sokoloff (1997) in a seminal
paper stress inequality as a key (negative) factor in the evolution of institutions in North
and South America; Easterly (2007), Easterly and Levine (2003), and Satyanath and
Subramanian (2007) confirm this for the worldwide sample. The famous work by
Acemoglu et al. (2001, 2005) stresses colonizing strategies as a historical determinant of
2

Bueno de Mesquita and Downs 2006, 627.

6

institutions, using settler health conditions as a determinant of whether the colonizer
followed a settler colony strategy or an exploitative strategy. Mauro (1995), Easterly and
Levine (1997, 2003), and Alesina et al. (2003) focus on ethnic fractionalization as an
adverse factor inhibiting institutional development; Alesina et al. (2007) suggest that
colonial partitioning of ethnic groups and other forms of artificial boundary drawing
made things even worse. Acemoglu and Johnson (2005) also stress long run factors like
inequality, share of agriculture in production, and natural resource endowments in their
magisterial work on determinants of democracy. Our paper extends this literature by
focusing on a recent set of political shocks that influenced democracy – Cold War
interventions by the superpowers.

Our paper has a much more distant relation to the extensive branch of the literature which
looks at the success of foreign “peacekeeping” forces in ending wars (Doyle and
Sambanis, 2000, Gilligan and Stedman 2004, Weinstein 2005), which is in turn related to
the literature on the determinants of civil war (Collier and Hoeffler, 1998, 2001, and
2002, World Bank 2003, Miguel, Satyanath, and Sergenti, 2004) and the literature on
what to do about “failed states” (Collier 2007, Birdsall et al (2006), Weinstein et al.
(2004), Council on Foreign Relations (2005), and Brainard (2007)). Although we share
the interest in foreign intervention, our paper deals with a different subject than these
papers do -- we are looking at foreign interventions that are explicitly concerned with
leadership selection and maintenance rather than “peacekeeping”or fixing “failed states”.
Our results still may have some indirect relevance for this very different debate, however,
since both focus on the effects of foreign intervention.

7

3) Hypothesis on the relationship between superpower interventions and
democracy-

This paper attempts to sort out which of two theoretical perspectives finds greater support
in the Cold War data. To take the first, one may expect superpower governments to have
a preference for spreading their own form of government. The benefits of establishing
democracies overseas may then exceed the costs for a democratic but not for an
authoritarian superpower. From such a perspective interventions by a democratic
superpower could result in more democratic (less authoritarian) environments than
interventions by a non-democratic superpower.

However, it is also plausible that an inclination favoring the spread of democracy on the
part of a democratic superpower may be swamped by other, realpolitik related,
considerations. Interventions by both superpowers may be primarily aimed at repressing
threats to its security overseas (communist opponents in the case of the US, and noncommunist opponents in the case of the Soviet Union). Under such circumstances, the
survival in office of a superpower-installed chief executive plausibly hinges on providing
the superpower that installed him what it wants by way of repressive policies.
Repression of communists/anti-communists is plausibly easiest for a chief executive to
implement if he is unconstrained from seeking the approval of a large number of
domestic political actors prior to implementing the repressive measures. It is thus in the
interest of a superpower-installed chief executive to attempt to reduce the domestic
checks and balances on his power. It is not in the interest of any superpower (democratic

8

or undemocratic) which has placed a priority on repressing opponents overseas to oppose
such attempts at centralization of power, since checks and balances are likely to make
repression more difficult. Thus, from this perspective we may plausibly expect
interventions by democratic and authoritarian superpowers to lead to similar declines in
democracy.

Which of these perspectives finds more support in the data? The rest of this paper is
devoted to answering this question.

4) Data

The focus of this paper is on superpower interventions to install and prop up the leaders
of other countries during the Cold War. Recently declassified documents reveal that
most such Cold War interventions took the form of operations organized by the covert
services of the superpowers, namely the CIA/KGB. There is no pre-existing dataset that
comprehensively captures such operations. Recent contributions to the Cold War history
literature (much of which is based on recently declassified documents) make it possible
to identify which countries were subject to such interventions. We have thus relied on
this literature, supplemented by our own archival research, to construct a dataset of
superpower interventions to install and prop up leaders of other countries that includes
covert interventions. We offer citations to accompany every case that we have identified
as an intervention.

9

The variables in the dataset are as follows. Each variable has one variant which captures
a US intervention and one which captures a Soviet intervention:

1) ONSET- This variable is coded as one in the period in which a leader is installed in
office with the support of the covert services of a superpower. This may be either via a
coup or by providing slush funds for elections.

2) FAILED- Coded as one for all periods in which a superpower initiates efforts to
install a leader in office, but is unsuccessful in its efforts.

3) COUNTER-Coded as one for periods in which a superpower organizes
counterinsurgency operations for a leader who was not installed in office by the
superpower. (One may think of this as an exclusively counterinsurgency based
intervention.)

4) OFFSET-Coded as one for the first point of time after an onset in which a superpower
explicitly relinquishes its ability to select the leader of a country. This may be by force
(for example in the case of Iran in 1979) or voluntary (as in the case of Gorbachev and
Eastern European satellites in the late 1980s).

5) INTERMED-This variable captures superpower meddling in periods other than onset
and offset periods. It is coded as one for all periods between ONSET and OFFSET as
well as for periods coded as one for COUNTER.

10

6) INVASION-Coded as one for all periods in which a superpower army invades a
country and successfully installs a leader in office. (Covert onsets and invasions are not
necessarily mutually exclusive, since invasions and covert operations may be used
simultaneously to install a leader.)

7) INTERVENTION-This is our omnibus measure of successful superpower meddling in
the domestic affairs of other countries. (Success here refers to successfully installing a
leader via covert service operations, successfully organizing counterinsurgency
operations, successfully installing a leader after invading a country, or successfully
propping up a leader in office.) All country periods coded as one on either ONSET,
COUNTER, INVASION, or INTERMED, plus periods not covered by these variables
when the literature indicates a leader is depending heavily on superpower support for
survival in office (prop ups) are coded as ones. Note that offset periods are coded as prop
up periods (and thus as intervention periods) if the offset does not occur the very
beginning of a period, which is generally the case. This is so because the portion of the
offset period prior to the actual occurrence of the offset is logically a time when the
superpower has not relinquished control over leadership selection.

Our core analysis covers 127 countries (see Data Appendix A), of which 24 were subject
to leaders installed with CIA involvement and 16 to leaders installed with KBG/MGB
involvement. While the sample is very large we note that we are unable to handle a few

11

partitioned/reunified countries such as Pakistan and Yemen due to difficulties in
gathering clean data on controls for different segments of a national unit.

We are aware of the fact that we may be missing some “secret” interventions but we see
no reason why these omissions should be systematically biased in a way that helps our
results. If anything, the incentives for the superpowers to reveal an intervention should
be greatest if the outcome is positive from an institutional standpoint so, if anything, we
are likely to be misclassifying some interventions that had adverse outcomes as noninterventions. Furthermore, a secret intervention is most likely to be ultimately revealed
in environments that ended up having strong transparent institutional environments.
This, of course, would only make it harder to find support for our hypotheses.

In order to provide time for the institutional effects of interventions to work themselves
out we conduct our main analysis in a panel setting with five year periods. The goal is to
see if an intervention in one five year period is associated with an improvement or
deterioration in democracy in the succeeding five year period. The Cold War may most
plausibly be claimed to have begun in 1947 with the announcement of the Truman
doctrine, and have ended in 1989 with the fall of the Berlin Wall. However, if we use
this entire period we are left with periods of uneven length. To ensure that all periods are
of equal length the first period for which we code interventions is 1950-54. The last
period for which we code interventions is 1985-89. In order to ensure that we do not lose
interventions in the 1947-49 period we classify these as having occurred in Period 1.3
3

Note that not all interventions began with or ended with the Cold War. There are a small number of cases
of states where there was already superpower influence well before the Cold War began (American

12

In conducting this analysis we are careful to ensure that we are not simply capturing a
correlation that results from interventions being aimed primarily at authoritarian regimes,
or by an automatic contemporaneous adjustment of the democracy score in response to an
external intervention. We rule out that we are capturing such effects by controlling for
the level of democracy in the period of the intervention, and observing the effect of the
intervention on democracy in the subsequent five year period. In addition we use
instruments to address the endogeneity of interventions to anticipated levels of
democracy. (Our precise strategy to address endogeneity is described in the next
section.)

With regard to our dependent variable, we use the two measures of democracy that are
most widely used in political science. The first, called REG, is from Przeworski and
colleagues and is a dummy variable which takes a value of 1 in the presence of an
authoritarian regime (Alvarez et al. 2000). The measure is behavioral in the sense that a
country is only classified as being democratic if it displays turnover in office following
an election. This procedure acts as a safeguard against counting rigged elections which
perpetuate the tenure of the incumbent as democratic elections. The second measure of
democracy that we use is the continuous measure from Polity.4 This is a subjective
measure that takes values from -10 to 10. Unlike the REG measure this measure is

influence in Liberia, Ethiopia, and gulf oil states), or where it continued after the Cold War ended
(continuing American support to Soeharto in Indonesia and Habre in Chad). In the former cases, we do not
show an ONSET with the beginning of the Cold War, and in the latter cases we do not show an OFFSET
with the end of the Cold War. We require hard evidence of superpower withdrawal to code an OFFSET
during or at the end of the Cold War.
4
The data is available at http://www.cidcm.umd.edu/polity/.

13

increasing in the degree of democracy. Since we are conducting a panel analysis using
five year periods, we use five year averages of these measures. (The REG measure thus
takes values between 0 and 1 depending on the proportion of years spent as an
authoritarian regime in a five year period.)

We use REG as our core measure of democracy and only use Polity for conducting
robustness checks. We do so because we believe that it is especially important to be
wary of subjective measures of democracy in the context of this project. The subjectivity
of Polity is a special concern for this paper given that Polity estimates are subjective
assessments from the perspective of the western bloc, which was of course one of the
participants in the Cold War. There is thus cause for concern that Polity may overstate
the degree of democracy in countries in which the United States intervened. There is no
such concern with respect to REG because it is behaviorally based, hinging on observed
turnover in government following an election, rather than based on subjective
assessments.

In addition to lagged democracy, we control for the main variables that have been
identified in the political science literature as influencing democracy. As Przeworski and
his colleagues have found, democracy is significantly influenced by per capita GDP
(Alvarez et al. 2000). We thus include log GDP per capita as a control variable. The
widest available coverage of GDP comes from the dataset created by Angus Maddison
(2003). This is of special interest to us because Maddison takes great pains to generate
GDP estimates for countries that were part of the Soviet bloc. Missing data from other

14

conventional sources is heavily skewed towards countries that experienced Soviet
interventions, which is obviously a serious problem for the subject of this paper. One
statistic which should reassure readers that our results are not driven by quirks in
Maddison’s approach to assessing GDP is that GDP values in his data set are highly
correlated to those of the widely used GDNGD (Growth Development Network Growth
Data) data set. (The correlation is 98%.) We also conduct robustness checks using GDP
data from GDNGD for reassurance.

While per capita GDP is the primary variable associated with democracy, Haggard and
Kaufmann have argued that bad economic times in general influence the propensity for
democracy (Haggard and Kaufman 1995). We thus also include controls for GDP
growth from Maddison and GDNGD. We additionally include a control variable
capturing the length of time since the last transition from democracy/dictatorship as a
means of addressing duration dependence. Continental dummies are always included,
given the propensity of some regions such as the Middle East for having authoritarian
regimes. In our instrumental variables regressions (described in the next section) we use
data for distance of each country’s capital from Moscow from Gleditsch and Ward
(2001). All regressions include dummies for each time period. Summary statistics are
presented in Appendix Table 1.

15

5) Identification strategy-

Identification is a serious issue for the question at hand. Interventions may be driven by
the institutional environment or by the same factors that contribute to worse institutions.
We adopt two strategies for addressing endogeneity. One captures between country
variation in the effects of interventions, while the second captures within country
variation. We describe these strategies below.

One strategy, which captures between country variation, relies on using instruments that
hinge on an explicit causal logic. As the instrument for US interventions we use the
distance of a country’s capital from Moscow. (We log this value to alleviate the effects
of outliers.) The reasoning behind this first stage regression is straightforward. Efforts
by the US to interfere in the politics of countries that are in the proximity of Moscow are
relatively likely to be perceived by the Soviet leadership as threatening to its security.
The US is thus most likely to anticipate stiff resistance from Moscow to interventions in
such countries, and US interventions are more likely to be located elsewhere. It follows
that the smaller the distance of a country’s capital from Moscow, the lower the likelihood
of a US intervention.5

While it is clear that distance from Moscow is not subject to reverse causality we must
also consider other ways in which this distance may affect democracy, and control for
5

The above logic implies that an intervention by the US close to Moscow would be perceived as more
threatening than one that is close to Vladivostok. While this is plausible another potential instrument may
be provided by the distance from the nearest Soviet border. Unfortunately there is no reliable measure of

16

them in order to satisfy the exclusion restriction. For instance, countries that are
extremely distant from Moscow may receive less investment from and trade less with the
Soviet Union, resulting in slower growth. Slower growth may, in turn, be associated with
the collapse of political regimes. We thus control for economic growth and per capita
GDP (in addition to lagged democracy) in all our specifications.

The analogous instrument to use for Soviet interventions would be distance from
Washington D.C. However, geography and history conspire to make this a poor indicator
of which potential Soviet interventions would be perceived as threatening to US security.
Specifically, ever since the Monroe doctrine of 1823 the United States has clearly
communicated that it considers any interventions in the Americas by other powers to be
unacceptable. South America happens to be an exceptionally long continent, which
means that many countries that are far from Washington D.C. are also ruled out as viable
targets for Soviet interventions thanks to the Monroe doctrine. The consequence is that it
is not possible to get a strong first stage for Soviet interventions using distance from
Washington D.C. as an instrument. We thus use an alternative instrumentation strategy
for Soviet interventions.

We use the US security perimeter as of the fall of Nazi Berlin (May 1945) as our
instrument for Soviet interventions. This perimeter is the boundary generated by the
Monroe Doctrine of 1823 (the Americas) and the relatively rapid collapse of the Nazi
eastern front (which subsequently limited the US sphere of influence in Europe), namely

distance from the closest border at this point in time. We ran regressions with a preliminary (as yet
unfinalised) version of a dataset that includes such data and got very similar results.

17

the Americas and Europe west of Germany. We believe this historically generated
perimeter is not the consequence of reverse causality for the following reasons. This
perimeter clearly emerged as a consequence of factors long in the historical past (the
Monroe doctrine) and short term military considerations (anticipated Axis resistance on
the Western vs. Eastern fronts in World War II), and not as a consequence of the quality
of institutions in the countries included within the perimeter. Historians are in broad
agreement that the extent of the Soviet western advance in World War II was agreed
upon between Stalin and Roosevelt in Teheran (1943) and Yalta (early 1945) on the basis
of considerations of the most efficient means to topple the Nazis. Furthermore, the
perimeter as of May 1945 clearly did not emerge as a consequence of anticipated Soviet
expansionism. As the Cold War historian John Lewis Gaddis puts it:

Roosevelt had built his whole strategy upon the expectation that the wartime
alliance would survive the end of the war…Although concerned during the last
months of his life about the increasing frequency of misunderstandings with the
Russians, he at no point sought to contest the substantial expansion of Soviet
influence in Europe and Asia that the end of the war would bring…Despite
obvious differences in personality and style, Harry S. Truman continued
Roosevelt’s policy upon coming into office… During his first months in office he
firmly rejected proposals from Winston Churchill and some of his own advisors
that would have denied the Russians previously agreed upon occupation zones in
Central Europe and North East Asia. “I was having as much difficulty with Prime
Minister Churchill as I was having with Stalin,” the new president noted in May
of 1945. As late as the fall of that year, both Truman and his new secretary of
state, James P. Byrnes, were still relying upon the establishment of a personal
relationship with Stalin as the best way to overcome the difficulties that had
already begun to emerge in the Soviet-American relationship.6

For our perimeter instrument we code all countries in the Americas and all Western
European countries excluding Greece and Finland as ones. Greece is coded as a zero
6

Gaddis 1987, 26.

18

because it was only included as part of the perimeter with the announcement of the
Truman doctrine in 1947. Finland’s status, of course, remained ambiguous for years after
the end of World War II and was never entirely resolved until the end of the Cold War.
We code Asian countries as being outside the US security perimeter as of May 1945.
This is because there was considerable uncertainty about where the US considered its
perimeter to lie in Asia at this time. (Recall that the Japanese surrender still lay ahead by
several months. Also, a great deal of uncertainty existed even as late as in 1950, forcing
Acheson to make his fateful “clarifying” speech at the National Press Club on January
12.)

The causal logic for the perimeter instrument is also straightforward. We should expect
the Soviets to anticipate relatively high resistance from the United States for intervening
in a country that is inside the US’s historically established security perimeter. This
would make Soviet interventions outside the perimeter more likely, causing us to expect a
negative relationship between being within the US perimeter and Soviet meddling. Once
again we are careful to control for growth and per capita GDP since being within the US
perimeter may be associated with more trade and investment and therefore higher growth
and development (as the Marshall plan suggests), which in turn can help the quality of
institutions.

Do we additionally expect a negative effect of distance from Moscow on Soviet
interventions and a positive effect of the US security perimeter on US interventions? We
are less confident about these relationships for two reasons. A potential positive

19

relationship between Soviet interventions and proximity to Moscow may be washed out
by Soviet interventions in countries that are far from Moscow and also outside the US
perimeter. Likewise, a positive relationship between the US perimeter and US
interventions may be washed out by US interventions in countries outside the perimeter
that are far from Moscow. While not ruling out these alternative causal paths, our
identification strategy thus hinges on the former two proposed causal links rather than on
the latter two links.

The instruments described above are obviously invariant over time, which rules out the
use of country fixed effects. We address concerns about omitted variables bias by
controlling for the lagged value of the dependent variable. Note that by conducting our
analysis in a panel setting we are also improving considerably on a cross country analysis
by explicitly controlling for the effects of economic shocks which, as mentioned earlier,
have been found to affect the level of democracy. (We are effectively allowing the
predicted values of interventions to respond to changes in the values of time varying
control variables as well as to common shocks to the global economy.)
We conclude our description of this instrumentation strategy by noting that our
instruments offer the added strength of not being correlated with the condition of
institutions at the end of World War II since very few countries in the world were
democracies in May 1945.

Our second strategy to address endogeneity is aimed at capturing within country
variation. We instrument for interventions using the GMM estimator developed by

20

Blundell and Bond (1998). The estimator incorporates the lagged value of the dependent
variable on the right hand side. The estimator uses equations in first differences
(instrumented by extended lags of levels) as well as equations in levels (instrumented by
first differences). The Blundell and Bond estimator is thus referred to as the system
GMM estimator. The identification assumptions of this estimator are that transient errors
are serially uncorrelated, that initial conditions are predetermined, and that country
specific effects are uncorrelated with the differenced values of the right hand side
variables. We are careful to conduct tests of AR(2) in differences which must be
surmounted for the identification strategy to be valid. In addition we test for violations of
the exclusion restriction by using the Hansen overidentification test.
6) Results-

We begin in Table 1 by addressing endogeneity using the distance from Moscow and the
U.S security perimeter as of May 1945 as instruments for US and Soviet interventions.
Since we only have two instruments we can only include two endogenous variables for
interventions in this section of our analysis. The regressions in Table 1 thus capture the
effects of our omnibus measures of successful interventions, US INTERVENTION and
SOVIET INTERVENTION. In Table 2, where we use the multiple instruments offered
by the GMM technique, we assess the independent effects of the numerous intervention
variables listed in Section 4.

We begin Table 1 with the results for an OLS specification in which we place our core
measure of democracy (REG) on the left hand side, and control for the lagged dependent

21

variable, per capita GDP, GDP growth, duration dependence, continental dummies, and
time dummies (column 1). We then proceed to our core instrumental variables results.
Our interest is in seeing how an intervention in a given five year period affects
democracy in the subsequent five year period, and to see if this effect differs depending
on whether the intervening superpower is a democracy (the US) or a dictatorship (the
Soviet Union).

Column 1 of Table 1 shows that both US and Soviet interventions result in significantly
lower levels of democracy in the next five year period in an OLS setting. (Recall that the
REG measure is decreasing in democracy.) The point estimates for US and Soviet
interventions are statistically indistinguishable from each other (p=.99). We now check if
these results are robust to addressing endogeneity with the two instruments listed above.
Column 2 presents the second stage result of the same specification as column 1, with the
exception that US and Soviet interventions are instrumented by distance from Moscow
and the US security perimeter in May 1945. Corresponding first stage results are
presented in columns 1 and 2 of Appendix Table 2. The first stage results are in
accordance with our theoretical expectations. Distance from Moscow is positively
associated with US interventions. The US security perimeter and distance from Moscow
are negatively associated with Soviet interventions. The Cragg-Donald F-statistic is 14
(vs. a benchmark of 10), which suggests that the specification does not suffer from weak
instrument problems. The second stage results reveal that both US and Soviet
interventions are negatively associated with democracy in the following five year period
(column 1). US interventions are significant at the 1% level, while Soviet interventions

22

are significant at the 10% level. The substantive effect of a US intervention is to reduce
democracy by 36%, while the effect of a Soviet intervention is to reduce democracy by
33%. The point estimates are statistically indistinguishable from each other. (The p
value for the test for the equality of coefficients is .95). This is the core instrumental
variables result of this paper, which we now submit to various robustness checks.

In column 3 we include failed interventions in our definition of interventions, thereby
capturing the effects of all meddling (successful as well as unsuccessful). The new
intervention variables with this addition are called US INTERVENTION2 and SOVIET
INTERVENTION2. Column 3 shows that both US and Soviet interventions are still
associated with significant declines in democracy and the point estimates are once again
indistinguishable from each other (p=.81.). (The first stage results are very similar to
those observed for the column 2 specification and are displayed in columns 3 and 4 of
Appendix Table 2.)

The regressions presented so far use GDP and GDP growth data from Maddison. As
mentioned, this is the appropriate source for this paper because it is the only one which
offers adequate coverage of countries that lie within the Soviet bloc. (If we were to rely
on one of the other widely disseminated sources most of these countries would be
dropped from the analysis when controlling for the most significant alternative
determinants of democracy, which would leave us unable to accurately estimate the
effects of Soviet interventions.) While using alternative income and growth controls
effectively rules out comprehensively estimating the effects of Soviet interventions, it is

23

still useful to see if the core results for US interventions hold when we use GDP data
from another source. We conduct this robustness check using GDP and GDP growth data
from the Growth Development Network Growth Database (GDNGD). The consequence
of switching from Maddison to this source is that the sample size drops from 878 to 596.
The smaller sample size here is largely a consequence of missing observations for several
countries with Soviet interventions such as Czechoslovakia, Romania, Hungary, North
Korea, Sudan, North Korea, Bulgaria, Poland, Somalia, and Afghanistan. In line with
this pattern of missing observations, we should expect the result for US interventions
alone to be robustly significant in GDNGD based specifications.7

Our results are in accord with this expectation. Columns 4 and 5 in Table 1 present
second stage results for specifications that are the same as those in columns 2 and 3, with
the exception that GDNGD controls replace Maddison. The first stages for US
interventions remain strong in these specifications. (See Appendix Table 2, columns 5-8.)
Unsurprisingly, given the pattern of missing data, the first stages for Soviet interventions
are much weaker with the GDNGD controls. As column 4 in Table 1 shows, US
interventions have a significant negative relationship with democracy in the next five
year period. In column 5 we include failed interventions in our definition of
interventions and the second stage results are substantially unchanged.

In columns 6-9 of Table 1 we conduct the same exercise as in columns 2-5, but using the
Polity measure of democracy. (The column 1 OLS result is robust to replacing REG with
7

We are entirely unable to estimate the effects of Soviet military interventions and counterinsurgencies in
the GDNGD specifications on account of missing data for Soviet bloc countries.

24

Polity and is available upon request.) As mentioned in Section 4, we do not use Polity as
our core measure of democracy because this is a subjective measure (unlike REG which
is behavioral). Additionally the subjective assessments are entirely made from one side
of the East-West divide, which generates the possibility of bias which could be
problematic when comparing the effects of Soviet and US interventions. We have special
reasons for concern about the subjectivity of the Polity measure here because we have
several cases where Polity codes countries subjectively as democracies following a
period of US intervention, while REG codes these same countries behaviorally as
dictatorships in the same period.8 In contrast to 22 discrepancies of this type, there are
only two instances of such discrepancies following Soviet interventions. Other
discrepancies between the two variables are limited in scope (there are three cases of
REG coding a democracy and Polity a dictatorship in the wake of a US intervention score
of one, and two instances of the same in the wake of a Soviet intervention score of one).
Overall, we should thus expect the negative results for US interventions to be weaker for
the Polity measure than with the REG measure.

Columns 6 and 7 use the Maddison controls, and use the INTERVENTION and
INTERVENTION2 variables respectively. The strong first stages are displayed in
Appendix Table 3, columns 1-4. The second stage estimate in Column 6 shows that
Soviet interventions are negatively associated with democracy. (Recall that unlike the
REG measure, the Polity measure is increasing in democracy.) US interventions fall
short of significance (p=.13), but the point estimate is statistically indistinguishable from
8

The countries are Guatemala, Honduras, El Salvador, Ecuador, Paraguay, Peru, Bolivia, Chile, South
Africa, Syria, Taiwan, South Korea, Laos, and the Philippines.

25

that for Soviet interventions (p=.25). Column 7 shows that including failed interventions
in the definition of interventions leaves the results essentially unchanged.

In columns 8 and 9 we repeat the specifications from columns 6 and 7 with the exception
that we replace the Maddison controls with GDNGD. The first stages for US
interventions are once again strong. The first stages for Soviet interventions are weaker,
which is to be expected given the pattern of missing observations in GDNGD. (See
Appendix Table 3, columns 5-8.) The pattern of missing observations in GDNGD should
bias against finding a significant result for the Soviet intervention variables.
Furthermore, the difference between REG and Polity codings in countries with US
interventions should cause us to expect a weaker result for US interventions with Polity
rather than with REG. Both of these expectations are borne out. While US interventions
emerge as significant in both columns 8 and 9, the substantive effects (in terms of the
percentage decline in democracy) are smaller in the Polity based specifications than in
the REG based specifications (columns 4 and 5).9 The coefficient for Soviet
interventions is not significant, but is still statistically indistinguishable from that for US
interventions in both cases (p of .79 and .84 respectively).

In Table 2 we check if our core instrumental variables result, which was presented in
column 2 of Table 1, is robust to addressing endogeneity in a different way, namely via
the Blundell and Bond GMM technique. In column 1 of Table 2 we present the GMM
analogue of our core instrumental variables result. The AR(2) and Hansen tests do not
indicate problems with identification; the null hypothesis of no AR(2) cannot be rejected

26

(p=.64), and the same is the case for the fulfillment of the exclusion restriction (Hansen
test p value of 1.) Similar to what we observed in our core IV regression, both US and
Soviet interventions emerge as having significant negative effects on democracy.

Since the GMM technique is based on using multiple lags of levels and differences as
instruments, we are not limited to only including two endogenous intervention variables
in our GMM analysis. In GMM we can thus separately examine the independent effects
of onsets, offsets, counterinsurgency support, and military invasions. We now thus focus
on estimating the independent effects of these variables.

Column 2 shows that both US and Soviet onsets are negatively associated with
democracy (at the 5% and 10% levels respectively). US and Soviet offsets are positively
associated with democracy (also at the 5% and 10% level respectively). Failed
interventions and counterinsurgency support have no effect on democracy. US military
interventions are positively associated with democracy here, but this latter result turns out
not be robust.10

In column 3 we address the question of whether the negative effects of onsets and the
positive effects of offsets are robust to controlling for the periods between onsets and
offsets in addition to counterinsurgencies. The variables USA INTERMED and SOVIET
INTERMED capture the effects of these periods. The results for US and Soviet onsets
9

The substantive effects here are approximately 26% with Polity as opposed to 36% with REG.
This result is based on a very small sample of invasions (Dominican Republic, Grenada, and Panama).
As we will see later, this latter result also does not survive our robustness check using the Polity measure of
democracy.
10

27

and offsets remain robust to the addition of the INTERMED variables as controls. The
point estimates for onsets are again very similar to those seen earlier. The substantive
effect of the US installing a leader is to reduce the level of democracy in the next five
year period by 18%. The corresponding effect of a Soviet onset is 23%. We are unable
to reject the null hypothesis that the two point estimates are equal to each other (p=.70).
We consider these to be our core GMM results.

As far as the INTERMED variables themselves are concerned, most of the changes in
democracy scores in the case of US interventions appear to be occurring in the immediate
wake of onsets and offsets. When it comes to Soviet interventions the relative sizes of
the point estimates also indicate that onsets and offsets generate larger marginal effects
on democracy than an intermed year, although the SOVIET INTERMED variable does
achieve significance (unlike USA INTERMED).

In column 4 we check if the results for our most expansive specification (the one with the
INTERMED controls) are robust to replacing the REG measure with the Polity measure
of democracy on the left hand side. A decrease in the Polity measure indicates a decline
in democracy. We note that identification here is less robust than with REG. (The null
hypothesis of no AR(2) cannot be rejected at the 95% level, but is on the border of
rejection at the 90% level.) The results for US and Soviet onsets are robust. From a
quantitative perspective a USA onset is associated with a 19% decline in democracy,
while a Soviet onset is associated with a 22% decline in democracy, which is very similar
to what we observed with the REG measure. These point estimates are also statistically

28

indistinguishable from each other. (The p for the test for the equality of coefficients is
.84). (The earlier result for US military invasions does not survive this robustness check
and the sign is in fact reversed.)

The regressions presented so far in Table 2 use data for GDP and GDP growth from
Maddison. As mentioned, this is the appropriate source for this paper because it is the
only one which offers adequate coverage of countries within the Soviet bloc. Just as we
did in Table 1 we now check for the consequences of using GDP and GDP growth data
from the Growth Development Network Growth Database (GDNGD) in place of
Maddison. Recall that we should expect the result for US interventions alone to be
robustly significant in GDNGD based specifications.11

Our findings are once again in accordance with this expectation. Columns 5-8 are
analogous to columns 1-4, with the only difference being that GDNGD controls replace
Maddison controls. Column 5 shows that our omnibus measure of US interventions is
negatively associated with democracy (as per the REG measure). Column 6 shows that
when we consider separately consider onsets, offsets, military invasions, and
counterinsurgency support, US onsets are negatively associated with democracy. Soviet
onsets are insignificant but display the same sign as US onsets, while US offsets, Soviet
offsets, and US military invasions are significantly associated with more democracy.
(Recall the very small number of US military invasions, which should cause us to treat
this latter result with caution.) Once again we are unable to reject the null hypothesis of
11

We are entirely unable to estimate the effects of Soviet military interventions and counterinsurgencies in
the GDNGD specifications on account of missing data for Soviet bloc countries.

29

equality between the US and Soviet onset point estimates (p=.74). In column 7 we use
the INTERMED control variable (which includes periods between onsets and offsets in
addition to including counterinsurgencies) and find that the results are similar. In column
8 we replace the REG measure with the Polity measure of democracy. While the
negative effect of US onsets remains significant, Soviet onsets also emerge as significant
in this specification and the point estimates are again statistically indistinguishable from
one another.

Overall, we thus find that US and Soviet interventions during the Cold War had
significant adverse consequences for democracy. We also find that the interventions of
the two superpowers were similar in their effects irrespective of the fact that one was a
democracy and the other was not.

7) Conclusion

In this paper we have demonstrated that superpower interventions in the domestic politics
of other countries during the Cold War had substantial adverse consequences for
democracy in the intervened countries. How far can one extrapolate from the history of
the Cold War to interventions justified by the war on terror? We have no rigorous
empirical basis on which to calibrate the relevance of the past to the present, but to the
extent that commonalities exist some qualified conclusions can be made. To the extent
that US leaders continue to share the Cold War world view that repressing anti-US
groups overseas enhances security, the US government has incentives to install leaders

30

who have powerful incentives to repress anti-US groups in their countries. It is clear that
under these conditions our findings offer a negative prognosis for democracy in
intervened countries.

31

BIBLIOGRAPHYAcemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, James Robinson 2005. Institutions as the
Fundamental Determinant of Long Term Growth, in Philippe Aghion and Steven
Durlauf, editors, Handbook of Economic Growth, Elsevier.
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James Robinson. 2001. “The Colonial Origins of
Economic Development.” American Economic Review 91 (5), 1369-1401.
Acemoglu, Daron and James Robinson. 2005. Economic Origins of Dictatorship and
Democracy, Cambridge University Press: Cambridge UK.
Acker, Alison. 1988. Honduras: The Making of a Banana Republic. Boston, MA: South
End Press.
Alesina, Alberto, Arnaud Devleeschauwer, William Easterly, Romain Wacziarg, and Sergio
Kurlat. (2003). “Fractionalization”, Journal of Economic Growth, 8(2), 155-194.
Alesina, Alberto, William Easterly, and Janina Matuszewski, “Artificial states,” NBER
Working Paper, June 2006
Alvarez, Michael, Jose Cheibub, Fernando Limongi, and Adam Przeworski. 2000
Democracy and Development: Political Institutions and Material Well Being in the
World. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2000.
Andrew, Christopher, and Vasili Mitrokhin. 2000. The Sword and the Shield: The
Mitrokhin Archive and the Secret History of the KGB. New York: Basic Books.
Andrew, Christopher, and Vasili Mitrokhin. 2005. The World Was Going Our Way. New
York: Basic Books.
Armony, Ariel C. 1997. Argentina, the United States, and the Anti-Communist Crusade
in Central America, 1977-1984. Athens, OH: Ohio University Center for International
Studies.
Birdsall, Nancy, Milan Vaishnav and Robert L. Ayres, eds 2006. Short of the Goal: U.S.
Policy and Poorly Performing States (Center for Global Development: Washington DC)
Blum, William. 1986. The CIA: a forgotten history: US global interventions since World
War 2. Atlantic Highlands, N.J.: Zed Books.
Blum, William. 2004. Killing Hope: U.S. Military and C.I.A. Interventions Since World
War II. Monroe, ME: Common Courage Press.
Blum, William. 2005. Rogue State. Monroe, ME: Common Courage Press,

32

Boley, G. E. Saigbe. 1984. Liberia: Rise and Fall of the First Republic. Westview Press.
Brainard, Lael, editor, Security by Other Means: Foreign Assistance, Global Poverty,
and American Leadership, Brookings Institution: Washington DC (2007)
Bueno de Mesquita, Bruce and George Downs. 2006. “Intervention and Democracy.”
International Organization 60 (3), 627-649.
Collier, Paul and Anke Hoeffler. 1998. “On Economic Causes of Civil War,” Oxford
Economic Papers 50.
Collier, Paul and Anke Hoeffler. 2001. “Greed and Grievance in Civil War.” World Bank
Policy Research Paper 2355 (May).
Collier, Paul and Anke Hoeffler. 2002. “On the Incidence of Civil War in Africa”,The
Journal of Conflict Resolution 46(1).
Copper, John F. 2003. Taiwan. New York: Westview Press.
Council on Foreign Relations, 2005, “More than Humanitarianism: A Strategic U.S.
Approach Toward Africa, Report of an Independent Task Force,” Council on Foreign
Relations: New York.
Doyle, Michael W. and Nicholas Sambanis. 2000. “International Peacebuilding: A
Theoretical and Quantitative Analysis.” American Political Science Review 94 (4):779--802.
Easterly, William, “Inequality Does Cause Underdevelopment: Insights from a New
Instrument” Journal of Development Economics, Volume 84, Issue 2, November 2007,
Pages 755-776.
Easterly, William and Ross Levine (1997), “Africa’s Growth Tragedy: Policies and
Ethnic Divisions,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXII (4), 1203-1250.
Easterly, William and Ross Levine (2003), “Tropics, germs, and crops: the role of
endowments in economic development” Journal of Monetary Economics, 50:1, January
2003.
Engermann, Stanley and Kenneth Sokoloff (1997), “Factor Endowments, Institutions,
and Differential Paths of Growth Among New World Economies: A View from
Economic Historians of the United States,” in Stephen Haber, ed. How Latin America
Fell Behind, Stanford CA: Stanford University Press.
Enterline, Andrew and J. Michael Greig. 2003. Beacons of Hope?: The Impact of
Imposed Democracy on Regional Peace, Democracy and Prosperity. Paper presented at
the annual meeting of the Peace Science Society (International), Ann Arbor, Michigan.

33

Fulbrook, Mary (ed). 2001. Europe Since 1945 (The Short Oxford History of Europe).
USA: Oxford University Press.
Gaddis, John Lewis. 1987. The Long Peace. New York: Oxford University Press.
Gilligan, Michael and Stephen John Stedman. 2004. “Where Do the Peacekeepers Go?”
in Suzanne Werner, David Davis, and Bruce Bueno de Mesquita (eds). Dissolving
Boundaries. Special Issue, International Studies Review 5.
Gleditsch, Nil Petter, Lene Siljeholm Christiansen & Håvard Hegre. 2004. “Democratic
Jihad? Military Intervention and Democracy.” Paper presented at the annual meeting of
the International Studies Association, March 17-20, 2004.
Gleditsch, Kristian S., and Michael D. Ward. 2001. "Measuring Space: A Minimum
Distance Database." Journal of Peace Research 38:749-68
Gorbachev, Mikhail. 1995. Memoirs. New York: Doubleday.
Gott, Richard. 2004. Cuba: A New History. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Haggard, Stephan and Robert Kaufman. 1995. The Political Economy of Democratic
Transitions. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Henl, Robert. 1996. Written in Blood: The History of the Haitian People. Lantham, MD:
University Press of America.
Herman, Edward and Frank Broadhead. 1984. Demonstration Elections: U.S. Staged
Elections in the Dominican Republic, Vietnam, and El Salvador. Boston: South End
Press. 133---56
Karl, Terry. 1990. “Dilemmas of Democratization in Latin America.” Comparative
Politics 23:1-23.
Kaufmann, Daniel, Aart Kraay, Massimo Mastruzzi. 2005. “Governance Matters:
Governance Indicators for 1996-2004.” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper
Series No. 3630.
Kegley, Charles. W. Jr & Margaret G. Hermann, 1997. “Putting Military Intervention
into the Democratic Peace: A Research Note.” Comparative Political Studies 30(1): 78--107.
Kinzer, Stephen. Overthrow: America’s Century of Regime Change from Hawaii to Iraq.
Times Books: New York, 2006.

34

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez Lopez de Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny.
1999. “The Quality of Government.” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization 15
(1), 222-279.
Legvold, Robert. 1970. Soviet Policy in West Africa. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Library of Congress. 2007. Country Studies. http://lcweb2.loc.gov/frd/cs/list.html
Maddison, Angus. 2003. The World Economy: Historical Statistics. Paris: OECD.
Mauro, Paolo (1995). Corruption and Growth. Quarterly Journal of Economics. v110, n3:
681-712
Meernik, James. 1996. United States Military Intervention and the Promotion of
Democracy, Journal of Peace Research 33:39---402.
Miguel, Edward, Shanker Satyanath, and Ernest Sergenti. 2004. Economics Shocks and
Civil Conflict: An Instrumental Variables Approach. Journal of Political Economy
(August).
Narimark, Norman and Leonid Gibianskii. 1997. The Establishment of Communist
Regimes in Eastern Europe, 1944-1949. Boulder: Westview Press.
O’Donnel, Guillermo, Philippe Schmitter and Laurence Whitehead (eds). 1986.
Transitions from Authoritarian Rule. Baltimore, Maryland: Johns Hopkins University
Press.
Olsen, Edward. 2005. A. Korea: The Divided Nation. Westport CT: Praeger Security
International.
Pateman, Roy. 1995. “Intelligence Operations in the Horn of Africa”, in Sorenson, John
(ed.), Disaster and Development in the Horn of Africa, Macmillan,.
Powaski Ronald E. 1998. The Cold War: The United States and the Soviet Union, 19171991. New York: Oxford University Press.
Roett, Riordan and Richard Scott Sacks. 1991. Paraguay: The Personalist Legacy.
Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
Rueschmeyer, Dietrich, Evelyn Huber Stephens, and John Stephens. 1992. Capitalist
Development and Democracy. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Satyanath, Shanker and Arvind Subramanian. 2007. “The Political Economy of Nominal
Pathologies.” IMF Staff Papers 54 (3), 419-453.

35

Smith, Peter. 2000. Talons of the Eagle: Dynamics of U.S.-Latin American Relations.
New York: Oxford University Press,
Treisman, Daniel. 2000. “The Causes of Corruption: A Cross National Study.” Journal
of Public Economics 76 (399-457).
Wantchekon, Leonard and David Nickerson. 1999. “Multilateral Intervention Facilitates
Post Civil War Democratization.” Working paper. New York, NY: Department of
Politics, New York University.
Weiner, Tim. 2007. Legacy of Ashes: The History of the CIA. New York:Doubleday.
Weinstein, Jeremy M., John Edward Porter and Stuart E. Eizenstat. 2004. On the Brink,
Weak States and US National Security, Commission on Weak States and US National
Security, Center for Global Development: Washington DC.
Wittlin, Thaddeus. 1972. Commissar. New York: Macmillan.
Weinstein, Jeremy M. 2005. Autonomous Recovery and International Intervention in
Comparative Perspective. Center for Global Development Working Paper Number 65.
Westad, Odd Arne. 2005. The Global Cold War: Third World interventions and the
making of our times. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Westad, Odd Arne. 2007. The Global Cold War: Third World Interventions and the
Making of Our Times. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Whitehead, Laurence. 1991. “The Imposition of Democracy,” in Abraham Lowenthal
(ed) Exporting Democracy: The United States and Latin America. Baltimore: Johns
Hopkins University Press.
World Bank. 2003. Breaking the Conflict Trap: Civil War and Development Policy.
New York. New York: Oxford University Press.
Zubok, Vladislav M. 2007. A Failed Empire: The Soviet Union in the Cold War from
Stalin to Gorbachev. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press.

36

Table 1- Instrumental Variables Results

US Intervention
Soviet
Intervention
Democracy
Time since
Transition
Log (GDP) per
capita
GDP growth
Africa
Asia
Middle East
CD F-stat
N
p(US-RUS = 0)

REG
MADDISON CONTROLS
OLS
Interv.
Interv2
.0527***
0.241***
0.242***
(.0175)
(0.0869)
(0.0870)
.0526**
0.236*
0.219*
(.0248)
(0.121)
(0.116)
.777***
0.699***
0.695***
(.0346)
(0.0555)
(0.0572)
.0206***
0.0203**
0.0199**
(.00648)
(0.00827)
(0.00853)
-.0403***
-0.0346**
-0.0350**
(.0130)
(0.0160)
(0.0162)
-.125
0.120
0.173
(.205)
(0.264)
(0.283)
.116***
0.213***
0.212***
(.0263)
(0.0591)
(0.0588)
.0468*
0.0735**
0.0691*
(.0242)
(0.0370)
(0.0369)
.125***
0.152***
0.150***
(.0286)
(0.0438)
(0.0445)
878
0.99

13.6
878
0.95

12.1
878
0.81

GDNGD CONTROLS
Interv.
Interv2
0.279***
0.276***
(0.0768)
(0.0772)
0.0967
0.101
(0.153)
(0.159)
0.651***
0.652***
(0.0562)
(0.0566)
0.0195**
0.0187**
(0.00881)
(0.00892)
-0.0309
-0.0305
(0.0211)
(0.0212)
0.00424
0.00422
(0.00348)
(0.00352)
0.301***
0.298***
(0.0595)
(0.0580)
0.115**
0.115**
(0.0488)
(0.0482)
0.226***
0.225***
(0.0566)
(0.0570)
19.7
596
0.28

15.2
596
0.33

POLITY
MADDISON CONTROLS
GDNGD CONTROLS
Interv.
Interv2
Interv.
Interv2
-1.61
-1.54
-2.12**
-2.03**
(1.07)
(1.07)
(1.01)
(1.00)
-2.75*
-2.59*
-1.62
-1.61
(1.47)
(1.37)
(1.97)
(1.98)
0.767***
0.769***
0.722***
0.725***
(0.0442)
(0.0440)
(0.0474)
(0.0462)
0.136*
0.141*
0.0735
0.0807
(0.0819)
(0.0841)
(0.0944)
(0.0969)
0.494***
0.492***
0.511**
0.510**
(0.178)
(0.181)
(0.254)
(0.257)
2.28
1.95
-0.0242
-0.0238
(3.77)
(3.91)
(0.0562)
(0.0558)
-1.88***
-1.83***
-2.82***
-2.74***
(0.639)
(0.652)
(0.832)
(0.826)
-0.737**
-0.693**
-0.925**
-0.904**
(0.339)
(0.337)
(0.409)
(0.403)
-2.38***
-2.33***
-3.00***
-2.94***
(0.483)
(0.477)
(0.706)
(0.709)
10.9
878
0.25

10.0
878
0.31

19.8
596
0.79

16.9
596
0.84

Robust Standard Errors Clustered by Country in Parentheses.
Significantly different than zero at 90% (*), 95% (**), 99% (***) confidence.

37

Table 2: GMM Results
MADDISON CONTROLS
REG
US interv.
Soviet
interv.

USA offset
Soviet
offset

Africa
Asia
Middle
East
N
AR(2) p
Hansen p
US-RUS=0

0.691***
(0.0569)
0.0227***
(0.00680)
-0.0633***
(0.0210)
-0.111
(0.216)
0.135***
(0.0441)
0.0438
(0.0348)
0.154***
(0.0373)
878
0.637
1.00
0.64

POLITY

0.185***
(0.0694)
0.264
(0.219)
-0.133**
(0.0649)
-0.256*
(0.148)
0.0916
(0.154)
-0.181
(0.117)
-0.357***
(0.0694)
Dropped

0.195***
(0.0707)
0.259
(0.211)
-0.138**
(0.0592)
-0.243*
(0.139)
0.116
(0.152)
-0.156
(0.117)
-0.324***
(0.0447)
Dropped

-2.64**
(1.15)
-4.61*
(2.72)
1.27
(0.872)
4.66
(1.32)
-1.73
(1.78)
2.24***
(0.821)
3.12
(2.02)
Dropped

0.0668
(0.0463)
0.136
(0.0849)
0.654***
(0.0506)
0.0139*
(0.00729)
-0.0573**
(0.0226)
0.000970
(0.00283)
0.174***
(0.0424)
0.0621
(0.0402)
0.184***
(0.0479)
596
0.14
1.00
0.77

-1.39***
(0.532)
-2.46***
(0.613)
0.697***
(0.0430)
0.0277
(0.0787)
0.973***
(0.343)
-0.0375
(0.0490)
-1.85***
(0.582)
-0.380
(0.449)
-2.87***
(0.699)
596
0.118
1.00
0.51

.114***
(.0422)
.0189
(.0717)
0.114**
(0.0563)
0.146*
(0.0763)
-0.106**
(0.0540)
-0.204*
(0.105)
0.0481
(0.0544)
-0.113
(0.0761)
-0.359***
(0.0550)
0.0137
(0.0579)
0.0421
(0.0563)
0.00391
(0.0391)

USA onset
Soviet
onset

USA failed
Soviet
failed
USA
invasion
Soviet
invasion
USA
counter
Soviet
counter
USA
Intermed.
Soviet
Intermed.
Lagged
democracy
Time since
Transition
Log (GDP)
per capita
GDP
growth

POLITY

.0862***
(.0289)
.112**
(.0530)

GDNGD CONTROLS
REG

0.762***
(0.0332)
0.0193***
(0.00592)
-0.0495***
(0.0164)
-0.213
(0.199)
0.0862***
(0.0312)
0.0354
(0.0271)
0.127***
(0.0296)
878
0.553
1.00
0.71

0.122**
(0.0568)
0.156**
(0.0766)
-0.100*
(0.0533)
-0.194*
(0.101)
0.0587
(0.0537)
-0.108
(0.0793)
-0.351***
(0.0487)
-0.00288
(0.0527)

-1.74*
(0.985)
-2.00*
(1.08)
0.475
(0.915)
3.43***
(1.25)
-1.55*
(0.855)
1.07*
(0.639)
3.94
(2.81)
0.0432
(0.721)

0.111
(0.0930)
Dropped
0.0297
(0.0287)
0.101***
(0.0334)
0.732***
(0.0370)
0.0177***
(0.00610)
-0.0489***
(0.0174)
-0.237
(0.204)
0.108***
(0.0345)
0.0434
(0.0299)
0.147***
(0.0338)
878
0.604
1.00
0.7

-0.223
(0.343)
-1.58***
(0.378)
0.794***
(0.0321)
0.0720
(0.0638)
0.707***
(0.248)
4.79
(3.28)
-0.952**
(0.446)
-0.373
(0.348)
-2.16***
(0.433)
878
0.098
1.00
0.84

.580***
(0.0683)
0.0294***
(0.00884)
-.104***
(0.0318)
.00481
(0.0334)
0.195***
(0.0672)
0.0541
(0.0564)
0.190***
(0.0582)
596
0.232
1.00
0.21

0.678***
(0.0492)
0.0157**
(0.00732)
(0.0219)
0.00156
(0.00287)
0.145***
(0.0369)
0.0490
(0.0373)
0.160***
(0.0416)
596
0.135
1.00
0.74

Robust Standard Errors in Parentheses.
Significantly different than zero at 90% (*), 95% (**), 99% (***) confidence.

38

Appendix Table 1- Summary Statistics

USA onset
Soviet onset
USA offset
Soviet offset
USA failed
Soviet failed
USA invasion
Soviet invasion
USA counter
Soviet counter
USA intermed.
Soviet intermed.
USA intervention
Soviet intervention
USA intervention2
Soviet
intervention2
REG
Time since REG
transition
Polity2
Time since Polity2
Transition
Log (GDP) per
capita MADDISON
GDP growth
MADDISON
Log (GDP) per
capita GDNGD
GDP growth
GDNGD
Log distance to
Moscow
USA perimeter

Observations
878
878
878
878
878
878
878
878
878
878
878
878
878
878
878

Mean
0.0251
0.0182
0.0216
0.0182
0.0182
0.0103
0.00228
0.00797
0.0205
0.00456
0.0763
0.0581
0.261
0.110
0.273

St. Dev.
0.156
0.134
0.146
0.134
0.134
0.101
0.0477
0.0890
0.142
0.0674
0.266
0.234
0.439
0.314
0.446

Minimum
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

Maximum
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

878
878

0.121
0.658

0.326
0.455

0
0

1
1

878
878

2.60
-1.11

2.12
7.39

0
-10

7
10

878

2.55

2.13

0

7

878

7.82

1.01

5.86

10.6

878

0.0176

0.0341

-0.161

0.218

596

8.11

1.01

6.11

10.1

596

2.01

3.15

-8.29

16.4

878
878

8.55
0.314

0.672
0.465

6.84
0

9.71
1

39

Appendix Table 2: First Stage Results-REG specifications
Table 1 Column 2
USA/Soviet
intervention
Log distance
to Moscow
USA security
perimeter
Lagged
Democracy
Time since
Transition
Log (GDP)
per capita
GDP growth
Africa
Asia
Middle East

USA
0.212***
(0.0485)
-0.00886
(0.115)
0.194**
(0.0809)
0.00100
(0.0194)
0.0159
(0.0439)
-0.423
(0.617)
-0.317**
(0.127)
-0.119
(0.138)
0.163
(0.127)

SOVIET
-0.0794**
(0.0321)
-0.307**
(0.130)
0.164***
(0.0551)
0.00923
(0.0112)
-0.0425*
(0.0226)
-0.762**
(0.298)
-0.444***
(0.131)
-0.300**
(0.145)
-0.466***
(0.131)

Table 1 Column 3
USA
0.201***
(0.0477)
-0.0336
(0.111)
0.217**
(0.0793)
0.000843
(0.0197)
0.0114
(0.0439)
-0.653
(0.615)
-0.351***
(0.124)
-0.131
(0.133)
0.116
(0.124)

SOVIET
-0.0743**
(0.0325)
-0.303**
(0.130)
0.169***
(0.0555)
0.0117
(0.0115)
-0.039*
(0.0231)
-0.807***
(0.301)
-0.434***
(0.132**)
-0.289**
(0.145)
-0.442***
(0.131)

Table 1 Column 4
USA
0.227***
(0.0468)
-0.150
(0.119)
0.259***
(0.0825)
0.0101
(0.0181)
-0.0273
(0.0437)
-0.00348
(0.00664)
-0.653***
(0.130)
-0.402***
(0.153)
-0.278*
(0.157)

SOVIET
-0.0346
(0.0246)
-0.226
(0.144)
0.0739**
(0.0371)
0.00750
(0.00867)
-0.0357**
(0.0162)
-0.00426
(0.00376)
-0.306**
(0.154)
-0.255*
(0.149)
-0.264
(0.164)

Table 1 Column 5
USA
0.226***
(0.0468)
-0.149
(0.120)
0.257***
(0.0826)
0.0123
(0.0182)
-0.0320
(0.0440)
-0.00336
(0.00665)
-0.650***
(0.131)
-0.403***
(0.154)
-0.280*
(0.158)

SOVIET
-0.0243
(0.0264)
-0.223
(0.146)
0.0774*
(0.0417)
0.00875
(0.00904)
-0.0259
(0.0203)
-0.00434
(0.00336)
-0.287*
(0.158)
-0.246
(0.151)
-0.242
(0.167)

Robust Standard Errors Clustered by country in Parentheses.
Significantly different than zero at 90% (*), 95% (**), 99% (***) confidence.

40

Appendix Table 3: First Stage Results-Polity specifications
Table 2 Column 6
USA/Soviet
intervention
Log distance
to Moscow
USA security
perimeter
Lagged
Democracy
Time since
Transition
Log (GDP)
per capita
GDP growth
Africa
Asia
Middle East

USA
0.196***
(0.0469)
0.0394
(0.114)
-0.0165***
(0.00468)
-0.00665
(0.0175)
0.0401
(0.0431)
-0.251
(0.590)
-0.248*
(0.130)
-0.0411
(0.140)
0.168
(0.124)

SOVIET
-0.0728**
(0.0319)
-0.310**
(0.128)
-0.0102***
(0.00335)
0.0236**
(0.0108)
-0.0396*
(0.0230)
-0.657**
(0.308)
-0.405***
(0.130)
-0.285**
(0.148)
-0.460***
(0.129)

Table 2 Column 7
USA
0.184***
(0.0460)
0.0140
(0.109)
-0.0177***
(0.00457)
-0.00648
(0.0177)
0.0356
(0.0430)
-0.467
(0.588)
-0.278**
(0.127)
-0.0511
(0.134)
0.122
(0.121)

SOVIET
-0.0658**
(0.0333)
-0.314**
(0.130)
-0.00962***
(0.00339)
0.0265**
(0.0114)
-0.0394*
(0.0230)
-0.704**
(0.305)
-0.401***
(0.132)
-0.282*
(0.149)
-0.437***
(0.130)

Table 2 Column 8
USA
0.213***
(0.0462)
-0.105
(0.118)
-0.0197***
(0.00473)
-0.000530
(0.0167)
0.00200
(0.0444)
-0.00155
(0.00664)
-0.577***
(0.128)
-0.303*
(0.156)
-0.269*
(0.152)

SOVIET
-0.0231
(0.0241)
-0.245*
(0.144)
-0.00377*
(0.00204)
0.0190**
(0.00879)
-0.0405**
(0.0170)
-0.00337
(0.00353)
-0.303**
(0.151)
-0.268*
(0.149)
-0.273*
(0.162)

Table 2 Column 9
USA
0.212***
(0.0462)
-0.105
(0.119)
-0.0196***
(0.00474)
0.00158
(0.0169)
-0.00258
(0.0446)
-0.00148
(0.00663)
-0.576***
(0.129)
-0.307*
(0.158)
-0.272*
(0.153)

SOVIET
-0.00983
(0.0278)
-0.252*
(0.148)
-0.00279
(0.00225)
0.0209**
(0.00963)
-0.0355*
(0.0186)
-0.00329
(0.00312)
-0.291*
(0.156)
-0.269*
(0.153)
-0.251
(0.165)

Robust Standard Errors Clustered by country in Parentheses.
Significantly different than zero at 90% (*), 95% (**), 99% (***) confidence.

41

Data Appendix A: Countries Included in Analysis
Afghanistan#
Albania
Algeria
Angola
Argentina
Australia
Austria
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Belgium
Benin
Bhutan*
Bolivia
Botswana
Brazil
Bulgaria
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cambodia#
Cameroon
Canada
Central African Republic
Chad
Chile
China
Colombia
Comoros
Congo
Costa Rica
Cote d'Ivoire
Cuba#

42

Djibouti #
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
Egypt
El Salvador
Equatorial Guinea
Ethiopia
Fiji*
Finland
France
Gabon
Gambia
Ghana
Greece
Guatemala
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Guyana*
Haiti
Honduras
Hungary
Iceland*
India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq#
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Jamaica
Japan

Korea, South
Kuwait#
Laos
Lebanon#
Lesotho
Liberia#
Libya#
Luxembourg*
Madagascar
Malawi
Malaysia
Mali
Mauritania
Mauritius
Mexico
Mongolia
Morocco
Mozambique
Myanmar#
Nepal
Netherlands
New Zealand
Nicaragua
Niger
Nigeria
Norway
Oman
Pakistan
Panama
Papua New Guinea*
Paraguay

Portugal
Qatar#
Romania
Rwanda
Saudi Arabia
Senegal
Sierra Leone
Singapore
Somalia#
South Africa
Spain
Sri Lanka
Sudan
Swaziland
Sweden
Switzerland
Syria
Taiwan
Tanzania
Thailand
Togo
Trinidad and Tobago
Tunisia
Turkey
Uganda
United Arab Emirates#
United Kingdom
Uruguay
Venezuela
Yugoslavia#
Zaire

Cyprus*
Czechoslovakia#
Denmark

Jordan
Kenya
Korea, North

Peru
Philippines
Poland

Zambia

# Denotes countries not appearing in the GDNGD sample. (Note GDNGD is also missing several periods of GDP data for Eastern
European countries in the sample).
* Denotes countries only appearing in the GDNGD sample.

43

