                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        RISK AND RETURN:
                 CONSUMPTION VERSUS MARKET BETA


                       N. Gregory Mankiw

                       Matthew D. Shapiro



                     Working Paper No. 1399




             NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                   1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                      Cambridge, MA 02138
                           July 198)4




We are grateful to R. Barsky, G. Chamberlian, S. Fischer, J.
Hausman, M. King, J. Poterba, D. Romer, L. Summers, R. Vishny and
seminar participants at Brown and M.I.T. for helpful comments. The
research reported here is part of the NBER's research program in
Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are those of the
authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                   NBER Working Paper #1399
                                                   Ju1r 198)4




                                Risk and Return:
                         Consumption versus Market Beta



                                   ABSTRACT


        The interaction between the macroeconomy and asset markets is

central to a variety of modern theories of the business cycle. Much recent

work emphasizes the joint nature of the consumption decision and the port-

folio allocation decision. In this paper, we compare two formulations of

the Capital Asset Pricing Model. The traditional CAPM suggests that the

appropriate measure of an asset's risk is the covariance of the asset's

return with the market return. The consumption CAPM, on the other hand,

implies that a better measure of risk is the covariance with aggregate con-

sumption growth. We examine a cross section of )46)4 stocks and find that the

beta measured with respect to a stock market index outperforms the beta

measured   with respect to consumption growth.



N. Gregory Mankiw                                  Matthew D. Shapiro
284 Harvard Street                                 16)43 Cambridge   Street
#)4)4                                              #)42
Cambridge, MA 02138                                Cambridge,   MA 02138
I. Introduction


     The    link between asset markets and product markets is central to a
variety of macroeconomic models. In IS—LM models, such as those
discussed   by Tobin [1980,19821 and Blanchard 119811, asset prices affect

wealth and thus aggregate demand. In models based upon intertemporal

substitution, such as the one Lucas [19181 considers, asset prices

adjust to equate desired expenditure with   the   endowment of the economy.

The important role given to the stock market in these very different

models is not surprising. As Fischer and Merton 1198-d document, there

is a close empirical connection between stock market movements and the

subsequent behavior of the economy.

     Recent work by Breeden [19191, Grossman and Shiller 11981,19821,

and others emphasizes the joint nature of the consumption decision and

the portfolio allocation decision.' This integration is natural, since

the economic agents who make consumption decisions are also deciding

how to allocate their savings among the various assets in the economy.

The implied model, which is often called the "consumption CAPM,"

provides an intuitive and empirically tractible framework for examining

the interaction between asset returns and the macroeconomy.

     The purpose of this paper is to compare the consumption CAPM to

the traditional Capital Asset Pricing Model. Both versions of the CAPM




     1-See also Hall 119821, Hansen and Singleton [1983], Mankiw
 [1981,1983] , Mankiw, Rotemberg and Summers [1982], Runkle [1982]
Shapiro [l981], Shiller [1982] , and Summers 119821.
                                                                           2.


relate the expected return on an asset to its systematic risk.

Traditional tests of the CAPM use the covariance with a stock market

index to nasure systematic risk. The consumption CAPM, however,

suggests that a better measure of systematic risk is the covariance

with aggregate consumption.

     Tests of the traditional CAPM produce mixed results. Faxna and

MacBeth 119731, for example, examine the returns on a cross—section of

stocks and conclude that the data confirm the theory. Other

researchers, such as Douglas [19691, Miller and   Scholes   [19721, Levy

[19781, and Gibbons [19821, report evidence contradicting the model.

One possible objection to these cross—sectional tests is that the true

market portfolio is much larger than the one used in practice. Most

studies use a stock market index as the market portfolio. In the

theoretical model, however, the market portfolio includes all assets:

bonds, land, residential structures and, most important, human capital.

It is possible that any empirical failure of the theory is attributable

to the exclusion of many relevant assets from the market portfolio.

     The inability to measure the market portfolio is a major obstacle

for both testing and using the traditional CAPM. Roll [1977] concludes

that, because of this problem, the CAPM is untestable. Acceptance of

Roll's nihilistic conclusion would render the CAPM useless as a posi-

tive theory of how investors do behave. Moreover, since practical

applications of the CAPM typically require knowing the market port—
                                                                       3.



folio, it would also diminish the usefulness of the CAPM as a normative

theory of how investors should behave. Thus, empirical application of

the model requires identification of the market portfolio.

     The consumption CAPM may offer a solution to this problem.

Breeden [19791 shows that Merton's [19731 intertemporal CAPM relates

the expected return on an asset to the covariance of its return with

the growth in consumption (its consumption beta). Intuitively, the

growth in consumption is the return on all assets. Only risk corre-

lated with consumption risk should be rewarded. Thus, our ability to

measure consumption can potentially circumvent the problem of expli-

citly identifying the market portfolio.2

     In this paper, we examine whether the consumption CAPM provides a

more empirically useful framework for understanding cross-sectional

stock returns. We address two questions. First, do high consumption

beta stocks earn a higher return? Second, does the consumption CA.PM

outperform the traditional CAPM in explaining the cross—section of

stock returns? By considering these questions, we hope to learn

whether the traditional CAPM or the consumption CAPM is rre consistent

with the data.

     Our study of the consumption CAPM parallels previous studies of




    2An alternative approach to this problem is taken by Stambaugh
[19821, who attempts to measure the market return explicitly
including a broad range of assets. Such explicit measurement of the
market return, however, does not easily permit including the return to
human capital, which appears the primary source of risk for a typical
the traditional CAPM. Thus we can directly compare the two models.

We assume throughout this paper that the expected returns on the assets

in our sample and the various risk measures we consider are constant

through time. Although this assumption is not required by the

underlying theory, it is useful for empirical testing and is common in

previous work.3 For example, Fama [1976, p.3314] argues "that the sta—

tionarity assumption is a necessary ingredient for successful tests of

the two—parameter model [i.e., the traditional CAPMI. Thus, although

the assumption is not an explicit part of the two—parameter theory, it

makes the theory more palatable, and it is pretty much a precondition

for tests of the theory." Some recent work on the consumption CAPM,

such as that of Hansen and Singleton [19831, tests the theory under

more general assumptionsi The assumption of constant expected

returns, however, yields the intuitively appealing relations we discuss




person. Even though the aggregate "dividend" to human capital (labor
income) can be measured, the capital gain or loss reflecting changes in
expected returns cannot. The use of the consumption CAPM obviates the
need for such measurement. Moreover, using the consumption CAPM allows
us to avoid other issues involving the definition of wealth. For
example, we need not decide whether government bonds are net wealth
(Barro [1971-il), as consumers have already made that decision implicit
in their optimal plans.

    3mis assumption is either explicit or implicit in, for example,
Douglas 119691, Fama and MacBeth 119731, Levy 119781, Gibbons [19821
and Stambaugh [19821.

    1Hansen and Singleton report that the over—identifying restrictions
implied by the consumption CAPM are overwhelmingly rejected. It is
difficult, however, to judge the economic significance of this finding.
Moreover, it is impossible to tell from their results whether the con—
                                                                             5.


in   this paper.

       Our examination of cross—sectional stock returns provides little

support for the consumption CAPM. We find that the beta measured with

respect to a stock index outperforms the beta measured with respect to

consumption growth. In particular, when we regress return on both the

market beta and    the   consumption beta, the coefficient on the consump-

tion beta is statistically insignificant and very small while the coef-

ficient on the market beta is statistically significant and

comparatively large. We conclude that the consumption CAPM is not a

more empirically useful model for explaining cross—sectional variation

in stock returns.

       Section II presents the theoretical framework for the tests.

Section III describes the data, while Section IV discusses some issues

concerning estimation. Section V presents the empirical results.

Section VI discusses the results and suggests some possible explana—

t ions.




II. Theory


       In this section, we present the two formulations of the Capital

Asset Pricing Model. We first briefly review the traditional CAPM. We

then discuss the more modern consumption CAPM.




sumption CAPM is less consistent with the data than is the traditional
CAPM.
                                                                               6.



A. The Traditional CAPM


      The traditional CAPM is a static model of portfolio allocation

under uncertainty and risk aversion. As Brealy and Myers [19811, Fama

[19761, and other textbooks show, the model relates the return            on

asset i to the risk—free return             and the market return RMt. The

relation is



(i)        EBt =      RFt   +
                                (ERMt
                                        —




where B denotes the expectation operator, and



                  =
(2)        8Mit       Cov(Rt, t)/Var(RMt).


The term Mit is a measure of the systematic risk of asset i. For an

asset with a certain real return, Mit = 0.          For the market portfolio,

Mit = 1.     In general, Mit can take any positive or negative value.

      Without auxiliary assumptions, we cannot implement the model

empirically. As in many previous empirical studies, we assume that the

risk measures Mit and the expected returns E1jt, BFt and ERMt are

constant through time. We can then write equation (1) as



(3) B1 =      aO+alMi+ui
                                                                          7.


where a0 = RF,

       a1 = ERM — RF,

       R1 =    the   realized return on asset i over our sample, and

           =   the   expectational error R1 — ER1.


The rdel thus relates the return on asset i to its systematic

risk Mi'
     If the Mi for each stock were directly observable, we could run

the regression (3) on a cross—section of stocks. The Mj' however,

are not observable. In practice, we use the sample estimates. That

is, for each stock i, we use the time series of returns R1t and RMt to

estimate 3Mi We then use the estimated               as the variable in

equation (3).



B. The Consumption CAPM


     Much recent work in finance stresses the Joint nature of consump-

tion and investment decisions. In the framework Merton [19731 introdu-

ces, Breeden [1979] derives a simple expression relating rates of

return and aggregate consumption. Various studies use this relation

for studying the time series properties of consumption and asset

returns.5 The results, however, do not provide a consistent verdict as




    5See the papers cited in note 1.
                                                                             8.

to    whether the ndel accords with the data. Few studies examine cross—

sectional returns.6 In this section, we briefly review the model and

discuss its implications for cross—sectional stock returns.

        Consider the optimization problem facing the representative con-

sumer. Each period he chooses a level of consumption and an allocation

of his portfolio among various assets. His goal is to maximize the

following utility function:7



(6)         Et              (i+p)5 u(c+5)
                     S =0



where            =   expectation   conditional on information available at

                     time t,

        p        =   rate   of subjective time preference,
             = consumption in period t+s of a nondurable good,

        U    = one—period, strictly concave utility function.

Consider some asset I for which the representative consumer holds a

positive amount. Along any proposed consumption path, C.,,

the consumer can consider a small feasible perturbation in C. and

Suppose he reduces consumption in period t by dCt, invests the saving




    6One exception is Marsh [19831, who examines the term structure of
interest rates and concludes that the data confirm the consumption CAFM.

    TThis utility function, which is standard in the consumption CAPM
literature, entails several assumptions. In particular, consumption of
the good measured by C is additively separable from other goods,
including durables and leisure. The utility function is also additi—
                                                                       9.



asset i, and then consumes the return in period t+l. He increases his

period t+l consumption by dCt÷i=(l+Rt)dCt,    where Rit is the real
return on asset 1. The change in total utility (14) due to this

feasible perturbation is



(5) —u' (ct)dc   +   (l+p )'-(1+Rt)U' (c+i)dCt.


At an optimum,   no feasible perturbation should increase expected utility.

Hence, the change in expected utility (7) due to this marginal change

is zero. That is,



                                              =   1,
(6) Et I((l÷Rt)/(1+P))(u'(ct÷i)/U'(ct))1



or    Et [(1+Rt)St]     1,




where St =   Ut(ct÷i)/U(ct)(l+p)   is the marginal rate of substitution.

The first order condition (6) is the now standard relation between the




vely separable through time. Another possible problem with the utility
function is that it assumes aggregation across consumers is per—
missable. Breeden [19791 and Grossman and Shiller [19821 show con-
ditions under which this aggregation can be rigorously justified.
Their theorems, however, are strictly applicable to infintessimal
intervals in continuous time, not to the discrete intervals we con—
s ider.
                                                                       10.


return on an asset and the marginal rate of substitution between

current and future consumption.

      From (6), we wish to derive a relation between an asset's expected

return and its covariance with consumption. Straightforward manipula-

tion of (6) leads to the following equivalent form:



(T) EtE1-4-Rtl =   LEtst]—'(l_cov(R,st))

We now assume that E+St is constant through time. This assumption is

equivalent to the assumption in the previous section that the risk—free

real interest rate is constant.8 We also assume that Cov(Rjt,St) and

thus ERt are constant through time. These auxilary assumptions allow

us to derive from (7) a consumption—beta relation.

      We assume the consumer's one—period utility function u(.) has

constant relative risk aversion. That is,



(8)   u(c) =   c_A/i_A


where A is the Arrow—Pratt measure of relative risk aversion. With




    8For a risk—free asset, the covariance in (7) is zero; thus, EtSt
is constant if and only if RF is constant. It is under these assump-
tions that Hall [19781 derives the conclusion that consumption follows
a random walk under the permanent income hypothesis.
                                                                          11.



this utility function, we can approximate the covariance in (7) as:9



(9) cov(Rt,st)        E.-A/(l+p)1cov(Rt,ct÷i/ct)



We can now derive the consumption—beta relation. We combine the

relation (7) with the approximation (9) to obtain the following

equation, which parallels equation (3) in the previous section:



(10) rj = a0 +    a20 + u

where R1 is the realized return on asset i over our sample,


      813   = [Et(st)]—l   —   i
      a2 =   A Cov(RMt,Ct+l/Ct)/[(l+p)Et(St)1


and


(ii) Ci = C0V(Rit,Ct4.l/Ct)/COV(RMt,Ct÷l/Ct).

As in the traditional CAPM, the model thus relates the return on asset

i to its sytematic risk            The measure of an asset's systematic




    9mis approximation is exact in continuous time if consumption and
stock prices follow diffusion processes.
                                                                                 12.



risk, however, is its covariance with consumption growth                   For

an asset with a certain real return, Ci =          0.   We have normalized the

        so that the       for the stock market is one. In general, the

consumption beta, Ci' can take on any positive or negative value.

       We can easily nest the traditional CAPM and the consumption CAPM

in one equation. In particular, we can regress the return on asset i

on its market beta and its consumption beta to see which measure of

risk is a better explanator of return. That is, we estimate


(12)     R1 = a0    +
                        alMi   +
                                   a20   +
                                             u1.


This regression can shed light on the empirical usefulness of the

consumption CAPM as compared to the traditional formulation.

       In all of the possible regressions above——(3), (10) and (12).-—the

constant term arj has a natural interpretation. For a risk—free asset,

all of the risk measures are equal to zero. Therefore, each equation

implies that a risk—free asset earns a return equal to the constant a0.

One way to judge the reasonableness of the results is to examine

whether the estimated constant accords with other estimates of the

risk—free return.

       We can also easily interpret the coefficients on systematic risk

Mi and Ci• We have normalized these risk measures so that the beta

for the stock market index is one. Therefore, since the constant a0 is

the real risk—free return (RF), each CAPM implies that the coefficient
                                                                                  13.


on the relevant beta is the spread between the market return and the

risk—free return (ERM —     RF). When we estimate equation (12), we can
compare the coefficients a1 and a2 to gauge the relative success of the

two CAPM formulations. The traditional CAPM implies a1 =               —
                                                              ERM          RF and

a2 =   0,   while the consumption CAPM implies a1 = 0 and a2 =   ERM
                                                                        —
                                                                            RF.

III. Data


       The cross—section of stocks, which is from the CRSP tape, includes

all those companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange continuously

during our sample period; they number lt61i. We use quarterly data from

1959 to 1982 to calculate the return and covariances for each stock.

The return is from the beginning of the quarter to the beginning of the

following quarter.

       The market return we use is the return on the Standard and Poor's

500 index. The consumption measure is real consumer expenditure

on non—durables and services during the first nnth of the quarter. We

use the comparable consumer expenditure deflator to compute real

returns for all the stocks and for the market index. All these NIA

data are seasonally adjusted.

       The consumption CAPM strictly relates an asset's return between

two points in time to consumption growth between the same two points in

time. In practice, we observe average consumption over an interval.

Thus, we are using nasured consumption during the month of January to
                                                                          l4.


proxy- the consumption flow on January 1. Since we examine annual returns,

this approximation is probably accurate. That is, consumption growth

between January (average) and April (average) is highly correlated

with consumption growth between January 1 and April 1. The time—

aggregation problem would, however, become more severe if we examined

monthly   returns.
     Since we can asure asset prices daily, there is no inherent time
aggregation   problem when testing the traditional CAPM. One might thus

suspect that our procedure is biased toward the traditional formulation.

To make the tests comparable, we use a market index analogous to our

consumption   data.     is, our stock market index is the average over
                      That

the first month of the Quarter.
     Although   data choices are always partly arbitrary, we can ensure

that our results are somewhat robust by trying other comparable data.

Although we do not report the results below, we have tried using annual

rather than Quarterly return data. The results were largely the

same as those we report. We have also tried using alternative measures

of consumption——in particular, expenditure on nondurables (i.e., not

including services) and expenditure on food (an item that is most

clearly non—durable). These alternative consumption measures produce

results even less favorable to the consumption CAPM than those we

report below.
                                                                         15.

IV. Estimation

     There are at least two potential problems when estimating

equations such as those we consider. The first issue concerns the

assumption regarding the variance—covariance matrix of the residuals.

The second issue involves the measurement of risk.


A. The Variance—Covariance Matrix


     Previous studies that examine the relation between risk and

return, such as Douglas [19691, Miller and Scholes [19721 and Fama and

MacBeth [19731, and Levy [1978], use ordinary least squares to estimate

equations such as (3). Although the coefficient estimates are con-

sistent under very general assumptions, the estimates are efficient and

the computed standard errors are correct only if the variance—

covariance matrix of the residuals is spherical. That is, implicit in

the OLS standard errors is the assumption that the returns of all

stocks have the same own variance and do not covary together at all.

     One simple improvement upon the use of ordinary least squares is

to allow for heteroskadasticity across stocks. In particular, we can

assume that the variance—covariance matrix is diagonal with elements

proportional to y, where     is defined as Var(Rt)/Var(RMt). This

straightforward application of weighted least squares (WLS)   is   likely

to produce more efficient estimates and more reliable standard errors

than OLS.
                                                                           16.



        Even this assumption regarding the variance-covariance matrix,

however, is not fully satisfactory, because stock returns do covary.

Unfortunately, finding a tractable alternative is difficult. We do not

have enough data to estimate freely a 1461 by 161 variance—covariance

matrix. Some parameterization of the matrix is necessary if we are to

estimate using generalized least squares. One simple parameterization

is to assume a macroeconomic shock \),   which affects stock i with some
factor k, and a stock—specific shock Yi, which is uncorrelated across

stocks.1° That is,



(15) u = kV        +


where    Cov(fl,r1) = 0 if i * j and Cov(V,ri1) = 0.

Under this assumption, we can show that k Mi and that Eu1u is pro—

port ional to 1j if i = i and to          if i * i.'- In Section V below,

we compare the results using ordinary least squares and weighted least

squares to those using generalized least squares with this paraineteri—




   10We are assuming here a one—factor model of returns. It is impor-
tant to note, however, that neither the validity of the underlying
theory nor the consistency of the estimates depends on this one—factor
model. For purposes of statistical efficiency and inference, this
parameterization appears better than the zero—factor model assumed by
others.

   '-1-This result is demonstrated by noting that, since the return on
the market portfolio is a weighted average of individual stock returns,
the (demeaned) market return is a weighted average of the u. Since
each stock is a small part of the market portfolio, the n average to
zero. Without loss of generality, we can now normalize the k so that
                                                                       17.


zation of the variance—covariance matrix)-2

     The estimates under alternative assumptions regarding the

variance—covariance matrix provide a statistical test of model specifi-

cation. Under the null hypothesis that the model is correctly spe-

cified, both OLS and GLS produce consistent estimates, although only

GLS is efficient. If the model is mis—specified, however, then the

estimates generally do not converge in probability. Following

procedures similar to those suggested by Hausman [19781   and White
[19801, we can thus formally test the model specification)-3


B. Measurement of Risk


     The second issue concerns the estimates of the risk measures

and 3Ci• The simplest approach is to use the sample estimates.

Implicit in this approach is the assumption that the sample covariances

are good measures of the covariances of the subjective distribution of

the representative investor. This assumption appears a useful starting

point for exploring the consistency of the data with the two models.




the (demeaned) market return is v.

   -2Inversion of this I61 by 161 matrix may at first seem corn—
puationally difficult. This matrix, however, can be written as
D + VY', where D is a diagonal matrix and V is a vector. Its inverse
is     — DVV'D/(V'DV).        See Rao [1973, p.331.

   13The test statistic is
          (aoLs — GLS ' (V(aOLS) —   V(Ls))l(L5     —
                                                      GLS
For this test, V(aOLS) is calculated taking into account the structure
on the variarice—covariance matrix of the residuals given in (15).
                                                                           18.


     One   possible   source of measurement error would seem to be the

error in measuring aggregate consumption. Measurement error in con—

suinption, however, need not lead to measurement error in the consump-

tion betas. If the measurement error in consumption is classical

errors—in—variables, then our estimated consumption betas are con-

sistent. We define the consumption beta as a ratio of two regression

coefficients and both coefficients are biased equal1y. Put       dif-
ferently, one can view our estimates of        as instrumental variables

estimates, where the return on the stock market is used as an instru-

ment for aggregate consumption growth. Thus, the fact that the con-

sumption data suffers from errors—in—variables does not preclude

consistent estimation of the consumption betas.

     A more serious errors—in—variables problem is that the estimates

of both betas include sampling error. To examine whether our results

are attributable to this sort of measurement error, we follow an

instrumental variables procedure. We divide the sample of T obser-

vations per stock into the T/2 odd quarters and the T/2 even quarters.

For each subsample, we compute the two betas. We then regress the odd

quarter return on the odd quarter beta using the even quarter beta as

an instrumental variable. Alternatively, we can reverse the procedure.




   1141n particular, Ci is the ratio of the coefficient from regressing
Rit            and the coefficient from regressing RMt              The
bias in both coefficents depends on the signal to noise ratio in con—
sumption growth and enters multiplicatively.
                                                                          19.


The   sampling error in the odd sample is uncorrelated with the
sampling   error in the even sample, since stock returns are serially

uncorrelated. This procedure thus produces consistent estimates.

Below we compare the results using this instrumental variable procedure

to   those using the sample estimates of the betas without instrumenting.



V. Results

      For each of our 161 stocks, we compute its mean return over our
sample and the two risk measures: its market beta (Mj and its consump-
tion beta          We also compute its normalized own   variance   of return

(y,). Table 1 contains some sample statistics. Note that all the

various risk measures are positively correlated. That is, stocks that

are risky according to one concept of risk tend to be risky according

to the other concepts as well. The risk measures are not, however,

very highly correlated. Thus, we expect to be able to discern the

empirical usefulness of the alternative measures.3-5


A. Do High Market Beta Stocks Earn Higher Returns?


      A primary implication of any version of the CAPM is that assets

with high systematic risk earn high average return. We therefore begin




     15 other sample statistics are of interest. First, the time—
series correlation between quarterly consumption growth and the stock
                                                                       20.


our exploration of the cross—section by examining whether this positive

association holds true. The regressions in Table 2 demonstrate that

the traditional CAPM passes this first test.16 Under all estimation

procedures, there is a positive relation between a stock's return and

its market beta. The estimated constant, which should be the risk—free

return, is always insignificantly different from one or from zero)-T

The slope coefficient, which should be the spread between the market

return and the risk—free return, is always positive, significant, and

of reasonable size. These results are thus broadly consistent with the

theory.


B. Do High Consumption Beta Stocks Earn Higher Returns?


     We next examine the empirical relation between return and consump-

tion beta. In Table 3, we report results analogous to those in Table 2




iarket return is 0.29. It is therefore not surprising that the two
betas have a cross—sectional correlation of only 0.58.
     Second, the time—series covariance between consumption growth and
the market return is 0.000125. The consumption CAPM (equation 10)
implies that if the risk—free return equals the rate of subjective time
preference, then the equity premium (ERM — RF) equals the product of
this covariance and the coefficient of relative risk aversion (A). An
annual equity premium of about six percent implies A is over 100.
Mehra and Prescott [1983] point out that unless one is ready to accept
extreme degrees of risk aversion, the high equity premium is indeed
puzzling.

   l6All the coefficients and standard errors have been multiplied by
400 and can therefore be interpreted as annual percentages.

  -TFama 119751 reports an annual risk—free real return of about one
percent for the period between 1953 and 1971. Mehra and Prescott 119831
                                                                           21.

for   the consumption—based model.    The results here are less supportive

of the theory. When we estimate using GLS, the coefficient on the con-

sumption beta is insignificant. When we use OLS or WLS, the constant

term in the regressions in Table 3 is higher than the theory suggests

it would be. Remember that the constant a0 is the implied risk—free

return. Regression (2b) implies a high risk—free real return of four

percent. When we estimate using our instrumental variables procedure,

the consumption beta has a negative sign, although with a very large

standard error.     Unlike the results for the traditional CAPM, the

results here provide no support for the theory.

      The formal   specification   test rejects both formulations of the

CAPM at very high levels of significance (< .001). That is, the coef-

ficient estimates change "too much" under the alternative assumptions

regarding the variance—convariance matrix. The point estimates for the

regressions in Table 2, however, appear far more stable than those for

the regressions in Table 3. This observation suggests that the rejec-

tion of the traditional CAPM may not be as economically significant as

the rejection of the consumption CAPM.




report a real risk—free return of 0.T5 percent for the period between
1889 and 1978. These estimates are based upon examination of the
returns on Treasury bills and other assets with little risk and are not
based upon a particular asset pricing model.
                                                                       22.


C. Which Beta is More Related to Returns?


     Since a stock market index excludes many assets that are in the

"true" market portfolio, we would expect a priori that measured con—

sumption is a better proxy for the market portfolio than is a stock

market index. That is, theoretical considerations suggest that a con—

sumption beta is a better measure of systematic risk than is a beta

measured using a stock market index. We now examine more directly

whether the data support this presumption.

     The regressions in Table b compare the consumption beta and the

more common market beta. The results do not at all support the con-

sumption CAPM. The coefficient on the market beta is always far larger

and far more significant than is the coefficient on the consumption

beta. Many of our estimation strategies, in fact, produce a negative

coefficient on the consumption beta. The market rewards systematic

risk with higher return, but the relevant measure of systematic risk

appears to be the market beta rather than the consumption beta.18




VI. Conclusion


     The data we examine in the paper provide no support for consump-

tion CAPM as compared to the traditional formulation. A stock's market




   lBFollowing Douglas [19691, Miller and Scholes [1972] and Levy
119781, we tried including the stock's own variance of return as a
                                                                             23.


beta   contains much more information on its return than does its con—
suinption   beta. Since the consumption CAPM appears preferable a priori

on theoretical grounds, the empirical superiority of the traditional

CAPM is indeed a conundrum.

       It is possible that our   results   are attributable to our various

auxiliary assumptions. Most important, the assumption that the expected

returns and the risk measures are constant through time may be overly

restrictive. It is not clear, though, that these assumptions would

bias our findings toward the traditional CAPM. We test in this paper

two alternative formulations of the CAPM and most of our auxiliary

assumptions apply symnietriclly to both formulations.

       It is possible that consumption CAPM performs poorly because many

consumers do not actively take part in the stock market. For whatever

reason——transaction costs, ignorance, general distrust of corporations,

or liquidity constraints——many individuals hold no stock at all.19 For

these individuals, the first order condition relating consumption to




measure of risk. As previous authors, we find that it has a statisti-
cally significant coefficient, although the size of the coefficient
does not always appear large. This rejection of the model is par-
ticularly pronounced using the consumption beta, confirming that the
traditional CAPM appears more consistent with the data.

  1-9When one considers implicit ownership via pension funds, stock
ownership is, however, more widespread than it first appears.
                                                                       214.




stock returns is not likely to hold.2° Furthermore, if the consumption

of these consumers constitutes a large fraction of total consumer

expenditure, it is less reasonable to expect the first order condition

to hold with aggregate data. In other words, it seems possible that

the consumption CAPM holds for the minority of consumers that hold

stock and that our stock market index is a better proxy for the con—

sumption of this minority than is aggregate consumption.




   20Runkle's [1982] examination of panel data indicates that the
first order condition holds only for individuals with high wealth.
                                                                   25.




                                      Table 1

                                Sample Statistics


                                          Mi        Ci
Mean                          7.53       1.20       1,01    5.50

Median                        7.12       1.l4       0.91    43)4

Standard Deviation            14.78      0.38       0.70    3.91


Correlation with:

       R                      1.00

                              0.117      1.00

                              0.27       0.58       1.00
       Ci
                              0.55       0.714      0.142   1.00
       Ii



    = Average Return

Mi = Market Beta
Ci = Consumption Beta
i. =    Own Variance (normalized by the variance of the return
        on the stock market index)
                                                                           26.


                                           Table 2

                   Do High Market Beta Stocks Earn Higher Returns?


                                Dependent Variable: R


                         (la)       (ib)       (ic)      (le)      (if)

Estimation               OLS       WLS         GLS     GLS—IV    GLS-IV


Subsample of Variable                                   ODD       EVEN

Subsample of Instrument                                 EVEN      ODD




Constant                 0.35      —0.38      —0.72     —0.01      O.91
                        (0.66)     (0.58)     (0.56)    (1.10)    (1.50)

Market Beta              5.97       6.12       6.27     12.32      7.57




s.e.e.                   I.23       3.147


                         0.22       0.22


Standard errors are in parentheses.



OLS =    Ordinary Least Squares
WLS = Weighted Least Squares

GLS =    Generalized Least Squares
IV = Instrumental     Variables Estimation
                                                                               27.


                                             Table 3

               Do High Consumption Beta Stocks Earn Higher Returns?


                                   Dependent Variable: R1


                            (2a)        (2b)       (2c)      (2e)      (2f)

Estimation                  OLS        WLS        GLS       GLS—IV    GLS-IV


Subsample of Variable                                        ODD       EVEN

Subsample   of Instrument                                    EVEN      ODD


Constant                 5.66          1L.143    —0.31      —7.77     —3.10
                        (0.37)         (0.32)     (0.55)    (4.69)    (7.08)


Consumption Beta         1.85           1.87      0.36     —51.17    —19.80
                        (0.31)          (0.32) (0.34) (44.07) (16.03)


                        4.60            3.80
R2                      0.07            0.07


Standard errors are in parentheses.
                                                                           28.


                                        Table 14

                        Which Beta Is More Related To Returns?


                                 Dependent Variable: R


                           (3a)         (3b)        (3c)       (3e)      (3f)

Estimation                 OLS          WLS         GLS       GLS—IV    GLS—IV


Subsample of Variable                                          ODD       EVEN

Subsample of Instrument                                        EVEN      ODD


Constant                   0.35        —0.37       —0.67       2.08     —9.14)4
                          (0.66)       (0.58)      (o.s'i)    (5.39)    (10.07)

Market Beta                5.97         6.05        6.05      2)4.114    11.149
                          (0.64)       (0.63)      (2.22)    (11.78)     (8.35)

Consumption Beta          —0.01         0.07        0.21     —56.09     —22.65
                          (0.34)       (0.314)     (0.34)    (48.58)    (18.83)


s.e.e.                     14.23        3.47

B2                         0.22         0.22


Standard errors are in parentheses.
                                                                         29.


References

Barro, Robert J., 1974, Are Government Bonds Net Wealth?, Journal of
     Political Econonr 82, PP. 1095—1117.

Blanchard, Olivier J., 1981, Output, the Stock Market, and Interest
     Rates, American Economic Review Ti, No. 1, pp. 132—1)43.

Brealy, Richard, and Stewart Myers, 1981, Principles of Corporate
     Finance, McGraw Hiil:New York.

Breeden, Douglas, 1979, An Intertemporal Asset Pricing Model with
     Stochastic Consumption and Investment, Journal of Financial
     Economics 7, pp. 265—296.

Douglas, George W., 1969, Risk in the Equity Markets: An Empirical
     Appraisal of Market Efficiency, Yale Economic Essays IX, pp. 3—Ii5.

Fama, Eugene F., 1975, Short Term Interest Rates as Predictors of
     Inflation, American Economic Review 65, pp. 269—282.

Faxna, Eugene F., 1976, Foundations of Finance, Basic Books: New York.

Fama, Eugene F. and J.D. MacBeth, 1973, Risk, Return and Equilibrium:
     Empirical Tests, Journal of Political Econor 81, pp. 607—636.

Fischer, Stanley and Robert C. Merton, 1984, Macroeconomics and
     Finance: The Role of the Stock Market, NBER Working Paper No. 1291.

Gibbons, Michael R., 1982, Multivariate Tests of Financial Models: A
     New Approach, Journal of Financial Economics 10, pp. 3—27.

Grossman, Sanford J. and Robert Shiller, 1981, The Determinants of the
     Variability of Stock Market Prices, American Economic Review 71,
     No. 2, pp. 222—227.

Grossman, Sanford J. and Robert Shiller, 1982, Consumption
     Correlatedness and Risk Measurement in Economies with Non—traded
     Assets and Heterogeneous Information, Journal of Financial
     Economics 10, pp. 195—210.

Hall, Robert E., 1978, Stochastic Implications of the Life
     Cycle—Permanent Income Hypothesis: Theory and Evidence, Journal of
     Political Economy 86, No. 6, pp. 971—987.

Hall, Robert E., 1982, Intertemporal Substitution in Consumption, NBER
     Working Paper.

Hansen, Lars Peter and Kenneth J. Singleton, 1983, Stochastic
     Consumption, Risk Aversion and the Temporal Behavior of Stock
     Returns, Journal of Political Economy.
                                                                        30.


Hausman, J.A., 1978, Specification Tests in Econometrics, Econometrica
     46, No. 6, pp. 1251—1271.

Levy, Haim, 1978, Equilibrium in an Imperfect Market: A Constraint on
     the Number of Securities in the Portfolio, American Economic
     Review 68, No. 4, pp. 643—658.

Lucas, Robert E., Jr., 1978, Asset Prices in an Exchange Economy,
     Econometrica 46, pp. 1429—1445.

Mankiw, N. Gregory, 1981, The Permanent Income Hypothesis and the Real
     Interest Rate, Economics Letters 7, pp. 307—311.

Mankiw, N. Gregory, 1983, Consumer Durables and the Real Interest Rate,
     NBER Working Paper No. 1148.

Mankiw, N. Gregory, Julio J. Rotemberg and Lawrence H. Summers, 1982,
     Intertemporal Substitution in Macroeconomics, NBER Working Paper
     No. 898, forthcoming in the Quarterly Journal of Economics.

Marsh, Terry A., 1983, Asset Pricing Model Specification and the Term
     Structure of Interest Rates, Sloan School Working Paper No.
     1420—83.

Mehra, Rajnish and Edward C. Prescott, 1983, The Equity Premium: A
     Puzzle, mimeo.

Merton, Robert T., 1973, An Intertemportal Capital Asset Pricing Model,
     Econometrica 41, pp. 867—887.

Miller, Merton H. and Myron Scholes, 1972, Rates of Return in Relation
     to Risk: A Re—examination of Some Recent Findings, in M. C. Jensen,
     ed., Studies in the Theory of Captial Markets, New York: Praeger.

Rao, C. Radhakrischna, 1973, Linear Statistical Inference and Its
     Applications, second edition, New York: Wiley.

Roll, R., 1977, A Critique of Asset Pricing Theory's Tests, Part I,
     Journal of Financial Economics 4, pp. 129—176.

Runkle, David, 1982, Liquidity Constraints and the Permanent Income
     Hypothesis: Evidence from Panel Data, M.I.T.

Shapiro, Matthew D., 1984, The Permanent Income Hypothesis and the Real
     Interest Rate: Some Evidence from Panel Data, Economics Letters 14,
     pp. 93—100.

Shiller, Robert, 1982, Consumption, Asset Markets, and Macroeconomic
     Fluctuations, supplement to the Journal of Monetary Economics,
     Carnegie—Rochester Conference Series, Volume 17.
                                                                       31.


Stambaugh, Robert F., 1982, On the Exclusion of Assets from Tests of
     the Two—parameter Model: A Sensitivity Analysis, Journal of
     Financial Economics 10, No. 3, pp. 237—268.

Summers, Lawrence H., 1982, Tax Policy, the Rate of Return, and
     Savings, NBER Working Paper No. 995.

Tobin, James, 1980, Asset Accumulation and Economic Activity,
     University of Chicago Press.

Tobin, James, 1982, Money and Finance in Macroeconomic Process, Journal
     of Money, Credit, and Banking 14, pp. 171—204.

White, Halbert, 1980, Using Least Squares to Approximate Unknown
     Regression Functions, International Economic Review 21, No. 1, pp.
     149—17O.
