                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      THE NON-COGNITIVE RETURNS TO CLASS SIZE

                                             Thomas Dee
                                             Martin West

                                        Working Paper 13994
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13994


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2008




We thank Jeremy Finn, Rob Hollister, John Tyler and Yona Rubinstein and seminar participants at
Harvard, Cornell, Swarthmore, and the 2008 AEFA meetings for helpful discussions and comments.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Thomas Dee and Martin West. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
The Non-Cognitive Returns to Class Size
Thomas Dee and Martin West
NBER Working Paper No. 13994
May 2008
JEL No. I20,I21,I28

                                              ABSTRACT

Although recent evidence suggests that non-cognitive skills such as engagement matter for academic
and economic success, there is little evidence on how key educational inputs affect the development
of these skills. We present a re-analysis of follow-up data from the Project STAR class-size experiment
and find evidence that early-grade class-size reductions did improve subsequent student initiative.
However, these effects did not persist into the 8th grade. Furthermore, the external and, possibly, the
internal validity of these inferences is compromised by non-random attrition. We also present a complementary
analysis based on nationally representative survey data and a research design that relies on contemporaneous
within-student and within-teacher comparisons across two academic subjects. Our results indicate
that smaller classes in 8th grade lead to improvements in measures of student engagement with effect
sizes ranging from 0.05 to 0.09 and smaller effects persisting two years later. Using the estimated earnings
impact of these non-cognitive skills and the direct cost of a class-size reduction, the implied internal
rate of return from an 8th-grade class-size reduction is 4.6 percent overall, but 7.9 percent in urban
schools.


Thomas Dee
Department of Economics
Swarthmore College
Swarthmore, PA 19081
and NBER
dee@swarthmore.edu

Martin West
Box 1938, 21 Manning Walk
Brown University
Providence, RI 02912
martin_west@brown.edu
                                                                                              1


1. Introduction

       Both policymakers and the broader public have an enduring interest in identifying

school reforms that will contribute to positive long-term social and economic outcomes.

One of the most popular strategies in recent decades has been to reduce the size of

classes, particularly for children in early grades. Over the last 30 years, 24 states have

implemented measures encouraging or mandating class-size reductions (Education

Commission of the States 2005). The presumed benefits of smaller classes have figured

prominently in recent legal battles over the equity and adequacy of state school finance

systems (West and Peterson 2007). And Howell et al. (2007) report that 77 percent of

American adults would prefer to see new educational dollars spent on reducing class

sizes rather than on increasing teacher salaries.

       While class-size reduction has strong intuitive appeal among parents and policy

makers, its effectiveness (and cost-effectiveness) continues to be debated among

researchers. Krueger (2003a, p. 36), for example, asserts that a “consensus is emerging

that smaller classes raise student achievement, both on average and in particular for

children from low-income and minority communities.” Hanushek (2003, p. F92), on the

other hand, argues that class-size reductions are an “expensive and generally

unproductive policy.”

       The growing recognition of the importance of non-cognitive skills for later life

outcomes may have important implications for this debate. “Non-cognitive skills” is an

overarching term for a range of behaviors, habits, and attitudes that are not measured by

conventional tests of cognitive ability. Indicators of non-cognitive skills that are highly

predictive of long-term educational and labor-market outcomes include such classroom
                                                                                                            2


behaviors as attentiveness, disruptiveness, tardiness, absenteeism, and homework

completion. Moreover, unlike IQ, which largely stabilizes while students are still in

elementary school, characteristics such as intellectual engagement, motivation, and self-

discipline appear to be malleable at later ages. As Carneiro and Heckman (2003) point

out, this evidence suggests that evaluations of educational interventions should

incorporate analyses of their effects on both cognitive and non-cognitive skills. Yet while

numerous researchers have hypothesized that smaller classes could improve non-

cognitive skills, there exists little reliable evidence on their effects on these types of

outcomes.1

         This paper examines the non-cognitive returns to class size through two

complementary studies of its effects on measures of student engagement drawn from

teacher and student surveys. First, we provide a reanalysis of follow-up data from Project

STAR, a randomized evaluation of class-size reduction in kindergarten through 3rd grade

launched in 1985 in Tennessee. Evidence from Project STAR on the cognitive benefits of

smaller classes has been extraordinarily influential in building support for class-size

reduction in the early grades (Krueger 1999, Krueger and Whitmore 2001, Schanzenbach

2007). We use teacher survey data collected after the conclusion of the experiment, when

most STAR students were in 4th and 8th grade, to determine whether taking into account

possible long-term non-cognitive benefits provides additional support for class-size

reduction policies.



1
  Krueger (2003b, page F58), for example, suggests that existing cost-benefit analyses of class-size
reduction probably understate its benefits because it is “likely that school resources influence non-cognitive
abilities, which in turn influence earnings.” See also Schanzenbach (2007, p. 220), who writes that smaller
classes may “improve non-cognitive skills in addition to the cognitive skills measured by standardized test
scores.”
                                                                                              3


       We also present a complementary analysis based on nationally representative

survey data from the National Educational Longitudinal Study of 1988 (NELS:88). To

estimate the causal effect of class size on both cognitive and non-cognitive outcomes

with observational data, we rely on contemporaneous within-student, within-teacher

comparisons across two academic subjects. This identification strategy, which to our

knowledge is new to the literature on class size, closely parallels the approach used to

evaluate data on identical twin pairs (e.g., Ashenfelter and Krueger 1994, Ashenfelter and

Rouse 1998, and Rouse 1999). It has also been used with the NELS:88 to isolate the

causal effects of teacher traits such as gender (Dee 2005, 2007), race (Dee 2005), and

subject-specific qualifications (Dee and Cohodes 2008). Our results based on this strategy

indicate that smaller class sizes in 8th grade lead to improvements in several measures of

student engagement, with effect sizes ranging from 0.05 to 0.09, and persistent but

smaller improvements two years later. We also use data from the 2000 follow-up

interview of adult NELS:88 respondents to construct a rough cost-benefit analysis of both

general and targeted class-size reductions in the 8th grade in light of its effects on both

cognitive and non-cognitive skills

       The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 summarizes recent

evidence on the effects of class-size reductions, the relationship between non-cognitive

skills, academic achievement, and labor-market success, and the role of intellectual

engagement in educational production. The following section presents experimental

estimates of the effect of early-grade class-size reductions on the available measures of

student engagement in the 4th- and 8th-grade follow-up data from Project STAR. Sections

4 and 5 present our analysis of the effects of 8th grade class size on a range of
                                                                                               4


engagement measures in the NELS:88 database and compare the costs and benefits of

general and targeted class-size reductions in the 8th grade in light of the observed effects

of class size on both cognitive and non-cognitive skills. The final section discusses the

implications of our results for policy and research.



2. Literature Review

The Effects of Class Size

       The scholarly debate over the effectiveness of class-size reductions has a long

history (Glass and Smith 1978). A central challenge in assessing the true effects of

smaller classes is that students with a propensity for poor achievement may be

systematically assigned to smaller classes (Lazear 2001). Similarly, the relationship

between teacher effectiveness and classroom assignment may also undermine inferences

about the effects of smaller classes based on observational data. Largely in an attempt to

settle this debate, the state of Tennessee in the 1980s carried out a large experimental

evaluation of class-size reduction known as Project STAR (Student/Teacher

Achievement Ratio). In the 1985-86 school year, kindergarten students in each of 79

elementary schools were randomly assigned to one of three class types: small, regular, or

regular with an full-time teacher’s aide. Teachers were also randomly assigned to

classrooms within their school. Students who entered a participating school while this

cohort of students was in grades 1-3 were added to the experiment and randomly assigned

to a classroom. In 4th grade, all students were returned to regularly sized classrooms.

       Because of its experimental design, Project STAR arguably provides the best

available evidence on the effects of class-size reductions in the early grades. Early
                                                                                           5


analyses of the experimental data (e.g. Finn et al. 1989, Finn and Achilles 1990) reported

positive effects on student achievement of being assigned to a smaller class, but these

studies failed to address the potential implications of non-random sample attrition and

treatment crossover. In a reanalysis intended to address these lingering concerns, Krueger

(1999) found that students randomly assigned to classes with eight fewer students in

kindergarten performed 0.2 standard deviations better on math and reading tests. The

estimated effect of small-class assignment persisted, but did not increase, as these

students remained in smaller classes through the third grade.

       Subsequent research (Krueger and Whitmore 2001; see also Finn et al. 2005)

indicates that the performance advantage for students assigned to smaller classes

decreased after they were returned to regular classes in the fourth grade. However,

differences in performance remained evident through 8th grade, and students who had

been assigned to smaller classes in kindergarten were 3.7 percentage points more likely to

take college-entrance exams in high school. For African-American students, the

difference in participation rates on college-entrance exams was 8.5 percentage points.

Krueger (2003b) compares the cost of an early class-size intervention like Project STAR

with the estimated present discounted value of the adult earnings gains implied by

improved test scores and concludes that the internal rate of return to class-size reductions

is roughly 6 percent.

       While evidence from Project STAR has been influential in creating enthusiasm

for class-size reductions in early grades (Boruch 2002), it has also been criticized on

several grounds. Hanushek (2003) argues that the lack of baseline data on the

performance of students before entering the experiment makes it impossible to assess
                                                                                                               6


fully the quality of the initial random assignment process and the effects of attrition from

the study sample. Hoxby (2000) suggests that the knowledge that they were participating

in an experiment may have altered the behavior of participating teachers, making the

results an unreliable guide for policy.2 Finally, the external validity of the experiment

may be limited since it was conducted in a single state among schools which volunteered

to participate and were large enough to accommodate the research design. Other recent

research on American students, using quasi-experimental methods, shows no evidence of

class-size effects on student achievement (e.g., Hoxby’s 2000 study of Connecticut).3

The Effects of Non-cognitive Skills

         As this discussion suggests, research on class size—like the great majority of the

broader academic literature on skill formation and its consequences—has focused mainly

on student performance on tests designed to measure quite specific cognitive skills.

Similarly, prominent accountability-based education reforms such as the No Child Left

Behind (NCLB) Act and mandatory high-school exit exams also focus largely on test-

based measures of cognitive performance. However, common sense suggests that a

variety of personality traits and behaviors that are conceptually distinct from cognitive

ability, such as motivation, persistence, and engagement, also have an important

influence on both educational and labor-market outcomes.




2
  Specifically, if teachers suspected that future investments in class-size reductions would be made only if
the experiment showed benefits, they may have made special efforts to ensure that students in smaller
classes performed well.
3
  There is also a large and rapidly growing literature that uses quasi-experimental methods to estimate the
effects of class-size reduction on student achievement internationally (e.g. Case and Deaton 1999, Angrist
and Lavy 1999, West and Woessmann 2006, Woessmann and West 2006). For a recent survey of this
evidence, see Woessmann 2007).
                                                                                                       7


        A number of recent studies have brought new attention to the role of such non-

cognitive skills.4 In particular, Heckman and Rubenstein (2001) note that high school

dropouts who successfully complete a General Education Development (GED) test had

lower wages and schooling levels than other high school dropouts after controlling for

measured ability. They conclude that the GED is a “mixed signal” that attracts high

school dropouts with relatively high cognitive skills but lower levels of unspecified non-

cognitive skills that are both relevant for educational attainment and valued in the labor

market. A subsequent study by Heckman et al. (2006) presented evidence that non-

cognitive skills had substantive influences on both labor-market outcomes and a variety

of risky behaviors. Specifically, this study measured non-cognitive skills with the

Rosenberg self-esteem scale and the Rotter “locus-of-control” scale, which measures the

extent to which individuals feel that their own actions determine the outcomes they

experience (as opposed to chance or their environment).5

        Several other recent studies have examined the effects of alternative measures of

non-cognitive skills on educational and labor market outcomes. For example, Segal

(2006a) finds that teacher reports of a student’s behavior in 8th grade appear as important

for adult earnings as their 8th-grade test scores. Similarly, Deke and Haimson (2006) find

that a composite measure of work habits (based on student and teacher reports) has an

apparent effect on subsequent educational attainment similar to that of a test-score

measure. They also find that the effect of a locus-of-control variable on adult earnings is

similar to the effect of a test-score measure. Furthermore, in a study of British data,

4
  However, as these recent studies note, the importance of non-cognitive skills had been recognized in
several early studies (e.g., Bowles and Gintis 1976, Edwards 1976, Jencks et al. 1979)
5
  Other recent studies have also concluded that the non-cognitive abilities measured by the Rotter and
Rosenberg scales had similar effects on wages and occupational traits (Goldsmith, Veum, and Darity 1997,
Waddell 2006).
                                                                                             8


Blanden et al. (2006) find that non-cognitive measures such as teacher reports of student

effort appear to influence labor market outcomes but do so largely through their effects

on educational outcomes.

       Another provocative development in the literature on non-cognitive skills

involves new evidence that researchers’ distinctions between measures of cognitive and

non-cognitive skills may be somewhat illusory. More specifically, two recent studies

(Segal 2006b, Borghans et al. 2006) argue that the scores of survey respondents on low-

stakes cognitive tests appear to reflect in part non-cognitive skills that are associated with

their degree of test effort. In particular, laboratory experiments indicate that subjects

whose personalities exhibit high levels of motivation and an internally focused locus of

control perform similarly on cognitive tests regardless of the presence of incentives,

while other subjects improve their test performance significantly in the presence of

stronger incentives.

Student Engagement

       The term “non-cognitive skills” clearly encompasses a diverse set of

psychological traits. In fact, a principal-components factor analysis discussed in

Heckman et al. (2006, footnote 6) confirms that non-cognitive skills reflect multiple

latent factors. However, educational psychologists have increasingly highlighted

intellectual engagement as a “multidimensional construct” with particularly important

implications for academic success. In a recent review of this literature, Fredricks et al.

(2004) broadly characterize school engagement as an active commitment to education

and note that concerns about engagement among American students have grown more
                                                                                              9


salient in recent years because of societal declines in respect for authority figures,

institutions, and their attendant academic expectations.

       Educational researchers have settled on a three-part taxonomy of types of student

engagement (Fredricks et al. 2004). “Behavioral engagement” focuses on forms of

academic participation such as attendance, not being disruptive, effort, assignment

completion, attentiveness in class, and asking questions. “Emotional engagement”

consists of student reactions to teachers, peers, and academics in general (e.g., interest,

boredom, sadness, and anxiety). Some measures of emotional engagement (e.g., “Is math

useful for your future?”) focus on identification with school and are closely related to

measures of motivation. The third category, “cognitive engagement”, refers to whether a

student has a personal psychological investment in learning. Measures of cognitive

engagement are based on student attitudes towards hard work, flexibility in problem

solving, and ways of coping with challenges.

       The non-cognitive outcome variables used in this study all measure behaviors and

attitudes that can be categorized as dimensions of student engagement. There is little

evidence on whether smaller classes actually promote the “fusion of behavior, emotion,

and cognition” (Fredricks et al 2004, p. 61) that constitutes student engagement.

However, smaller classes could conceivably improve all three dimensions of student

engagement. For example, smaller classes promote behavioral engagement by allowing

teachers to limit disruptive behavior as well as to encourage attentiveness and asking

questions. Smaller classes may also help teachers promote emotional engagement in the

form of student interest and personal academic identification. Finally, smaller classes
                                                                                                     10


may promote cognitive engagement by allowing teachers to assist students in flexible

problem-solving in the face of challenges.

        A fundamental, common-sense appeal of the use of student engagement as a non-

cognitive skill is that the behaviors and attitudes that make up the construct seem

unambiguously instrumental in promoting academic success.6 In contrast, it should be

noted, recent work from the fields of education and psychology suggests a growing

consensus against the view that the measures of self-esteem used in several recent

economic studies primarily capture an important non-cognitive skill. The alleged

difficulty with conventional measures of self-esteem is that they encompass traits such as

narcissism and defensiveness that may be detrimental for long-term success. Baumeister

et al. (2003, 2004) also argue that the direction of causality between self-esteem and

various outcomes has not been established and that interventions designed to promote

self-esteem have generally been ineffective (or even counterproductive). Furthermore,

laboratory experiments suggest that increases in self-esteem do not generally improve

task performance (Baumeister et al. 2003). Nonetheless, it remains possible that efforts to

boost self-esteem could be effective when they reinforce meaningful achievements

instead of being pursued indiscriminately.



3. Evidence from Project STAR

        Project STAR was a randomized study of class-size reduction in kindergarten

through third grade conducted in 79 Tennessee schools beginning in the 1985-86

academic year (Finn and Achilles 1990, Mosteller 1995). The students and teachers


6
 We also present evidence that our engagement measures have robust positive correlations with multiple
measures of academic and labor market success.
                                                                                              11


assigned to the treatment condition were in classes that had, on average, 16 students

while the remaining classrooms averaged 23 students. This influential study remains the

only large-scale experiment designed to isolate the causal effect of class size on student

outcomes (Schanzenbach 2007). As such, it provides a unique and compelling

opportunity to evaluate the effects of class size on non-cognitive student outcomes.

       Data on non-cognitive outcomes were collected for a subset of the students who

participated in Project STAR in the first and fifth years after the experiment concluded

(i.e., when most student participants were in the 4th and 8th grades). Specifically, a team

of researchers fielded teacher questionnaires that solicited information on the observable

classroom behavior of sampled students (Finn, Fulton, Zaharias and Nye 1989; Finn,

Pannozzo and Achilles 2003). In the seminal analysis of the 4th-grade data, Finn, Fulton,

Zaharias and Nye (1989) found that the students who were taught in small classes in

grades K-3 demonstrated significantly higher levels of effort and initiative and lower

levels of non-participatory behavior than students who had been taught in regular classes.

However, subsequent analyses indicated that these effects did not persist into the 8th

grade (Finn, Pannozzo and Achilles 2003, p. 329; Voelkl 1995).

       In this section, we present an independent re-analysis of these 4th- and 8th-grade

follow-up data. Our analysis addresses three potential shortcomings of the original

analysis. First, Finn, Fulton, Zaharias and Nye (1989) classified the treatment status of

students by whether they attended small classes in the third grade. However, Krueger

(1999) reports that about 10 percent of participants were moved from one type of class to

another after their initial assignment. This “treatment crossover” constitutes a potentially

important source of bias. Our analysis therefore focuses instead on an “intent to treat”
                                                                                             12


variable (i.e., class-size status upon entry to the experiment) rather than using the

potentially compromised measure of class-size status at the end of the experiment.

       Second, only subsets of Project STAR participants were included in the 4th and

8th-grade follow-up studies. Non-random attrition from these studies could compromise

both the external and the internal validity of the resulting inferences. We use auxiliary

regressions to assess the pattern of attrition and the balance of observed characteristics

across treatment and control states. Third, like other recent Project-STAR analyses (i.e.,

Krueger 1999, Krueger and Whitmore 2001), we adopt fixed-effects specifications that

may be more efficient and that more clearly reflect the nature of the random-assignment

process. In particular, our preferred specifications condition on fixed effects unique to

each school-by-entry-wave cell because randomization occurred within schools upon

entering the study.

       It should be noted that, in addition to the teacher-reported follow-up data we

study, other non-cognitive traits were also measured while the Project STAR experiment

was in progress. More specifically, at the end of each school year during the experiment,

the participating students completed a group-administered instrument, the Self-Concept

and Motivation Inventory (SCAMIN). The SCAMIN attempts to measure internal

personality traits related to self-concept and motivation by asking students to indicate

which of a set of pictures would best capture their response to 24 situations (Finn and

Achilles 1990). Like other proposed measures of non-cognitive skills that primarily

capture self-esteem, it has been criticized for its low correlation with academic
                                                                                                        13


performance and ambiguity over the causal direction of any observed relationships.7 In

addition, Finn and Achilles (1990, p. 562) report that the SCAMIN’s “reliability is only

moderate in the early grades, with alpha coefficients between .56 and .69 for subscales.”

Even so, prior analyses of the self-concept and motivation subscales suggest that

assignment to a small class had no statistically significant effects on these measures (Finn

and Achilles 1990) or effects that were not sustained to grade 3 (Schanzenbach 2007).

The Project STAR and Beyond Database

        Our data come from the recently released Project STAR and Beyond Database,

which contains information on the full sample of 11,601 students who participated in the

experimental phase of the study for at least one year (Finn, Boyd-Zaharias, Fish and

Gerber 2007). Project STAR relied on a within-school experimental design: All students

entering participating schools in Kindergarten through 3rd grade were randomly assigned

to either a small class (intended to be between 13 and 17 students), a regular class (22-25

students), or a regular class with a full-time teacher’s aide within their school.8

        The composition of the sample of schools included in Project STAR reflects both

the decisions of schools about whether to participate in the study and eligibility

restrictions on school participation. All elementary schools in Tennessee were invited to

participate, and 180 schools in 50 districts initially expressed interest. In order to be

eligible, however, schools had to have at least 57 Kindergarten students—enough to

accommodate two regular classes of 22 students and a small class of 15 students. Among



7
  The correlations of the self-concept and motivation scores with math achievement in the 3rd grade Project
STAR sample are -0.004 and -0.015, respectively. The analogous correlations with reading scores are
0.023 and 0.025.
8
  Due to concerns about fairness, students assigned to regular or regular with aide classes in Kindergarten
were re-randomized in 1st grade. Students assigned to small classes were unaffected by this modification of
the experimental design.
                                                                                                        14


the approximately 100 schools meeting the size restrictions, 79 schools in 42 districts

were ultimately selected to participate. Study administrators ensured that inner-city

schools (defined as those in metropolitan areas with more than half of their students

eligible for a free or reduced price lunch) were overrepresented in the final sample in

order to comply with requirements for geographic diversity mandated by the state

legislature. In the end, Project STAR schools were larger and enrolled a higher

percentage of blacks and poor students than elementary schools statewide.

        Our analysis centers on three distinct outcome measures collected in two follow-

up studies conducted when most STAR students were in 4th and 8th grades.9 Specifically,

the 4th grade teachers in participating schools rated as many as 19 randomly chosen

students who had entered Project STAR schools in Kindergarten or 1st grade on 31 items

that comprised the “Student Participation Questionnaire” (SPQ).10 Each item on the SPQ

asked teachers to rate the frequency of occurrence of a particular behavior from “never”

(1) to “always” (5). Factor analysis was used to group twenty-five of the SPQ survey

items into three subscales measuring student effort (13 items, e.g., “Pays attention in

class”), initiative-taking (8 items, e.g., “Does more than just the assigned work”), and

non-participatory behavior (4 items, e.g., “Annoys or interferes with peers’ work”).

        The Project STAR and Beyond Database reports simple scale scores created by

summing the responses to all of the items within each cluster (after inverting the

responses to items asking about negative behaviors). Alpha coefficients for the effort,



9
  Each of the three non-cognitive measures based on the SPQ is strongly associated with the current and
future academic success as measured by test scores, SAT or ACT participation, performance on the SAT or
ACT (conditional on participation), and high school completion.
10
   Although the study protocol called for teachers to complete surveys for only 10 students in order to
lessen the burden of participating, 64 of the 262 teachers who participated completed surveys for more than
10 students.
                                                                                                          15


initiative, and non-participatory behavior subscales are .94, .89, and .89, respectively,

indicating a high degree of internal consistency (Finn, Folger, and Cox 1991, p. 391). We

standardize these scales separately to have a mean of zero and a variance of one.

         Four years after the experiment concluded, when most STAR participants were in

8th grade, many of their English and mathematics teachers were both asked to complete a

shortened version of the SPQ consisting of 14 items, all but one of which was drawn

from the 4th-grade survey.11 The items were grouped into three additive scales again

measuring student effort, initiative, and non-participatory behavior, each of which we

again standardize to have a mean of zero and a variance of one.

         These measures of effort, initiative, and non-participatory behavior are available

for 2,212 students in 75 schools at the 4th-grade level.12 In 8th grade, they are available for

2,978 students attending 167 schools. While the 4th-grade sample includes only students

entering Project STAR schools in kindergarten or 1st grade, the 8th-grade sample includes

students from all four entering cohorts.

         Table 1 shows how the observed baseline characteristics of these students

compare with the full Project STAR sample. In 4th grade, students included in the SPQ

are more likely to be White or Asian, more likely to be female, less likely to be born in

1979 (an indicator that they are above-age for their grade), less likely to be eligible for a

free lunch, and more likely to have been assigned to a small class. Many of these same

differences appear at the 8th grade level, though there no longer seems to be any

association between treatment status and inclusion in the SPQ. Auxiliary regressions

11
   The new item, asking how often students were “verbally or physically abusive to the teacher,” had been
considered less relevant for younger students.
12
   At least one 4th-grade teacher in 71 of the 79 schools originally participating in Project STAR completed
the SPQ for at least one student, as did teachers from an additional 4 schools that enrolled Project STAR
students but were not in the initial study sample.
                                                                                            16


based on the specification introduced below provide more direct evidence on the patterns

of attrition from the follow-up studies and their implications for the internal and external

validity of our results.

Intent-to-Treat Specifications

        Given random assignment, the causal effect of being assigned to a small class can

be estimated by comparing average outcomes across different class types. All published

analyses of the Project STAR have shown that assignment to a class with a teacher aide

had no effect on student test scores, a pattern we also see in our analyses of non-cognitive

outcomes (results not shown). We therefore ignore this aspect of the experimental design

and compare students assigned to small classes to all students in regular classes,

regardless of whether an aide was present.

        More specifically, we estimate separate models by grade (e.g., 4th and 8th) and by

non-cognitive outcome (e.g., each of the three SPQ subscales) that take the following

form:

(1)                        Yicsw = β0 + β1(SMALLcsw) + β2Xicsw + αsw + εicsw

where Yicsw is the dependent variable for student i in classroom c of school s and entry

wave w. SMALLcsw is a binary indicator for whether a student’s initial classroom

assignment within a school and entry wave was to a small class. The matrix, Xicsw,

includes controls for student observables (race, gender, free-lunch eligibility, and an

indicator for having been born in 1979) and αsw represents a full set of fixed effects

unique to each school-by-entry-wave cell. The rationale for conditioning on school fixed

effects specific to the entry wave (i.e., the grade of entry into the experiment) is that

randomization occurred in this manner (i.e., within school upon entering the experiment).
                                                                                               17


The error term, εicsw, is adjusted to reflect heteroscedasticity clustered at the school-by-

entry-wave level. In order to provide continuity with the initial analysis of these data,

some specifications exclude the school-by-entry-wave fixed effects.

Study attrition

       Evidence in Table 1 shows that the observable characteristics of Project STAR

students for whom the 4th and 8th-grade SPQ data are available differ notably from the

initial Project STAR sample. The propensity for certain types of students to leave the

follow-up studies (e.g., male and free-lunch eligible students) clearly reduces the external

validity of the results with respect to the full Project STAR sample. Moreover, to the

extent that attrition patterns differed between students in the treatment and control

groups, it may also undermine the internal validity of our results by creating a situation

where the treatment and control groups differ with respect to unobserved traits.

       To assess attrition patterns more carefully, we estimated auxiliary regressions

based on the full Project STAR sample that have as their dependent variable a dummy

variable indicating whether the student was included in the SPQ studies in 4th and 8th

grade. The first two columns of Table 2 show that, conditional on school-by-entry-wave

fixed effects, females and students who were born in 1979 were significantly more likely

to be included in the SPQ samples in both 4th and 8th grade, while poor students were

significantly less likely to be included. Because the 4th grade sample was drawn primarily

from schools that participated in the experimental phase of Project STAR, the under-
                                                                                                               18


representation of poor students in the 4th grade may reflect higher levels of mobility

within this population.13

          Of potentially greater concern is the fact that for the 4th-grade (but not the 8th-

grade) sample, attrition was more likely in the control group.14 Unless the relative

attrition from the control group is random—that is, unrelated to unobserved

characteristics that affect student outcomes—our estimates of class-size effects based on

equation (1) will be biased. The third and fourth columns of Table 2 provide evidence

that the difference in attrition between treatment and control group students was in fact

random with respect to observed characteristics. Specifically, the baseline student

characteristics that are available to us are uncorrelated with assignment to a small class

within the SPQ samples in either grade. However, selection on unobserved characteristics

still remains a potential concern. If, for example, the treatment-group students who

benefited the most from small classes were more likely to remain in their school, then our

estimates will exaggerate any benefits of smaller classes.

Results

          Table 3 presents estimates based on equation (1) of the effect of assignment to a

small class on each of the three measures of non-cognitive skills drawn from the 4th-grade

SPQ. For purposes of comparison with the seminal evaluations of these data, we also

present models that do not include school-by-entry-wave fixed effects. Finally, as a

robustness check, we also present models that include a fixed effect for each 4th-grade



13
   Additional regressions (not shown) conditional on fixed effects for each 4th-grade school suggest that the
selection of students was random with respect to students observed characteristics within schools, as the
evaluators intended.
14
   It should be noted that this pattern of differential attrition by treatment status does not appear in the larger
group of students who were included in the achievement follow-up studies (e.g., Krueger and Whitmore
2001).
                                                                                                          19


teacher who completed an SPQ. Although teacher quality in the 4th grade is potentially

endogenous, we use this specification to ensure that our results are not driven by

systematic differences in rating standards across teachers.

         Our preferred specification shows that assignment to a small class in grades K-3

was associated with an increase in student initiative as measured in 4th grade of more than

0.1 standard deviations. Although this effect should be interpreted cautiously in light of

the concerns about non-random attrition noted above, it is statistically significant and

robust to the inclusion of fixed effects for the teacher completing the survey.15 In

contrast, we do not find strong evidence that assignment to a small class led to increases

in effort or to decreases in non-participatory behavior. Although both point estimates are

in the expected direction, both fall short of conventional levels of statistical significance.

         Our results therefore differ from those reported by Finn et al (1989, Table 3), who

report statistically significant effect sizes of 0.14, 0.12, and -0.11, respectively, for the

effect of smaller classes on initiative, effort, and non-participatory behavior. As discussed

above, our analysis differs from theirs in several ways. For example, we control for

observed student characteristics and use students’ initial classroom assignment rather

than their class type in 3rd grade as the treatment variable. However, neither of these

changes appears to explain the divergence in our results. Estimates based on the model

that makes only these changes are all at least weakly significant and similar in magnitude

to those reported in the earlier analysis, as are similar models that include dummy

variables measuring the urbanicity (rural, suburban, urban, or inner-city) of each

student’s entry school.


15
   When 4th grade math and reading test scores are included in the regression, however, the effect of class
size on initiative becomes small and statistically insignificant.
                                                                                              20


        However, we find that conditioning on school-by-entry-wave fixed effects leads

to substantial reductions in the estimated treatment effects for all three dependent

variables. Results based on models that introduce either entry-school or entry-wave fixed

effects separately indicate that each of these changes contributes to the reduced estimate

across all three outcome variables. This sensitivity suggests that treatment students who

appear in the follow-up studies tend to have unobserved school-level and cohort-level

traits that predict good non-cognitive outcomes—and that the prior evidence linking

small-class assignment to improvements in student effort and behavior should be treated

with caution. Nonetheless, it should also be noted that the 95-percent confidence interval

for the point estimates that condition on fixed effects includes the point estimate from the

model that does not.

        As Table 4 indicates, we find no evidence based on our preferred specification

that the apparent effects of early class size on student initiative in 4th grade persist to

grade 8. In fact, the only (weakly) significant evidence we find of class-size effects on the

non-cognitive outcomes we examine runs in a counter-intuitive direction, suggesting that

being placed in a small class in grades K-3 increases non-participatory behavior as

reported by students’ 8th-grade math teacher by 0.08 standard deviations. Because we did

not observe similar patterns when students were in 4th grade, we consider this result to be

a false positive. Taken as a whole, the results in Table 4 strongly suggest that any effects

of class size in the early grades on the non-cognitive outcomes measured by the SPQ had

fully dissipated by grade 8.
                                                                                            21


4. Evidence from NELS:88

       The use of large, nationally representative survey data to examine the effects of

class size on non-cognitive outcomes provides a useful complement to the Project STAR

findings for a number of reasons. First, the external validity of results based on a sample

of larger public schools from Tennessee for schools in other states is not unambiguously

clear. The external (and, possibly, the internal) validity of the longer-term Project STAR

results presented above is further compromised by the non-random attrition of study

participants who were at risk of low achievement. Second, a complementary data set can

provide information on the effects of class-size reductions in later grades. This is an

important issue because state class-size reduction initiatives have been criticized for

targeting multiple grade levels even though Project STAR only provided evidence on the

effects of class-size reductions in grades K through 3 (Kim 2007). Another relevant

dimension to the grade-level issue is the claim that important non-cognitive skills are

more malleable than cognitive skills for older students (Heckman 2000; Carneiro and

Heckman 2003). A third contribution of studying an alternative data set is that longer-

term longitudinal data on educational attainment and labor market experiences make it

possible to assess the cost-effectiveness of class-size reductions that improve non-

cognitive student skills.

       However, the use of non-experimental data also raises some non-trivial

identification challenges. As the class-size literature has generally recognized, student

assignment to a class of a particular size is likely to reflect in part their unobserved

propensity for achievement. In fact, both theory (Lazear 2001) and empirical evidence

(West and Woessmann 2006), which are confirmed here, indicate that there appears to be
                                                                                           22


negative selection into smaller classes (i.e., students with a propensity for low

achievement are more likely to be assigned to small classes). Another identification

challenge that has been less widely acknowledged is that unobserved teacher quality is

also likely to be related to class size. For example, an attentive principal might support a

struggling teacher by allowing them to have smaller classes. This study addresses these

issues by exploiting the unique features of the student and teacher surveys in a major,

nationally representative, longitudinal study, which make it possible to examine class-

size effects conditional on both student and teacher fixed effects. The next three sections

introduce the relevant data, specifications, and the results and also discuss issues related

to the possible remaining threats to the internal validity of these inferences.

National Education Longitudinal Study of 1988 (NELS:88)

       NELS:88 is nationally representative, longitudinal survey that began in 1988 with

a sample of 24,599 8th-grade students from over 1,000 schools. The two-stage sampling

design selected schools first and then approximately 26 students within each participating

school (Ingles et al. 1990). This study is based on students from the 815 public schools

that participated in the base-year sample. In addition to student surveys, NELS:88 also

fielded surveys of teachers, administrators, and parents. The unique design of the teacher

surveys is of particular relevance to this study’s research design. For every participating

student, two academic-subject teachers were surveyed (i.e., a math or science teacher and

an English or history teacher). The teachers were selected by randomly assigning each

school to one of the four possible subject pairings of math and science with English and

history. Teachers provided information on themselves (e.g., certification, education, and

experience) and the size of their sampled classes.
                                                                                           23


       In combination, the teacher and student surveys in NELS:88 provide three types

of student-outcome measures which are specific to each of the two academic subjects

taught by sampled teachers. First, NELS:88 collected direct cognitive assessments based

on subject tests completed by students. Second, both of the surveyed teachers provided

their subjective assessment of the performance and behavior of each sampled student. For

example, the teachers answered questions about whether a sampled student was

frequently inattentive or disruptive in class. And, third, the student survey in NELS:88

solicited information on each student’s intellectual engagement with each academic

subject.

       Our analysis exploits each type of outcome measures. The measures drawn from

student surveys were based on three questions students were asked about their

engagement in each of four academic subjects (i.e., math, science, English, and history).

Specifically, students were asked to indicate their level of agreement with statements

about whether the subject was not useful for their future, whether they didn’t look

forward to the subject and whether they were afraid to ask questions in their class on that

subject. There were four possible categorical responses to these questions (i.e., strongly

agree, agree, disagree, and strongly disagree). These responses were assigned values of 1

to 4 so that higher values implied lower levels of engagement and they were standardized

within subjects to create the variables, NOTUSE, NOTLF, and AFASK (Table 5). The

teacher perceptions of individual students are based on binary indicators for whether they

viewed a particular student as frequently disruptive and consistently inattentive

(DISRUPT and INATT). The test score measure (STEST) is the cognitive assessment
                                                                                                          24


based on the subject for which a teacher was sampled and is standardized by subject

(Table 5).

         In order to examine whether the effects of smaller classes persist, we also utilize a

subject-specific, non-cognitive outcome reported by the subset of students participating

in the 1990 follow-up survey (when most were in 10th grade). The student survey

administered in 1990 did not include the same battery of questions as the base-year

survey. However, it did include a closely related measure of student effort. Specifically,

with respect to each of four academic subjects, participants in the first follow-up survey

were asked “how often do you try as hard as you can?” We numbered the five possible

responses (which ranged from “never” to “almost every day”) 1 to 5 and standardized

them separately within each subject to create the variable TRYH. These paired-subject

data are available for over 9,000 base-year students.16

         All of these non-cognitive outcome measures fit within the broad construct of

student engagement as conceptualized by educational psychologists (Fredricks et al.

2004). The teacher-reported measures (i.e, INATT and DISRUPT), which focus on the

character of classroom participation, represent forms of “behavioral engagement.” In

contrast, the student-reported measures (i.e., AFASK, NOTLF, NOTUSE, and TRYH)

are more clearly aligned with “emotional engagement” in that they reflect reactions to

teachers and peers and identification with school as it relates to motivation and effort.

         Table 5 reports the means and standard deviations for these and other variables

for which variation might exist after conditioning on student and teacher fixed effects.


16
  The available sample size is smaller largely because only a subset of base-year respondents were
included in the follow-up survey. However, this variable is also undefined for students who reported not
taking a course in the given academic subject. We found that 8th-grade class size in a subject was unrelated
to whether a student took a class in that subject during the follow-up study.
                                                                                                       25


The average class size in this sample is 24.5 with a standard deviation of 5.9.17 Other

variables identify whether the student and teacher share the same race or gender, whether

the teacher has state certification in the given subject and the share of a student’s

classmates who have limited English proficiency. The base-year sample from NELS:88

includes 19,396 students from public schools. However, this sample is limited to 33,802

student-by-subject observations because two teacher questionnaires are available for only

16,901 of these students. More than half of the students for whom two teacher

questionnaires are unavailable are also missing data on test scores. Students missing two

teacher surveys are also more likely to be minorities and, where test score data are

available, are more likely to be lower-achieving. Based on the prior class-size literature,

which finds that class-size reductions are more effective among disadvantaged students,

we would expect this sample reduction to bias our results against finding larger class-size

effects.

First-difference (FD) specifications

     The design of the NELS:88 surveys implies that each student-outcome measure is

contemporaneously observed twice (i.e., once in each of two academic subjects) along

with the corresponding class size. The matched-pairs nature of these data makes it

possible to construct within-student comparisons that purge the influence of student-

specific unobservables that are invariant across subjects (e.g., unobserved student traits

that may influence class-size assignments). Furthermore, because teachers sometimes

taught multiple classes that were part of the NELS:88 sample, it is also possible to




17
  It should be noted that we found results similar to those reported here when excluding the small number
of class-size outliers (i.e., classes smaller than 8 or larger than 36).
                                                                                                     26


condition on teacher fixed effects that reflect the unobserved teacher quality that may

also be correlated with class size.

        More specifically, assume that the math or science outcome observed for student i

who is with teacher t (i.e., y1it) is a function of observed student traits, Xi and the size of

the student’s class with teacher t (i.e., SIZE1it):

(2)                      y1it = αXi + β(SIZE1it) + λZ1t + θ1t + µ i + ε1it

In equation (2), the terms, µ i, θ1t, and ε1it, are, respectively, a student fixed effect, a

teacher fixed effect, and a mean-zero error term adjusted to accommodate school-level

clustering. And the term, Z1t, consists of the other observed determinants of y1it, which

vary at the level of the classroom and teacher. These variables include fixed effects for

the subject of the class and other observed attributes of the teacher and the classroom. In

a conventional cross-sectional study based on equation (2), it would be difficult to

estimate β reliably because the error term in equation (2) would include confounding

teacher and student effects (i.e., θ1t and µ i). However, the availability of a second

contemporaneous observation makes it possible to estimate β conditional on student and

teacher fixed effects. More specifically, suppose an equation like (2) applies to the

student outcomes observed in English or history:

(3)                      y2it = αXi + β(SIZE 2it) + λZ2t + θ2t + µ i + ε2it.

First differencing equations (1) and (2) yields the following:

(4)             (y1it – y2it) = β(SIZE1it - SIZE2it) + λ(Z1t - Z2t) + (θ1t – θ2t) + (ε1it - ε2it).

        Estimates based on equation (4) identify the effects of class size conditional on all

the subject-invariant determinants unique to individual students and teachers. However,

these inferences could still be biased by subject-specific student traits as well as by
                                                                                              27


unobserved classroom traits associated with class size. For example, our results would

overstate the beneficial effects of smaller classes on the intellectual engagement of

students if students with a tendency to like a particular subject were more likely to be

assigned to a smaller class in that subject. Similarly, if smaller class sizes were associated

with important classroom traits (e.g., a lower share of peers with limited English

proficiency), estimates based on equation (4) would overstate the benefits of smaller

classes.

       We address these concerns partly by examining the robustness of our results to

conditioning on various observables (e.g., characteristics of classroom peers) in addition

to student and teacher fixed effects. The pattern suggested by this evidence is generally

one of negative selection into smaller classes. In particular, the pattern of selection on

observables suggests that students with a propensity towards lower intellectual

engagement with a particular academic subject are actually more likely to be assigned to

a smaller class in that subject. These results imply that the inferences based on equation

(3) would, if anything, imply a lower bound on the true non-cognitive benefits of class

size reductions. We also examine the internal validity of estimates based on equation (3)

in several other ways. For example, some of our specifications control for the possible

influence of subject-specific propensities for good non-cognitive outcomes by

conditioning on the student’s test score in that subject. While test scores are potentially

endogenous with respect to class size, this specification provides a useful robustness

check for our main results.

       We also present evidence on whether small classes in one subject create

empirically meaningful spillover benefits in closely related subjects. For example, we
                                                                                             28


examine whether a lower class size in math appears to influence non-cognitive outcomes

in science. This evidence is of interest mainly because it provides information on the

nature of the educational production function. However, it also provides an indirect

robustness check of our main results. More specifically, some spillover effects of smaller

classes might be expected. However, if the “other-subject” effects of smaller classes were

large relative to the own-subject effect, it would suggest that students with a propensity to

do well in related subjects (e.g., math and science) were simply more likely to be

assigned to such classes. Alternatively, the existence of even modest spillover effects

could imply that our research design understates the true benefits of smaller classes. That

is, our within-student comparisons would understate the effects of smaller class in a

particular subject if that smaller class also improved student outcomes in another subject.

However, we suspect this is not an important concern both because of the “other-subject”

results we report and because the sampling design for the teacher surveys in NELS:88

always paired disparate academic subjects (i.e., math and science were paired with either

English or history),

Baseline results

       Table 6 presents the estimated effects of class size on the non-cognitive and

cognitive student outcomes and across different specifications. The results in column (1)

are based on a specification that includes several student, teacher, and classroom

observables (e.g., race, gender, socioeconomic status, teacher experience, etc.) as well as

school fixed effects. The results of this within-school specification suggest that smaller

class sizes actually reduce student test scores, increase the perceived disruptiveness and

inattentiveness of students and lower their levels of academic engagement. However, the
                                                                                             29


subsequent first-difference (FD) estimates indicate that these counterintuitive results

reflect the non-random sorting of students (and, to a lesser extent, teachers) to classrooms

of different sizes.

        More specifically, the most basic FD specification (i.e., column 2) suggests that

smaller classes reduce the extent to which students don’t look forward to a subject, don’t

see it as useful for their future and are afraid to ask questions. Similarly, smaller classes

reduce the chance that a given student is inattentive (though, not disruptive). Smaller

classes also appear to increase student test scores. However, the effect size is quite small

(i.e., .0022 x 5.87 = 0.013) and statistically insignificant.

        The third specification in Table 6 introduces teacher fixed effects (more

specifically, teacher fixed effects specific to math-science and English-history subject

pairings). Interestingly, the introduction of these controls increases the R2 in these

regressions quite dramatically. More important, the estimated effects of class size on

NOTLF, NOTUSE and AFASK increase substantially after introducing teacher fixed

effects. The apparent bias relative to the prior specification is consistent with students

who have poor academic engagement with a subject being more likely to be assigned to a

relatively small class and a teacher who is particularly effective at promoting engagement

in that subject. However, the estimated effect of class size on INATT falls somewhat in

this specification and becomes statistically insignificant (p-value = .107). This pattern of

results is similar in specifications that introduce controls for teacher and classroom

observables (i.e., PCTLEP, OTHRACE, OTHSEX, and SCERTIFD).
                                                                                              30


Robustness checks

       Overall, these results indicate that the benefits of smaller classes for 8th graders

are concentrated in their effects on the three student-reported measures of emotional

engagement. The effect sizes implied by these point estimates range from roughly 0.05 to

0.08. Yet there are several reasons that these modest effects could actually overstate the

benefits of smaller classes. For example, all of our first-difference models condition on

student fixed effects that are, by assumption, invariant across subjects. In a situation

where students who are likely to have high degrees of engagement in a particular subject

are more likely to be assigned to smaller classes in that subject, the estimated benefits of

smaller classes would be biased upwards. Similarly, the apparent benefits of smaller

classes would be misleading if smaller classes were associated with classroom traits such

as higher-quality peers.

       However, several types of evidence suggest that the estimates reported in Table 6

do not overstate the non-cognitive benefits of smaller classes (and may, in fact,

understate them). First, the estimated effects of class size on NOTLF, NOTUSE, and

AFASK are robust in a specification that introduces STEST, a subject-specific (and

endogenous) variable as a control. Second, the comparative results across the

specifications in Table 6 actually suggest a pattern of negative selection into smaller

classes. More specifically, models that include weaker student and teacher controls

suggest that smaller class sizes have smaller or even negative benefits (Table 6). This

pattern of selection on observables implies that students with a propensity for worse non-

cognitive outcomes are more likely to be assigned to smaller classes. The existence of
                                                                                              31


negative selection into smaller classes implies that, to the extent that these inferences are

biased, they understate the true non-cognitive benefit of smaller classes.

        Table 7 presents further evidence on this point by reporting the estimated effects

of class size in auxiliary regressions where PCTLEP, SCERTIFD and a binary measure

for novice teachers (i.e., 1 to 3 years of experience) are the dependent variables. The

results from models that condition on school or student fixed effects indicate that smaller

class sizes imply a statistically significant increase in the percent of classroom peers who

have limited English proficiency and a statistically significant decrease in the likelihood

of having a teacher who is state-certified in the given subject. In models that condition on

teacher fixed effects, this pattern of selection on observables becomes smaller and

statistically insignificant with respect to PCTLEP and is not defined with respect to the

teacher traits.

Spillover effects and persistence

        An implied assumption of our FD research design is that the benefits of a small

class in one subject do not have empirically meaningful implications for outcomes in

other subjects. As noted above, this assumption may be a reasonable one because the

sampling design for the teacher survey implies that observations specific to math and

science classes are always paired with observations of either English or history classes.

However, whether class-size reductions in one academic subject create benefits in more

closely related academic subjects is an interesting and policy-relevant question. We

examined this issue directly by estimating the effect of class size in a particular subject

(i.e., class size interacted with subject-specific fixed effects) on the outcomes in a related

but different subject. More specifically, we estimated specifications where the non-
                                                                                                          32


cognitive outcome in one academic subject was replaced by the corresponding outcome

from a related academic subject.

         Table 8 presents the key results from this exercise and focuses on one of the three

academic-engagement measures, AFASK.18 The baseline model reports the results of a

specification where the dependent variables were unaltered (i.e., own-subject effects).

Those results indicate that the estimated effect of class size on AFASK is largest in math

and English. However, the hypothesis that these four coefficients are equal cannot be

rejected. The remaining results in Table 8 suggest that small classes in one academic

subject led to benefits in closely related academic subjects (i.e., the four key estimates are

all positive). However, these estimated effects are all relatively small and, in 3 of the 4

cases, statistically insignificant. The only exception is that a smaller English class implies

a relatively small but weakly significant increase in student engagement with history.

Overall, these results imply that the non-cognitive benefits of smaller classes are largely

concentrated in the particular subject taught with a smaller class size.

         In addition to providing evidence on the nature of the educational production

function, these results also provide a useful ad-hoc falsification exercise for the basic FD

identification strategy employed in this study. In particular, if the “other-subject” effects

of class size had been comparatively large, it would have underscored concerns about

whether students with a propensity for good non-cognitive outcomes in a broad subject

area (e.g., math and science) are more likely to be assigned to smaller classes in those

subjects. Instead, the results in Table 8 suggest that, for all four academic subjects, the

18
  The results of this falsification exercise are similar for NOTUSE and NOTLF. However, AFASK appears
to provide a more powerful test because the effects of class size are more even across subjects. In
particular, the effects of math class sizes on NOTUSE and NOTLF are relatively small. However, with
regard to all three non-cognitive measures, the hypothesis that the effects of class size are the same across
subjects cannot be rejected.
                                                                                                33


spillover effects to related subjects are relatively small. Like the prior robustness checks,

this pattern implies that non-random, within-student selection to smaller classes is not

confounding our results.

        While reassuring with respect to the internal validity of our main results, the

subject-specific nature of the class-size effects also raises the question of whether the

apparent effects of 8th-grade class size on engagement persist over time or whether they

simply reflect the interaction between classroom environments and fixed student traits. It

is worth noting that even transient effects on student engagement could have policy

relevance, to the extent that our measures are, in fact, instrumental to subsequent

academic success. However, the interpretation of these effects on student engagement as

a form of “skill” development would clearly be strengthened if the subject-specific

effects were to persist over time.

        Fortunately, the subject-specific questions about the frequency of trying hard

(TRYH), which were asked of students participating in the first follow-up study, allow us

to address this question. Table 9 reports the key results from specifications that estimate

the effect of subject-specific class sizes in 8th grade on these longer-term measures. The

basic FD specification suggests that a smaller class size in an academic subject during 8th

grade implies a statistically significant increase in effort in that subject two years later.

The effect size implied by this point estimate (0.032) is smaller than the effect size for

contemporaneous grade-8 measures. In models that introduce teacher fixed effects as well

as other controls (e.g., OTHRACE, OTHSEX, SCERTIFD, and PCTLEP), this effect is

somewhat larger but becomes weakly significant because of a large increase in the
                                                                                            34


standard error. However, this weakly significant result is also robust to conditioning on

subject-specific test scores from the base year.

Treatment heterogeneity

       Overall, the results based on the NELS:88 data suggest that assignment to a

smaller class improves several of the non-cognitive measures (i.e., NOTUSE, NOTLF,

and AFASK) and that these results cannot be explained by the presence of confounding

student or classroom unobservables. In fact, the pattern of selection is such that these

results may actually understate the true non-cognitive benefits of smaller classes. The

results with respect to teacher observations (i.e., DISRUPT and INATT) and cognitive

scores (i.e., STEST), on the other hand, were less dispositive.

       All of these results were based on the full analytical sample of NELS:88 8th

graders and the implicit assumption of a common treatment effect for different types of

students and schools. However, there are a variety of reasons to suspect that the effects of

class size might differ across particular types of students and educational settings. Table

10 presents evidence on this issue by presenting the estimated effects of class size on

each of the non-cognitive and cognitive measures for samples defined by various student

and school traits.

       Several aspects of these results are worth underscoring. For example, these results

imply that a 1 SD decrease in boys’ class sizes would reduce the probability that a boy is

viewed as frequently inattentive by 3.5 percentage points (i.e., 6.0 x 0.0058), a reduction

of roughly 13 percent relative to the gender-specific mean. Similarly, a 1 SD decrease in

the class sizes of Hispanic students would reduce the probability that a Hispanic student

is seen as disruptive by 6.5 percentage points (i.e., 6.0 x 0.0109), a reduction of roughly
                                                                                             35


38 percent relative to the Hispanic-specific mean. The estimated effect of class size on

subject-specific test scores is statistically significant among girls and in urban schools

with effect sizes of 0.037 and 0.067, respectively. The estimated effects of class size on

the student-engagement measures (i.e., NOTLF, NOTUSE, and AFASK) also differ

across the sub-samples. For example, the class-size effects on these outcomes are

particularly large in urban schools. However, it should also be noted that these

distinctions are in most cases small relative to the sampling variation.



5. Cost-Benefit Considerations

       Our NELS:88 analysis indicates that class-size reductions in the 8th grade lead to

statistically significant improvements in several non-cognitive outcomes (i.e., NOTLF,

NOTUSE, and AFASK). Furthermore, the educational gains from class-size investments

appear to be larger and more extensive in certain targeted settings (e.g., urban schools).

However, class-size reductions also involve costly, upfront expenditures. Whether these

benefits justify further expenditures is, in large part, an empirical question. In this

section, we present some qualified evidence on the relevant cost-benefit comparisons.

Non-cognitive skills and long-term outcomes

       The longitudinal nature of NELS:88 makes it possible to examine the long-term

consequences of improvements in cognitive and non-cognitive skills as measured in the

8th grade. The fourth follow-up interview of NELS:88 respondents, which elicited

information on both educational attainment and early labor-market experiences, occurred

in 2000, when respondents were approximately 26 years old. In order to gauge the

possible benefits of 8th grade class-size reductions, we examine the effects of the 8th grade
                                                                                              36


non-cognitive and cognitive skill measures (standardized and averaged across all four

subjects) on these outcomes. This type of correlational evidence raises important

identification problems which, as in similar studies, are not addressed here. However, our

analysis does improve upon much of the prior evidence by conditioning on school fixed

effects. Furthermore, the comparative results across specifications that introduce

additional controls provide evidence on the direction of selection on unobservables.

       The fourth follow-up interview included 12,144 respondents. However, the

exclusion of those who were not base-year participants from public schools and those for

whom base-year cognitive and non-cognitive data are unavailable reduces the sample size

to approximately 8,300. Our results condition both on measures of student observables

(i.e., dummy variables for gender, race, ethnicity, and age) and on dummy variables that

identify a variety of family traits. The family measures consist of unrestricted dummy

variables for multiple categories of family composition (7 categories), family size (10),

parental education (8), family income (16), and language-minority status (2). Our

measures of educational attainment consist of dummy variables for high-school

completers (excluding GED completers), matriculants at 4-year colleges, and those who

have completed bachelor’s degrees.

       Table 11 presents the estimated effect of each non-cognitive measure on

educational attainment in specifications that also condition on STEST. Overall these

results suggest that both cognitive and non-cognitive skills have statistically significant

effects on educational attainment. However, the effect sizes associated with the non-

cognitive measures are smaller than those associated with the cognitive measure,

particularly for college entrance and completion. For example, a 1 SD increase in
                                                                                            37


NOTLF implies that the probability of completing a bachelor’s degree falls by 3.4

percentage points. However, a 1 SD decrease in STEST reduces the probability of

completing a bachelor’s degree by 16.7 percentage points. Interestingly, one of the

measures (AFASK) has a somewhat counterintuitive but weakly significant effect on

high school graduation. More specifically, students who are more afraid to ask questions

in their academic classes were more likely to graduate from high school (though less

likely to enter or complete college).

       A notable feature of the results in Table 11 is that the estimated effects of STEST

tend to decrease after conditioning on family observables and school fixed effects.

However, the estimated effects of the non-cognitive measures tend to grow in absolute

value after conditioning on these controls. This pattern of selection on observables

suggests that these results, if anything, understate the effects of the non-cognitive

measures on educational attainment. These results may also understate the effects of non-

cognitive skills to the extent that the low-stakes test measure included in these

regressions also reflects non-cognitive skills (e.g., Segal 2006a). The first specification in

Table 10 indicates that the estimated effects of the non-cognitive measures are larger in

models that exclude the cognitive measure.

       In Table 12, we present evidence on how the cognitive and non-cognitive 8th

grade measures are related to labor market outcomes as reported in the fourth follow-up

survey. Our first labor-market outcome is a binary indicator for whether the respondent

reports that they were engaged in full-time employment in 1999. This variable is defined

for the roughly 5,600 respondents who were not students (i.e., those who did not attend a

postsecondary institution after January of 1999) and who reported data on hours and
                                                                                             38


weeks worked. We define full-time employment as having worked 40 or more weeks and

35 or more hours in a typical week. Roughly 80 percent of respondents met this definition

of full-time employment. Our second labor-market outcome is the natural log of reported

employment earnings for 1999. This measure is defined for the roughly 4,100

respondents who had full-time employment in 1999 and who responded to the earnings

question. An average hourly wage can be imputed using the earnings data and the data on

hours and weeks worked, and results based on this measure are similar to those reported

here. However, we report the results based on the annual earnings measure because it has

less measurement error (Segal 2006a, Deke and Haimson 2006).

       The results in Table 12 indicate that respondents with worse non-cognitive skills

in the 8th grade (i.e., higher levels of NOTLF, NOTUSE, and AFASK) are less likely to

have been employed full-time in 1999. However, only the effect associated with NOTLF

is statistically significant after controlling for the measure of cognitive skills. A 1 SD

deviation decrease in NOTLF implies that the probability of full-time employment as a

young adult increased by 2.7 percentage points (i.e., roughly 3.2 percent of the mean).

Interestingly, this point estimate changes relatively little after conditioning on measures

of educational attainment, suggesting these non-cognitive skills have labor-market

consequences that are independent of their schooling effects. Lower levels of NOTLF,

NOTUSE, and AFASK are also associated with higher earnings. However, only the

effect associated with AFASK is statistically significant after conditioning on the

cognitive test-score measure. A 1 SD decrease in AFASK implies earnings that are

approximately 5.4 percent higher. As with the effects of NOTLF on employment, the
                                                                                         39


estimated effect of AFASK on earnings is similar after controlling for educational

attainment.

Comparing Costs and Benefits

       The results in Tables 11 and 12 indicate that the non-cognitive skills most clearly

shaped by exposure to smaller classes are highly predictive of subsequent educational

attainment and may also generate some targeted labor-market benefits among young

adults. However, whether these benefits justify class-size reductions is not clear.

Investments in smaller classes involve costly upfront expenditures but generate benefits

that are realized only over the subsequent years. We provide some evidence on this issue

by using our NELS:88 results to compare the costs and benefits of reducing class sizes in

the 8th grade. These comparisons necessarily involve a number of important assumptions

and caveats, which we discuss after presenting our basic results. The normative

interpretation of our cost-benefit comparisons appears sensitive to reasonable differences

in the relevant parameters and assumptions. Nonetheless, we view this qualified evidence

as policy relevant because it suggests whether class-size reductions appear remotely cost-

effective and underscores some of the key issues relevant to understanding this issue

more clearly.

       First, we estimated the per-pupil cost of a 1 SD decrease in class size as $3,392 in

2006 dollars. To construct this estimate, we first noted, using the NELS:88 data in Table

5, that a 1 SD decrease in class sizes would increase the number of classes by 31 percent.

Following Krueger (2003b), we assumed that the cost of a class-size reduction would be

proportional to expenditures per pupil. We estimated expenditures per pupil in 2006

dollars ($10,774) by taking the 2002-03 expenditures per pupil in public schools and
                                                                                            40


adjusting for inflation. Our estimate of the direct per-pupil cost of a 1 SD class-size

reduction is then simply 31 percent of this estimate.

       To construct a comparable estimate of the monetized benefits of an 8th-grade

class-size reduction, we calculated the present discounted value of the increased earnings

implied by this investment. In particular, we focused on the AFASK measure, which

appears to have had the clearest impact on earnings. More specifically, using the point

estimate from model (3) in Table B, a 1 SD decrease in class size would reduce AFASK

by 0.089 (i.e., 0.014 x -5.8675). Using the estimate from column (3) in Table 11, this

decrease in AFASK implies that earnings would grow by 0.48 percent (i.e., -.0541 x -

0.089). As in Krueger (2003b), we assumed that this earnings impact would exist from

age 18 to 65. To calculate the present discounted value of this earnings increase, we

identified employment earnings by year of age for members of the civilian labor force,

aged 18 to 65, who responded to the March 2007 Current Population Survey (CPS). This

age-earnings profile is represented in Figure 1. We then calculated the present discounted

values of a 0.48 percent increase in earnings under different assumptions about the

discount rate and the productivity-related growth in earnings. These increased earnings

are assumed to begin 5 years after the class-size investment (i.e., at age 18).

       Table 13 presents the results. The increased earnings implied by the class-size

reduction exceed the cost of this reduction only for lower values of the discount rate or

more generous assumptions about productivity growth. For example, assuming a 5

percent discount rate and 1 percent productivity growth, the present discounted value of

the increased earnings is $3,060, roughly $300 more than the cost. The internal rate of

return (i.e., the discount rate that would equate the present discounted value of costs and
                                                                                                            41


benefits) provides a useful way to summarize the results.19 The internal rates of return for

this class-size investment range from 3.6 to 5.6 percent, depending on the assumed

productivity growth (i.e., 0 to 2 percent).

         The results in Table 10 suggest that targeted investments in class-size reductions

may be more unambiguously cost-effective. In particular, this could be so for urban

schools where class-size reductions appear to improve both cognitive and non-cognitive

skill measures. We estimated the cost of a 1 SD reduction in urban class sizes at $3,157

in 2006 dollars. This estimate reflects an upward adjustment in costs to reflect the higher

costs per pupil in urban schools as well as the fact that the standard deviation for class

size is smaller among the urban schools in NELS:88 (i.e., 5.69).20 Using the results from

Tables 10 and 12, we estimated that a 1 SD class-size reduction in 8th grade would

increase earnings by 0.97 percent. That estimated increase reflects the effects of the class-

size reduction on both AFASK and STEST. Table 14 presents the present discounted

value of this earnings increase under different assumptions about the discount rate and

productivity growth. Not surprisingly, the urban-specific results suggest that a class-size

investment appears cost-effective under a broader range of assumptions. For example,

assuming a 5 percent discount rate and 1 percent productivity growth, the benefit from

the class-size investment (i.e., $6,173) is nearly twice its estimated cost. Stated

differently, the internal rate of return for a class-size investment is 7.9 percent under the

assumption of 1 percent productivity growth.



19
   However, the standard caveats about internal rates of return should be noted. For example, it can be
misleading when judging the net benefits of projects of different scales. The internal rate of return can also
take on multiple values. However, the latter concern is unlikely in this situation, which involves one
upfront cost and a stream of benefits.
20
   More specifically, we adjusted costs upward by 3.7 percent, a correction based on data from Table 86 of
the 2006 Digest of Education Statistics.
                                                                                                               42


         Overall, these results suggest that the apparent cost-effectiveness of an 8th grade

class-size reduction is sensitive to whether the investment is targeted where it would

appear to be most effective (e.g., urban schools) and to reasonable disagreements about

how to compare costs and benefits appropriately (e.g., the relevant discount rate). For

example, Krueger (2003c) and Summers (2003) discuss whether the appropriate

benchmark for an investment of this sort should be the long-term real interest rate on

government bonds, the average real return on the stock market, or the pre-tax profit rate.

Other substantive issues complicate a comparison of costs and benefits even further. For

example, the estimated direct cost of a class-size reduction would understate the true cost

of this investment to the extent that the tax mechanisms used to raise this revenue

generate deadweight loss (Summers 2003). Furthermore, these cost-benefit comparisons

also ignored the possible general-equilibrium consequences of a broad investment in

smaller classes. In particular, a pervasive effort to reduce class sizes might be

compromised, at least in the short term, by rising salaries, lower-quality teachers, and

inadequate facilities. However, it should also be noted the benefit calculations may

understate the true benefits of class-size investments because they ignored any positive

externalities (e.g., through improved civic engagement and reductions in criminal

behavior).21 Finally, an additional uncertainty is that our estimates of the effect of a class-

size reduction (e.g., Tables 6 and 10) turn on an identification strategy that compares a

student contemporaneously across two academic subjects with different class sizes.

However, this source of variation could conceivably overstate or understate the true

effects of a class-size reduction across multiple academic subjects.

21
  Interestingly, the fourth follow-up NELS:88 survey included questions about volunteering and voting.
Increases in the 8th grade non-cognitive measures are associated with statistically significant increases in
these forms of civic participation.
                                                                                            43


6. Conclusions

       The prevalence of class-size reduction policies in public schools is a powerful

testament to their public appeal. However, the research base has provided more limited

and sometimes conflicting evidence on the likely cost-effectiveness of broad class-size

reductions. This study addressed one of the most important gaps in this literature by

examining the effects of class size on non-cognitive student outcomes that appear to have

important educational and labor-market implications.

       Our re-analysis of follow-up data from the Project STAR class-size experiment

suggests that assignment to a small class led to improvements in teacher-reported

measures of student initiative. However, these estimated effects did not persist to later

grades and may be compromised by non-random attrition from the follow-up studies. Our

quasi-experimental analysis of nationally representative data on 8th graders provided

more definitive evidence that reductions in class size improve some non-cognitive skills

related to student engagement. Furthermore, we find qualified evidence that 8th-grade

class-size reductions may be cost-effective, in light of the apparent long-term labor-

market benefits of these non-cognitive skills. While our cost-benefit comparisons are

sensitive to their underlying assumptions, it is notable that 8th-grade class-size reductions

appear to be particularly cost-effective when targeted in urban schools. A final and

substantive caveat worth underscoring is that broad initiatives to reduce class sizes may

be implemented in haphazard ways and have implications for teacher quality that are not

captured by these results.

       Our analysis also adds to the growing literature indicating that non-cognitive

skills matter for subsequent academic and labor-market success. Taken as a whole, this
                                                                                             44


body of evidence strongly suggests that policy-makers and researchers should consider

ways to encourage schools to promote these skills. The results we have presented here

imply that targeted class-size reductions are one promising policy lever. In contrast,

accountability-style policies that reward or sanction schools explicitly based on the types

of teacher- and student-reported measures of non-cognitive skills that we have examined

here would, in all likelihood, perform poorly because they would be easy to game.

However, this does not mean that class-size reductions are the only way, or indeed, the

most attractive way in which to promote such skills. The non-cognitive effects of other

reform-oriented policies, from test-based accountability to school choice programs to

efforts to improve teacher quality, are not well-understood. Further research may uncover

policies and practices that are both effective and, quite possibly, more cost-effective in

this regard.
                                                                                       45


REFERENCES
Angrist, Joshua D. and Victor Lavy. 1999. Using Maimonides’ Rule to Estimate the
       Effect of Class Size on Student Achievement Quarterly Journal of Economics
       114: 533-575.
Ashenfelter, Orley and Alan Krueger. 1994. Estimating the returns to schooling using a
       new sample of twins. American Economic Review 84: 1157-1173.
Ashenfelter, Orley and Cecilia Rouse. 1998. Income, schooling and ability: Evidence
       from a new sample of identifical twins. Quarterly Journal of Economics 113:
       253-284.
Baumeister, R. F., Campbell, J. D., Krueger, J. I. and Vohs, K. D. 2003. Does High Self-
       Esteem Cause Better Performance, Interpersonal Success, Happiness, or Healthier
       Lifestyles? Psychological Science in the Public Interest 4(1): 1–44.
Baumeister, R. F., Campbell, J. D., Krueger, J. I. and Vohs, K. D. 2004. Exploding the
       Self-Esteem Myth. Scientific American, 20 December.
Boruch, Robert. 2002. The Virtues of Randomness. Education Next 2(3): 37-41.
Bowles, Samuel and Herbert Gintis. 1976. Schooling in Capitalist America: Educational
       reform and the contradictions of economic life. New York: Basic Books.
Carneiro, Pedro and James J. Heckman. 2003. Human Capital Policy. In James J.
       Heckman and Alan B. Krueger. Inequality in America: What Role for Human
       Capital Policies? Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press.
Case, Ann and Angus Deaton. 1999. School Inputs and Educational Outcomes in South
       Africa. Quarterly Journal of Economics 114:1047-1084.
Dee, Thomas S. 2005. A Teacher Like Me: Does Race, Ethnicity or Gender Matter?
       American Economic Review 95(2): 158-165.
Dee, Thomas S. 2007. Teachers and the Gender Gaps in Student Achievement. Journal of
       Human Resources 42(3): 528-554.
Dee, Thomas S. and Sarah Cohodes. 2008. Out-of-Field Teaching and Student Achievement:
       Evidence from ‘Matched-Pairs’ Comparisons. Public Finance Review 36(1): 7-32.
Deke, John and Joshua Haimson. 2006. Valuing Student Competencies: Which Ones
        Predict Postsecondary Educational Attainment and Earnings, and for Whom?
        Princeton, NJ: Mathematica Policy Research.
Duncan, Greg J. and Rachel Dunifon. 1998. ‘Soft-skills’ and long-run labor market
        success. Research in Labor Economics 17: 123-149.
Dunifon, Rachel, Greg J. Duncan and Jeanne Brooks-Gunn. 2001. As Ye Sweep, So
        Shall Ye Reap. American Economic Review 91(2): 150-154.
Education Commission of the States. 2005. State Class-Size Reduction Measures,
        Denver, Colorado: Education Commission of the States.
Edwards, Richard C. 1976. Individual traits and organizational incentives: What makes a
        good worker? Journal of Human Resources 11(1): 51-68.
Finn, Jeremy D. and Charles M. Achilles. 1990. Answers and Questions about Class Size:
        A Statewide Experiment. American Educational Research Journal 27(3): 557-
        577.
Finn, Jeremy D., John Folger, and Deborah Cox. 1991. Measuring Participation Among
        Elementary School Students. Educational and Psychological Measurement
        51(393-402).
Finn, Jeremy D., DeWayne Fulton, Jayne Zaharias, and Barbara A. Nye. 1989. Peabody
        Journal of Education. 67(1): 75-84.
                                                                                     46


Finn, Jeremy D., Susan B. Gerber, and Jayne Boyd-Zaharias. 2005. Small Classes in the
        Early Grades, Academic Achievement, and Graduating from High School.
        Journal of Educational Psychology 97(2): 214-223.
Finn, Jeremy D., Gina M. Pannozzo, and Charles M. Achilles. 2003. The ‘Why’s’ of
        Class Size: Student Behavior in Small Classes. Review of Educational Research
        73(3): 321-368.
Finn, Jeremy D., Jayne Boyd-Zaharias, Reva M. Fish, and Susan B. Gerber. 2007.
        Project STAR and Beyond: Database User’s Guide. Lebanon, Tennessee: Hero’s,
        Incorporated.
Fredricks, Jennifer A., Phyllis C. Blumenfeld, and Alison H. Paris. 2004. School
        Engagement: Potential of the Concept, State of the Evidence. Review of
        Educational Research 74(1): 59-109.
Glass, Gene and Mary L. Smith. 1978. Meta-Analysis of the Relationship of Class Size
        and Student Achievement. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis 1(1): 2-
        16.
Hanushek, Eric A. 1999. Some Findings from an Independent Investigation of the
        Tennessee STAR Experiment and from Other Investigations of Class Size Effects.
        Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 21(2): 143-163.
Hanushek, Eric A. 2003. The Failure of Input-Based Schooling Policies. Economic
        Journal 113(1): F64-F98.
Heckman, James J. 2000. Policies to Foster Human Capital. Research in Economics 54:
        3-56.
Heckman, James J., Jora Stixrud, and Sergio Urzua. 2006. The Effects of Cognitive and
        Non-cognitive Abilities on Labor Market Outcomes and Social Behaviors.
        Journal of Labor Economics 24(3): 411-482.
Heckman, James J and Yona Rubenstein. 2001. The Importance of Non-cognitive Skills:
        Lessons from GED Testing Program, American Economic Review 91(2): 145-149.
Howell, William G., Martin R. West, and Paul E. Peterson. 2007. What Americans Think
        About Their Schools. Education Next, 7(4): 12-26.
Hoxby, Caroline M. 2000. The Effects of Class Size on Student Achievement: New
        Evidence from Population Variation. Quarterly Journal of Economics 115: 1239-
        1285.
Ingels, Steven J., Sameer Y. Abraham, Rosemary Karr, Bruce D. Spencer and Martin R.
        Frankel. National Education Longitudinal Study of 1988 Base Year: Student
        Component Data File User’s Manual. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of
        Education, National Center for Education Statistics, 1990.
Jacob, Brian A. 2002. Where the Boys Aren’t: non-cognitive skills, returns to school and
        the gender gap in higher education. Economics of Education Review 21: 589-598.
Jencks, Christopher, et al. 1979. Who gets ahead? The determinants of economic success
        in America. New York: Basic Books.
Jepsen, Christopher and Steven Rivkin. 2002. What is the Tradeoff between Smaller
        Classes and Teacher Quality. NBER Working Paper 9205. Cambridge, Mass.:
        National Bureau of Economic Research.
Kim, James S., The Relative Influence of Research on Class-Size Policy. In Tom
        Loveless and Frederick M. Hess, eds., Brookings Papers on Education Policy,
        2006/2007. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press.
                                                                                    47


Krueger, Alan B. 1999. Experimental Estimates of Education Production Functions.
       Quarterly Journal of Economics 114: 497-532.
Krueger, Alan B. 2003a. Inequality, too much of a good thing. In James J. Heckman and
       Alan B. Krueger. Inequality in America: What Role for Human Capital Policies?
       Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press.
Krueger, Alan B. 2003b. Economic Considerations and Class Size. Economic Journal
       113: F34-F63.
Krueger, Alan B. 2003c. Responses. In James J. Heckman and Alan B. Krueger.
       Inequality in America: What Role for Human Capital Policies? Cambridge,
       Mass: MIT Press.
Krueger, Alan B., and Whitmore, Diane M. 2001. The Effect of Attending a Small Class
       in the Early Grades on College-Test Taking and Middle School Test Results:
       Evidence from Project STAR. Economic Journal 111: 1-28.
Lazear, Edward P. 2001. Educational Production. Quarterly Journal of Economics
       116(3): 777-803.
Mosteller, F. 1995. The Tennessee study of class size in the early school grades. The
       Future of Children 5:113-127.
Rouse, Cecilia 1999. Further estimates of the economic return to schooling from a new
       sample of twins. Economics of Education Review 18: 149-157.
Segal, Lydia. 2006a. Motivation, Test Scores, and Economic Success. Harvard Business
       School. Mimeo.
Segal, Lydia. 2006b. Classroom Behavior. Harvard Business School. Mimeo.
Schanzenbach, Diane Whitmore. 2007. What Has Research Learned from Project STAR?
       In Tom Loveless and Frederick M. Hess, eds., Brookings Papers on Education
       Policy, 2006/2007. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press.
Summers, Lawrence H. 2003. Comments. In James J. Heckman and Alan B. Krueger.
       Inequality in America: What Role for Human Capital Policies? Cambridge,
       Mass: MIT Press.
Voelkl, Kristen E. 1995. Class Size and Classroom Participation. Paper presented at the
       National Symposium on Class Size Research, London, England.
West, Martin R. and Paul E. Peterson. 2007. School Money Trials: The Legal Pursuit of
       Educational Adequacy. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press.
West, Martin R. and Ludger Woessmann. 2006. Which School Systems Sort Weaker
       Students into Smaller Classes? International Evidence. European Journal of
       Political Economy 22:944-968.
Woessmann, Ludger. 2007. International Evidence on Expenditure and Class Size: A
       Review. In Tom Loveless and Frederick M. Hess, eds., Brookings Papers on
       Education Policy, 2006/2007. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press.
Woessmann, Ludger and Martin R. West. 2006. Class-size Effects in School Systems
       Around the World European Economic Review 50(3): 695-736.
                                                                                           48


    Table 1- Project STAR: Descriptive Statistics for the Grade 4 and 8 Participation Studies
                             Grade 4                     Grade 8                Project STAR

                                   Mean                         Mean
                                                                                      Mean (SD)
                      Obs          (SD)            Obs          (SD)         Obs
Variable
                                     0.000                      0.000
Initiative              2,212                      2,978                       -          -
                                    (1.000)                    (1.000)
                                     0.000                      0.000
Effort                  2,212                      2,978                       -          -
                                    (1.000)                    (1.000)
Non-participatory                    0.000                      0.000
                        2,212                      2,978                       -          -
behavior                            (1.000)                    (1.000)
White/Asian
                        2,212        0.762         2,978        0.733       11,467      0.623
(1= Yes)
Female
                        2,212        0.499         2,978        0.529       11,581      0.471
(1=Yes)
Birth year 1979
                        2,212        0.309         2,977        0.339       11,533      0.340
(1=Yes)
Free lunch
                        2,193        0.410         2,925        0.404       11,334      0.550
(1=Yes)
Small class
(1=Assigned to          2,212        0.333         2,978        0.267       11,601      0.261
small class)


             Notes: Standard deviations for continuous variables are reported in
             parentheses. The free lunch variable measures whether the student
             was eligible for a free or reduced price lunch during his or her entry
             year.
                                                                                           49


                  Table 2 – Project STAR: Assessing Attrition and Balance
Independent variable               Dependent variable:                    Dependent variable:
                                    Study Participation                 Small-class Assignment
                               Grade 4             Grade 8            Grade 4            Grade 8
Small Class                    0.065††              0.001
                                                                          -                 -
                               (0.013)             (0.010)
White/Asian                     -0.000              -0.007             0.003              0.000
                               (0.013)             (0.015)            (0.038)            (0.035)
Female                         0.019††             0.064††             0.019              0.001
                               (0.006)             (0.008)            (0.018)            (0.018)
Birth year 1979                 0.016*              0.020†             0.017              0.006
                               (0.008)             (0.010)            (0.021)            (0.020)
Free lunch                    -0.069††            -0.110††             -0.003            -0.039
                               (0.011)             (0.013)            (0.027)            (0.025)
School-by-entry-
                                  Yes                 Yes                Yes               Yes
wave fixed effects?
P-value for joint
                                 0.000               0.000             0.742              0.540
significance test
Sample Size                     11,183              11,183             2,193              2,924
Notes: Standard errors, adjusted for school-by-entry-wave clustering, are reported in
parentheses. The sample for the models presented in the first two columns includes all
Project STAR participants with valid data for each observed student characteristic. The
final row reports the p-value for a joint test of the significance of the independent
variables listed.
* Statistically significant at the 10-percent level
† Statistically significant at 5-percent level
†† Statistically significant at 1-percent level
                                                                                                                               50



                        Table 3 – Project STAR: Effects of Small Class Assignment on Grade 4 Engagement
Independent                   Dependent Variable:                 Dependent Variable:                Dependent Variable:
Variable                            Initiative                           Effort                       Non-part. Behavior
Small Class             0.179††      0.113†    0.129††      0.136††      0.072       0.075     -0.102*      -0.043      -0.049
                         (0.047)     (0.045)    (0.050)     (0.046)     (0.043)     (0.049)    (0.052)     (0.055)     (0.058)
White/Asian              -0.120       -0.033     -0.038      0.032       -0.032      0.017     -0.130†     -0.193*    -0.288††
                         (0.080)     (0.111)    (0.095)     (0.070)     (0.094)     (0.089)    (0.061)     (0.106)     (0.095)
Female                  0.289††      0.265††   0.265††      0.432††     0.412††    0.398††    -0.522†† -0.514†† -0.496††
                         (0.042)     (0.043)    (0.044)     (0.038)     (0.040)     (0.042)    (0.045)     (0.049)     (0.049)
Birth year 1979         -0.247†† -0.149†† -0.148†† -0.214††             -0.100†      -0.084     0.085*      0.007       -0.005
                         (0.056)     (0.052)    (0.054)     (0.056)     (0.050)     (0.053)    (0.049)     (0.050)     (0.051)
Free lunch              -0.392†† -0.380†† -0.338†† -0.353†† -0.343†† -0.314††                  0.122††    0.163††      0.119†
                         (0.057)     (0.056)    (0.062)     (0.049)     (0.051)     (0.056)    (0.041)     (0.043)     (0.049)
School-by-entry-           No          Yes        Yes          No         Yes         Yes         No         Yes         Yes
wave fixed effects?
Teacher fixed                 No           No        Yes         No           No          Yes         No      No        Yes
effects?
R2                           0.076        0.204     0.372      0.095         0.219       0.371       0.083   0.180     0.344
Notes: Standard errors, adjusted for school-by-entry-wave clustering, are reported in parentheses.
* Statistically significant at the 10-percent level
† Statistically significant at 5-percent level
†† Statistically significant at 1-percent level
                                                                                                 51



         Table 4 – Project STAR: Effects of Small Class Assignment on Grade 8 Engagement
Independent                Dependent Variable                               Dependent Variable
Variable             (as reported by Math teacher):                  (as reported by English teacher):
                Initiative         Effort       Non-part.        Initiative         Effort      Non-part.
                                                 Behavior                                        Behavior
Small Class       -0.038           -0.053          0.080*          -0.026           -0.037        -0.033
                 (0.045)          (0.043)         (0.045)         (0.053)          (0.045)        (0.044)
White/Asian       0.123            0.201†        -0.395††          -0.126          0.160†        -0.411††
                 (0.078)          (0.084)         (0.100)         (0.085)          (0.069)        (0.092)
Female           0.177††          0.353††        -0.463††         0.301††          0.516††       -0.500††
                 (0.039)          (0.037)         (0.041)         (0.042)          (0.039)        (0.038)
Birth year       -0.101†          -0.096†          -0.021         -0.104†           -0.060         0.068
1979             (0.044)          (0.045)         (0.044)         (0.041)          (0.045)        (0.044)
Free lunch      -0.132††         -0.147††         0.148††        -0.202††         -0.266††        0.124†
                 (0.041)          (0.070)         (0.049)         (0.050)          (0.046)        (0.049)
R2                0.227            0.231           0.209           0.273            0.262          0.239
                      Notes: Standard errors, adjusted for school-by-entry-wave
                      clustering, are reported in parentheses. All models condition
                      on school-by-entry-wave fixed effects.
                      * Statistically significant at the 10-percent level
                      † Statistically significant at 5-percent level
                      †† Statistically significant at 1-percent level
                                                                                        52

                     Table 5 – Samples Means, NELS:88 Base-Year Sample


                                                                            Standard    Sample
 Variable                       Description                        Mean     Deviation    size

NOTUSE      Subject not useful for my future                       0.0018   0.9953      32,152
NOTLF       Do not look forward to subject                         0.0008   0.9945      32,246
AFASK       Afraid to ask questions in subject class              -0.0061   0.9936      32,197
DISRUPT     Student is frequently disruptive                       0.1368   0.0019      33,018
INATT       Student is consistently inattentive                    0.2255   0.0023      32,962
TRYH        Frequency of trying hard in subject (1st follow-up)   -0.0071   1.0012      18, 612
STEST       Test score in subject                                  0.0219   0.9976      32,646
CLSSIZE     Class size                                            24.5067   5.8675      33,162
OTHRACE     Teacher of opposite race/ethnicity                     0.3172   0.0025      33,802
OTHSEX      Teacher of opposite gender                             0.5028   0.0025      33,802
SCERTIFD    Teacher certified by state in subject                  0.8838   0.0017      33,802
PCTLEP      % classmates with limited English proficiency          0.0141   0.0718      31,362
SUBJECT1    English                                                0.2576   0.0024      33,802
SUBJECT2    History/social studies class                           0.2424   0.0023      33,802
SUBJECT3    Mathematics class                                      0.2568   0.0024      33,802
SUBJECT4    Science class                                          0.2432   0.0023      33,802
                                                                                                                                                       53



                         Table 6 – NELS:88: Estimated effects of class size on noncognitive and cognitive student outcomes
                                                                                      First-difference (FD) estimates
                                         (1)                      (2)                    (3)                    (4)                           (5)
Dependent variable                     β̂         R2           β̂         R2           β̂         R2           β̂          R2          β̂            R2
                                     0.0023                0.0056‡                 0.0117‡                 0.0126‡                 0.0112‡
NOTLF                                           0.0888                  0.0166                  0.3366                  0.3470                      0.3626
                                   (0.0016)                (0.0020)                (0.0032)                (0.0034)                (0.0034)
                                   -0.0053‡                0.0039†                 0.0085‡                 0.0095‡                 0.0086†
NOTUSE                                          0.0649                  0.0142                  0.2664                  0.2738                      0.2788
                                   (0.0016)                (0.0018)                (0.0031)                (0.0033)                (0.0034)
                                   -0.0031*                0.0081‡                 0.0140‡                 0.0152‡                 0.0142‡
AFASK                                           0.0612                  0.0024                  0.2723                  0.2834                      0.2906
                                    (0.0017)               (0.0017)                (0.0030)                (0.0032)                (0.0033)
                                   -0.0040‡                 -0.0010                 -0.0005                 -0.0003                 -0.0005
DISRUPT                                         0.1123                  0.0005                  0.3212                  0.3305                      0.3342
                                    (0.0006)               (0.0007)                (0.0011)                (0.0012)                (0.0012)
                                   -0.0034‡                0.0034‡                   0.0021                  0.0017                  0.0016
INATT                                           0.1129                  0.0029                  0.3481                  0.3513                      0.3562
                                    (0.0007)               (0.0009)                (0.0013)                (0.0014)                (0.0014)
                                    0.0246‡                 -0.0022                 -0.0029                 -0.0018
STEST                                           0.2965                  0.0237                  0.2928                  0.2996                n/a
                                    (0.0019)               (0.0014)                (0.0020)                (0.0021)

Sample sizes (range)                 29,724 - 31,140         15,478 – 15,911         15,478 – 15,911         13,865 – 14,586         13,394 – 14,035

Control variables
Student observables                      x
School fixed effects                     x
Student fixed effects                                         x                        x                        x                       x
Teacher fixed effects                                                                  x                        x                       x
Teacher/classroom observables            x                                                                      x                       x
Subject test score                                                                                                                      x
 Each reported coefficient is from a separate regression. Standard errors, adjusted for school-level clustering, are reported in parentheses. All
 models include gender-specific subject fixed effects.
 * Statistically significant at the 10-percent level
 † Statistically significant at the 5-percent level
 ‡ Statistically significant at the 1-percent level
                                                                                                                                                54




                                        Table 7 – NELS:88: Selection on classroom and teacher observables

                                                                                     First-difference (FD) estimates
                       Dependent variable                         (1)           (2)           (3)          (4)          (5)
                                                              -0.0010‡      -0.0010‡       -0.0002      -0.0002      -0.0002
                       PCTLEP
                                                              (0.0002)      (0.0003)       (0.0002)     (0.0002)     (0.0002)
                                                               0.0070‡      0.0037‡
                       SCERTIFD                                                               n/a          n/a          n/a
                                                              (0.0009)      (0.0014)
                       Novice Teacher (1-3 years               -0.0001       -0.0002
                                                                                              n/a          n/a          n/a
                       experience)                            (0.0007)      (0.0012)

                       Control variables
                       School fixed effects                       x
                       Student fixed effects                                    x            x            x             x
                       Teacher fixed effects                                                 x            x             x
                       Teacher/classroom observables              x                                       x             x
                       Subject test score                                                                               x

Standard errors, adjusted for school-level clustering, are reported in parentheses. All models include gender-specific subject fixed effects.
* Statistically significant at the 10-percent level
† Statistically significant at the 5-percent level
‡ Statistically significant at the 1-percent level
                                                                                                                                           55



                             Table 8 – NELS:88: Estimated effects of class size on AFASK by academic subject

                                                                                 Change in dependent variable
                                   Baseline          Math AFASK            Science AFASK         Reading AFASK              History AFASK
     Independent variable          measures       replaced by science      replaced by math     replaced by history       replaced by reading

Class size in math                  0.0153‡              0.0024                 0.0145‡                 0.0145‡                 0.0109†
                                    (0.0051)            (0.0044)                (0.0051)                (0.0051)                (0.0051)
Class size in science               0.0083*             0.0082*                  0.0064                  0.0045                 0.0104*
                                    (0.0048)            (0.0048)                (0.0053)                (0.0051)                (0.0053)
Class size in English               0.0201‡             0.0171‡                 0.0170‡                 0.0104*                 0.0103‡
                                    (0.0053)            (0.0050)                (0.0054)                (0.0055)                (0.0053)
Class size in history               0.0115†             0.0124†                  0.0069                 0.0111†                  0.0040
                                    (0.0052)            (0.0051)                (0.0060)                (0.0052)                (0.0051)

p-value (H0: βM = βS = βE = βH)      0.3669              0.0920                  0.3968                  0.5666                  0.1998

   Standard errors, adjusted for school-level clustering, are reported in parentheses. All models include gender-specific subject fixed
   effects, student and teacher fixed effects.
   * Statistically significant at the 10-percent level
   † Statistically significant at the 5-percent level
   ‡ Statistically significant at the 1-percent level
                                                                                                                                              56



                     Table 9 – Estimated effects of grade-8 class size on subsequent effort, NELS:88 First Follow-up Survey

                                                                                                        Sample
                                Specification                                    β̂           R2         Size
                                Student fixed effects, gender-specific,       -0.0054‡
                                                                                            0.0032       9,046
                                subject fixed effects                          (0.0019)
                                                                              -0.0061*
                                Previous model and teacher fixed effects                    0.3181       9,046
                                                                              (0.0035)
                                Previous model and teacher & classroom        -0.0067*
                                                                                            0.3218       8,174
                                observables                                   (0.0037)
                                                                              -0.0065*
                                Previous model and subject test scores                      0.3275       7,898
                                                                              (0.0039)


The dependent variable is TRYH, a standardized measure for the frequency of student-reported effort in an academic subject during the first
follow-up interview. Standard errors, adjusted for school-level clustering, are reported in parentheses.
* Statistically significant at the 10-percent level
† Statistically significant at the 5-percent level
‡ Statistically significant at the 1-percent level
                                                                                                                                                     57



                                       Table 10 – NELS:88: Class Size Effects by Student and School Traits

Dependent Variable           Boys          Girls         Black       Hispanic      Low SES       High SES       Urban        Suburban        Rural

                            0.0122†       0.0110†       0.0124         0.0161      0.0139‡       0.0125†        0.0195‡      0.0085*       0.0110†
NOTLF
                            (0.0059)     (0.0054)      (0.0145)      (0.0121)      (0.0053)      (0.0054)      (0.0069)      (0.0052)      (0.0048)
                            0.0099*       0.0098*      0.0224*         0.0067       0.0054       0.0123†        0.0138†      0.0089*         0.0053
NOTUSE
                            (0.0058)     (0.0054)      (0.0134)      (0.0117)      (0.0051)      (0.0054)      (0.0070)      (0.0051)      (0.0047)
                            0.0102†       0.0134†      0.0270*       0.0267†       0.0169‡       0.0151‡        0.0145†      0.0116†       0.0159‡
AFASK
                            (0.0051)     (0.0053)      (0.0158)      (0.0135)      (0.0051)      (0.0048)      (0.0068)      (0.0045)      (0.0051)
                             0.0013       -0.0011       -0.0038      0.0109†        -0.0014       -0.0008       -0.0014        0.0008       -0.0014
DISRUPT
                            (0.0020)     (0.0015)      (0.0053)      (0.0054)      (0.0019)      (0.0018)      (0.0028)      (0.0016)      (0.0017)
                            0.0047†       -0.0007       0.0071         0.0094       0.0021         0.0027        0.0008        0.0013      0.0038*
INATT
                            (0.0023)     (0.0019)      (0.0066)      (0.0059)      (0.0024)      (0.0020)      (0.0031)      (0.0018)      (0.0023)
                             -0.0003     -0.0065†       -0.0114       -0.0085       -0.0028       -0.0051      -0.0117†       -0.0002       -0.0009
STEST
                            (0.0036)     (0.0033)      (0.0077)      (0.0080)      (0.0029)      (0.0037)      (0.0045)      (0.0033)      (0.0029)

Standard errors, adjusted for school-level clustering, are reported in parentheses. All models include gender-specific subject fixed effects, student
fixed effects, and teacher fixed effects.
* Statistically significant at the 10-percent level
† Statistically significant at the 5-percent level
‡ Statistically significant at the 1-percent level
                                                                                                                                                58



          TABLE 11 – Estimated effect of noncognitive and cognitive measures on educational attainment, NELS:88 Fourth Follow-up

                                       High School Graduate                        College Entrant                   Bachelor’s Degree
    Independent variables           (1)         (2)        (3)             (1)            (2)         (3)        (1)        (2)         (3)
    NOTLF                        -0.0209‡ -0.0153‡ -0.0190‡             -0.0478‡      -0.0304‡ -0.0341‡       -0.0393‡ -0.0247‡ -0.0337‡
                                 (0.0057)    (0.0057)   (0.0062)        (0.0077)      (0.0071)     (0.0077)   (0.0071)   (0.0065)    (0.0072)
    STEST                            -       0.0659‡    0.0618‡             -          0.2078‡     0.2050‡        -      0.1707‡     0.1669‡
                                             (0.0043)   (0.0044)                      (0.0061)     (0.0069)              (0.0060)    (0.0069)

    NOTUSE                       -0.0258†     -0.0165‡     -0.0175‡     -0.0740‡      -0.0448‡    -0.0447‡    -0.0552‡   -0.0311‡   -0.0349‡
                                 (0.0054)     (0.0053)     (0.0058)     (0.0070)      (0.0065)    (0.0071)    (0.0060)   (0.0057)   (0.0063)
    STEST                            -         0.0648‡      0.0607‡         -          0.2042‡     0.2012‡        -       0.1685‡    0.1645‡
                                              (0.0043)     (0.0048)                   (0.0061)    (0.0069)               (0.0060)   (0.0069)

    AFASK                          -0.0038     0.0088*     0.0089*      -0.0581‡      -0.0200‡    -0.0229‡    -0.0457‡   -0.0140†   -0.0165‡
                                  (0.0046)     (0.0046)    (0.0051)     (0.0066)      (0.0064)    (0.0071)    (0.0058)   (0.0056)   (0.0064)
    STEST                              -       0.0684‡     0.0647‡          -          0.2062‡     0.2033‡        -       0.1698‡    0.1663‡
                                               (0.0043)    (0.0049)                   (0.0063)    (0.0071)               (0.0062)   (0.0071)

    Dependent mean                               0.87                                   0.51                               0.30

    Control variables
    Student observables              x            x            x            x             x           x          x          x           x
    Family observables               x            x            x            x             x           x          x          x           x
    School fixed effects                                       x                                      x                                 x

Standard errors, adjusted for school-level clustering, are reported in parentheses.
* Statistically significant at the 10-percent level
† Statistically significant at the 5-percent level
‡ Statistically significant at the 1-percent level
                                                                                                                                          59



          TABLE 12 – Estimated effects of noncognitive and cognitive measures on labor-market outcomes, NELS:88 Fourth Follow-up

                                                Full-time Employment (1999)                              ln(1999 Earnings)
     Independent variables              (1)             (2)         (3)             (4)       (1)         (2)           (3)        (4)
     NOTLF                           -0.0217‡       -0.0179†    -0.0269‡        -0.0223†   -0.0273†    -0.0210       -0.0216    -0.0144
                                     (0.0081)       (0.0081)    (0.0094)        (0.0095)   (0.0133)   (0.0134)      (0.0152)   (0.0151)
     STEST                               -           0.0457‡     0.0368‡         0.0156*       -      0.0905‡       0.0859‡    0.0414‡
                                                    (0.0068)    (0.0079)        (0.0087)              (0.0099)      (0.0124)   (0.0139)

     NOTUSE                          -0.0160†       -0.0103           -0.0130    -0.0077    -0.0086    0.0022       0.0051      0.0155
                                     (0.0077)      (0.0078)          (0.0090)   (0.0091)   (0.0108)   (0.0109)     (0.0135)    (0.0134)
     STEST                               -         0.0456‡           0.0370‡    0.0158*         -     0.0917‡      0.0876‡     0.0429‡
                                                   (0.0069)          (0.0079)   (0.0088)              (0.0099)     (0.0124)    (0.0139)

     AFASK                           -0.0168†       -0.0093           -0.0077    -0.0075   -0.0631‡   -0.0495‡     -0.0541‡    -0.0512‡
                                     (0.0073)      (0.0073)          (0.0086)   (0.0088)   (0.0121)   (0.0122)     (0.0158)    (0.0158)
     STEST                               -         0.0453‡           0.0374‡    0.0153*        -       0.0844‡      0.0791‡     0.0345†
                                                   (0.0069)          (0.0079)   (0.0087)              (0.0099)     (0.0128)    (0.0145)

     Dependent mean                                           0.84                                            10.19

     Control variables
     Student observables                 x             x                x             x       x          x             x          x
     Family observables                  x             x                x             x       x          x             x          x
     School fixed effects                                               x             x                                x          x
     Educational attainment                                                           x                                           x

Standard errors, adjusted for school-level clustering, are reported in parentheses.
* Statistically significant at the 10-percent level
† Statistically significant at the 5-percent level
‡ Statistically significant at the 1-percent level
                                                                              60



                          Figure 1 - Age-Earnings Profile - 2007 March CPS




$50,000


$40,000


$30,000


$20,000


$10,000


    $0
          18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48 50 52 54 56 58 60 62 64
                                                                                            61

              Table 13 - Present Discounted Value of Increased Earnings from
                  Reducing 8th-Grade Class Size by 1 Standard Deviation

                                        Assumed Productivity Growth Rate
          Discount rate                   0%          1%           2%
          0.02                          $5,167      $6,941        $9,433
          0.05                          $2,376      $3,060        $3,986
          0.08                          $1,247      $1,548        $1,548
          0.11                           $727        $876         $1,065

          Internal rate of return        0.036          0.046          0.056

Notes: The estimated increase in earnings is based on the age-earnings profile of labor-force
participants from the 2007 March CPS, the estimated effect of a 1 SD class-size decrease on
AFASK (Table 6, column 4) and the estimated effect of AFASK on earnings (Table 11,
column 3). The direct cost of 1 SD class-size reduction is estimated as $3,392 in 2006 dollars.




             Table 14 - Present Discounted Value of Increased Earnings from
          Reducing 8th-Grade Class Size by 1 Standard Deviation in Urban Schools

                                         Assumed Productivity Growth Rate
          Discount rate                   0%          1%            2%
          0.02                          $10,423     $14,003       $19,031
          0.05                           $4,793      $6,173        $8,042
          0.08                           $2,515      $3,123        $3,916
          0.11                           $1,467      $1,768        $2,149

          Internal rate of return        0.069          0.079          0.090

Notes: The estimated increase in earnings is based on the age-earnings profile of labor-force
participants from the 2007 March CPS, the estimated effect of a 1 SD class-size decrease on
AFASK and STEST (Table 9) and the estimated effect of AFASK and STEST on earnings
(Table 11, column 3). The direct cost of 1 SD class-size reduction is estimated as $3,157 in
2006 dollars.
