                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                     INDEXED REGULATION

                                         Richard G. Newell
                                          William A. Pizer

                                        Working Paper 13991
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13991


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2008




We thank Drew Baglino for research assistance and Arun Malik, two anonymous referees, Carolyn
Fischer, Ulf Moslener, John Parsons, Wally Oates, Brian McLean, David Evans, and participants in
seminars at RFF, FEEM, HEC Montréal, and the Southern Economic Association Annual Meetings
for useful comments on previous versions of the paper. We acknowledge funding from MISTRA,
the Swedish Foundation for Strategic Environmental Research. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Richard G. Newell and William A. Pizer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Indexed Regulation
Richard G. Newell and William A. Pizer
NBER Working Paper No. 13991
May 2008
JEL No. C68,D81,H41,Q54,Q58

                                                 ABSTRACT

Seminal work by Weitzman (1974) revealed prices are preferred to quantities when marginal benefits
are relatively flat compared to marginal costs. We extend this comparison to indexed policies, where
quantities are proportional to an index, such as output. We find that policy preferences hinge on additional
parameters describing the first and second moments of the index and the ex post optimal quantity level.
When the ratio of these variables' coefficients of variation divided by their correlation is less than approximately
two, indexed quantities are preferred to fixed quantities. A slightly more complex condition determines
when indexed quantities are preferred to prices. Applied to climate change policy, we find that the
range of variation and correlation in country-level carbon dioxide emissions and GDP suggests the
ranking of an emissions intensity cap (indexed to GDP) compared to a fixed emission cap is not uniform
across countries; neither policy clearly dominates the other.


Richard G. Newell
Nicholas School of the Environment
Duke University
Box 90227
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
richard.newell@duke.edu

William A. Pizer
Resources for the Future
1616 P Street, NW
Washington, DC 20036
pizer@rff.org
                                        Indexed regulation

                               Richard G. Newell and William A. Pizer



1. Introduction
        The literature on policy instrument choice under uncertainty historically has focused on

the relative performance of prices, quantities, and hybrid price–quantity instruments [9; 12; 15;

18; 21; 22; 24]. In practice, however, the decision for policymakers often comes down to

choosing among different types of quantity-based instruments, not choosing between prices and

quantities. Nowhere is this better illustrated than in the debate on the form and implementation of

measures to address global climate change. While the Kyoto Protocol and current U.S.

congressional proposals for a greenhouse gas cap-and-trade system focus on a quantity-based

system with largely fixed emissions targets, the United States’ Bush administration and Australia

have so far embraced targets based on emission intensity—a quantity target indexed to economic

activity.1 Canada has committed to a quantity target under the Kyoto Protocol, but is pursuing an

intensity-based approach in its domestic program. Japan has similarly pursued voluntary sectoral

emission intensity goals. Few countries have chosen the relevant price instrument, a carbon tax,

and this option is largely taboo in the United States.2




1 The EU Emission Trading Scheme (ETS) is a somewhat intermediate case because not all sectors are
covered under the system and allocations can be adjusted in response to output growth (i.e., new
installations) and decline (i.e., installation shutdowns).
2 Finland and Sweden are currently the only countries that have a broad-based carbon tax, in addition to
participating in the EU ETS. New Zealand initially proposed then rejected a carbon tax in favor of a cap-
and-trade system. Japan has considered but not enacted proposals for a carbon tax.



                                                    1
        This paper considers the welfare implications of this indexed versus fixed quantity

distinction and reveals a simple condition for preferring one to the other. When the coefficient of

variation in the index divided by the coefficient of variation in the ex post optimal quantity level

is less than approximately twice their correlation, indexed quantities are preferred. The question

is whether the variance of the index is “too much,” with the factor of two reflecting adjustment

by double the desired adjustment (given the useful information in the index) to the point where

the over-adjustment erases any gain. Applying these results to the question of indexed versus

fixed emissions limits to address global climate change, we find that the empirical range of

variations and correlations for emissions and GDP is such that a cap on emission intensity

(emissions indexed to GDP) may be preferred to a fixed emission cap for some countries, but not

for others.

        Of course, interest in indexed and fixed quantity regulation is not limited to climate

change. Environmental policy in the United States is replete with examples of both kinds of

quantity policies. The most familiar example to many is the U.S. sulfur dioxide tradable permit

or “cap-and-trade” system for electricity generators [2; 17]. Since 1995, this system has set a

fixed limit on the tons of sulfur dioxide emitted from power plants, while allowing sources to

trade emissions allowances in order to minimize compliance costs. The NOx Budget Program,

the Clean Air Interstate Rule, and Clean Air Mercury Rule (all promulgated by the

Environmental Protection Agency under the Clean Air Act), along with a host of regional air and

water trading programs, round out the U.S. experience with fixed targets.

        Despite these examples, performance standards are a more common form of

environmental regulation, typically set in terms of an allowable emissions rate per unit of

product output (i.e., emission intensity) [5; 16]. The phase-down of lead in gasoline—the first



                                                 2
large-scale experiment with market-based environmental policy—employed a tradable

performance standard [7; 11]. Over 25 U.S. states now have (and the U.S. Congress has

proposed) renewable portfolio standards that require a certain share of electricity generation from

renewable sources. Corporate Average Fuel Economy (CAFE) standards are a less flexible

performance standard that can be traded and banked within but not across firms (e.g., across

vehicle lines within a firm). Even less flexible are traditional command-and-control style

regulations, such as New Source Performance Standards.

        Like an intensity target for greenhouse gases, these forms of regulation allow the

effective emissions cap to adjust in response to changes in output. This feature has political

appeal because it provides a way to set environmental standards that are less likely to be, or

perceived to be, constraints on economic growth, either within a regulated sector or across the

economy. Intuition suggests that the responsiveness of intensity-based quantity regulation to

output changes also may have economic appeal. Such adjustments could lower the expected

costs of achieving a particular environmental target by loosening the cap when costs are

unexpectedly high and tightening it when costs are low.3 This is analogous to the cost advantage

of prices over quantities identified in the literature.

        On the other hand, including an index in the policy formula introduces another uncertain

variable and potentially unrelated noise, which could have negative consequences for efficiency.

The purpose of this paper is to clarify these tradeoffs by identifying the key features of the

regulatory problem, modeling the relative performance of fixed versus indexed quantity targets,

and demonstrating how the resulting framework can be applied using the case of climate policy.


3 Linking an emissions limit to output raises questions of both subsidizing output and creating pro-
cyclical costs, points we consider at the end of this paper.



                                                    3
We note that all of our theoretical results apply, almost without modification, to the case of

indexed price policies.4

        Several recent papers have looked both theoretically and empirically at the relative

advantages of intensity targets in the case of climate change policy. Quirion [14] finds that strong

positive correlation between a cost shock and the index favors indexed quantities, similar to our

results.5 His analytic model differs from ours in that he considers a particular functional form

where marginal costs depend on emissions as a share of baseline emissions, and where baseline

emissions are the index, rather than a more general linear approximation. He argues that indexed

quantities typically rank between prices and quantities in terms of expected net benefits, a result

we can replicate by applying the restrictions implied by his functional form to our model.

However, we find such restrictions at odds with empirical evidence, as discussed further in

sections 2.5 and 3.

        Focusing solely on costs (and ignoring benefits), Ellerman and Sue Wing [3] employ a

simulation model to argue that partial indexing—what we call a general indexed quantity—is

more sensible. Such an approach sets the mean emissions level and the rate of adjustment to the

index separately, rather than allowing a single parameter (the emissions rate) to determine both.6



4 The obvious exception being the large number of policies and contracts with nominal values indexed to
inflation, as well as natural gas contracts that are sometimes indexed to crude oil prices.
5 In Quirion’s model, stronger positive correlation between the cost shock and the index is implicit in a
higher variance in baseline emissions (see his proposition 4). His index is baseline emissions, which is
assumed to be perfectly correlated with marginal costs. Therefore, a higher variance in baseline emissions
means a larger portion of uncertainty in costs (comprised of both uncertainty about baseline emissions
and an independent shock) is due to the index, and thus correlation between the two is higher.
6 Compare q = a + rx with and without the parameter a, where q is emissions, x is the index, and r is the
rate of adjustment to the index. We address the distinction between general and ordinary (proportional)
indexing further below.



                                                    4
Similar to Ellerman and Sue Wing, Jotzo and Pezzey [6] derive an optimal indexing rule based

on minimizing expected costs and use a simulation model to evaluate both a general indexed

quantity policy and an ordinary, proportional indexed quantity policy. They conclude that for

climate policy, indexes of either type are better than fixed quantity policies at a global level, that

the more general index is considerably better than ordinary indexing, and that the rate of

indexing varies greatly among countries.

       Finally, Sue Wing et al. [19] conclude that sufficiently small GDP variance and high

correlation favor indexed quantities for climate policy—as we do—but based on minimizing

expected costs rather than maximizing expected benefits minus costs (note the ranking would be

same if marginal benefits are flat). They also present empirical evidence supporting indexed

quantities over fixed quantities, with strong support for developing countries and more equivocal

results for industrialized countries.

       Our work ties together and clarifies this literature by deriving simple analytic expressions

for the advantage of indexed quantities relative to both fixed quantity and price controls. Two

factors tend to tilt the preference toward indexed quantities relative to fixed quantities: stronger

positive correlation between the index and marginal cost uncertainty and relatively small index

variance. The intuition is straightforward. With low correlation between the index and the cost

shock, indexing introduces unwanted noise in the target without reducing cost uncertainty.

Further, a large index variance, relative to the marginal cost variance, will over-adjust quantities

even if there is perfect correlation. Whether indexed quantities also dominate prices depends, in

addition, on marginal benefits being sufficiently steep relative to marginal costs—as in the

original Weitzman result.




                                                  5
       Applying the analytic results to the case of greenhouse gas mitigation, we find that the

ranking of carbon dioxide caps indexed to GDP compared to fixed quantity controls varies across

countries. Those countries with a strong correlation between output and emissions and relatively

low output variance tend to favor indexed quantities, while those with low correlation and/or

high output variance favor fixed quantities.

       Our motivation and application relate to cases where the government is seeking to

regulate a market constrained by both an information asymmetry (between the moment a policy

is determined and the horizon over which it applies) and a limit on regulatory complexity.

Similar features characterize other mechanism design problems where these results may be

helpful. Sales contracts, for example, face an asymmetry of information between the moment a

contract is agreed and when it is executed and, similarly, a limit to the complexity of contract

contingencies. Like our regulatory example, subjecting delivery quantity and/or price to indexing

rules can enhance contract performance [see, e.g., 1; 8]. In the case of monetary policy, the

uncertain link between the instrument (current interest rate or money supply) and outcome

(future inflation and output) mimics our information asymmetry. The literature on monetary

policy considers ways to use all available information to improve performance but often ends up,

like our regulatory example, with fairly simple linear index rules to minimize squared errors [see

20 for a recent summary]. These examples suggest a potentially broad application of our analysis

beyond the regulatory arena.

       The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. First, we set up our model and review

the original Weitzman [21] result. Next, we introduce the notion of indexed quantities and derive

results for both a general indexed quantity—where the mean quantity level and rate of




                                                 6
adjustment to the index are distinct—as well as a simple proportional indexed quantity. Finally,

we present an application to climate change and conclude.

2. Model and analytic results

       Our modeling approach follows Weitzman [21] with quadratic cost and benefit functions

for a generic market, q. The functions can be viewed as local approximations about an arbitrary

point. Maximizing net benefits based on these functions, we determine expected net benefits for

optimal price and fixed quantity controls, as in Weitzman, and then for an indexed quantity

policy. We consider two types of indexed policies, “ordinary” indexed quantities where the

regulated quantity equals a fixed rate times the index, and “general” indexed quantities where the

rate of adjustment is distinct from the mean level of control. We derive expressions for the

difference in net benefits for pair-wise comparisons of the policies, evaluate the dependence of

these policy rankings on key parameters, and summarize these rankings in a two-dimensional

space defined by key parameter values.

2.1. Review of prices versus quantities

       We start by replicating the basic Weitzman [21] results with costs and benefits measured

as quadratic functions about the expected optimal quantity q* .7 Note that for the case of pollution

control, we take q to represent emissions, not abatement. Costs are given by

                             C ( q ) = c0 + ( c1 − θ c ) ( q − q* ) +      ( q − q* ) ,
                                                                        c2           2
(1)
                                                                        2




7 Like Weitzman, we make the approximation around the optimal fixed quantity q* without loss of
generality for the resulting comparative advantage expressions. A more general approximation simply
adds constant terms to all of the expected net benefit expressions, which cancel out when they are
compared.



                                                        7
where θc is a mean-zero random shock to marginal costs with variance σ c2 , and the cn

parameters capture constant, linear, and quadratic behavior. We assume c2 > 0 ; that is, costs are

strictly convex. Note that we have defined the cost shock such that a positive value of θc reduces

the marginal cost of producing q, but increases the marginal cost of reducing q. We chose this

specification to ease the interpretation for our application to pollution control, where the

regulator typically is seeking emissions reductions.

        Similar to costs, benefits are given by the form

                                  B ( q ) = b0 + b1 ( q − q* ) −      ( q − q* ) ,
                                                                   b2           2
(2)
                                                                   2

with b2 ≥ 0 ; that is, benefits are weakly concave (marginal benefits are non-increasing). We do

not include benefit uncertainty because, unless it is correlated with cost uncertainty, it does not

affect net benefits in this quadratic setting [18; 21].8 The remaining parameters, particularly the

linear terms, can be negative. This is relevant for our motivating example of pollution where

marginal benefits are negative, and increasingly so, for increases in q.

        Differentiating (1) and (2) with respect to q to obtain marginal costs and benefits, taking

expectations, and equating the expressions, yields the condition

                                     b1 − b2 ( q − q* ) = c1 + c2 ( q − q* )




8 Uncertainty in marginal benefits would influence the price-quantity policy instrument ranking if it is
correlated with marginal costs, tilting the preference toward (from) quantities in the case of positive
(negative) correlation [18; 21]. Regarding indexed quantities, positive (negative) correlation between the
index and marginal benefits would similarly tilt the preference toward (from) fixed quantities. The
reasoning is the same: both prices and indexed quantities allow a less stringent policy in states of the
world with high costs / high index values—a feature that is less desirable when benefits also tend to be
high in those same states of the world (and vice versa). Uncertainty in marginal benefits will also
influence the stringency of policy if marginal benefits are non-linear.



                                                       8
for the optimal fixed quantity policy, a condition satisfied at q = q* if and only if b1 = c1. We

now see the implication of approximating benefits and costs around the optimal fixed quantity

policy (q*). That is, marginal benefits equal expected marginal costs (b1 = c1) at the optimum.

Taking this into account and subtracting (1) from (2) we have a general equation for net benefits

as a function of q:

                                                                   b2 + c2
                           NB ( q ) = b0 − c0 + θ c ( q − q* ) −           ( q − q* ) .
                                                                                     2
(3)
                                                                      2

       Expected net benefits under the optimal fixed quantity policy, NBQ, are therefore given

by

(4)                                          E ⎡⎣ NBQ ⎤⎦ = b0 − c0

because the optimal fixed quantity policy is q*.

       An arbitrary price policy p equates marginal cost to price, ex post. That is,

p = c1 − θ c + c2 ( q − q* ) , with an associated quantity response function of

q p (θ c ) = q* + ( p − c1 + θ c ) c2 . The optimal price policy, p* , equates marginal benefits and

expected marginal costs, given the response function q p (θ c ) . It is straightforward to show that

                                                                 θc
(5)                                          q*p (θ c ) = q* +        ,
                                                                 c2

with the implication that the optimal price equals the expected price at the optimal fixed quantity

and yields the optimal fixed quantity (q*) in expectation. Substituting (5) for q in (3) and taking

expectations we find the expected net benefits under the optimal price policy, NBP, are

                                                            σ c2 (c2 − b2 )
(6)                                 E [ NBP ] = b0 − c0 +                     .
                                                                      2c22




                                                       9
       Taking the difference between E[NBP] and E[NBQ] yields the familiar Weitzman [21]

relative advantage expression for prices versus fixed quantities

                                                     σ c2 (c2 − b2 )
(7)                                       Δ P −Q =                       .
                                                           2c22

Prices therefore outperform fixed quantities if the slope of marginal benefits is less than the slope

of marginal costs, and vice versa.

       At this point, it is useful to define both the first-best policy and the associated net

benefits. Setting marginal costs equal to marginal benefits after the shock θ c is revealed yields

what we refer to as the optimal ex post quantity, qO:

                                                                  θc
(8)                                      qO (θ c ) = q* +                     .
                                                             c2 + b2

Intuitively, the sum of the cost and benefit slopes c2 + b2 reflects the rate at which a deviation in

quantities translates into a deviation in net benefits, where here the net benefit deviation equals

θ c . This in turn leads to an expected value for net benefits under the first-best policy, NBO of

                                                                       σ c2
(9)                                  E [ NBO ] = b0 − c0 +                        .
                                                              2(c2 + b2 )

       Graphically, we can visualize the outcomes under the first-best, price, and fixed quantity

policies in Figure 1 for a particular realization of θ c . The larger hatched area represents the loss

under the fixed quantity policy and the smaller shaded area represents the loss under the price

policy, both relative to the first best. From the figure, we can see that while the price policy

misses the optimum because it over-adjusts the expected quantity target, the fixed quantity policy

misses the optimum because it fails to adjust at all in response to the cost shock.

       The divergence in performance of price and quantity controls from the optimum and from

one another arises because of an information asymmetry. The regulator does not observe the cost

                                                      10
shock θ c that, in contrast, is known to the regulated firms at the time q is chosen. Once the

information is revealed, it is not possible to rapidly adjust the policy, and we find that fixed

policies lead to second-best outcomes with the well-known distinction between prices and

quantities.

        An important observation at this point is that an alternate policy could improve upon both

fixed prices and quantities if somehow it adjusted the ex post quantity level in a way that was

closer to the optimum than either of these instruments. In this regard, three things are

immediately necessary: the adjustment should be correlated to the cost shock; the adjustment

should not be too small; and it especially should not be too large.9 We now turn to how indexed

quantities might achieve this end.

2.2. General indexed quantities

        We consider a random variable, x, that is used to index the otherwise fixed quantity

policy. In the pollution case, it is useful to think of x as some observed index of activity, such as

output (e.g., kWh of electricity or gallons of fuel), that is correlated with the level of unregulated

pollution. More generally, it could be anything related to the object of regulation, q, including

weather or prices in related markets. We assume a linear policy of the form

(10)                                            q ( x ) = a + rx ,

where a and r are policy parameters, E [ x ] = x , var ( x ) = σ x2 , and cov ( x, θ c ) = σ cx . That is, the

index has mean x , standard deviation σ x , and covariance σ cx with the cost shock θ c .




9 It is also necessary that information about the index become available alongside information about the
shock. Learning about an index adjustment after firms have made their final decision about q is of little
use.



                                                       11
        As an example of an indexed quantity policy, the U.S. phase-down of lead in gasoline

established rate limits in terms of grams of lead per gallon of gasoline, with the eventual quantity

limit equaling the fixed rate times the volume of gasoline produced. The volume of gasoline

represented an unknown, random variable to the regulator at the time of regulation and

introduced variation in the ex post quantity of lead released into the environment.

        We consider two types of policies, a general indexed quantity (GIQ) policy where no

restrictions are placed on the parameters a and r, and an ordinary indexed quantity (or just

indexed quantity, IQ) policy where we constrain a = 0. In practice, the latter is the much more

common form of regulation, where the regulated level of q is simply a multiple r of random

variable x, as in the U.S. phase-down of lead in gasoline.

        Substituting the indexed quantity rule (10) into (3), maximizing net benefits with respect

to r and a, and taking expectations yields the optimal form of the GIQ policy:

(11)                                  *
                                     qGIQ ( x ) = q* + r ** ( x − x ) ,
where

(12)                                 r ** = (σ cx σ x2 ) ( b2 + c2 ) .

Repeating these steps but maximizing only with respect to r, while constraining a = 0, yields the

optimal form of the ordinary indexed quantity (IQ) policy:

(13)                                             *
                                                qIQ ( x ) = r* x ,
where


(14)                                    r   *
                                                =
                                                  (q x ) + v r
                                                     *             2 **
                                                                   x
                                                                          ,
                                                         1 + vx2

and vx = σ x x (the coefficient of variation in x). Note that while the optimal GIQ policy delivers

the optimal fixed quantity q* in expectation (as with the other policies), the optimal IQ policy

                                                         12
does not generally yield q* in expectation, although it will be quite close in typical applications

where vx is small.

        Intuitively, using two parameters permits the GIQ policy to match both the mean and

variance of the optimal quantity adjustment. Using only one parameter (as in the IQ policy)

requires a trade-off between matching the mean and variance. This points to an underlying

question of the paper: does this trade-off on net improve welfare compared to the simpler

approach of using fixed quantities to set the mean at the optimum ignoring x? For the remainder

of this section, we focus on the GIQ policy, returning to discuss the ordinary IQ policy in the

next section.

        The parameter r** equals the coefficient of a regression of the first-best optimal

adjustment ( θ c ( b2 + c2 ) from (8)) on x. Therefore, we can interpret the GIQ policy as the best

linear predictor of the first-best adjustment, given x. If x and θ c are jointly normal, the GIQ

policy is also the minimum variance unbiased predictor (i.e., including the possibility of non-

linear predictors). This result is extended easily to the case of multiple index variables, where x

would be a vector of index variables and r** would be a vector of regression coefficients.

        Substituting (11) for q in (3) and taking expectations, we derive expected net benefits of

the GIQ policy equal to

                                                                σ c2
(15)                             E ⎡⎣ NBGIQ ⎤⎦ = b0 − c0 +                 ρcx2 ,
                                                             2(c2 + b2 )

where ρ cx = σ cx (σ xσ c ) , the correlation of x and θ c . Comparing this to the expected net benefits

under the first-best policy given in (9), we can see that the GIQ policy achieves the first best if

ρcx = 1 , that is, if the index and cost shock are correlated perfectly. In other words, if we have an




                                                    13
exogenous, observable index variable that perfectly reveals the cost shock, the information

problem that creates our second-best setting vanishes and we can implement a first-best policy.

          More generally, the gain from the GIQ policy will depend on the squared correlation,

which can be interpreted as the goodness of fit (R2) of a regression of the first-best optimal

adjustment on the index. Thus, the degree to which the index can predict the underlying cost

shock, in terms of predicted versus residual variation, determines the degree to which the

indexed policy achieves the first-best result given in (9). Meanwhile, the GIQ policy is always at

least as good as the fixed quantity policy, with the relative advantage given by

                                                         σ c2
(16)                                    Δ GIQ −Q =                 ρcx2 ≥ 0 .
                                                     2(c2 + b2 )

This expression is always non-negative and tends to zero as the correlation goes to zero. Similar

observations about the ability of the GIQ policy to always outperform fixed quantities are made

by both Jotzo and Pezzey [6] and Sue Wing et al. [19].

          Subtracting (6) from (15) yields the relative advantage of the GIQ policy over the price

policy:

                                                  σ c2     ⎛       ⎛ b2 ⎞
                                                                          2
                                                                            ⎞
(17)                             Δ GIQ − P   =             ⎜ ρcx + ⎜ ⎟ − 1⎟ .
                                                              2

                                               2(c2 + b2 ) ⎜       ⎝ c2 ⎠   ⎟
                                                           ⎝                ⎠

The GIQ policy will therefore be preferred if benefits are sufficiently steep (as with a fixed

quantity policy) or if correlation between the index and the cost shock is high. Put another way,

the preference for the GIQ policy versus prices is a competition between the relative flatness of

marginal benefits (pushing Δ GIQ − P negative) and the correlation between the index and the cost

shock (pushing Δ GIQ − P positive).




                                                         14
        Figure 1 shows the loss under the GIQ policy as thickly outlined for a case where it

adjusts for roughly half of the observed cost shock. As indicated, the GIQ policy will have an

expected loss no larger than the quantity policy, but its advantage relative to the price policy

hinges on the relative slopes and degree of correlation between the index and shock.

        While not the focus of this paper, we note that a generalized indexed price (GIP) policy

             *
of the form pGIP ( x ) = p* + u** ( x − x ) also is possible, equaling the optimal fixed price policy
plus an adjustment rate u** times the deviation in the index from its expectation. As in the GIQ

case, the optimal adjustment rate equals a regression coefficient but this time for the optimal ex

post price regressed on the index. Similar to the relative advantage of the GIQ policy over fixed

quantities, the relative advantage of the GIP policy over fixed prices equals the difference

between the first-best welfare gain and the fixed price policy, times the correlation squared,

Δ GIP − P = 1 2 (σ c2 (c2 + b2 ) ) ( b2 c2 ) ρcx2 . As the correlation goes to unity, the GIP policy achieves
                                      2




the first-best outcome; as it tends to zero, it becomes the same as the fixed price policy.

        While it is easy to imagine general indexed quantities of the form (10), or even the

general indexed prices noted above, in practice we see very few (if any)—much as we see very

few price–quantity hybrid policies along the lines of Roberts and Spence [15] or Pizer [12]. For

that reason, we now focus on the ordinary indexed quantity policies given by (13).

2.3. (Ordinary) indexed quantities

        Consider the more common case in practice where the regulated quantity is strictly equal

to a rate times the index variable, qIQ ( x ) = r x , where we have imposed the constraint that a = 0

in (10). We noted above that the optimal indexed quantity is

(13)                                            *
                                               qIQ ( x ) = r* x ,


                                                      15
where


(14)                                          r* =
                                                     (q x ) + v r
                                                       *                 2 **
                                                                         x
                                                                                .
                                                               1 + vx2

Like the optimal rate for the GIQ policy (r**), the optimal indexed quantity rate r* can be

interpreted as a regression coefficient when the first-best adjustment θ c ( c2 + b2 ) is regressed on

x—but this time with the constraint that a constant term is not included—a point we return to

below.

         Expression (14) for r* is a weighted average of two terms, q* x and r**, with the relative

weight depending on the coefficient of variation of x. As the index variation becomes large, r*

tends to the GIQ regression coefficient r** and the variance of the IQ and GIQ policies converge.

As variation in the index tends to zero, r* tends to q* x , and the mean of the IQ and GIQ (and

fixed quantity) policies converge. Because r* cannot simultaneously match both the mean and

variance of the GIQ policy (unless it happens that a = 0 even when unconstrained), (14)

represents the minimum variance solution given that there is only one rather than two flexible

parameters. An implication, nonetheless, is that r* does not generally yield the optimal fixed

quantity q* in expectation, as do the other policies, although it will be quite close in typical

applications where vx is small.

         Substituting (13) for q in (3) and taking expectations, we derive the expected net benefits

of the optimal IQ policy,

                                      b + c (q x ) 2                     2 ( vq2* vx ) + vx2 ρcx
                                              *            2
                                                                σ c2
(18)          E ⎡⎣ NBIQ ⎤⎦ = b0 − c0 − 2 2           σ   +                                       ρcx ,
                                             1 + vx2       2 ( b2 + c2 )         1 + vx2
                                                       x
                                        2

where we have defined vx = σ x x and

(19)                                       vq* = (σ c ( b2 + c2 ) ) q* ,

                                                           16
the coefficient of variation in the index and the ex post optimal quantity from (8), respectively.

       Arranged this way, the expression (18) highlights two important results. First, if there is

no correlation between the index and the cost shock, the last term vanishes and variance in the

index reduces expected net benefits based on the third term. This follows from Jensen’s

inequality applied to the fact that net benefits (costs minus benefits) are a concave function of the

regulated quantity level and that higher variance in the index implies higher variance in the

indexed quantity level and lower expected net benefits. Second, for a given index variance—that

is, holding the third term constant—correlation between the index and cost shock improves net

benefits based on the fourth term.

       If ρcx ≠ 0 , it is useful to rearrange (18) to yield,


                                                    σ c2        ⎛    1     ⎛    v     ⎞ ⎞
                                                                                       2

(20)                     E ⎡⎣ NBIQ ⎤⎦ = b0 − c0 +             ρ ⎜1 −
                                                                2
                                                                           ⎜1 −   x
                                                                                      ⎟ ⎟,
                                                  2(c2 + b2 )   ⎜ 1 + vx2 ⎝⎜ ρcx vq* ⎠⎟ ⎟
                                                                cx

                                                                ⎝                        ⎠

Note that vx   (ρ    v
                    cx q*   ) = (q x )
                                 *
                                         r ** , the ratio of the two terms being averaged to determine the

index rate in (14).

       Comparing (15) and (20), we can see that the net benefit expression for ordinary indexed

quantities is the same as for the GIQ policy, except that it contains an extra factor multiplying the

third term. Holding other parameters fixed, increases in vx improve the performance of the IQ

policy up to the point where

                                                      vx
(21)                                                         = 1,
                                                     ρcx vq*

beyond which further increases in vx worsen the performance of IQs. When this condition is met

exactly, the term in (outer) parentheses of (20) equals one and the expected welfare gain from the

IQ policy equals the expected gain from the GIQ policy.


                                                           17
          How do we interpret the condition given in (21)? One way is to recall, as noted above,

that vx   (ρ    v
               cx q*   ) = (q x )
                            *
                                    r ** , yielding the condition ( q* x ) r ** = 1 and, therefore, r* = r** from

the definition of r* in (14). That is, the rate of adjustment is the same under the IQ policy and the

GIQ policy. As noted above, both r** and r* are regression coefficients in models predicting the

first-best adjustment as a function of x, the former with a constant and the latter without.10 If the

two regression coefficients happen to be equal thanks to a lucky or thoughtful choice of the index

variable, it implies also that the freely estimated constant a in the GIQ policy equals zero, the IQ

policy yields the same response function q ( x ) as the GIQ policy, and it performs just as well.

However, as ( q* x ) r ** diverges from unity, r* diverges from r**. This divergence reflects an

increased importance of the non-zero constant term in the regression model, and the ordinary IQ

policy does increasingly worse than the more flexible GIQ policy.

          As an alternative interpretation of (20) and the resulting condition (21), we can think

about the “desired” value of vx for an IQ policy, given the values of vq* and the correlation ρ cx .

How much variation should there be in the index in order to maximize net benefits? If an index’s

correlation with the underlying cost shock is perfect, it makes sense to have the index vary by

just as much as the ex post optimal quantity (i.e., vx = vq* ). At the other extreme, when the

correlation is zero, it is preferable to have an index with no variation because the index is all

noise with respect to the cost shock and optimal quantity. Likewise, for cases between these two




10 In general, a regression coefficient with and without a constant will be the same if the coefficient of
variation of the explanatory variable equals the dependent variable’s coefficient of variation, times the
correlation between the variables—exactly the condition in (21).



                                                           18
extremes, expression (21) reveals that as the correlation declines the desired variation in the

index should also decline.

        As the level of index variation deviates from the desired level, the performance of the IQ

policy deteriorates. In particular, very noisy indexes will tend to a limiting net benefit given by

                                                                σ c2  ⎛ ⎛ 1 ⎞2 ⎞
                     lim vx →∞ E ⎡⎣ NBIQ ⎤⎦ = b0 − c0 +             ρ ⎜1 − ⎜
                                                                           2
                                                                                     ⎟ ⎟.
                                                        2(c2 + b2 )   ⎜ ⎜⎝ ρ cx vq* ⎟⎠ ⎟
                                                                           cx

                                                                      ⎝                ⎠

In contrast, indexes with too small a coefficient of variation tend toward the fixed quantity result,

a point we now confirm.

2.4. The advantage of indexed quantities relative to prices and quantities

        We can now calculate the relative advantage of indexed quantities to prices and fixed

quantities. The relative advantage of indexed quantities over fixed quantities is

                                          σ c2       ⎛    1     ⎛     v     ⎞
                                                                              2
                                                                                ⎞
(22)                       Δ IQ −Q   =             ρ ⎜1 −
                                                      2
                                                                ⎜ 1 −   x
                                                                            ⎟   ⎟.
                                       2(c2 + b2 )   ⎜ 1 + vx2 ⎝⎜ ρ cx vq* ⎠⎟ ⎟
                                                      cx

                                                     ⎝                          ⎠

In terms of the parameter vx, this expression equals zero when vx equals zero, reaches a

maximum of Δ GIQ −Q when vx = ρcx vq* and then declines to Δ GIQ −Q 1 − ( ρcx vq* )     (     −2
                                                                                                   ) as v → ∞ .
                                                                                                        x



Based on these tendencies, if ρ cx vq* ≥ 1 , this expression is non-negative for all values of vx and

indexed quantities are always at least as good as, and usually better than, fixed quantities.

        In all practical cases, however, ρcx vq* < 1 , because ρcx ≤ 1 by definition and vq* < 1 unless

the first-best optimum is highly variable relative to its mean—an unusual case that would in any

event be inappropriate for the modeling framework we have set out. With ρcx vq* < 1 , indexing is


preferred to fixed quantities so long as vx      (ρ   cx q*v   )<2     (1 − ( ρ v ) ) . We can simplify this
                                                                                cx q*
                                                                                        2




                                                           19
condition by further focusing on cases where the variation is not only less than one, but relatively

small (i.e., vq*   1 ), which leads to the approximate condition vx                  (ρ    v
                                                                                          cx q*   ) < 2 for indexed
quantities to be preferred. Such a focus already is implicit given the framing of our problem as a

local quadratic approximation around the expected optimum and likewise seems reasonable for

practical targets of regulation.

        The intuition for this latter condition is straightforward to understand. We previously

observed that for parameter values satisfying vx              (ρ    v
                                                                   cx q*   ) = 1 the indexed quantity matches the
GIQ policy. That is, the expression can be re-written as ( q* x ) r ** = 1 and the indexed quantity

rate of adjustment r* equals the GIQ rate of adjustment r** based on (14). Now imagine

parameter values whereby vx        (ρ    v
                                        cx q*   ) = (q x )
                                                     *
                                                              r ** = 2 , corresponding to the threshold condition

for preferences between indexed and fixed quantities to flip. Under the noted assumption

vq*   1 , we know vx     1 over the relevant range near vq* and therefore r * ≈ q* x based on (14).

Under this assumption, the adjustment based on this rate is approximately double what it should

be compared to the GIQ policy (i.e., r * r ** ≈ 2 ) and all the expected gains relative to the fixed

quantity policy are squandered by overshooting the new expected optimum, as shown in Figure

2. The surprisingly simple result that the point of indifference between indexing and fixed

quantities occurs at r * r ** ≈ 2 is attributable to the linear marginal form assumptions, which




                                                             20
imply that equal-sized positive and negative deviations from the optimum have equal and

opposite effects on marginal net benefits.11

        When vq* and vx are closer to one, r* is an average of q* x and r** based on (14),

reflecting the fact that we are willing to trade off higher mean error to better match variance and

reduce the mean-squared error. Therefore, vx                    (ρ    v
                                                                     cx q*   ) can actually be slightly larger than 2
before indexed quantities squander their gain over fixed quantities. Specifically, for values of


   (
2 1 − ( ρcx vq* )
                    2
                        ) or smaller, indexed quantities continue to be preferred.
        What about prices? The relative advantage of indexed quantities over prices is given by

                                                      ⎛ ⎛ ⎞2          ⎛          ⎛           ⎞ ⎞⎞
                                                                                              2
                                             σ c2         b
                                                      ⎜ ⎜ ⎟ − 1 + ρ ⎜1 −   1          v
                           Δ IQ − P   =                                          ⎜1 −        ⎟ ⎟⎟ .
                                                                   2
(23)                                                       2                            x

                                        2 ( c2 + b2 ) ⎜ ⎝ c2 ⎠        ⎜ 1 + vx2 ⎜⎝ ρ cx vq* ⎟⎠ ⎟ ⎟
                                                                   cx

                                                      ⎝               ⎝                         ⎠⎠

Based on the expression in outer parentheses, the sign of Δ IQ − P is positive or negative depending


on whether ( b2 c2 ) is greater or less than 1 − ρ cx2 ⎛⎜ 1 − (1 + vx2 ) 1 − vx         ( ( ( ρ v ))) ⎞⎟⎠ . As
                    2                                                   −1                                    2
                                                                                                     cx q*
                                                        ⎝

illustrated further below, the expression can be viewed as a parabola-like function in vx                              (ρ    v
                                                                                                                            cx q*   )
with a maximum at vx              (ρ     v
                                       cx q*   ) = 1, where it equals ( b    2   c2 ) − 1 + ρcx2 and where Δ IQ − P = Δ GIQ − P
                                                                                    2




(matching the general indexed quantity policy comparison). Thus indexed quantities are

preferred to prices when marginal benefits are relatively steep and/or when correlation with the

index is high, as was the case comparing the GIQ policy to prices.




11 Note that if marginal costs are convex, the critical value would be more than 2; conversely, if marginal
benefits are convex, the critical value would be less than 2.



                                                                 21
          As vx    (ρ       v
                        cx q*   ) deviates from 1, the relative performance of the indexed quantity policy
worsens and the expression in outer parentheses of (23) tends to

( b2
          2
                        (
       c2 ) − 1 + ρcx2 1 − (1 ρcx vq* )
                                              2
                                                  ) for values of v → ∞ (treating ρ v
                                                                    x                          cx q*   as fixed) and equals


( b2   c2 ) − 1 when vx = 0 . Whether indexed quantities prevail over prices depends on the degree
          2




of correlation between the index and cost shock and/or relative steepness of marginal benefits, as

well as on whether vx            (ρ    v
                                      cx q*   ) is sufficiently close to 1.
2.5. Summary of the relative advantages of alternate policies

          We can summarize the relative advantages of indexed quantities, prices, and fixed

quantities in a two-dimensional space. The space is defined by the squared ratio of marginal

benefit /cost slopes along the y-axis, and the expression vx                      (ρ    v
                                                                                       cx q*   ) , measuring how closely
indexed quantities match the GIQ policy, along the x-axis. Figure 3 shows three relations plotted

in this space (with dashed lines), with each relation separating the space into two regions where

one or another of two policies is preferred. Together the relations distinguish six regions where

different policy rankings among the three policy options occur. Given five parameters—the

marginal cost and benefit slopes, the coefficients of variation for the index and ex post optimal

quantity, and the correlation between the latter two—one can identify a point in Figure 3 and

determine the relative ranking of policies.

          First, above the horizontal line where ( b2 c2 ) = 1 fixed quantities are preferred to prices
                                                                              2




and below it prices are preferred to fixed quantities—this is the Weitzman (1974) result. Second,

note the vertical line at vx           (ρ      v
                                              cx q*   )=2   (1 − ( ρ v ) ) ≈ 2 based on (22). For cases (to the left of
                                                                  cx q*
                                                                          2




                                                                   22
the vertical line) where vx                (ρ    v
                                                cx q*   )<2    (1 − ( ρ v ) ) indexed quantities are preferred to fixed
                                                                      cx q*
                                                                              2




quantities; for the reverse, fixed quantities are preferred. The rough intuition for the fixed versus

indexed quantity result is that indexed quantities are an improvement unless they adjust by more

than about twice the desired amount conditional on x—with the desired amount arising where

vx   (ρ    v
          cx q*   ) = 1 (i.e., where indexed quantities replicate the GIQ policy).
           Third, the nearly parabolic function defined by (23) describes the boundary between a

preference for prices over indexed quantities (below the curve) and a preference for indexed

quantities over prices (above the curve). Here, losses relative to the first-best outcome under the

price policy depend on the distance from the x-axis—the ratio ( b2 c2 ) —with relatively steep
                                                                                                   2




marginal benefits disfavoring prices. Meanwhile, losses under indexed quantities depend on a

more complex relationship involving both the correlation between index and the cost shock ( ρcx )

and the difference between vx                    (ρ     v
                                                      cx q*   ) and its most favorable value of 1—with high values of
ρcx2 and values of vx            (ρ    v
                                      cx q*   ) close to 1favoring indexed quantities. The locus of points where
these losses are equivalent, and where prices and indexed quantities generate the same expected

net benefits, defines the parabola-like function shown in the figure, passing through the points

( 0,1) , (1,1 − ρcx2 ) , and (approximately) ( 2,1) . Inside this parabola, ( b2                       c2 ) is sufficiently large
                                                                                                          2




and vx      (ρ     v
                  cx q*   ) is sufficiently close to 1 to favor indexed quantities. Note that the effect of ρ                cx



on the policy comparison arises from both its scaling of vx                        (ρ    v
                                                                                        cx q*   ) and its movement of the
minimum of the parabola at 1 − ρcx2 . Based on (6) and particularly (18), however, we know that




                                                                       23
the unambiguous effect of higher values of ρcx (other things equal) is to tilt preferences towards

indexed quantities.

       Note that for the GIQ policy, we can look along a vertical line where vx                                     (ρ    v
                                                                                                                         cx q*   ) = 1 to
determine policy rankings. In that case, when ( b2 c2 ) < 1 − ρcx2 , we have prices preferred to
                                                                            2




general indexed quantities preferred to quantities. When 1 > ( b2 c2 ) > 1 − ρcx2 , general indexed
                                                                                                   2




quantities are preferred to prices are preferred to quantities. Finally, when ( b2 c2 ) > 1 , indexed
                                                                                                                     2




quantities are preferred to quantities are preferred to prices. In no instance is the fixed quantity

policy preferred to index policies when vx             (ρ      v
                                                            cx q*     ) = 1  as indexed quantities match the
performance of the GIQ policy, and the GIQ policy is always (weakly) preferred to fixed

quantities.

       These results differ from Quirion [14] in that he finds indexed quantities almost always

rank between quantities and prices; that is, indexed quantities are hardly ever the best or worst

policy in his model. However, we find that this is due to his specific model for marginal costs—

namely, that marginal costs are a function of emissions relative to baseline emissions, where

baseline emissions is also the index. If we linearize such a model around the optimal quantity

policy q*, mean index x , and mean-zero cost shock we have

                      MC = f (θ c , q x )

(24)                                                   ∂f                           ∂f                 ⎛ q q* ⎞ ,
                          ≈ E ⎣⎡ f (θ c , q x ) ⎦⎤ −                      θc +                         ⎜ − ⎟
                                                       ∂θ                        ∂ (q x)
                                                                                           ( 0, q* x ) ⎝
                                                            ( 0, q* x )                                  x x ⎠

                                                            c2 q*
                          ≈ c1 − ω + c2 ( q − q* ) −              (x − x)
                                                              x

where ω is the linearized cost shock and we have written the new model to preserve the

previous interpretation of the c1 and c2 parameters as the expected marginal cost and slope of


                                                               24
marginal costs with respect to emissions, respectively, as in (1).12 Setting expected marginal

costs equal to marginal benefits from (2) yields

                                                  ⎛ c q* x ⎞
                                       q = q * + ⎜⎜ 2        ⎟⎟( x − x ) ,
                                                  ⎝ b2 + c 2 ⎠

revealing that the optimal GIQ policy is r ** = (c 2 q * x ) (b2 + c 2 ) under this specification of the

index. Comparing the latter expression to (12) we see that while the effect of the index on

optimal emissions in our more general model is governed by its empirical relationship with

emissions, the Quirion approach assumes a particular relationship between optimal emissions

and the index—specifically that the index perfectly measures baseline emissions and that costs

hinge on fractional reductions.

        What does this imply? Given that r * ≈ q * x from (14) and assuming vx is small, we

have v x (ρ cx v q* ) = r * r ** = 1 + b2 c 2 . From (22) and (23), this implies that indexed quantities


are preferred to fixed quantities when b2 < c 2 1 + v x2 and indexed quantities are preferred to


prices when b2 > c 2         (    (       ))( (            ))
                         1 + ρ cx2 1 − ρ cx2 v x2 1 + v x2 . Again assuming vx is small, the preceding

two conditions reduce to b2 < c 2 (1 + ε 1 ) and b2 > c 2 (1 − ε 2 ) , respectively, for some small ε. In

other words, indexed quantities are always better than either prices or fixed quantities, but only




12 Quirion assumes a more specific functional form; however, the critical assumption is simply that the
relationship between marginal costs and emissions is in terms of emissions relative to baseline emissions,
where baseline emissions is also the index. Another difference between our model and Quirion’s is that he
incorporates marginal cost uncertainty as a multiplicative factor on the entire marginal cost function
(including the slope), rather than solely in the intercept. In (24) we have approximated any uncertainty in
the marginal cost slope as the linear term ω , finding this assumption is not the key driver of differences
in our results.



                                                      25
better than both prices and fixed quantities in some narrow space c 2 (1 − ε 2 ) < b2 < c 2 (1 + ε 1 ) ,

which is exactly the Quirion result.

        But how plausible are these restrictions? It certainly seems plausible that marginal costs

could be linear in the ratio of controlled emissions to baseline emissions—climate policy studies

often compare marginal costs from models with different baselines in this way [23]. However,

baseline emissions are not observable, and therefore are not a practical index; instead most

proposals suggest using aggregate (e.g., GDP) or sectoral (e.g., electricity) economic output as

an index. Therefore, we have to worry about imperfect correlation between the index and the

level of baseline emissions. When we turn to our climate policy application below, we find that

indexed quantities turn out to be worse than both fixed quantities and prices in some cases,

suggesting the restrictive model is not always appropriate. For other applications, we see no

reason why it is implausible that indexed quantities should be preferred to both fixed quantities

and prices, as is possible in our theoretical framework.

3. Applying the model: the case of climate policy

        In order to demonstrate how the model can be applied, as well as to highlight the

importance of our modeling assumptions vis-à-vis Quirion [14], we briefly consider a simplified

representation of national climate policy targets. Based on the results in section 2, the necessary

parameters for understanding the relative advantage of the price, quantity, and indexed quantity

policies, given by equations (7), (22), and (23), are the marginal cost and benefit slopes (c2 and

b2), the variance of the cost shock ( σ c2 ), the coefficients of variation of the index and ex post

optimal quantity (vx and vq*), and the correlation of the cost shocks and the index ( ρcx ).

        Given evidence in the literature that marginal benefits for greenhouse-gas mitigation are

much flatter than marginal costs [9], we make the simplifying assumption that the slope of


                                                     26
marginal benefits of climate change mitigation is approximately zero over the relevant range of

emissions reduction. This implies that prices dominate quantities for climate policy, whether or

not the quantities are indexed. This does not render the question of indexed quantities for climate

policy uninteresting, as most countries are practically more interested in quantity policies of

some sort, compared to the relevant price policy (a carbon tax). Coupled with an assumption

about the nature of the index, this dramatically simplifies the analysis.

        In particular, we also assume that the index (output or a similar measure) is being used to

predict baseline emissions, which horizontally shifts the marginal cost schedule and is otherwise

unrelated to remaining cost shocks.13 In other words,

                                                   θ c = c2θ q + υ

in (1) where θ q is the deviation in baseline emissions, υ is the remaining unexplained cost

shock, and they are uncorrelated. Expressing deviations in baseline emissions ( θ q ) as a

prediction based on the index yields

                          θ c = c 2 β q x ( x − x ) + υ ′ = c 2σ q x (σ q σ x )( x − x ) + υ ′ ,

where β q x is the regression coefficient of baseline emissions on the index (then expanded into its

definition in terms of correlations and variances) and υ ′ = υ + c 2θ q − c 2 β q x ( x − x ) now includes

the residual error from the prediction of θ q . With the assumption that x and υ are uncorrelated,




13 In their focus on the level of abatement (baseline emission minus the target), Sue Wing et al. [19]
implicitly make this assumption. A more thorough application would need to consider a potentially more
flexible relationship between the index and marginal costs (e.g., using data from cost modeling exercises),
but this is unnecessary to provide a general sense of the results.



                                                           27
we have ρ cx = c 2 ρ q x (σ q σ x )(σ x σ c ) . From (19) we have vq* = σ c (c2 q* ) (making use of the

assumption that b2 = 0). This yields


                                                  vx      ⎛ v         ⎞ ⎛ q* ⎞
(25)                                                    =⎜ x          ⎟⎟ ⎜ ⎟ .
                                                 ρcx vq* ⎜⎝ ρ qx vq    ⎠⎝ q ⎠

Recalling the approximate condition that indexed quantities are preferred to fixed quantities if

vx   (ρ    v
          cx q*   ) < 2 , expression (25) indicates that under these simplifying assumptions this
preference depends only on the coefficients of variation in baseline emissions and the index,

their correlation, and the ratio of expected optimal to baseline emissions.14

           Using country-level data on historic variation in carbon dioxide emissions and GDP (as

the index), we estimate the following ranges for these variables across 19 high-emitting

countries: 0.02 < vq < 0.07 , 0.01 < vx < 0.07 , and 0.01 < ρ qx < 0.74 (for details see [10]). As

shown in Table 1, combining these values for each country yields estimates of vx                    (ρ    v
                                                                                                         qx q   )
ranging from 0.9 to 4.0. Depending on the stringency of emissions reduction ( q* q ), these

values clearly indicate that for some countries indexed quantities will have higher expected net

benefits while for other countries fixed quantities clearly dominate. For example, for a country

with vx        (ρ    v
                    qx q   ) = 4 , indexed quantities will rank higher for emission reductions up to 50
percent, while for a country with vx            (ρ    v
                                                     qx q   ) < 2 , fixed quantities will dominate even for very



14 Pizer [13] compared the coefficient of variation in intensity and emissions to provide a crude argument
in favor of targets based on one or the other. Such a comparison is equivalent to the condition in (25)
only if emissions and output have roughly the same coefficient of variation.



                                                                28
small rates of control. These results are consistent with Sue Wing et al. [19], but contrast with

Quirion’s results for the reasons described above.

4. Conclusion

       The relevance and importance of instrument choice for policy design never has been

greater, particularly in the realm of environmental and energy policy. With the increasing

acceptance in policy circles of market-based instruments, especially tradable permits, attention

has turned to the more subtle design elements of these instruments and how they might be

refined. In addition, interest has risen in the properties of more traditional instruments, such as

performance standards, when flexibility is introduced through trading (e.g., renewable fuel

standards and potential CAFE reforms in the United States). This interest is particularly intense

in the realm of climate change, both in relation to the form that national commitments might take

within an international framework and in the design of domestic implementing policies.

       Our paper contributes to this debate by clarifying analytically how uncertainty in the

costs of meeting particular policy targets might or might not be ameliorated by indexing fixed

quantity policies to variables such as economic output. We find that the advantage of such

indexing depends on a tradeoff between the introduction of an additional source of uncertainty—

which lowers expected net benefits—and the benefit-raising effect of adjusting the policy target

ex post thanks to correlation of the index with the object of regulation. For typical cases where

uncertainty is relatively small (variation in the ex post optimum of less than about 10 percent of

its mean), the preference for indexed over fixed quantities reduces to a question of whether the

ratio of coefficients of variation of the index and the ex post optimal quantity, divided by their

correlation, is less than approximately two. This fundamentally is an empirical question for

ordinary indexed quantity policies, where the quantity is strictly proportional to the index. A



                                                 29
general indexed quantity policy, however, allows separate setting of the mean quantity level and

rate of adjustment to the index, and such a policy will always dominate a fixed quantity policy

from the perspective of maximizing expected net benefits. Comparisons to a price policy are

more complex and involve the ratio of the slopes of marginal benefits and costs.

        These conclusions are subject to the caveat that we have chosen a deliberately simple

model to focus on what we believe to be one of the most important elements of the instrument

choice question, namely cost uncertainty. We have abstracted from other relevant concerns,

including the potential for an indexed quantity policy to create undesirable incentives if firms

perceive that they can gain additional emissions rights by increasing their output.15 While we do

not think this is a concern for national-level policies, it could be for indexed policies at the

sectoral or product level. We also have not addressed the fact that quantities indexed to output,

even if they reduce overall expected costs, may lead to worse outcomes when output is low and

better outcomes when output is high. This type of pro-cyclical behavior may be undesirable from

a macroeconomic perspective, although we suspect this concern is not large.16

        Applying these conceptual insights and analytic formulae to the case of climate change

policy across the biggest international emitters of CO2, we find (consistent with previous

literature) that while prices (i.e., carbon taxes) dominate both fixed and indexed quantities from

an efficiency perspective, indexing quantities to economic output could yield higher expected net

benefits than fixed quantity policies for some but not all countries. Applying this framework to




15 This is the typical form of a performance standard, such as the U.S. lead phase-down in gasoline.
Alternatively, emissions rights could be increased for all firms based on aggregate output, diluting the
effect. See Fischer [4] for a discussion of these issues.
16 This point is discussed in Ellerman and Sue Wing [3].




                                                    30
more in-depth empirical analyses of specific environmental, resource, and other policies would

be an interesting focus of further research.




                                               31
                        marginal cost schedule
                             (expected)
p                                         marginal cost schedule
                                                (realized)



p*


                                                                                  marginal benefit
                                                ex post optimum


                                                                                     schedule
                         quantity policy




                                                                   price policy




                                           q*                     q * + (θ c c2 )      q
         q * + r ** ( x − x )                            q * + (θ c ( c2 + b2 ) )
         general indexed
          quanity policy
Figure 1. Welfare losses under quantity, price, and general indexed quantity policies
(quantity loss is hatched; price loss is shaded; indexed quantity loss thickly outlined)




                                                        32
                              marginal cost schedule
                                   (expected)
    p                                                                  marginal cost schedule
                                                                   (revised expectation knowing x)



    p*
                                                                        marginal benefit
                                                                           schedule




                                                               indexed quantity
                              quantity policy




                                                                  with r* = 2r**



                                                q*        r*x                      q


      Figure 2. Point of indifference between quantity and (ordinary) indexed quantity policies
                      (quantity loss is hatched; indexed quantity loss is shaded)

Note: The figure shows how, under an assumption of linear marginal costs, the gains from ordinary indexing relative
to fixed quantities is exactly offset by the losses at the point where the ordinary indexed quantity adjusts by twice
the optimal amount.




                                                         33
squared ratio of marginal benefit / cost slopes


                                                                                                                   quantities >
                                                                                                                     indexed
                                                                                                                   quantities >
                                                      2                                                               prices
                                                               indexed quantities > quantities > prices


                                                                                                                                  quantities > prices >
                                                                                                                                   indexed quantities


                                                      1
                                                                    indexed quantities > prices >
                                                                             quantities
                                                                                                                         prices > quantities >
                                                                                                                          indexed quantities
                                                  1− ρ 2
                                                               prices > indexed quantities > quantities
                                                      0
                                                           0                       1      vx    (ρ     v
                                                                                                     cx q *   )2                           3

                                                                 ratio of coefficients of variation in index and ex post
                                                                      optimal quantity, divided by their correlation


                                                   Figure 3. Regions of relative advantage for indexed quantities, prices, and quantities




                                                                                                34
                              Table 1. Application to climate change policy

                                                                       vx
                                  Country
                                                                     ρ qx vq

                                  Australia                           3.1
                                  Brazil                              1.0
                                  Canada                              1.2
                                  China                               1.4
                                  France                              3.9
                                  India                               2.6
                                  Indonesia                           2.5
                                  Iran                                2.5
                                  Italy                               1.3
                                  Japan                               4.0
                                  Korea (South)                       0.9
                                  Mexico                              1.3
                                  Netherlands                         1.3
                                  Poland                              2.4
                                  Saudi Arabia                        2.4
                                  South Africa                        3.0
                                  Spain                               1.3
                                  United Kingdom                      2.7
                                  United States                       1.1
                                  U.S. Electricity                    0.9
                                  World                               1.4

Note: Under the simplifying assumptions described in section 3 of the text, indexed quantities are preferred to fixed
quantities for CO2 mitigation if vx   ( ρ qx vq ) multiplied by the ratio of optimal to baseline emissions ( q* q ) is
approximately less than 2.




                                                           35
References
[1]    K.K. Aase, A pricing model for quantity contracts. Journal of Risk and Insurance 71
       (2004) 617-642.
[2]    C. Carlson, D. Burtraw, M. Cropper, and K.L. Palmer, SO2 Control by Electric Utilities:
       What are the Gains from Trade. Journal of Political Economy 108 (2000) 1292-1326.
[3]    A.D. Ellerman, and I.S. Wing, Absolute versus Intensity-Based Emission Caps. Climate
       Policy 3 (2003) S7-S20.
[4]    C. Fischer, Combining rate-based and cap-and-trade emissions policies. Climate Policy
       (2003) S89-S109.
[5]    G.E. Helfand, Standards versus Standards: The Effects of Different Pollution
       Restrictions. American Economic Review 81 (1991) 622-634.
[6]    F. Jotzo, and J.C.V. Pezzey, Optimal intensity targets for greenhouse gas emissions
       trading under uncertainty. Environmental and Resource Economics 38 (2007) 259-284.
[7]    S. Kerr, and R.G. Newell, Policy-Induced Technology Adoption: Evidence from the U.S.
       Lead Phasedown. Journal of Industrial Economics 51 (2003) 317-343.
[8]    C.-L. Li, and P. Kouvelis, Flexible and risk-sharing supply contracts under price
       uncertainty. Management Science 45 (1999) 1378-1398.
[9]    R.G. Newell, and W.A. Pizer, Regulating Stock Externalities Under Uncertainty. Journal
       of Environmental Economics and Management 45 (2003) 416-432.
[10]   R.G. Newell, and W.A. Pizer, Indexed regulation, RFF Discussion Paper 06-32,
       Washington, DC, 2006.
[11]   A.L. Nichols, Lead in Gasoline. in: R.D. Morgenstern, (Ed.), Economic Analyses at EPA:
       Assessing Regulatory Impact, Resources for the Future, Washington, DC, 1997, pp. 49-
       86.
[12]   W.A. Pizer, Combining price and quantity controls to mitigate global climate change.
       Journal of Public Economics 85 (2002) 409-434.
[13]   W.A. Pizer, The case for intensity targets. Climate Policy 5 (2005) 455-462.
[14]   P. Quirion, Does uncertainty justify intensity emission caps. Resource and Energy
       Economics 27 (2005) 343-353.
[15]   M.J. Roberts, and M. Spence, Effluent Charges and Licenses Under Uncertainty. Journal
       of Public Economics 5 (1976) 193-208.
[16]   C.S. Russell, W. Harrington, and W.J. Vaughan, Enforcing Pollution Control Laws,
       Resources for the Future, Washington, DC, 1986.
[17]   R. Stavins, What Can We Learn from the Grand Policy Experiment? Positive and
       Normative Lessons from SO2 Allowance Trading. Journal of Economic Perspectives 12
       (1998) 69-88.
[18]   R.N. Stavins, Correlated Uncertainty and Policy Instrument Choice. Journal of
       Environmental Economics and Management 30 (1996) 218-232.


                                               36
[19]   I. Sue Wing, A.D. Ellerman, and J. Song, Absolute vs. Intensity Limits for CO2 Emission
       Control: Performance under Uncertainty. in: H. Tulkens, and R. Guesnerie, (Eds.), The
       Design of Climate Policy, MIT Press, Cambridge, in press.
[20]   L.E.O. Svensson, What is wrong with Taylor rules? Using judgement in monetary policy
       through targeting rules. Journal of Economic Literature XLI (2003) 426-477.
[21]   M.L. Weitzman, Prices vs. Quantities. Review of Economic Studies 41 (1974) 477-491.
[22]   M.L. Weitzman, Optimal Rewards for Economic Regulation. American Economic
       Review 68 (1978) 683-691.
[23]   J.P. Weyant, and J. Hill, The Costs of the Kyoto Protocol: A Multi-Model Evaluation,
       Introduction and Overview. Energy Journal Special Issue (1999).
[24]   G.W. Yohe, Towards a General Comparison of Price Controls and Quantity Controls
       under Uncertainty. The Review of Economic Studies 45 (1978) 229-38.




                                              37
