                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       INSTITUTIONS AND BEHAVIOR:
            EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE ON THE EFFECTS OF DEMOCRACY

                                          Pedro Dal Bó
                                          Andrew Foster
                                         Louis Putterman

                                       Working Paper 13999
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w13999


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2008




We thank Anna Aizer, Sandeep Baliga, Gary Charness, Ernesto Dal Bó, Guillaume Fréchette, Sophocles
Mavroeidis and seminar audiences at Brown University, NYU, UC Berkeley and FSU for very useful
comments. We also thank CASSEL (UCLA) and SSEL (Caltech) for the Multistage software, Omar
Ahmed for adapting it for this experiment and James Campbell, Bruno García and Jonathan Rodean
for experimental and research assistance. This work was supported by grant number 0720753 from
the National Science Foundation. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Pedro Dal Bó, Andrew Foster, and Louis Putterman. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Institutions and Behavior: Experimental Evidence on the Effects of Democracy
Pedro Dal Bó, Andrew Foster, and Louis Putterman
NBER Working Paper No. 13999
May 2008
JEL No. C10,C9,D7,O10

                                             ABSTRACT

A novel experiment is used to show that the effect of a policy on the level of cooperation is greater
when it is chosen democratically by the subjects than when it is exogenously imposed. In contrast
to the previous literature, our experimental design allows us to control for selection effects (e.g. those
who choose the policy may be affected differently by it). Our finding implies that democratic institutions
may affect behavior directly in addition to having effects through the choice of policies. Our findings
have implications for the generalizability of the results of randomized policy interventions.


Pedro Dal Bó                                        Louis Putterman
Department of Economics                             Department of Economics
Brown University                                    Brown University
64 Waterman Street                                  64 Waterman Street
Providence, RI 02912                                Providence, RI 02912
and NBER                                            Louis_Putterman@brown.edu
pdalbo@brown.edu

Andrew Foster
Economics Department
Brown University
64 Waterman St.
Providence RI 02912
Andrew_Foster@brown.edu
1. Introduction

         The study of institutions is key to our understanding of the determinants of

economic performance (see North 1981, La Porta et al. 1998, Acemoglu, Johnson and

Robinson 2001, and Easterly and Levine 2003 among others). In this paper we study how

democratic institutions affect behavior. The central idea is that in addition to affecting the

choice of policies, democratic institutions may affect behavior directly. We argue and

provide experimental evidence that the same policy may have different effects depending

on whether it was democratically selected or not, even after controlling for differences in

the types of individuals who choose such a policy.

         While the idea that democracy may influence the effect of policies can be traced

to Tocqueville (1838),1 our contribution consists of identifying this effect of democracy.

We present results from a series of experiments designed to determine whether a policy

that was exogenously imposed has the same effect as the same policy when it is

democratically (that is, endogenously) chosen. In these experiments, subjects participate

in several prisoners’ dilemma games and may choose, by simple majority, to establish a

policy that could encourage cooperation. This policy consists of a fine on unilateral

defection, which transforms the game into a coordination game in which both mutual

defection and mutual cooperation are Nash equilibria. In some cases the experimental

software randomly overrides the votes of the subjects and randomly imposes, or not, the

policy. Before proceeding to play again with either the original or the modified payoffs,

the subjects are informed of whether payoffs are modified and whether it was decided by

1
  “It is not always feasible to consult the whole people, either directly or indirectly, in the formation of the
law; but it cannot be denied that, when such a measure is possible, the authority of the law is much
augmented. This popular origin, which impairs the excellence and wisdom of legislation, contributes
prodigiously to increase its power.” Tocqueville (1838), pag. 228. On other theories stating that political
participation is intrinsically beneficial see Pateman (1970), Thompson (1970), and Finkel (1985).


                                                        2
their vote or by the computer. This setup allows us to compare the behavior of

individuals and groups that voted in the same way and were presented with the same

game (coordination versus prisoner’s dilemma) but differed by whether the game was

chosen endogenously (democratically chosen by the subjects) or exogenously (randomly

chosen by the computer). By conditioning on the subjects’ vote, we control for the fact

that those that voted for the policy may differ in important ways from those who did not

(for example, subjects that choose the policy may be more likely to value cooperative

behavior and cooperate after the policy is implemented). As we condition on the subjects’

vote, any remaining effect associated with endogenous choice of the policy cannot be due

to differences between those that voted for the policy and those that did not. That is, the

difference cannot be attributed to selection.

       Even after controlling for selection, the results show that the effect of the policy

(i.e., the fine) on the percentage of cooperative actions is significantly greater when it is

democratically chosen by the subjects (endogenous) than when it is imposed by the

computer (exogenous). We find that the effect of the fine on cooperation is 40% larger if

it is imposed democratically. Our results suggest that the treatment effect of a policy (that

is, its causal impact on behavior) depends on whether it is democratically chosen or not.

This implies that the same policy may have different effects depending on whether it was

democratically selected or autocratically imposed, even controlling for selection.

       The observed difference in experimental outcomes between exogenous and

endogenous policies is consistent with evidence from field settings. Bardhan (2000) finds

that farmers are less likely to violate irrigation rules when they themselves have crafted

those rules. Frey (1998) finds that Swiss cantons with greater democratic participation



                                                3
face lower tax evasion. A literature on worker participation in workplace decisions finds

that such participation positively affects productivity provided that some of the material

gains also accrue to the workers (see Levine and Tyson 1990, and Bonin, Jones and

Putterman 1993). While these findings from the field suggest that democratic institutions

may affect cooperative behavior, they can also be explained by unobservable

characteristics of the actors that affect both the degree of democratic decision making and

individual behavior. In contrast, our experimental design allows us to control for potential

unobservable characteristics that could be related to democratic decision making by

randomizing the existence of democratic institutions. An emergent literature in

development economics on the effects of local democracy (e.g., Foster and Rosenzweig

2005, and Besley, Pande and Rao 2005) has also paid attention to plausibly exogenous

sources of variation in democracy but has largely ignored the possible direct effects of

democratic institutions.2

         There are extensive literatures considering the role of rewards and punishments in

games3 and exploring the effect of voting on the availability of rewards and punishments

in voluntary contribution games.4 This second literature studies the total effect of

democratically allowing for rewards and punishments. For example, Sutter, Haigner and

Kocher (2005) find that rewards and punishments are more effective when they are

allowed democratically, and call this a “democratic participation rights premium.”

2
  Our results are also related to the social psychology literature on procedural justice (see for example
Thibaut and Walker 1975 and Lind and Tyler 1988). This literature has shown that subjects’ evaluation of a
given outcome may depend on the fairness of the procedures that have led to that outcome. An important
element studied in this literature is whether subjects have an opportunity to express their opinions during
the procedure (on “voice” see Folger 1977 and van den Bos 1999). For the related idea in economics of
procedural utility see Frey, Benz and Stutzer (2004). For a discussion of the effects of institutions on
behavior that combines economics and psychology see Bohnet (2006).
3
  See e.g. Fehr and Gächter (2000), Falkinger et al. (2000), and Andreoni, Harbaugh and Vesterlund (2003).
4
  See e.g., Botelho, et al. (2005), Ertan, Page and Putterman (2005), and Sutter, Haigner and Kocher (2005).


                                                     4
However, their results could be due to unobservable characteristics affecting both how

groups vote and their response to rewards and punishments.

          In contrast, our experimental design allows us to control for potential

unobservable characteristics by comparing groups and individuals that were both

exogenously formed and voted in the same way. This allows us to separate the total effect

of an endogenous policy into a selection effect (due to differences across groups that vote

differently) and a treatment effect (the real causal effect) and to study how the treatment

effect varies depending on whether the policy was democratically chosen or exogenously

imposed. We find that the total effect of an endogenous change of payoffs can be

decomposed into 8% selection effect and 92% endogenous treatment effect. In addition,

we find that the endogenous treatment effect is 40% greater than the exogenous treatment

effect.

          More generally, there are a number of papers comparing behavior in a given game

when it was exogenously given and when it was chosen by the subjects.5 While

differences in behavior are sometimes considered evidence of selection, in other cases

they are considered evidence that endogeneity affects behavior. Our main methodological

contribution is to separate the total effect of endogeneity into a selection effect and an

endogeneity premium.

          Finally, there is also an extensive experimental literature on the issue of

cooperation and its determinants (see Kagel and Roth 1995 for a survey of the literature),

and a growing experimental literature that studies the determinants of voting turnout and



5
 See for example Van Huyck, Battalio and Beil (1993), Bohnet and Kübler (2005), Potters, Sefton and
Vesterlund (2005), Charness, Fréchette and Qin (2006) and Lazear, Malmendier and Weber (2006).


                                                   5
the effects of different voting rules on information aggregation and efficiency.6 Palfrey

(2005) provides a useful survey of the experimental literature on political economy in

general.

        Our findings have two main implications. The first is that democratic institutions

may affect not only the types of policies adopted but also the impact of a given policy, so

that a policy democratically selected will not have the same effect when imposed

undemocratically. The second implication relates to the study of treatment effects more

generally. Much applied work in economics seeks to identify the treatment effect of

policies, institutions, or products. Since people usually choose their policies, institutions

and products, it is necessary to account for selection into treatment to measure the “true”

treatment effect (i.e. one that does not reflect selection). Based on such estimates, policy

recommendations may be made to assign the treatment without choice (that is,

exogenously). Our experimental results suggest that such policy recommendations may

be unwarranted given that the treatment effect may differ based on whether it is

exogenously or endogenously determined, even after controlling for selection.




2. Experimental Design

        In each experimental session, subjects participate anonymously through

computers.7 The subjects are randomly divided into groups of four for the entire session.

Groups consist of four subjects so as to maximize the probability of a tie in the voting

stage that is described below. Each session consist of two parts. In part 1, subjects play

6
  See Schram and Sonnemans (1996), Morton and Williams (1999), Hung and Plott (2001), Goeree and
Holt (2005), Großer and Schram (2006), Casella, Gelman and Palfrey (2006), Levine and Palfrey (2007),
and Battaglini, Morton and Palfrey (2006) among others.
7
  We adapted the Multistage software by SSEL-Caltech/CASSEL-UCLA.


                                                   6
10 rounds of the prisoner’s dilemma game in Table 1 (Initial Payoffs).8 The exchange

rate is 50 points for one dollar. After each round each subject is randomly matched with

another subject in his or her group for the next round. In part 2 of the experiment the

subjects play 10 rounds as in part 1 but the payoffs can be modified at the beginning of

this part to the payoffs in Table 1 (Modified Payoffs). The modification of payoffs

consists of imposing a tax or fine on unilateral defection. While under the initial payoffs

the unique Nash equilibrium is mutual defection, under the modified payoffs both mutual

defection and mutual cooperation are Nash equilibria.




                            Table 1: Stage Game Payoffs (in points)

                          Initial Payoffs                      Modified Payoffs

                               Other’s action                            Other’s action

                  Own                C         D            Own                C        D
                 action       C      50       10            action      C      50       10

                              D      60       40                        D      48       40



           We chose a prisoners’ dilemma game as the initial game as the tension between

personal incentives and efficiency is not only an important feature of human interaction

but also a feature that groups attempt to solve by imposing different kinds of policies. We

chose a prisoners’ dilemma game over other kind of social dilemma games (i.e. public

good games) as the former is simpler which allows a simple explanation of the policy.

The modified game was chosen to be a coordination game as it is intuitive to think that



8
    For neutrality, the actions C and D are denoted as 1 and 2 in the experimental sessions.


                                                        7
the incentive to follow policies and regulations may depend on the behavior of others and

may result in a multiplicity of equilibria.

         Whether the payoffs are modified in the policy selection stage is determined as

follows. First, subjects vote on whether to modify payoffs. Second, the computer

randomly chooses whether to consider the votes in each group. If the computer considers

the votes, then the majority wins and in case of a tie the computer breaks the tie. If the

computer does not consider the votes in a group, it randomly chooses whether to modify

payoffs or not in that group. The voting stage is summarized in Figure 1. The subjects’

computer screens inform them whether the computer randomly chose to consider the

votes and whether payoffs were modified. The subjects do not learn the exact distribution

of votes, including whether the computer needed to break a tie.9 We denote the four

possible outcomes of the voting stage as EndoMod, EndoNot, ExoMod and ExoNot,

where Endo denotes that the votes of the group were considered, Exo denotes that the

computer overrode the group and Mod denotes that payoffs were modified versus Not.

After the voting stage, the subjects play 10 more rounds with other subjects in their

group, with the payoff matrix depending on the results from the policy selection stage.

         After the ten rounds in part 2, the subjects answer a series of questions that allow

us to assess the subjects’ understanding of the experimental design and their reasoning in

the voting stage and after. In addition we ask them for personal characteristics such as:




9
  Since subjects know whether the group voted for modification or not when the votes are considered while
that is not the case when votes are not considered, some of the effect of democracy that we will be
measuring may well stem from the institution’s informational effect. In our view, this is one of the effects
of voting institutions in many settings, not something extraneous to democracy that we “confound” with it.
Nevertheless, as will be discussed in the conclusion, it is also of interest to distinguish informational from
other effects of democracy, as we plan to do in future research.


                                                      8
academic major, class, math and verbal SAT scores,10 political philosophy. These

questions allow us to study how personal characteristics affect the voting decisions and

the impact of the policy. Finally, the subjects participate in a “beauty contest” game in

order to gauge their strategic sophistication.11

        We present next a short theoretical analysis of the game subjects play in this

experiment. First, note that under the initial payoffs (prisoner’s dilemma game) there is a

unique Nash equilibrium in the stage game which is inefficient: both players play D.

Second, under the modified payoffs (coordination game) there are two Nash equilibria in

pure strategies, an efficient and an inefficient one: CC and DD, respectively. Since in the

experiment there are a finite number of repetitions and in addition subjects are randomly

re-matched after each round we expect that predictions from the one-shot games are valid

also for the finite repetition (see Duffy and Ochs 2003).

        How should subjects vote? While modified payoffs allow subjects to cooperate in

equilibrium, mutual defection remains an equilibrium outcome. As such, if subjects

expect to coordinate in mutual defection under modified payoffs, they have no incentive

to vote for modification. Sub-game perfection does not provide a prediction regarding

vote behavior. The optimal vote depends on subjects’ expectation of others’ behavior

under the modified payoffs game. Subjects that expect to achieve mutual cooperation

under modified payoffs should vote for modification. In contrast, subjects that expect no




10
   We believe that the self reported SAT scores can be trusted since Palacios Huerta (2003) found no
misreporting of SAT scores among Brown undergraduates in a previous experiment.
11
   Each subject chose a number between zero and one hundred and the subject with the closest number to
two thirds of the average of all numbers in the group earns 100 points. The unique Nash equilibrium of this
game is to choose zero. See Bosch-Domènech, et al. (2002) and references therein for a detailed description
of beauty contest games and the role of levels of strategic reasoning to explain behavior in these games.


                                                    9
change in behavior under modified payoffs have little incentive to vote for

modification.12

         Will subjects coordinate on the efficient outcome (CC) under modified payoffs?

Under the modified payoffs the efficient outcome is an equilibrium outcome. However,

previous experimental literature has shown the difficulty of coordinating on the efficient

equilibrium in coordination games.13 But if prior behavior affects behavior in the current

game, having the subjects choose to modify payoffs may affect the equilibrium selection

process in the resulting coordination game. 14 Knowing that the coordination game was

chosen by the group may increase the probability that the efficient equilibrium becomes

focal.




3. Strategies to identify the effect of democracy

         To estimate the impact of democracy we cannot simply compare cooperation rates

across the four vote stage results (EndoMod, ExoMod, etc.). This is the case even when

both the formation of groups and consideration of the votes were random. The reason is

that while groups were randomly formed they are not necessarily identical. Groups with

12
   Off equilibrium reasoning can justify voting for modification even for a defector. The reason is that if
modification results in an increase in cooperation, a defector may obtain a higher profit. As such, voting for
modification may be part of a “bait” strategy.
13
   For example Cooper et al. (1990) and Van Huyck et al. (1990), among others, have shown that in
experimental coordination games subject may coordinate on the “safer” equilibrium over the efficient one.
In our experiment, cooperation is optimal for a subject only if the partner cooperates with a probability
higher than 30/32. Mutual cooperation is not very robust to uncertainty over others’ behavior. For this
reason, we may observe that subjects coordinate on mutual defection under modified payoffs.
14
   See the literature on forward induction (Kohlberg and Mertens 1986, and van Damme 1989) and related
experimental literature (Cooper et al. 1992, Van Huyck, Battalio and Beil 1993, and Cachon and Camerer
1996). Note however that forward induction, as defined by van Damme (1989), has no bite in the game we
analyze. Intuitively, the modification of payoffs does not affect the payoff from mutual defection (the
unique equilibrium outcome under the initial payoffs) and, hence, voting for modification is not
inconsistent with planning to defect. Moreover, it can be shown that the elimination of weakly dominated
strategies does not eliminate the equilibrium in which subjects vote for modified payoffs and then defect
even if payoffs are modified.


                                                     10
endogenous modification may be different from groups with exogenous modification:

subjects in the former may have preferences for cooperative behavior that affect both

cooperation and the decision to modify payoffs. In the presence of this type of selection,

comparisons of cooperation levels between subjects in groups with endogenous and

exogenous modifications can be misleading.

        To make this point explicit, and develop an appropriate identification strategy, we

develop a simple formal framework. In particular, we consider a simplified game in

which individuals are matched in groups, they vote, they learn the mechanism used to

select payoffs (votes or randomly by the computer), they learn the payoffs (initial or

modified), and then they play the stage game.15 An individual i’s action in the stage game

depends on the information available to him at that time. This information includes the

mechanism that selected payoffs M∈ {Endo, Exo} (votes or randomly by the computer),

the payoffs chosen P∈ {Mod , Not } (modified and non-modified), his vote vi∈ {Y , N } , and

his type μi. Thus we may write the probability that subject i cooperates as

(1)      C i (M , P, vi , μ i ) .

The type μi includes any personal characteristic that is unobserved to the researcher but

that may be correlated with both the subject’s probability of cooperation and his or her

voting decisions. For example, the subject may have preferences for cooperative behavior

that affect both cooperation and the decision to modify payoffs.16 In addition, subjects

may differ in their expectations of how often a modification of payoffs would result in



15
   In particular we abstract from the fact that players may have learned something about people in their
group from the pre-vote rounds. This creates a potential inference problem, which we discuss below.
16
   On social preferences see Charness and Rabin (2002), Fehr and Fischbacher (2002), and Camerer and
Fehr (2004) among others.


                                                    11
mutual cooperation and hence may have different propensities to vote for modification

and to cooperate after a modification.

          In this framework, an individual’s vote can only depend on his type, as he is

randomly matched with the others and does not know either their type or how they will

vote

(2)       vi = v( μi ) .

Further, (2) may be substituted into (1) to give, abusing notation,

(3)       C i (M , P, μ i ) .

To test for differences in outcomes between endogenous and exogenous modifications,

we test whether, given the payoff structure P (Mod or Not), actions differ by mechanism

M (Endo versus Exo). Consider, then the expected difference in behavior by selection

mechanism given a payoff structure P:

      E (C i Endo, P ) − E (C i Exo, P ) =

      ∫ [C (Endo, P, μ ) f (μ         Endo, P ) − C i (Exo, P, μ i ) f (μ i Exo, P )]dμ i
(4)
          i                i      i



where f (μ i M , P ) is the conditional density of the type given the selection mechanism

and the payoff matrix. Note further that P is informative about μ when payoffs are

determined by voting but not when payoffs are determined by the computer and thus

(5)           f (μ i ) = f (μ i Exo, P ) ≠ f (μ i Endo, P ) .

Thus the difference (4) may be non-zero even if there are no differences in behavior by

mechanism: C i (Exo, P, μ i ) = C i (Endo, P, μ i ) .




                                                           12
             Similarly, to estimate differences that arise between exogenous and endogenous

modification (i.e. whether there exists an endogeneity premium) we cannot simply

compare cooperation averages:

[E (C   i   Endo, Mod ) − E (C i Endo, Not )] − [E (C i Exo, Mod ) − E (C i Exo, Not )] .

             We employ two strategies to solve this identification problem.

             First, we use individual-level data and condition on both the payoff structure P

and the individual vote vi. This approach works because

 f (μ i Endo, P, vi ) = f (μ i Exo, P, vi ) = f (μ i P, vi ) : once one knows how somebody votes,

the payoffs are no longer informative about type under either computer or voter regimes.

Thus,

             E (C i Endo, P, vi ) − E (C i Exo, P, vi ) =
(6)
             ∫ [C (Endo, P, v , μ ) − C (Exo, P, v , μ )] f (μ
                 i             i   i      i           i     i    i   P, vi )dμ i

can only be non-zero if, for some positive measure set of types, behavior differs by

mechanism (Endo versus Exo).17 Our experimental design yields the data necessary to

make this comparison.

             Second, we use group-level data and groups for which the vote is tied. Note that

for these groups all four voting stage outcomes are possible. Moreover, as these groups

voted in the same fashion, they should be similar in their personal characteristics. Their

outcomes in the voting stage differed only due to random luck. Thus, the densities in (5)


17
   The key condition here is that the votes of the other players are not correlated with a player’s type or with
his vote. This is true given random assignment as long as individuals have no information about each other
at the time of voting—something ruled out in our simplified framework but possible in the actual
experiment because of the pre-vote rounds played by participants. We have shown using the same analytic
methods that this problem can be addressed by conditioning on individual histories of play in the pre-vote
rounds. Our analysis shows that, first, votes are statistically independent across members of each group
and, second, our estimates are not affected by controlling for individual histories.


                                                          13
are equal: f (μ i Exo, P ) = f (μ i Endo, P ) . As a result we can compare

E (C i Endo, P ) − E (C i Exo, P ) for these groups to uncover the effect of democracy.

However, identifying the effects of democracy by focusing on these groups is done at a

considerable loss of data as we can only use the small subset of the observations with a

tied vote for this analysis.




4. Experimental Results

        We conducted 18 experimental sessions from May to November 2006 in a

computer lab at Brown University. A total of 276 subjects participated in the experiment,

with an average of 15 subjects per session. The subjects were Brown University

undergraduates recruited through advertisement in university web pages and signs posted

on campus. Table 2 displays the characteristics of subjects. A high number of subjects

correctly answered the questions regarding the experiment. For example, more than 90%

of the subjects remembered correctly the result from the voting stage. The subjects earned

an average of $24.57, with a maximum of $29.40 and a minimum of $17.60. Given that

sessions lasted on average little more than half an hour, the earnings represent a

significant hourly rate.

        The average level of cooperation was 18% in the first part of the experiment. The

level of cooperation was decreasing with experience, with a maximum of 31.9% in round

1 and a minimum of 6.9% in round 10 (the last round of part 1). Both the level and

evolution of cooperation in this experiment are similar to those on other experiments on

prisoner’s dilemma games (see for example Cooper et al. 1996, Bereby-Meyer and Roth




                                              14
2006, Dal Bó 2005, and Aoyagi and Fréchette 2003); they also resemble those in the

voluntary contributions mechanism literature (Ledyard 1995).




4.1. Results from the voting stage

        Of the 276 subjects, 147 (53.26%) voted to modify payoffs and 129 (46.74%)

voted not to modify payoffs in the second part of the experiment. Voting for modification

(votemod) is positively and significantly correlated with the math SAT scores and

negatively and significantly correlated with the number provided in the “beauty contest”

game – see Table 3. This suggests that both cognitive ability and strategic sophistication

are related to voting for modification of payoffs. Voting also seems to depend on the

subjects’ experience in the first part of the experiment. Subjects that cooperated more and

those that faced little cooperation are more likely to vote for modification. Surprisingly,

neither the class, the political philosophy nor the major are correlated with the voting

decisions.

        The fact that a large proportion of subjects (46%) voted to remain in a prisoner’s

dilemma game is of interest and has implications for the large political economy

literature on inefficient polices and delayed reforms.18 This experiment shows that

subjects will not necessarily vote for reforms that may make efficient behavior incentive

compatible.

        We define the variable voteshare as the number of votes in favor of modification

of payoffs in a group. This variable ranges from 0 to 4. The mode of the distribution of


18
  See Coate and Morris (1995), and Dixit and Londregan (1995) on inefficient redistribution, and
Fernandez and Rodrik (1991) and Alesina and Drazen (1991) on reform delays.


                                                   15
this variable is 2. There is evidence that voting decisions are independent within groups.

Figure 2 shows the observed cumulative distribution function of voteshare (solid line)

and the distribution that would arise if subjects decide their votes independently of each

other (binomial, depicted as a dashed line). As Figure 2 shows there is little difference

between the two distributions. In fact the difference is not statistically significant (p-

value=0.32).19 A random-effects analysis of voting does not reject that there are no

random-effects at the group level suggesting that voting decisions are independent within

groups (p-value=0.368).




4.2. Exogenous versus endogenous treatment effect: individual level analysis

         As discussed earlier, the difficulty identifying the effect of democracy is that the

subjects in groups with endogenous modification may be different from those in groups

with exogenous modification. In this section we solve this problem by conditioning on

the voting behavior of the subject. Once we control for a subject’s vote, whether he or she

is under endogenous or exogenous modification is uncorrelated with any unobserved

personal characteristic. Thus, greater cooperation under endogenous versus exogenous

modification is evidence that democracy affects behavior.

         In the analysis of the experimental data we initially focus on the behavior in round

11 (the first round of part 2), because after round 11 the impact of the payoff

modification on cooperation is not independent across subjects given that the actions of

one player will affect the actions of the other players. Panel A in Table 4 shows the

19
  Since the theoretical distribution is not continuous we do not use the usual Kolmogorov-Smirnov test but
a modification proposed by Pettitt and Stephens (1977). The p-value is calculated by Monte Carlo
simulation under the null that voteshare follows a binomial distribution with probability of success equal to
the observed one (0.5326).


                                                     16
number of observations (subjects) by vote stage result and vote. The minimum number of

observations in a cell is 17 and the maximum is 55.

        There is little difference in the cooperation rates in round 10 (the last round of

part 1) by vote stage results (see panel B of Table 4). In fact, there are no statistical

differences in cooperation (p-value 0.87).20 Therefore, before the voting stage subjects

are statistically identical in terms of their levels of cooperation.

        Panel C in Table 4 shows the percentage of cooperation at the beginning of part 2

(round 11) by voting stage result and individual vote. Aggregating over the votes of the

individuals, we observe that subjects under endogenous modification cooperated more

than subjects under exogenous modification: 72% against 50%. This difference is

statistically significant at the 1% level (p-value 0.003 – see Table 5, column 1). However,

as discussed before, this difference is not an unbiased estimate of the effect of

democracy. First, groups with endogenous modification have a larger share of subjects

that voted for modification than groups with exogenous modification (see Table 4, panel

A). Second, subjects who voted for modification are more likely to cooperate under

modification than those who did not vote for modification (see Table 4, panel C). This

may imply that another factor affects both the vote of the individual (which affects the

voting stage result of his group) and his behavior in part 2, thereby biasing our estimates.

However, as discussed previously, we can obtain an unbiased estimate by controlling for

how the individuals voted.

        Among individuals who voted for modification, those who experienced an

endogenous modification of payoffs (EndoMod) had levels of cooperation of 82% while

20
 The p-values in this section correspond to Wald tests. The results are robust to performing Wilcoxon-
Mann-Whitney tests when applicable.


                                                   17
those who experienced an exogenous modification of payoffs (ExoMod) only had 58%.

This difference is statistically significant at the 1% level (p-value 0.009 – Table 5,

column 2). In addition, for players that voted for modification, there is no significant

difference in cooperation under the original payoffs depending on whether votes were

considered or not (24% versus 23.53%). These results are robust to controlling for own

and observed behavior before the vote stage and eliminating subjects who did not

remember the result of the voting stage.

       In conclusion, for subjects that voted for modification, we find that democracy

does not affect behavior under initial payoffs but it does have a significant effect under

modified payoffs. As a result, the effect of modifying payoffs is greater when the

modification is endogenous than when it is exogenous: 57.82% versus 34.05%

respectively.

       Among individuals who did not vote for modification, cooperation levels do not

depend on the way that payoffs were chosen. In round 11, cooperation is 41.18% under

endogenous modification and 41.94% under exogenous modification (p-value 0.95).

       The effect of democracy can also be seen in Figure 3. Figure 3 shows the

percentage of cooperation by vote stage result, round and individual vote. It is interesting

to note that cooperation generally increases in round 11 for most vote stage results. Part

of this increase is presumably reflective of the well-known re-start effect in prisoner’s

dilemma games (see Andreoni and Miller 1993). This jump tends to be larger for subjects

that voted for modification, when payoffs are modified, and even larger when they are

modified endogenously.




                                             18
        Interestingly, as Figure 3 shows, the difference in cooperation rates between

individuals under endogenous modification (EndoMod) and exogenous modification

(ExoMod) is not limited to round 11. However, after round 11 differences in cooperation

between EndoMod and ExoMod cannot be fully attributed to the effect of democracy.

This is because subjects under endogenous modification are more likely to meet a partner

that voted for modification (and more likely to cooperate) than a subject under exogenous

modification, and this can influence behavior in later rounds. To estimate the effect of

democracy in later rounds it is necessary to control for the votes of partners that subjects

meet in the second part of the experiment. In addition, we need to consider the fact that

the behavior of a subject is not independent across rounds. A method for doing so is

developed and described in detail in the appendix. As there is little difference in behavior

between exogenous and endogenous initial payoffs, we focus on the effect of democracy

under modification for the rest of the section.

        Table 6 presents the estimates of the effect of democracy under modified payoffs

for all rounds after the voting stage. For subjects who voted for modification, the effect is

the largest in round 14 when the effect reaches 32% and it is the lowest in round 13 when

it is 20%. The effect is significant at least at the 10% level in all ten rounds after the

voting stage, and significant at the 5% level in seven of the rounds. It cannot be rejected

that all effects are the same and that it is the same in rounds 11 and 20, both at the 10%

significance level. Therefore, for subjects that voted for modification, democracy has a

stable, large and statistically significant effect on cooperative behavior.

        For subjects who did not vote to modify payoffs, Table 6 shows an interesting

pattern in the evolution of the effect of democracy across rounds. While the effect is



                                              19
negligible in round 11 it reaches a statistically significant level (31%) in round 13. The

effect of democracy remains significant until round 16. This effect for subjects who did

not vote to modify payoffs is due in part to their meeting subjects who voted to modify

payoffs and being affected by their higher rate of cooperation under democracy.

However, after round 16, the effect disappears for subjects who did not vote to modify

payoffs.

       Finally, the responses of subject to the question at the end of the experiment on

whether the voting stage had affected their behavior are consistent with their observed

behavior. Subjects who voted for modification are significantly more likely to say that the

voting stage modified their behavior under endogenous modification than under

exogenous modification (p-value less than 0.01). In addition, a significant share of

subjects that voted for modification mention whether votes were considered or not in

explaining their behavior after the voting stage.

       In conclusion, the experimental results show that there is an effect of democratic

institutions in addition to the instrumental effect through policy choice.




4.3. Decomposing the total effect of an endogenous modification

       The individual level analysis allows us to separate the total effect of an

endogenous modification of payoffs into a selection effect and an endogenous treatment

effect. We can further separate this endogenous treatment effect into an exogenous

treatment effect and an endogeneity premium (the part of the endogenous treatment effect

that cannot be explained by the exogenous treatment effect). For simplicity we will focus

on round 11 behavior to provide this decomposition of effects.


                                             20
Total effect:

         From the totals in the first two columns in panel C of Table 4 we calculate the

effect of the policy under democracy (EndoMod versus EndoNot) and find that the total

effect of an endogenous modification on cooperation is 55%. Note that the totals of these

columns can be calculated as weighted averages of the cooperation rates by type of vote

if we use as weights the proportion of subjects that voted for and against modification. If

we denote as f (v P, M ) the proportion of subjects that voted for v ∈ {Y , N } given the

payoff structure P ∈ {Mod , Not } and the mechanism M∈ {Endo, Exo} and we denote as

C (v P, M ) the proportion of cooperation for subjects that voted for v given the payoff

structure and mechanism, the total effect is:

TE =     ∑ f (v Endo, Mod )C (v Endo, Mod ) − f (v Endo, Not )C (v Endo, Not ) .21
         { }
       v∈ Y , N




Selection effect:

         The selection effect captures the changes in cooperation that arise not from the

change in treatment but from the change in the proportion of types of subjects. Thus, the

selection effect can be measured as:

SE =     ∑ ( f (v Endo, Mod ) − f (v Endo, Not ))C (v Endo, Not ) .
       v∈{Y , N }



From Table 4 we calculate the selection effect as a 4% increase in the cooperation rate.22




21
   The total effect can be calculated from Table 4 as follows: TE=((17/72)41.18+(55/72)81.82)-
((55/80)14.55+(25/80)24)=54.72.
22
   SE=(17/72-55/80)14.55+(55/72-25/80)24=4.27.


                                                   21
Endogenous treatment effect:

           The endogenous treatment effect corresponds to changes in cooperation due to an

endogenous change in the payoff matrix and not due to changes in the proportion of the

different types of voters. In addition the endogenous treatment effect must be equal to the

difference between the total effect and the selection effect. Thus, the endogenous

treatment effect is:

EndoTrE =         ∑ f (v Endo, Mod )(C (v Endo, Mod ) − C (v Endo, Not )) .
                v∈{Y , N }



From Table 4 we calculate the endogenous treatment effect as 50%.23




Exogenous treatment effect:

           The exogenous treatment effect corresponds to the change in cooperation due to

an exogenous modification of payoffs. As such we must leave the proportion of the

different types of voters constant but change the behavior due to exogenous modification.

Moreover, the proportion of the different types of voters must be consistent with the ones

used to calculate the endogenous treatment effect. Thus, we can calculate the exogenous

treatment effect as:

ExoTrE =        ∑ f (v Endo, Mod )(C (v Exo, Mod ) − C (v Exo, Not )) .
              v∈{Y , N }



From Table 4 we calculate the exogenous treatment effect as 36%.24




23
     EndoTrE=(17/72)(41.18-14.55)+(55/72)(81.82-24)=50.45.
24
     ExoTrE=(17/72)(41.94-3.85)+(55/72)(57.58-23.53)=36.


                                                  22
Endogeneity premium:

       Having calculated the endogenous and exogenous treatment effects, we can

calculate the endogeneity premium. The difference between the endogenous treatment

effect (50%) and exogenous treatment effect (36%) constitutes the endogeneity premium:

14%.




Decomposition:

       The total effect from endogenous modification of payoffs can be separated in

three components: the selection effect, the exogenous treatment effect, and the

endogeneity premium. Our estimates show that in this case the selection effect explains

8% of the change in behavior, the exogenous treatment explains 66% and the endogeneity

premium explains 26%. The difference between exogenous and endogenous treatment

effects is large: the endogeneity premium is more than three times the size of the

selection effect and more than 40% of the exogenous treatment effect. These results

suggest that, even after controlling for selection, when studying the impact of institutions

or policies on behavior it is important to distinguish whether they are endogenous or

exogenous.




4.4. Exogenous versus endogenous treatment effect: group level analysis

       In this section we consider the group as the unit of analysis and we focus on

groups with even split votes since they allow us to estimate the difference between

exogenous and endogenous modification controlling for underlying characteristics of the




                                             23
groups since they are essentially the same. The evidence we present is consistent with the

idea that the effect of the payoff modifications depends on whether the modification was

endogenous or exogenous to the group. However, the result is not conclusive due to the

statistical power of the analysis (by looking at evenly split groups we loose 46 of the 69

groups – see Table 7).

         Table 8 shows the level of cooperation by the result of the voting stage and the

vote share of the groups. There is little difference in the cooperation rates of groups with

vote share 2 in part 1 (see panel A of Table 8). In fact, there are no statistical differences

in cooperation (p-value 0.47). 25 If anything, the groups with exogenous modification

(ExoMod) cooperated more in the first part of the experiment than those with endogenous

modification (EndoMod) but this difference is not statistically significant (p-value 0.24).

Therefore, before the voting stage all groups were basically identical in terms of

cooperation levels.

         Focusing on groups with evenly split votes (voteshare=2), we observe that the

cooperation levels after the voting stage under the initial payoffs are very similar between

groups whose votes were considered (EndoNot) and those that were not (ExoNot): 8.44%

and 9.38% respectively (panel B of Table 8). As democracy has no effect under initial

payoffs, we can focus on the difference between endogenous and exogenous modification

(EndoMod versus ExoMod) to calculate the difference in treatment effects. We find that

groups with endogenous modification (EndoMod) had 51.67% cooperation after voting

against 43.50% for the groups with exogenous modification (ExoMod). The statistical

25
  For all the statistical tests in this section we only consider one observation per group. In this case the
observation is the average cooperation rate in the group in the first ten rounds of the experiment. The p-
values correspond to Wald tests. The results are robust to performing Wilcoxon-Mann-Whitney tests when
applicable.


                                                     24
significance of these differences is provided in Table 9. The difference of 8% in favor of

endogenous modification (EndoMod) versus exogenous modification (ExoMod) is not

always statistically significant. It is significant at the 10% level if we eliminate from the

analysis groups with subjects that did not remember the vote stage result. Finally, the

payoff modification has a large effect on cooperation rates: a 43% and 34% increase for

endogenous and exogenous modification. While this increase is always significant for

endogenous modification (p-values less than 0.002, see Table 9) it is not significant for

exogenous modification under all specifications.

         To study the effect of democracy under modified payoffs (EndoMod versus

ExoMod) we can also focus on the small number of groups with voteshare 3.26 As shown

in Table 8, of groups with voteshare 3, those under endogenous modification reach higher

cooperation rates than those with exogenous modification (48% versus 32.5%). However,

this difference is not statistically significant. Similarly, to study the effect of democracy

under initial payoffs (EndoNot versus ExoNot) we can also focus on the small number of

groups with voteshare 1. Consistent with previous results, Table 8 shows that there are no

differences in cooperation between endogenous and exogenous initial payoffs for groups

with voteshare 1 (11.67% versus 12.5%).

         In sum, the results based on group-level analysis are consistent with the results

from the individual-level analysis, but, due to small samples sizes, are not always

statistically significant.




26
  However these groups do not allow us to study the differences in treatment effects as it is not possible to
have observations for endogenous initial payoffs (EndoNot).


                                                     25
5. Conclusions

       Previous literature has suggested that democratic institutions might have an effect

on individual behavior in addition to their instrumental effect through policy choice.

However, it has been empirically difficult to provide strong evidence for such an effect

due to the possible endogeneity of democratic institutions and policies. Using data from a

novel experiment design that overcomes these identification hurdles, we show that the

effect of a given policy on behavior depends on whether it was democratically chosen or

not. This experimental result supports the idea that democracy may have an effect on

behavior in addition to its effect through the choice of policies. More generally, our

results show that a treatment effect may depend on whether the treatment is endogenous

or exogenous. The greater increase in cooperation that we observe for endogenous

modification of payoffs relative to exogenous modification, once we control for selection,

is what we refer to as the “endogeneity premium.”

       Understanding the forces that generate this “endogeneity premium” in our

experiments remains for future work. One hypothesis is that an endogenous modification

affects behavior because it reveals to the subjects that their partner is more likely to have

voted for modification, affecting the subjects’ beliefs about the partner’s future behavior,

and thus affecting their own behavior. A second hypothesis is that it is the endogeneity

itself which affects behavior. Knowing that the policy was imposed by the decision of the

group may directly affect subjects’ behavior. For example, endogenous modification may

strengthen the establishment of a cooperative social norm. Future experimental work will

help us distinguish between these hypotheses and provide an explanation for the




                                             26
difference between endogenous and exogenous treatment effects in our social dilemma

experiments.




                                         27
       References

Acemoglu, D., S. Johnson, and J. Robinson (2001). “The Colonial Origins of

           Comparative Development: An Empirical Investigation,” American Economic

           Review 91(5), 1369-401.

Alesina, A. and A. Drazen (1991). “Why Are Stabilizations Delayed?,” American

           Economic Review 81(5), 1170-88.

Andreoni, J., W.T. Harbaugh and L. Vesterlund (2003). “The Carrot or the Stick:

           Rewards, Punishments and Cooperation,” American Economic Review, 93(3),

           893-902

Andreoni, J. and J.H. Miller (1993). "Rational Cooperation in the Finitely Repeated

           Prisoner's Dilemma: Experimental Evidence," Economic Journal 103(4), 570-

           85.

Aoyagi, M., and G. Fréchette (2003). “Collusion in Repeated Games with Imperfect

           Public Monitoring,” HBS, mimeo.

Bardhan, P. (2000). “Irrigation and Cooperation: An Empirical Analysis of 48 Irrigation

           Communities in South India,” Economic Development and Cultural Change

           48(4), 847-65.

Bereby Meyer, Y. and A.E. Roth (2006). "The Speed of Learning in Noisy Games:

           Partial Reinforcement and the Sustainability of Cooperation," American

           Economic Review 96(4), 1029-42.




                                           28
Besley, T., R. Pande and V. Rao (2005) “Political Selection and the Quality of

           Government: Evidence from South India”, Yale University, Economic Growth

           Center WP 921.

Bohnet, I. (2006). “How Institutions Affect Behavior: Insights from Economics and

           Psychology.” pp 213-38 in David De Cremer, Marcel Zeelenberg and Keith J.

           Murnighan eds., Social Psychology and Economics. London: Lawrence

           Erlbaum, 2006.

Bohnet, I. and D. Kübler (2005). “Compensating the Cooperators: Is Sorting in the

           Prisoner’s Dilemma Possible?” Journal of Economic Behavior and

           Organization 56, 61-76.

Bonin, J.P., D. Jones, and L. Putterman (1993) “Theoretical and Empirical Research on

           Producers’ Cooperatives: Will Ever the Twain Meet?” Journal of Economic

           Literature 31, 1290-1320.

Bosch-Domènech, A., J.G. Montalvo, R. Nagel and A. Satorra (2002). "One, Two,

           (Three), Infinity, ….: Newspaper and Lab Beauty-Contest Experiments,"

           American Economic Review 92(5), 1687-1701.

Botelho, A., G. Harrison, L.M. Costa Pinto and E.E. Rutström (2005). “Social Norms and

           Social Choice,” unpublished paper, Dept. of Economics, University of Central

           Florida.

Cachon, G.P. and C.F. Camerer (1996). “Loss-Avoidance and Forward Induction in

           Experimental Coordination Games,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 111(1),

           165-194.




                                           29
Casella, A., A. Gelman and T. Palfrey (2006). “An Experimental Study of Storable

           Votes,” Games and Economics Behavior 57(1), 123-54.

Camerer, C. and E. Fehr (2004). “Measuring social norms and preferences using

           experimental games: a guide for social scientists,” pp. 55-95 in Joseph

           Henrich, et al. eds., Foundations of human sociality: economic experiments

           and ethnographic evidence from fifteen small scale societies. Oxford: Oxford

           University press.

Charness G., G. R. Fréchette, and C.-Z. Qin (2006) “Endogenous Transfers in the

           Prisoner’s Dilemma Game: An Experimental Test Of Cooperation And

           Coordination,” Games and Economic Behavior, forthcoming.

Charness, Gary and Matthew Rabin, 2002, “Understanding Social Preferences with

           Simple Tests,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 117(3), 817-870.

Coate, S. and S. Morris (1995). “On the Form of Transfers to Special Interests,” Journal

           of Political Economy 103(6), 1210-35.

Cooper, R., D.V. DeJong, R. Forsythe and T.W. Ross (1990). “Selection Criteria in

           Coordination Games: Some Experimental Results,” American Economic

           Review, 80(1), 218-33.

Cooper, R., D.V. DeJong, R. Forsythe and T.W. Ross (1992). "Forward induction in

           coordination games," Economic Letters 40, 167-172.

Cooper, R., D.V. DeJong, R. Forsythe and T.W. Ross (1996). "Cooperation without

           Reputation: Experimental Evidence from Prisoner's Dilemma Games," Games

           and Economic Behavior 12(2), 187-218.




                                           30
Dal Bó, P. (2005). “Cooperation under the shadow of the future: experimental evidence

          from infinitely repeated games,” American Economic Review 95(5), 1591-

          1604.

Dixit, A. and J. Londregan (1995). “Redistributive Politics and Economic Efficiency,”

          American Political Science Review 89(4), 856-66.

Duffy, J. and J. Ochs (2003). “Cooperative Behavior and the Frequency of Social

          Interaction,” University of Pittsburgh, mimeo.

Ertan, A., T. Page and L. Putterman (2005). “Can Endogenously Chosen Institutions

          Mitigate the Free-Rider Problem and Reduce Perverse Punishment?,” mimeo.

Easterly, W. and R. Levine (2003). “Tropics, Germs, and Crops: How Endowments

          Influence Economics Development,” Journal of Monetary Economics 50(1) 3-

          39.

Falkinger, J., E. Fehr, S. Gächter and R. Winter-Ebmer (2000). “A Simple Mechanism

          for the Efficient Provision of Public Goods: Experimental Evidence,”

          American Economic Review 90, 247-264.

Fehr, E. and U. Fischbacher (2002). “Why Social Preferences Matter – The Impact of

          Non-Selfish Motives on Competition, Cooperation and Incentives,” Economic

          Journal 112, C1-C33.

Fehr, E. and S. Gächter (2000). “Cooperation and Punishment,” American Economic

          Review 90, 980-94.




                                          31
Fernández, R. and D. Rodrik (1991). "Resistance Against Reform: Status Quo Bias in the

           Presence of Individual Specific Uncertainty," American Economic Review

           81(5), 1146-55.

Finkel, S. E. (1985). “Reciprocal Effects of Participation and Political Efficacy: A Panel

           Analysis,” American Journal of Political Science 29, 891-913.

Fogel, R. (1977). “Distributive and Procedural Justice: Combined Impact of “Voice” and

           Improvement on Experienced Inequity,” Journal of Personality and Social

           Psychology 35(2), 108-19.

Foster, A.D. and M.R. Rosenzweig (2005), “Democratization, Decentralization and the

           Distribution of Local Public Goods in a Poor Rural Economy”, Brown

           University, manuscript.

Frey, B. S. (1998). “Institutions and morale: the crowding-out effect,” in Ben-Ner, A. and

           Putterman, L., ed., Economics, values, and organization. Cambridge:

           Cambridge University Press.

Frey, B.S., M. Benz, and A. Stutzer (2002). “Introducing Procedural Utility: Not only

           What, but also How Matters,” Journal of Institutional and Theoretical

           Economics 160(3), 377-401.

Goeree, J.K. and C.A. Holt (2005). “An Explanation of Anomalous Behavior in Models

           of Political Participation,” American Political Science Review 99(2), 201-13.

Großer, J. and A. Schram (2006). “Neighborhood Information Exchange and Voter

           Paraticipation: An Experimental Study,” American Political Science Review

           100(2), 235-48.



                                            32
Kagel, J.H. and A.E. Roth, editors (1995). The Handbook of Experimental Economics.

           Princeton University Press.

La Porta, R., F. Lopez de Silanes, A. Shleifer and R. Vishny (1998). “Law and Finance,”

           Journal of Political Economy 106: 1113-1155.

Lazear, E.P., Malmendier, U. and R.A. Weber (2006). “Sorting in Experiments with

           Application to Social Preferences,” mimeo.

Ledyard, J. (1995). “Public Goods: A Survey of Experimental Research,” pp. 111-94 in

           John Kagel and Alvin Roth, eds., Handbook of Experimental Economics.

           Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Levine, D. I. and L.D. Tyson (1990). "Participation, Productivity, and the Firm’s

           Environment," in A. Blinder, ed., Paying for Productivity: A Look at the

           Evidence. Washington: Brookings Institution.

Levine, D.K. and T.R. Palfrey (2007). “The Paradox of Voter Participation? A

           Laboratory Study,” American Political Science Review 101(1), 143-58.

Lind, E.A. and T.R. Tyler (1988). The Social Psychology of Procedural Justice. New

           York: Plenum Press.

Morton, R. and K.C. Williams (1999). “Information Asymmetries and Simultaneous

           versus Sequential Voting,” American Political Science Review 93(1), 51-67.

North, D.C. (1981). Structure and Change in Economic History. New York: Norton and

           Co.

Palfrey, T.R. (2005). “Laboratory Experiments in Political Economy,” mimeo.




                                           33
Pateman, C. (1970). Participation and Democratic Theory. Cambridge: Cambridge

           University Press.

Pettitt, A.N. and M.A. Stephens (1977). “The Kolmogorov-Smirnov Goodness-of-Fit

           Statistic with Discrete and Grouped Data,” Technometrics 19(2), 205-210.

Palacios Huerta, I. (2003). “Learning to Open Monty Hall’s Doors,” Experimental

           Economics 6, 235-51.

Potters, J., M. Sefton and L. Vesterlund (2005). “After you – endogenous sequencing in

           voluntary contribution games,” Journal of Public Economics 89, 1399-419.

Schram, A. and J. Sonnemans (1996). “Voter Turnout as a Participation Game: An

           Experimental Investigation,” International Journal of Game Theory 27(3),

           385-406.

Sutter, M., S. Haigner and M.G. Kocher (2005). “Choosing the stick or the carrot?

           Endogenous institutional choice in social dilemma situations,” mimeo.

Thibaut, J. and L. Walker (1975). Procedural Justice: A Psychological Analysis. New

           Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Thomson, D. (1970). The Democratic Citizen: social science and democratic theory in

           the twentieth century. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Tocqueville, Alexis de (1838). Democracy in America. New York : Adlard and Saunders.

Van den Bos, K. (1999). “What Are We Talking about When We Talk about No-Voice

           Procedures? On the Psychology of the Fair Outcome Effect,” Journal of

           Experimental Social Psychology 35, 560-77.




                                           34
Van Huyck, J.B., R.C. Battalio and R. Beil (1990). “Tacit Cooperation Games, Strategic

          Uncertainty, and Coordination Failure,” American Economic Review, 80(1),

          234-48.

Van Huyck, J.B., R.C. Battalio and R. Beil (1993). “Asset Markets as an Equilibrium

          Selection Mechanism: Coordination Failure, Game Form Auctions, and Tacit

          Communication,” Games and Economic Behavior 5, 485-504.




                                          35
Appendix: Estimation of democracy effects using individual data after round 11.




        In this appendix we describe in detail the methodology used to estimate the effect

of democracy in all rounds after the voting stage discussed in section 4.2. We focus on

the effect of democracy under modified payoffs. The methodology we present here

allows us to estimate the effect of democracy on behavior after “controlling” for the fact

that subjects under endogenous modification are more likely to meet subjects that voted

for modification than subjects under exogenous modification are. In addition, this

methodology considers the fact that a subject’s behavior may be correlated with her

previous behavior and be affected by the behavior of previous partners.

        Consider the following model of behavior after the voting stage:

         y1i = xi β1 + u1i
         y 2i = xi β 2 + ρ 21u1i + ϕ 21 y1, −i + u 2i
(A1)      y3i = xi β 3 + ρ 31u1i + ρ 32 u 2i + ϕ 31 y1, − i + ϕ 32 y 2, − i + u 3i ,
         ...
                           r −1            r −1
         y ri = xi β r + ∑ ρ rs u si + ∑ ϕ rs y s , −i + u ri
                           s =1            s =1



where r denotes the round number in part 2 (for simplicity we start counting from 1), i

denotes the subject and -i denotes previous partner of i. The variable yri denotes

cooperation in round r by subject i, yr,-i denotes cooperation in round r by subject i’s

partner in that round, and xi is a vector of indicator variables for the four combinations of

individual vote (yes or no) and whether votes where considered (Endo or Exo). The

errors uri are assumed to follow these properties: E (u ri ) = 0 , E (u ri u sj ) = 0 , and

E (u ri x j ) = 0 for any rounds r or s and subjects i or j. Note that (A1) is a linear


                                                         36
approximations to decision rules and that our inference will be valid to the extent that this

linear approximation is reasonable.

        To estimate the parameters in (A1) we start by estimating the system in (A2)

which differs from (A1) in that we include the previous behavior of the subject as a

control instead of previous errors:

         y1i = xi b1 + ε 1i
         y 2i = xi b2 + r21 y1i + f 21 y1, −i + ε 2i
(A2)     y3i = xi b3 + r31 y1i + r32 y 2i + f 31 y1, − i + f 32 y 2, − i + ε 3i ,
        ...
                             r −1                 r −1
         y ri = xi br + ∑ rrs y si + ∑ f rs y s , −i + ε ri
                             s =1                 s =1



        It can be easily shown that the errors in (A2) coincide with the errors in (A1):

u ri = ε rj . Given our previous assumptions about the errors in (A1) it follows that the

errors in (A2) satisfy all the requirements for an OLS regression:

E (u ri ) = 0 , E (u ri u sj ) = 0 , E (u ri x j ) = 0 for any subjects i and j and rounds r and s, and

finally E (u ri y sj ) = 0 for any subjects i and j and rounds r and s such that s<r.


        From the vector of estimated coefficients (bˆr , rˆrs , fˆrs ) for (A2) we can construct

the estimates of the coefficients in (A1) as follows:

                          r −1
        βˆ r = bˆr + ∑ ρˆ rs bˆs
                          s =1
                            r −1

(A3)     ρˆ rs = rˆrs +    ∑ ρˆ
                          t = s +1
                                        rˆ .
                                      rt ts

                            r −1
        ϕˆ rs = fˆrs +      ∑ ρˆ
                           t = s +1
                                      rt   fˆts




                                                         37
This is straightforward for r=1, as the first equation in (A1) coincides with the first

equation in (A2) and βˆ1 = bˆ1 . For r=2, we can use the first equation in (A2) to substitute

for u1i in the second equation in (A1) and then:

y 2i = xi (β 2 − ρ 21b1 ) + ρ 21 y1i + ϕ 21 y1, − i + u 2i .


Which implies that bˆ2 = βˆ 2 − ρˆ 21bˆ1 , rˆ21 = ρˆ 21 and fˆ21 = ϕˆ 21 . Rearranging, we find the

equalities in (A3) for r=2. For r=3, we can use the first two equation in (A2) to substitute

for u1i in the third equation in (A1) and then

y3i = xi (β 3 − ρ 31b1 − ρ 32 b2 ) + (ρ 31 − ρ 32 r21 ) y1i + ρ 32 y 2i + (ϕ 31 − ρ 32 f 21 ) y1, − i + ϕ 32 y 2, − i + u 2i
Which implies that bˆ3 = βˆ 2 − ρˆ 31bˆ1 − ρˆ 32 bˆ2 , rˆ31 = ρˆ 31 − ρˆ 32 rˆ21 , rˆ32 = ρˆ 32 ,

 fˆ31 = ϕˆ 31 − ρ 32 fˆ21 and fˆ32 = ϕˆ 32 . Rearranging, we find the equalities in (A3) for r=3. In

similar way we can verify (A3) for r>3.

         With the vector of estimates ( βˆ r , ρˆ rs , ϕˆ rs ) we can calculate the effect of

democracy by round. As said before, we focus on groups with payoff modification. First,

we calculate the direct effect of democracy by individual vote and round: DEDrv, where r

denotes the round and v the individual vote (yes or no). The direct effect of democracy

can be thought as the difference in cooperation under endogenous and exogenous

modification once we control for the behavior of previous partners. This difference can

be calculated as DEDrv = βˆ rv , Endo − βˆ rv , Exo , where β̂ rv , Endo is the estimated coefficient for

those in round r, with individual vote v and whose vote was counted (endogenous

modification) and βˆ rv , Exo is the coefficient for those whose vote was not counted

(exogenous modification).




                                                         38
       The effect of democracy is not only the direct effect as a subject’s behavior is

modified by the behavior of other subjects which in turn depend on whether payoffs are

modified endogenously or exogenously. We calculate the effect of democracy EDrv on

round r for subjects with vote v, as follows:

        ED1v = DED1v
                            r −1
        EDrv = DEDrv + ∑ ϕˆ rs ( pvy EDry + pvn EDrn )
                                                         ,
                            s =1



where ϕ̂ rs is the estimated coefficient measuring how subjects’ cooperation in round r

responds to cooperation by their partners in round s, and p vy and p vn denotes the

probabilities that a subject with vote v meets a yes and no subject respectively under

endogenous modification. The estimates of the effect of democracy under modification

are presented in Table 6.




                                                39
Table 2: Summary statistics of sessions
Session                           1            2             3             4             5              6             7          8           9
Date                         3/5/06      10/5/06       12/5/06       15/5/06       17/5/06        13/7/06       18/9/06    22/9/06    13/10/06
Subjects                         20           16            16            20            12             12            12         16          24
Economics                   10.00%        6.25%        12.50%        15.00%        16.67%         16.67%        33.33%     25.00%       8.33%
Class                          1.90         1.63          2.19          2.45          2.42           3.25          2.08       2.13        2.08
Political Philosophy           2.26         2.00          2.36          2.11          1.91           2.09          1.91       2.43        2.21
SAT Math                     730.79      697.33         736.88        734.00        662.73         706.36        743.33     711.88     720.87
SAT Verbal                   723.16      728.67         720.00        736.00        689.00         720.91        717.50     681.25     723.48
Beauty Contest Num.           39.20        37.94         39.50         38.75         42.25          44.00         38.08      49.63       31.92
Subject Comprehension
 Vote stage                 80.00%       81.25%        93.75%       100.00%       100.00%         91.67%      100.00%      81.25%     91.67%
 Initial Payoffs            90.00%       93.75%        81.25%        85.00%       100.00%         91.67%       83.33%      81.25%     95.83%
 Modified Payoffs           65.00%       75.00%        62.50%        70.00%        91.67%         58.33%       91.67%      93.75%    100.00%
Earnings
 Maximum                      29.00        28.20         29.40         28.20         28.20          28.60         26.40      28.20       28.68
 Average                      24.44        24.23         24.86         24.42         24.78          24.35         24.16      23.62       25.51
 Minimum                      20.60        20.40         20.60         20.80         21.80          20.40         19.20      17.60       20.80

Session                     10                11            12            13            14             15           16          17          18      All Sessions
Date                  20/10/06          23/10/06      27/10/06      30/10/06      06/11/06       10/11/06     17/11/06    20/11/06    27/11/06 Total/Means Std. Dev.
Subjects                    12                20             8            16            16             12           12          12          20          276
Economics              33.33%            10.00%        12.50%        18.75%         0.00%          8.33%        0.00%      16.67%      10.00%       13.41%
Class                     2.00              1.85          1.88          1.50          1.81           2.00         1.83        1.75        1.80          2.02      1.11
Political Philosophy      2.25              2.00          1.86          2.00          2.00           1.91         2.08        1.92        1.95          2.09      0.77
SAT Math                732.50            746.67        733.75        734.00       722.00         758.33       662.73       764.17      728.00       724.91      68.17
SAT Verbal              721.67            718.89        736.25        737.33       724.67         728.33       750.00       730.83      729.50       723.21      66.72
Beauty Contest Num.      35.92             37.10         28.63         37.56         30.44          28.67        47.25       37.00       35.30        37.68      19.63
Subject Comprehension
 Vote stage            91.67%            95.00%      100.00%         87.50%        87.50%        100.00%        91.67%    100.00%      95.00%         92.03%
 Initial Payoffs      100.00%           100.00%      100.00%         81.25%        81.25%        100.00%        66.67%     75.00%      95.00%         89.13%
 Modified Payoffs      75.00%            85.00%      100.00%         75.00%        68.75%        100.00%        41.67%    100.00%      95.00%         80.43%
Earnings
 Maximum                 26.40             28.40         26.80         27.60         27.60          26.60         27.64      28.20       29.36          29.40
 Average                 24.50             24.41         25.49         24.36         24.15          24.45         24.17      25.83       24.75          24.57        2.19
 Minimum                 21.80             19.80         23.40         20.20         20.76          21.48         20.56      22.00       19.60          17.60

Note: Economics is the percentage of Economics majors in the session; Class is equal to 1 for freshment, 2 for sophomore, etc.; Political Philosophy is equal to 1 for
very liberal to 5 for very conservative; Beauty contest num. is the number chosen in the beauty contest game.
Table 3: Determinants of Voting
Dependent Variable: Voting for modification (Votemod)
                            (1)         (2)        (3)               (8)          (7)          (6)          (5)         (4)            (9)
Own Part 1 Coop.           0.47                                                                                                       0.673
                        [0.161]***                                                                                                 [0.170]***
Partners' Part 1 Coop.                -0.419                                                                                         -0.762
                                    [0.211]**                                                                                      [0.222]***
Class                                            -0.029                                                                              -0.019
                                                 [0.027]                                                                             [0.028]
Guess Number                                                       -0.003                                                            -0.004
                                                                  [0.002]**                                                         [0.002]**
SAT Verbal                                                                       0.001                                                  0
                                                                                [0.000]                                              [0.000]
SAT Math                                                                                     0.001                                    0.002
                                                                                           [0.000]***                              [0.000]***
Econ                                                                                                      0.072                      -0.001
                                                                                                         [0.088]                     [0.089]
Political                                                                                                               0.003         0.029
                                                                                                                       [0.041]       [0.040]
Constant                     0.448        0.608         0.59        0.657        0.01        -0.312       0.523         0.517        -0.733
                           [0.042]***   [0.048]***   [0.063]***   [0.065]***    [0.334]      [0.324]    [0.032]***   [0.091]***      [0.454]
Observations                  276          276          276          276          265          266         276           254           246
R-squared                     0.03         0.01          0           0.02        0.01         0.03          0             0           0.15

Note: All results are from OLS regressions. The dependent variable is Votemod which is an indicator variable for whether the
subject voted to modify payoffs. Standard errors in brackets: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.
Table 4: The effect of the democracy - Individual Level Data
Panel A: Number of observations
                 Consider Votes            Not Consider Votes
Vote for      Modify      Not Modify      Modify     Not Modify
Modify      (EndoMod)      (EndoNot)    (ExoMod)      (ExoNot)     Total
No              17            55            31            26           129
Yes             55            25            33            34           147
Total           72            80            64            60
Panel B: Cooperation Percentage in Round 10
                  Consider Votes            Not Consider Votes
Vote for      Modify       Not Modify      Modify     Not Modify
Modify      (EndoMod)      (EndoNot)     (ExoMod)      (ExoNot)
No             5.88%         3.64%         9.68%         11.54%
Yes            5.45%         4.00%         9.09%         8.82%
Total          5.56%         3.75%         9.38%         10.00%
Panel C: Cooperation Percentage in Round 11
                  Consider Votes            Not Consider Votes
Vote for      Modify       Not Modify      Modify     Not Modify
Modify      (EndoMod)      (EndoNot)     (ExoMod)      (ExoNot)
No            41.18%         14.55%       41.94%         3.85%
Yes           81.82%         24.00%       57.58%         23.53%
Total         72.22%         17.50%       50.00%         15.00%
Table 5: The effect of the democracy - Individual Level Data
Dependent Variable: Individual cooperation in round 11
                                (1)         (2)          (3)                 (4)           (5)
EndoMod                       0.722
                            [0.050]***
EndoNot                       0.175
                            [0.048]***
ExoMod                          0.5
                            [0.053]***
ExoNot                         0.15
                            [0.055]***
EndoModn                                   0.412        0.362                0.4          0.353
                                        [0.101]***   [0.102]***          [0.106]***    [0.106]***
EndoNotn                                   0.145        0.05                0.137         0.058
                                         [0.056]**     [0.067]            [0.057]**      [0.069]
ExoModn                                    0.419        0.314                0.4          0.316
                                        [0.075]***   [0.086]***          [0.075]***    [0.086]***
ExoNotn                                    0.038       -0.016               0.045        -0.001
                                          [0.082]      [0.084]             [0.087]       [0.090]
EndoMody                                   0.818        0.719               0.849         0.763
                                        [0.056]***   [0.063]***          [0.056]***    [0.064]***
EndoNoty                                   0.24         0.09                0.273         0.134
                                        [0.083]***     [0.090]           [0.087]***      [0.095]
ExoMody                                    0.576        0.431               0.633         0.502
                                        [0.072]***   [0.082]***          [0.075]***    [0.085]***
ExoNoty                                    0.235        0.112               0.226         0.121
                                        [0.071]***     [0.079]           [0.074]***      [0.080]
Own Part 1 Coop.                                        0.618                             0.569
                                                     [0.139]***                        [0.141]***
Partners' Part 1 Coop.                                 -0.034                            -0.066
                                                       [0.179]                           [0.181]
Exclude did not remember
vote result                     No          No           No                 Yes           Yes
Observations                   276          276          276                254           254
R-squared                      0.54        0.57          0.6                0.6           0.62

Tests of differences of cooperation rates by mechanism (Endo versus Exo),
payoffs (Mod versus Not) and vote (y versus n)
                           p-values
EndoNot=ExoNot                0.732
EndoMod=ExoMod                0.003
EndoMod=EndoNot               0.000
ExoMod=ExoNot                 0.000
EndoNotn=ExoNotn                           0.281      0.494       0.381                  0.566
EndoModn=ExoModn                           0.952      0.694       1.000                  0.772
EndoModn=EndoNotn                          0.022      0.006       0.030                  0.013
ExoModn=ExoNotn                            0.001      0.003       0.002                  0.006
EndoNoty=ExoNoty                           0.966      0.834       0.682                  0.908
EndoMody=ExoMody                           0.009      0.001       0.022                  0.005
EndoMody=EndoNoty                          0.000      0.000       0.000                  0.000
ExoMody=ExoNoty                            0.001      0.001       0.000                  0.000

Note: All results are from OLS regressions. The dependent variable is an indicator variable for whether the subject
cooperated in round 11. The explanatory variables in column (1) are indicator variables for the vote stage result. In the rest
of the columns the explanatory variable are the interaction of indicator variables for vote stage results with indicator
variables for the vote of the subject. EndoMod: endogenous modification, EndoNot: endogenous non-modification, ExoMod:
exogenous modification, ExoNot: exogenous non-modification, n and y denote the individual vote of the subject (agains or
for modification). Regressions in columns (3) and (5) control for the individuals' and their partner's cooperation rate in the
rounds before the voting stage (Part 1). Standard errors in brackets: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant
at 1%. The p-values correspond to Wald tests based on the regression results.
Table 6: The effect of the democracy - Individual Level Data - All Rounds
                         Vote for Modify
            Round        Yes         No
              11        0.242      -0.008
                      [0.124]**    [0.103]
              12        0.216       0.143
                      [0.116]**    [0.154]
              13        0.204       0.309
                       [0.144]* [0.120]***
              14        0.322       0.274
                      [0.147]** [0.132]**
              15        0.217       0.300
                       [0.138]* [0.145]**
              16        0.219       0.346
                       [0.154]* [0.136]***
              17        0.296       0.086
                      [0.154]**    [0.197]
              18        0.270       0.091
                      [0.153]**    [0.194]
              19        0.299       0.216
                      [0.157]**    [0.171]
              20        0.264       0.069
                      [0.160]**    [0.175]

    Note: table reports estimated impact of democracy on likelyhood of choosing C by round for
    groups with modified payoffs following the model in the Appendix. Jackknife standard errors
    by group: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.
Table 7: Number of Groups by Vote Stage Results and Vote Share
               Consider Votes           Not Consider Votes
             Modify    Not Modify       Modify    Not Modify
Vote Share (EndoMod) (EndoNot)        (ExoMod)     (ExoNot)     Total
     0         X            3             0           0           3
     1         X            9             5           4          18
     2         6            8             5           4          23
     3         5           X              6           6          17
     4         7           X              0           1           8
  Total        18          20            16           15         69

Table 8: The effect of democracy - Group Level Data
Panel A: Cooperation Percentage in Part 1
                 Consider Votes          Not Consider Votes
              Modify     Not Modify      Modify    Not Modify
Vote Share (EndoMod) (EndoNot)         (ExoMod)     (ExoNot)
     0           X         19.17%
     1           X         21.39%        31.00%      11.25%
     2        11.25%       16.88%        16.50%      16.88%
     3        12.00%          X          17.92%      19.58%
     4        20.36%          X                      10.00%

Panel B: Cooperation Percentage in Part 2
                 Consider Votes          Not Consider Votes
              Modify     Not Modify      Modify    Not Modify
Vote Share (EndoMod) (EndoNot)         (ExoMod)     (ExoNot)
     0           X         21.67%
     1           X         11.67%        24.50%      12.50%
     2        51.67%       8.44%         43.50%       9.38%
     3        48.00%          X          32.50%      12.50%
     4        88.93%          X                       7.50%
Table 9: The effect of democracy - Group level data - Voteshare=2
Dependent Variable: Group cooperation rate in part 2
                                 (1)          (2)                (3)           (4)
EndoMod                         0.517        0.404              0.538         0.45
                             [0.090]***   [0.117]***         [0.094]***    [0.123]***
EndoNot                         0.084       -0.085              0.079        -0.047
                               [0.078]      [0.139]            [0.071]       [0.134]
ExoMod                          0.435        0.27                0.3          0.19
                             [0.099]***    [0.149]*          [0.094]***      [0.136]
ExoNot                          0.094       -0.075              0.108        -0.015
                               [0.111]      [0.158]            [0.109]       [0.155]
Part 1 Cooperation                           1.002                            0.704
                                            [0.687]                          [0.636]
Exclude did not remember
vote result                      No           No               Yes           Yes
Observations                     23           23                18            18
R-squared                       0.74         0.77              0.76          0.78

Tests of differences of cooperation rates by mechanism (Endo versus Exo) and payoffs (Mod versus Not)
                              p-values
EndoNot=ExoNot                   0.946        0.944      0.822      0.806
EndoMod=ExoMod                   0.550        0.333      0.096      0.074
EndoMod=EndoNot                  0.002        0.001      0.002      0.001
ExoMod=ExoNot                    0.033        0.028      0.204      0.176

Note: All results are from OLS regressions. The dependent variable is the cooperation rate by group in the
10 rounds after the voting stage (part 2). The explanatory variables are indicator variables for the vote
stage result. EndoMod: endogenous modification, EndoNot: endogenous non-modification, ExoMod:
exogenous modification, ExoNot: exogenous non-modification. Regressions in columns (2) and (4) control
for the cooperation rate of the group before the voting stage (Part 1). Standard errors in brackets: *
significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. The p-values correspond to Wald tests based
on the regression results.
                         Figure 1: Voting Stage

                                                  modify (EndoMod)
                                                  Payoffs
                               Majority
                    consider   decides to
                                                  not
                    votes      (computer
                                                  modify (EndoNot)
                               breaks ties)
                                                  payoffs
       Computer
Vote
       decides to
                                                  modify
                                                          (ExoMod)
                    not                           payoffs
                    consider
                    votes      Computer
                               decides to
                                                  not
                                                          (ExoNot)
                                                  modify
                                                  payoffs
                           Figure 2: Cumulative Distribution of Vote Share
                           1

                          0.9

                          0.8
Cumulative Distribution




                          0.7

                          0.6

                          0.5

                          0.4

                          0.3

                          0.2

                          0.1

                           0
                                0       1             2                  3   4
                                                 Vote Share

                                               Observed       Binomial
Figure 3: Cooperation by Round, Vote Stage Results and Individual Vote
                                             Voted for modification                                                               Did not vote for modification
                1




                                                                                                         1
                .8




                                                                                                         .8
                .6




                                                                                                         .6
  Cooperation




                                                                                           Cooperation
                .4




                                                                                                         .4
                .2




                                                                                                         .2
                0




                                                                                                         0




                     1   2   3   4   5   6   7    8   9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20                      1   2   3   4   5   6   7    8   9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
                                                        Round                                                                                    Round

                                                 EndoMod              EndoNot                                                             EndoMod             EndoNot
                                                 ExoMod               ExoNot                                                              ExoMod              ExoNot
