                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           PARENTAL EDUCATION AND PARENTAL TIME WITH CHILDREN

                                         Jonathan Guryan
                                            Erik Hurst
                                     Melissa Schettini Kearney

                                        Working Paper 13993
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13993


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2008




The authors thank Seth Freedman for his extremely capable research assistance. We also thank Rebecca
Vichniac for her help in obtaining data from various countries. We thank Bruce Sacerdote and Anna
Lusardi for their assistance in translating the Italian time-use documentation. Lastly, we thank Susanne
Bianchi, Jim Hines, Valerie Ramey, Andrei Shleifer, Tim Smeeding, Jeremy Stein, and Tim Taylor
for helpful comments on previous drafts. None of the agencies of the individual governments who
provided the international time-use data bear any responsibility for the analysis or interpretation of
the time-use data. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Jonathan Guryan, Erik Hurst, and Melissa Schettini Kearney. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Parental Education and Parental Time With Children
Jonathan Guryan, Erik Hurst, and Melissa Schettini Kearney
NBER Working Paper No. 13993
May 2008
JEL No. J13,J22

                                             ABSTRACT

Parents invest both their material resources and their time into raising their children. Time investment
in children is thought to be critical to the development of "quality" children who will become productive
adults. This paper has three goals related to the examination of parental time allocated to the care of
their children. First, using data from the recent American Time Use Surveys (ATUS), we highlight
what we think are the most interesting, and perhaps surprising, cross sectional patterns in time spent
with children by parents within the United States. Second, we interpret our results in a Beckerian
framework of time allocation with a view toward establishing whether parental childcare appears to
be more akin to leisure or home production. Third, we examine data from a sample of 14 countries
to establish whether the patterns we observe in the United States hold across countries and within other
countries. We show that both within countries and across countries there is a strong positive relationship
between parental education, or earnings, and time spent with children. We then show that time spent
with children does not follow patterns typical of leisure or home production, suggesting an important
difference. We speculate that one reason for this positive education gradient relates to the investment
aspect of time spent with children.


Jonathan Guryan                                     Melissa Schettini Kearney
University of Chicago                               Department of Economics
Graduate School of Business                         University of Maryland
5807 S. Woodlawn Ave.                               3105 Tydings Hall
Chicago, IL 60637                                   College Park, MD 20742
and NBER                                            and NBER
jonathan.guryan@chicagoGSB.edu                      kearney@econ.umd.edu

Erik Hurst
Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago
Hyde Park Center
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
erik.hurst@gsb.uchicago.edu
        Parents invest both material resources and their time into raising their children.

Time investment in children is important to the development of human capital. It is also

one possible mechanism through which economic status is transmitted from generation to

generation.

        This paper examines parental time allocated to the care of their children. First,

using data from the recent American Time Use Surveys, we highlight what we think are

the most interesting cross sectional patterns in time spent by American parents as they

care for their children.1 We find that higher-educated parents spend more time with their

children; for example, mothers with a college education or greater spend roughly 4.5

hours more per week in child care than mothers with a high school degree or less. This

relationship is striking, given that higher-educated parents also spend more time working

outside the home. This robust relationship holds across all sub-groups examined,

including both non-working and working mothers and working fathers. It also holds

across all four sub-categories of child care: basic, educational, recreational, and travel

related to child care. From an economics perspective this positive education/income

gradient in child care (which also holds for income) can be viewed as surprising given

that the opportunity cost of time is higher for higher-educated, high-wage adults.

        Second, we interpret our results in a Beckerian framework of time allocation with

a view toward establishing whether the allocation of time to child care follows similar

patterns to home production or leisure time (Becker 1965).                      Many of the tasks

constituting child care can be purchased in the market, and so economists often include


1
 Throughout this paper we refer to the concepts of parental child care and parental time spent with their
children interchangeably, though in section 2 we explicitly acknowledge that the two measures might
capture different things.

                                                                                                       1
child care as just another form of household production (for example, Burda,

Hamermesh, and Weil, 2008).         However, parents report spending time with their

children, especially in recreation or educational child care, to be among their more

enjoyable activities, especially when compared with other standard home production

activities (Juster 1985; Robinson and Godbey 1999, Appendix Table 0; Krueger,

Kahneman, Schkade, Schwarz, and Stone (2007).). We will point out that in sharp

contrast to the positive education and income gradient we observe for child care, the

amount of time allocated to home production and to leisure falls sharply as education and

income rise. Given such patterns in the data, we conclude that child care is best modeled

as being distinct from either typical home production or leisure activities, and thinking

about it differently suggests important questions that are wide open for economists to

explore about parental inputs of time toward their children.

       Third, we examine data from a sample of 14 countries to establish whether the

patterns we observe in the United States hold across countries and within other countries.

The results are strikingly similar. Both within other countries and across countries, higher

income is associated with more parental time spent with children. Within all of the 14

countries for which we have data, more-educated parents spend more time with their

children than less-educated parents do, all else equal.



Parental Time Use in the United States

Findings from Previous Studies

       The vast empirical literature on parental time use in the United States has shown

that the age of the parents’ youngest child (see e.g. Zick and Bryant (1996) for a



                                                                                          2
comprehensive survey), and family structure (see Sayer, Bianchi, and Robinson (2004)

for a discussion) are particularly important factors driving time spent by parents with

their children. We do not focus on children’s ages or on family structure in our discussion

below. However, given the documented importance of these variables, we include age of

children and marital status as control variables when explaining differences in time use

across parents with different education or income.

       The literature has also shown that in the United States, at least, mothers spend

more time with their children than do fathers, although the gender gap is not nearly as

wide as it once was. The ratio of married fathers' to married mothers' hours spent on child

care increased from 0.24 in 1965 to 0.55 in 1998 (Bianchi, 2000). Mothers also spend

proportionally more time in routine care of children, while fathers spend proportionally

more time in teaching or playing activities (Bryant and Zick, 1993; Pleck, 1997).

       Numerous examinations of U.S. time use data confirm that employed parents

spend less time with their children than non-employed parents. However, given that

school-aged children are often not present in the home when the parent is working, the

time that non-working parents spend with their children is not that much greater than the

time spent with children by working parents—and not nearly as large as the difference in

working hours (Bianchi, 2000; Zick and Bryant, 1996; Gauthier, Smeeding, and

Furstenberg, 2004; Sayer, Bianchi, and Robinson, 2004). Furthermore, employed parents

can maximize their time spent with children by altering work hours to coincide with

children's available hours. For example, employment data suggests that around one-third

of new mothers remain firmly attached to the labor force while two-thirds follow other




                                                                                         3
patterns—perhaps working seasonally or part-time—during the years when child care

demands are most intense (Bianchi, 2000; see also Klerman and Liebowitz, 1999).

        Finally, previous studies have long documented that highly-educated mothers

spend more time with children than less-educated mothers. Hill and Stafford (1974),

using nationally representative data from the 1965 Productive Americans Survey

conducted by the Survey Research Center of the University of Michigan, found that high

socio-economic status mothers spend two to three times as much time in preschool child

care as do low socio-economic status mothers. More recently, Kimmel and Connelly

(2007) use data from the 2003-2004 American Time Use Survey to estimate a structural

model of the allocation of time for women. As part of their results, they find that a

woman’s predicted wage is positively correlated to the time women allocate to child

care.2 These latter patterns are most interesting to us from an economic perspective, and

we focus on them here. However, instead of estimating a structural model, we show

patterns of time use for both men and women by educational attainment. The two

methodologies yield similar results, but our approach facilitates our comparison of the

U.S. data to the patterns found in other countries which we document later in this paper.



Time Spent in Child care by Subgroups: Evidence from the American Time Use Survey

        We begin our data exploration by documenting total hours spent in child care by

various subgroups defined by gender, marital status, employment status, and education.

We use data from the 2003-2006 waves of the American Time Use Survey conducted by

2
  Sayer, Gauthier, and Furstenberg (2004) examine the link between education and parental time spent with
children in Canada, Germany, Italy, and Norway. Bianchi and Robinson (1997) examine time diary data
from a sample of children from California age 3-11 and show that children of higher-educated parents
study and read more and watch less television.


                                                                                                       4
the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. This survey uses a 24-hour recall of the previous

day’s activities to elicit time diary information. Each day of the week is equally

represented within the survey. We pool data from survey years 2003 through 2006.3 Our

primary analysis sample includes only those individuals between the ages of 21 and 55

with at least one child under age 18, and who had a complete 24-hour time diary. This

nationally representative sample includes 22,693 individuals with children, with 13,434

of them being women.

         We define “total child care” as the sum of four primary time use components.

“Basic” child care is time spent on the basic needs of children, including breast feeding,

rocking a child to sleep, general feeding, changing diapers, providing medical care (either

directly or indirectly), grooming, and so on. However, time spent preparing a child’s

meal is included in general “meal preparation,” a component of non-market production.

“Educational” child care is time spent reading to children, teaching children, helping

children with homework, attending meetings at a child’s school, and similar activities.

“Recreational” child care involves playing games with children, playing outdoors with

children, attending a child’s sporting event or dance recital, going to the zoo with

children, and taking walks with children. “Travel” child care is any travel related to any

of the three other categories of child care. For example, driving a child to school, to a

doctor, or to dance practice are all included in “travel” child care. Again, “total child

care” is simply the sum of these four measures.4


3
   For more information on the American Time Use Survey, see Aguiar and Hurst (2007). Our creation of
variables is essentially identical to that used in their paper, though they only focus on the 2003 data. We
have adjusted our classification slightly relative to theirs to account for changes in the survey between 2003
and 2006. All of our data and codes for this paper can be found at <http://www.econ.umd.edu/~freedman-
s/jep-timeuse>). A full description of our handling of the data is described in the data appendix.
4
  In our empirical work, we include the total time parents spend with both household and non-household
children. As discussed in the data appendix, we do this for comparability with the international time use

                                                                                                            5
         Table 1 reports hours spent in child care for women and men by marital and work

status. We present total time spent in any child care as well as time broken down into our

four child care categories: basic, educational, recreational, and travel. The average time

spent in child care for all women with children is 14.0 hours per week. This is dominated

by time spent in basic child care (7.7 hours).             The time input associated with having a

young child in the household is expectedly larger. Women with at least one child under

the age of five spend an average of 21.0 hours per week in child care, with 12.6 of those

hours devoted to basic child care.

         Women spend roughly twice as much time in child care as do men, a pattern

which holds true for all subgroups. Among all men with children, average child care is

6.8 hours per week, compared to 14.0 hours for women. For both men and women, basic

child care activities consume the largest amount of time spent in child care. But men do

spend proportionately more of their child care time in recreational activities.5

         These patterns cannot be fully explained with the belief that men tend to

specialize in market production and women tend to specialize in home production,

because the gender gap persists within groups of working parents. Working women

devote an average of 11.6 hours per week to child care, compared to 6.5 hours among

working men. This data does not, however, show whether working women with children

have selected into occupations or positions that have more flexibility of hours or even

lower total hours.

data presented later in this paper. This distinction, however, is not important empirically given that parents
between the ages of 21 and 55 (our analysis sample) spend very little time with other households’ children
when their own children are not present. The 75th percentile of the time spent with non-household children
distribution for our analysis sample is zero. All of the U.S. results presented in this paper were redone
excluding time spent with non-household children from our measure of child care, but this does not change
any of our results in any significant way.
5
  A basic examination of the data revealed no obvious differences in child care time for either mothers or
fathers based on the gender of the child.

                                                                                                            6
       Non-working women with children spend on average seven more hours in child

care per week than their working counterparts. This difference is spread across the four

categories of child care, with the largest differences being in basic and recreational child

care activities. As shown by others in the literature, married women and women with

young children spend more time in child care than single women or women with older

children.



Patterns by Education and Income

       Parents with different education levels spend substantially different amounts of

time in child care. Table 2 reports that women with less education than a high school

degree spend an average of 12.1 hours per week in child care, while college-educated

women and women with education beyond a college degree spend 16.5 and 17.0 hours in

child care, respectively.

       These differences do not appear to be driven by differences in employment rates.

Higher-educated women with children are much more likely to be working (79 percent

for women with more than a college degree compared to 42 percent for women with less

than a high school degree). In addition, higher-educated women tend to have fewer

children—1.8 children per household for women with more than a college degree

compared to 2.2 children per household for women with less than a high school degree—

making the pattern of child care across education groups even more surprising. Higher-

educated women are also much more likely to be married; the fraction of women with a

high-school degree or less who are married is around 60 percent, compared to more than

85 percent among college educated women.



                                                                                          7
       The education gradient is also not driven by a woman’s age, number of children,

marital status, or age of youngest child. We estimate ordinary least squares regressions

with time spent with children as the dependent variable: for the explanatory variables, we

include the three factors just mentioned along with dummy variables for the differing

levels of completed education. Women with less than 12 years of education is the omitted

group, so the coefficients on the other levels of education can be interpreted as additional

hours spent with children relative to that group. Adjusting for these other factors makes

the education gradient even steeper. These results are shown separately for working and

non-working women under the “conditional” columns in Table 2. Specifically, non-

working women with a college degree or more than a college degree spend, respectively,

6.4 and 9.7 hours per week more on child care than non-working women with less than a

high school degree. The corresponding conditional educational differences for working

women are 6.1 and 6.4 hours per week.

        Tables 3 and 4 show that a rising education gradient holds within all four types of

care (basic, educational, recreational, and travel) and for all four groups we analyzed

(non-working and working women and men). These tables report conditional ratios of

time spent in childcare, for each education group relative to those with less than a high

school degree. The conditioning set of variables includes a cubic in age, number of

children indicators, a married indicator, and age of youngest child indicators. As shown

in the table, for nonworking women, the education gradient is apparent in all four child

care categories, but is largest with respect to educational and recreational child care. For

working women, the gradient is steeper, so that working women with a college degree

spend 70 percent more time in child care than their counterparts with less than a high



                                                                                          8
school degree, and the education gradient is even stronger in recreational child care.

Working college-educated men spend about 105 percent more time in child care than

working men with less than a high school degree, and this gradient is fairly consistent

across child care categories. For non-working men, the gradient is less clear, but this is

not surprising given that so few men, particularly college-educated men, are not working.

        An important caveat to interpretation is that up to this point we have followed the

bulk of the previous literature and focused exclusively on child care coded as a "primary"

activity. However, child care is often an individual’s “secondary” activity. For example,

individuals who report going grocery shopping, preparing a meal or watching television

as their primary activity may have a child in their care at the time. Furthermore, many

child care scholars have noted that child care sometimes extends to a supervisory role,

which may take place when a child is not even present in the same room. For example, a

parent must stay in the house while a child naps or sleeps. We made the choice to focus

on primary activities in part because by categorizing the activity this way parents are

indicating something about the quality of the interaction, or about the amount invested by

the parent. Using this narrow definition of child care is potentially problematic, though.

Parental time spent on secondary child care or in the presence of a child almost

necessarily involves less active interactions than primary child care, but this time might

still be quite important for a child's well-being or development.6




6
  The importance of distinguishing between time spent on “primary” and “secondary” child care activities
has been discussed by Folbre, Yoon, Finnoff, and Fuligni (2005), Folbre and Yoon (2007) and Zick and
Bryant (1996). Zick and Bryant note that studies utilizing time use surveys have been criticized for
undercounting parents’ time in child care due to the exclusion of secondary activities. They examine data
from the 1977-78 Eleven State Time Use Survey, which has a sample of 2,100 families, all with two minor
children in the home. They find that secondary child care time by both parents is a sizable fraction of all
child care, making up between 30 and 34 percent of the total time spent in child care.

                                                                                                         9
       The American Time Use Survey only records an individual’s primary allocation

of their time for almost all activities. However, there are two other ways to measure child

care in the survey. As pointed out by Folbre and Yoon (2007), for each activity, the

respondent is asked a special question about having a child "in your care". Respondents

are also asked whom was "in the same room" (for activities at home) or "accompanying

you" if not at home. Multiple individuals could be listed. Note that it is not clear which

measure provides a broader measure. If a child is playing in the backyard or in a different

room, the parent’s supervisory role would be captured by the "in your care" measure, but

not by the "with whom" measure. On the other hand, it is not clear that caring for a child

when he is sleeping is what one would want to capture with a measure of child care.

Because the “in care of” question is only asked of parents with children less than 13, we

focus on the “with whom” question to create an alternative measure of time spent with

children.

       Using the “with whom” data, we find that mothers spend roughly 45 hours per

week in the presence of their children. The comparable number for fathers was roughly

30 hours per week. These numbers are much higher than the roughly 14 and 7 hours per

week of primary child care reported by mothers and fathers, respectively (documented in

Table 1).   In other words, parents spend a good deal more time around their children

even if they are not engaging in tasks where “child care” is the primary activity.      In

terms of the education gradient, high educated parents and low educated parents spend

nearly identical amounts of total time in the presence of their children. These results are

shown in Table 5.      As with the results in Table 4, all differences are relative to

individuals with less than a high school degree and are conditioned on demographics. As



                                                                                        10
seen in Table 5, there is no education gradient with respect to spending time in the

presence of one’s children for either working women, non working women, working men

and non working men.

        At a minimum, the analysis above shows that even though parents of differing

education spend similar total time around their children, the nature of the interactions is

very different. The point that should be taken away from the analysis above is that high

educated parents spend much more time in activities where child care is listed as the

primary activity. Additional work is warranted to assess the extent to which parental

investments in children occur along other margins (secondary child care activities,

parental investments during meal time, etc.). As the discussion of the economic model of

time-use will highlight below, this pair of patterns may shed light on the reason why

more-educated parents spend more time in which they are focused primarily on child

care.



Understanding Time Spent With Children

        Many economic models categorize child care as a form of home production. Can

we infer something from the patterns in the time use data about the appropriateness of

this assumption? Though economists tend to be skeptical about inferring too much from

what people say, as opposed to what they do, it is perhaps instructive that individuals

often report spending recreational or educational time with their children as being among

their most enjoyable activities – particularly when compared with home production

activities (for example, Juster, 1985; Robinson and Godbey, 1999; Krueger, 2007).7 Do


7
 A recent book on family patterns by Bianchi, Robinson, and Milkie (2006) includes some survey data
about how parents feel about their time allocation. Among a national sample of 1,200 parents surveyed in

                                                                                                     11
the data presented here suggest whether parents treat time with their children as home

production (akin to preparing meals) or leisure (akin to going to the movies)?

         It might seem foolhardy to try to classify such an activity as multifaceted as child

care as being either leisure or home production, but economic principles can shed some

light on the question. Below, we describe the basic elements of an economic model of

time use that can help us to think about how we should expect the time spent in different

types of activities to vary across people with different wages, which economists tend to

consider the opportunity cost of one's time.



An Overview of an Economic Model of Time Allocation

         Consider a model in which individuals derive utility from three commodities: a

home-produced good, a leisure good, and well-cared-for children. The utility derived

from children may take several forms. Having well-cared for children may contribute

directly to a parent’s utility; for example, parents may enjoy spending time with their

children. Parents may also altruistically care about their children’s future happiness and

well-being and consider time with their children as an investment in their children’s

human capital. Or parents may care selfishly about their children’s future earnings

potential, knowing that high resource children may be better able to offset negative

income or health shocks experienced by the parent in old age.

         Each commodity is produced using a combination of market expenditures and

time (as in Becker, 1965). One way to classify goods as either “home production” or


2000 and 2001, 47.6 percent of parents report spending “too little time” with their youngest (or only) child,
57.7 percent report spending too little time with their oldest child, and 42.1 percent report too little time
with both. In contrast, only about five percent of parents reported too much time with their children. Of
course, these data do not give us insight into whether parents feel this way because of a sense of obligation,
or whether these responses are a window into parents’ marginal utility of time with their children.

                                                                                                          12
“leisure” is based on the elasticity of substitution between time and goods in their

production (Aguiar and Hurst, 2007). Most home production shows a fair degree of

substitutability between time and goods. For example, one can order take-out or purchase

pre-processed foods to reduce the time input associated with cooking, and similar

substitutability exists for cleaning the house, tending to the yard, and doing laundry.

However, in the case of leisure, time and goods are far less substitutable. To watch a

movie, it is necessary to allocate a fixed amount of time; you cannot pay someone to

watch a movie for you and expect to have a comparable experience. Other time-intensive

activities include socializing with friends, playing golf, reading, and watching television.

       In this framework, how might we expect time spent in home production, leisure or

child care to vary with the opportunity cost of time – that is, with a higher wage? In a

traditional economics model of the choice between income (that is, wages from labor)

and leisure, a higher wage has an ambiguous effect on the number of hours worked,

because of offsetting substitution and income effects. A similar analysis applies here. A

higher wage will lead to substitution toward more hours worked, and less time in home

production, leisure, or child care activities. For goods that have a relatively high degree

of substitutability between time and expenditures in the production of the commodity

(e.g., home-produced goods) an increase in wages will result in a greater decline in the

time allocated to that good, all else equal. A higher wage also brings a positive income

effect, which will lead people to desire more of all goods. The income effect will be

larger for goods where the elasticity of demand for the good with respect to additional

income is relatively high. In this model, there is also an interaction between the income

and substitution effects, because when an income effect leads to demanding more of a



                                                                                          13
consumable good for which time is an input, the degree to which individuals will choose

to produce the good with time rather than market expenditures will vary. The substitution

and income effects push in opposite directions. As the opportunity cost of time (the

wage) increases, the time allocated to the production a home-produced good, a leisure

good, or child care can increase (if the income effect dominates) or decrease (if the

substitution effect dominates).

       This discussion suggests that – all else equal – the relationship between the time

allocated to home production and a higher wage should be more negative than the

relationship between the time allocated to leisure and the wage. This outcome arises

because of a higher degree of substitutability between time and goods in the production

of home-produced goods, on average, than of leisure. To the extent that home-produced

goods have a higher income elasticity than leisure goods, this prediction would be

mitigated.

       The model as presented to this point could also be expanded to allow both

productivity of time and tastes for goods to vary according to a person’s earning capacity.

For example, suppose that high-wage individuals are more efficient in the production of

one of the commodities. On the one hand, the marginal return to spending another hour in

home production is higher for individuals with higher non-market productivity. On the

other hand, the more efficient worker can produce any given amount of the consumable

output in less time. These effects go in opposite directions, and so the existence of such

productivity differences would again have an ambiguous effect on how time spent in that

activity would differ between high and low wage individuals (all else equal) and either

could dominate.



                                                                                        14
        In a related vein, tastes may differ across households in a way that is correlated

with the household’s opportunity cost of time. For example, lower-educated households

may have a greater taste for leisure goods—for example, relatively time-intensive goods

like television watching and socializing with friends—than higher-educated households.8

        Thinking about child care in this framework will point to ways in which parents

view time spent with their children as similar or different from either home production or

from leisure.



Patterns of Time Spent in Leisure and Home Production

        Before interpreting the trends in child care in terms of our theoretical discussion,

it is useful to document the educational gradient in time spent on activities other than

child care. If time spent with children follows patterns across parents with different

opportunity costs of time similar to leisure, we might conclude that parents treat time

spent with their children as a form of leisure. Alternatively, if time spent with children

correlates in ways similar to time in home production, we might conclude that parents

treat time spent with their children as a form of work.

        For our empirical work here, we divide household time into five categories:

market work, total non-market work, leisure, child care, and all other uses of time. The

“market work” category is straightforward. “Total non-market work” includes time spent

in core household chores, time spent obtaining goods and services, plus time spent on



8
  Allowing different time use to have different disutilities would be a potential extension of the Beckerian
model, as Krueger et al. (2007) discuss. For example, if lower wage households derive a greater disutility
from allocating time to a certain activity, they will spend less time in that activity, all else equal. The
implications for the cross-sectional interpretation of the relationship between time allocated to a good and
the wage would be similar if low-educated individuals simply liked the good less or if they liked like the
time they allocated to production of the good less.

                                                                                                        15
other home production such as home maintenance, outdoor cleaning, vehicle repair,

gardening, pet care, and others. In turn, core household chores includes meal preparation

and cleanup, doing laundry, ironing, dusting, vacuuming, indoor household cleaning,

indoor design and maintenance. Examples of time spent “obtaining goods and services”

include grocery shopping, shopping for other household items, comparison shopping,

coupon clipping, going to the bank, going to a barber, going to the post office, and buying

goods on-line; time spent acquiring medical care, education, and restaurant meals are

explicitly excluded from this category. The definition of home production that we use

here is the same as used by Aguiar and Hurst (2007), which in turn is very similar to the

definition used by other time researchers like Robinson and Godbey (1999), with the key

exception that neither we nor Aguiar and Hurst include child care as a component of

home production.

       Leisure activities are harder to define.     We follow the “leisure measure 2”

definition used by Aguiar and Hurst (2007). It includes activities such as time spent

watching television, socializing (relaxing with friends and family, playing games with

friends and family, talking on the telephone, attending/hosting social events, etc.), in

exercise/sports (playing sports, attending sporting events, exercising, and running),

reading (books and magazines, personal mail, and personal email), entertainment/hobbies

(going to the movies or theatre, listening to music, using the computer for leisure, doing

arts and crafts, playing a musical instrument), and other similar activities. We also

include in our measure of leisure activities that provide direct utility but may also be

viewed as intermediate inputs, such as sleeping, eating, and personal care. We exclude

own medical care, but include such activities as grooming, having sex, sleeping or



                                                                                        16
napping, and eating at home or in restaurants.             All other uses of time are in the residual

category, which we will not discuss further here.

         Panel A of Table 6 reports the differences for time spent in home production and

leisure for both non working and working women across education groups. The approach

here uses an ordinary least squares regression in which the dependent variable is time

spent on a certain activity. One set of independent variables are dummy variables for

level of education; the education level of less than 12 years is the omitted category, so the

coefficients on the other variables can be interpreted as the difference in hours relative to

that group. The regression also includes control variables for age (expressed as a cubic),

and dummy variables for number of children, married or not, and age of youngest child.

Different regressions were run for each activity, as well as for nonworking women

(columns I) and working women (columns II).

         For women, this analysis reveals a steep negative education gradient for both

leisure and home production activities. These results are similar to those documented in

Aguiar and Hurst (2007), who examined leisure and home production differences across

education groups for women and men, but did not condition on work status. Non-working

women with more than a college degree spend 6.1 fewer hours per week in home

production and 7.3 fewer hours per week in leisure activities relative to women with less

than a high school degree.9 Working women with more than a college degree spend 4.4

fewer hours per week in home production and 4.8 fewer hours per week in leisure

compared to the lowest educated group in the sample.




9
  In results not reported here, we find that there is a negative education gradient for both men and women in
total sleep hours.

                                                                                                          17
       Panel B of Table 6 shows the analogous results for non-working and working

men. The education gradient in home production for non-working men appears positive,

but the sample of non-working men is too small to warrant any strong conclusions. For

working men, there does not appear to be a strong education gradient in home production.

But, there is a large negative education gradient for leisure time among men that stands in

contrast to the positive education gradient.

       An examination of time-use patterns by earnings for those currently working –

another proxy for the opportunity cost of time – reveals the same underlying trends. In

particular, we rank working married women by their age-adjusted weekly earnings. To

get a measure of age-adjusted weekly earnings, we run a regression of log weekly

earnings on a cubic in age on a sample that only includes married working women. The

married working women are then placed into age-adjusted weekly earnings quintiles

based on the residuals from this regression. Table 7 reports the coefficients on earnings

quintiles indicators from a regression of time spent in child care on the earnings

indicators and demographic controls. Consistent with the results for education, higher

earning married working women and higher earning married working men spend more

time with their children than do their lower income counterparts.



Interpreting the Data

       Given the higher substitutability between expenditures and time in production,

one may have predicted that individuals with a high opportunity cost of time, all else

equal, would be more willing to purchase market substitutes for their home production

time and thereby reduce their time input into home production tasks, as compared with



                                                                                        18
leisure. As seen in Tables 6 and 7, however, the education and earnings gradients for

leisure are actually more negative than the gradient for home production. Apparently, all

is not equal when making such cross-sectional comparisons. According to the theoretical

discussion above, this implies that either: 1) home production goods have higher income

elasticities; 2) the relative productivity within the home production sector differs by

educational attainment; or 3) individuals with a lower opportunity cost of time have a

stronger relative preference for leisure goods.

       But from the perspective of this article, the key question is what do these patterns

suggest about how individuals view time spent in child care relative to alternate uses of

their time? The education/earnings gradient is negative for both leisure and home

production activities. However, the education/earnings gradient is strikingly positive for

child care time. Time spent caring for one’s children appears to be fundamentally

different from these other two categories of time use.

       Given our discussion above, at least four potential reasons could explain why

child care patterns relative to education and income differ from the leisure and home

production patterns. First, parents may simply view the output of investing in children as

being more of a luxury good than either traditional home production or leisure goods. If

this reason holds true, then as income increases, the marginal utility from time invested

into children must be higher than the marginal utility of an additional unit of time

invested in either preparing meals (the dominant home production activity) or watching

television (the dominant leisure activity). Additional support for this possibility comes

from the evidence, recounted above, that adults often state that spending time with their




                                                                                        19
children in recreational activities is among their most enjoyable activities (especially

when compared to other home production activities).

       Second, the child care patterns in the data documented above are consistent with

parents viewing market-purchased child care options as poor substitutes for parental time,

relative to the degree of substitutability between expenditures and time in the production

of typical home produced goods. Highly-educated parents may be more likely to feel that

market alternatives are not good substitutes for their own time spent with their children.

They may not think it is possible to monitor child care providers well enough to ensure

their children spend time in the activities of their choosing, such as doing art projects or

reading books, rather than watching television. Or high-education parents may believe

that spending time with adults with less human capital is an imperfect substitute for

spending time with themselves.

       Similarly,   if   the   demand     for   well-cared-for    children   increases    in

income/education, then even if parents viewed the degree of substitutability in child care

to be comparable to the degree of substitutability in traditional home production

activities, we would expect highly-educated parents to substitute more toward market

alternatives – to pay nannies and schools to care for their children and to purchase

educational aids like computers and enriching toys. Of course, many highly educated

parents do some of these things, but even net of this substitution, they still spend more of

their own time with their children.

       Third, higher-wage parents might have a greater preference for the output

generated by time spent with their children, at least relative to their preferences for home

produced and leisure goods. Or, conversely, lower-educated parents may have a greater



                                                                                         20
relative preference for their own leisure. Allowing preferences for the consumption goods

to differ by education can tautologically explain all the patterns in the data. The fact that

preferences for leisure differs by education is not implausible given the fact that

differences in preferences are a common explanation for differences in educational

attainment across households.

        A fourth explanation is that perhaps the return to investment in children from

higher-income/higher-education parents is higher. If the children of higher-educated

parents have greater potential or greater opportunities, the marginal return on time

invested in such children could be higher. (Alternatively, the marginal return to time

investment in children with lower innate ability could be higher. There appears to be

remarkably little evidence informing this issue.) Importantly, this explanation requires

that parents do not consider market alternatives to be highly effective substitutes for their

own time spent in child care. One recent phenomenon that may have increased the return

on investment in children, particularly for highly-educated parents, is the large size of the

cohort comprised of the children of the baby boom. Ramey and Ramey (2007) argue that

the competition by this cohort for inelastically supplied slots at top-tier college led to a

rat race.

        Another reason why higher-educated parents may have a higher return to

investing in their children is that the value or quality of their time investment may be

higher. However, recall from the theoretical discussion above that such productivity

differences have ambiguous effects on time spent in child care. A higher return might

induce parents to spend more time with their children, but on the other hand, these more

productive parents can produce the same amount of human capital in their children in less



                                                                                          21
time. Future research might investigate this possibility by focusing on types of child care

for which productivity might be assumed to be related directly to education, such as

reading to one’s child.

       This final possible explanation for the educational gradient in child care points to

the question of whether parental time investments in children are correlated with

increased child human capital, and whether this relationship is stronger for more-

educated parents. Economists have been considering this question at least since the

seminal work of Leibowitz (1972, 1974, and 1977). Haveman and Wolfe (1995) provide

an extensive review of the literature on the determinants of children's attainments with an

emphasis on family characteristics other than parental time use, including poverty, family

structure, mother's education. In sociology, Coleman’s (1988) classic work argues that if

parents are absent or not involved with their children, then social capital is lacking, and

as a consequence the level of human capital that parents possess is an irrelevant resource

for the child because the mechanism of transferring human capital does not function.

Cooksey and Fondell (1996) examine data from the 1987-88 National Survey of Families

and Households and find a strong positive relationship between fathers' time spent with

children and academic grades, which they interpret as supportive of Coleman's view.

       The empirical evidence on the relationship between parental time investment and

children’s outcomes is only moderately convincing. Empirical papers on this issue have

tended to focus on educational achievement, which is only one potential measure of child

outcomes. The consensus of these studies is not clear (for example, Leibowitz, 1974;

Etaugh, 1984; Steelman and Mercy, 1980; Datcher-Loury, 1988; Blau and Grossberg,

1990). Moreover, such studies are plagued with identification problems; for example,



                                                                                        22
perhaps parents spend more time working on homework with children who are having

trouble with their homework, so parental time will appear to be correlated with lower

educational performance. Furthermore, some of the studies do not have direct measures

of maternal child care time and rely on proxy measures. As we have documented above,

maternal time spent in child care often follows surprising patterns, in the sense that

mothers with a higher opportunity cost of time tend to spend more time on child care.

Further empirical work on this issue is warranted.10

         More empirical work is also needed to disentangle why the educational gradient

with child care is positive while the educational gradients of home production and leisure

are negative. The fact that there is a positive wage elasticity for time spent on child care

and a negative wage elasticity for time spent on leisure and home production was also

noted by Kimmel and Connelly (2007). The negative educational gradient for home

production and leisure was also noted by Aguiar and Hurst (2007). Both of these papers

also caution readers to treat child care time as distinct from either home production or

leisure. Given these differences, researchers measuring the allocation of time or modeling

parental inputs into children should proceed by treating child care as being distinct from

other leisure or home production activities.




Trends in Parental Child Care over Time



10
   There is a related literature in child development on the impacts of maternal employment in early
childhood on a child’s subsequent cognitive outcomes. The presumption of this literature is that maternal
employment in the early years of a child’s life translates into less parental investment during that time. Han,
Waldfogel, and Brooks-Gunn (2001) and Brooks-Gunn, Han, Waldfogel (2002) find that maternal
employment during a child’s first year of life is negatively associated with cognitive outcomes in later
childhood.

                                                                                                           23
       We have presented a snapshot picture of parental time use in the United States,

with an emphasis on documenting current differences across various subgroups. An in-

depth consideration of how these differences have evolved over time is beyond the scope

of this article. But we would be remiss to not at least raise the issue of time trends in

parental time use, given widespread interest in the issue. For example, if child care

increases with individual income, it would not be surprising to find child care increase

substantially within the United States over the last 40 years, given the large increases in

income experienced by the average household.

       Bianchi (2000), Sayer, Bianchi, and Robinson (2004), Aguiar and Hurst (2007)

and Ramey and Ramey (2007) all report that adults in the United States today are

spending more time with their children than in the past. This pattern holds true for parents

as a group, as well as within subgroups – both working and non-working parents and both

mothers and fathers. Bianchi documents that from 1965 to 1998, the average amount of

time spent providing "child care" has increased from 0.4 hours per day to 1.0 hour per

day among married fathers and from 1.7 to 1.8 hours per day among married mothers.

Aguiar and Hurst show that adjusting for changing demographics (including the aging of

the population and declining fertility rates) the average time spent in child care for men

and women in the U.S. increased by roughly 2.0 hours per week between 1965 and 2003.

The cross sectional trends documented above are consistent with the time series trends.

Furthermore, Ramey and Ramey (2007) show that the increase in time spent with

children was larger for more educated individuals relative to less educated individuals.

       Gauthier, Smeeding, and Furstenberg (2004) provide evidence that the trend

toward greater parental child care time was not exclusive to the U.S. experience. The



                                                                                           24
authors examine trends in child care from 1960 to 2000 using data from 16 countries

included in the Multinational Time Use Study. This study administers a common 24-hour

diary instrument in all sample countries. The authors include data from Australia,

Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Czechoslovakia, Finland, France, Germany, Hungary, Italy,

Norway, Poland, Sweden, United Kingdom, United States, and the former Yugoslavia.

Examining parental time spent in child care for married/cohabiting parents with at least

one child under the age of five, the authors document a notable increase in time spent in

child care for all sub-samples considered: working mothers, working fathers, non-

working mothers, and non-working fathers. They further document that fathers have

increased time spent in housework and reduced time spent in paid work and personal

activities (including sleep), while mothers' increased time spent in child care is

coterminous with decreases in time spent on paid work, personal activities (including

sleep), and housework.



An International Perspective on Parental Child Care Time

       Do the positive education and income gradients that we have documented above

for parental child care time in the United States hold across countries and within other

countries? We examine data from the following countries, with the corresponding sample

years in parentheses: Austria (1992), Canada (1998-1999), Chile (1999), Estonia (1999-

2000), Italy, (2002-2003), France (1998-1999), Germany (1991-1992), Netherlands

(2000), Norway (1990-1991), Palestine (1999-2000), Slovenia (2000-2001), South Africa

(2000), and the United Kingdom (2000-2001). Our choice of countries and time periods




                                                                                      25
is limited to places and times in which the time use data is based on 24-hour time diaries,

a restriction that facilitates the comparison of time use patterns across countries.11

          We acknowledge that the time use surveys were conducted in a variety of

different manners across the different countries and that one should proceed cautiously

when comparing the exact amount of time spent in different activities across the

countries.    Our goals in this section are twofold. First, we wish to show that the time

spent in child care within these countries correlates with per capita income. Second, we

wish to show that within a diverse set of countries, we see the same educational gradient

for time spent in child care. This latter approach, given its reliance on within survey

variation, is not subject to the concern that these surveys are not literally comparable

across countries.

          For the different countries, our measure of time spent in child care includes all

time the individual spends in basic, educational, and recreational child care (as described

above).      Again, these surveys only focus on primary child care activities. This

harmonization of the data across countries was facilitated by the fact that activities

included in the basic, educational and recreational child care measures were similarly

categorized across the countries. The one exception is that some countries included travel

time associated with child care (like taking your children to school) in a general travel
11
    Tables in the data appendix provide detailed information about this data including information about
each survey’s sample methodology and coverage as well as the actual sample sizes used in our analysis. In
the appendix, we also note how we defined child care within each of the surveys. There are three important
notes about the international time use data which we want to emphasize. First, some of these datasets were
accessed through the Multinational Time Use Survey (MTUS) which harmonized the time use
classification and sample demographics for the participating surveys. The participating time use surveys
included in the MTUS that met our inclusion criteria include the surveys from Austria, France, Germany,
Norway, Slovenia, and South Africa. The remaining data were accessed directly through the organization
which collected the data. Second, the Chilean data had respondents choose from a pre-determined set of
activity codes when filling out their time diaries. The respondents from all other countries reported their
activities in their own words. Their description was then converted into time use categories by the staff of
the respective surveys. Third, all the surveys provide weights designed to ensure that the surveys are
nationally representative. We use these weights when describing the country means below.

                                                                                                        26
time category. For these countries, we cannot separately identify child care travel from

other types of travel. For that reason, travel time associated with children was excluded

from all our measures of total time spent in child care for all countries.

       Table 8 reports the average hours per week spent in child care for men and

women, respectively, for the countries we analyzed. We restrict the sample to include

only individuals between the ages of 21 and 55 (inclusive) with at least one child under

the age of 18 in the household. To facilitate comparisons, in this section we report U.S.

numbers according to this sample restriction, as opposed to restricting the sample to

parents, as we do above. We also restrict the analysis to individuals with a complete time

diary (the sum of time across all activities totaled 1440 minutes). We further weight all

country data to ensure that each day of the week (within each sub sample) is equally

represented.    For the reasons given above, Table 8 redisplays the U.S. child care

numbers excluding travel-related child care. The countries are listed in order of GDP per

capita (measured in 2000 U.S. dollars), from the United Nation’s Statistics Division

National Accounts Main Aggregates Database.

       The patterns of Table 8 are broadly consistent with the cross-sectional patterns

found within the United States. Countries with higher GDP per capita, on average, spend

more time on child care. The table shows that parents in the United States, Canada, and

Norway spend the most amount of time caring for their children. Parents in South Africa,

France, and Slovenia spend the least amount of time in child care. The gender gap in time

spent with children varies widely across countries. The ratio of time spent by mothers to

time spent by fathers is the lowest in Canada, Netherlands, Norway and the United States,

with ratios of child care hours that are approximately two to one. The ratio of time



                                                                                       27
exceeds three to one in Estonia, Austria, France, Palestine, and most notably in South

Africa, where the ratio of mother-to-father time in child care pushes ten to one.

        Of course, there are dramatic differences in the demographics of parents across

the countries we examine. Maternal labor force participation ranges from a low of 12

percent in Palestine to over 65 percent in Canada, Norway, Slovenia, United Kingdom,

and United States. Countries also differ with regard to the age distribution of parents as

well as number of children. To adjust for such differences across countries, time spent

with children is regressed, separately for men and for women, on country indicator

variables (with the United States as the excluded country), five year age category

indicators, number of children indicators, whether the household includes a child under

the age of five, marital status indicators for the parent, an indicator for employment, and a

full set of interactions between marital status and employment status indicators. This

adjustment makes the relationship between per capita GDP and time spent with children

even more positive.

       These coefficients on the country dummies are shown in Table 9. As before, we

rank the countries in the table by GDP per capita. Because of insufficient demographic

data in the surveys to make demographic adjustments, we exclude Austria and Estonia

from Table 9. Specifically, across the countries, higher GDP per capita is related to more

time spent on child care for both men and women.

       Table 10 confirms the U.S. patterns of the educational gradient of time spent with

children within each country in our sample. We restrict this analysis to women with

children. As we did with the U.S. data, we report conditional differences in time spent in

child care between educational groups. The method we used to compute the conditional



                                                                                          28
educational differences in time spent with children within all other countries was

identical to the procedure we used to compute the conditional educational differences in

the United States.        Within the non-U.S. countries, however, we only segmented the

population into two educational categories (high and low) as opposed to four. We chose

the educational cutoff within each country such that the high educated group comprised

roughly 30 percent of the women with children sample.

        Table 10 shows the educational difference of high-educated women relative to

low educated women, conditional on demographics, for both working women with

children and non-working women with children. In every country, high-educated women

spend more time on child care than low-educated women. The only exception is non-

working women in Chile, where the difference is essentially zero. Furthermore, even

though the sample sizes are small in many of these surveys, the differences are usually

statistically significant at standard levels.

        In short, higher-educated (and presumably higher-income) individuals spend more

time in child care than their lower-educated (and presumably lower-income) counterparts

in all countries that we analyzed. Furthermore, the absolute level of time spent in child

care across countries is positively correlated with cross country differences in GDP per

capita.12 These results are consistent with the patterns found in the United States and are




12
   Sayer, Gauthier, and Furstenberg (2004) examine the link between education and time spent with
children among married parents in Canada, Germany, Italy, and Norway using MTUS data. They
hypothesize that the educational differential in parental child care would be less pronounced in states with
more generous welfare states. They do not support this prediction. Joesch and Spiess (2006) use data from
the 1996 waive of the European Community Household Panel (ECHP) to compare the time mothers spend
with children across nine European countries. ECHP is based on a retrospective survey that asks each
sample household member age 16 years or older about their normal daily activities. Given differences in
time measurement within retrospective surveys compared to time measurement via time diaries, it is hard to
compare their results directly with those we present here.

                                                                                                        29
consistent with the interpretation that child care is valued more by individuals with higher

earnings potential.



Conclusion


        We draw three major empirical conclusions about parental child care time: (1)

higher earnings or earnings potential is associated with more time spent with children; (2)

this relationship appears to hold within the United States, across other countries, and

within other countries examined; and (3) this positive education/income gradient in time

spent in child care is the opposite of the education/income gradient observed for typical

leisure and home production activities. Collectively, our results show that time spent with

one’s children seems to be valued more by individuals with a higher opportunity cost of

time.   This result could arise if child care is more of a luxury good than other

consumption commodities; if higher-educated parents have a lower elasticity of

substitution between own and market-based child care or just a higher relative preference

for time spent with their children; or if the returns to investing in the children of higher

educated parents are higher than the returns to investing in the children of lower educated

parents. The fact that we see the education gradient in child care as a primary activity but

not in total time spent with children may suggest that highly-educated parents view child

care as an investment in which it is important to devote their active attention. Future

research should seek to differentiate between these hypotheses.

        Regardless of why parents with higher levels of education and income spend more

time on child care, the fact that they do so may have important implications for the

intergenerational transmission of human capital. Whether it is because higher-educated

                                                                                         30
parents demand more cared-for children, or because higher-educated parents are more

effective at enriching their children through face to face interaction, the fact that the

children of higher-educated parents enjoy more time being cared for directly by their

parents may have important effects on their development, both economic and otherwise.

       Child care is productive, like home production. Child care is also enjoyable, like

leisure. But we infer from the patterns in the data that parents view time spent with their

children as fundamentally different from either home production or leisure. Further

studies of what makes time spent caring for and investing in children unique could prove

both informative and important.




                                                                                        31
32
References

Aguiar, Mark and Erik Hurst. 2007. “Measuring Trends in Leisure: The Allocation of Time Over
        Five Decades,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(3): 969-1006.

Becker, Gary, S. 1965. “A Theory of the Allocation of Time.” The Economic Journal 75: 493-
        517.

Bianchi, Suzanne. 2000. “Maternal Employment and Time With Children: Dramatic Change or
        Surprising Continuity?” Demography, 37(4): 401–414.

Bianchi, Suzanne M., John P. Robinson, and Melissa A. Milkie. 2006. Changing Rhythms of
        American Family Life. ASA Rose Series. New York: Sussell Sage.

Bianchi, Suzanne M. and John P. Robinson. 1997. "What Did You Do Today? Children's
       Use of Time, Family Composition, and the Acquisition of Social Capital" Journal
       of Marriage and the Family , 59, 2, 332-344

Blau, Francine D. and Adam J. Grossberg. 1990. "Maternal Labor Supply and Children's
       Cognitive Development." The Review of Economics and Statistics, 74(3): 474-481.

Breedveld, K. Sociaal en Cultureel Planbureau , Tijdsbestedingsonderzoek 2000 - TBO 2000
       [computerfile], Amsterdam, Steinmetz Archives (P1576)

Brooks-Gunn, Jeanne, Wen-Jui Han, and Jane Waldfogel. 2002. “Maternal Employment and
       Child Outcomes in the First Three Years of Life.” Child Development, 73(4) (July-
       August): 1052-1072.

Burda, Michael, Daniel Hamermesh, and Philippe Weil, 2008. “The Distribution of Total Work
       in the EU and US”, in Working Hours and Job Sharing in the EU and USA, eds. Boeri,
       T., Burda, M.C., and Karmarz, F., Oxford University Press (forthcoming).

Bryant, W. Keith and Cathleen D. Zick. 1993. “Trends in time spent caring for children: 1924:31
        vs. 1981. Proceedings of the American Statistical Association’s 1993 Winter Conference,
        401-409.

Bureau of Labor Statistics and U.S. Census Bureau. The American Time Use Survey. 2002-2006.

Coleman, James S. 1988. "Social Capital in the Creation of Human Capital." The American
      Journal of Sociology, 94: S95-S120.

Cooksey, Elizabeth C. and Michelle M. Fondell. 1996. “Spending Time With His Kids: Effects of
       Family Structure on Fathers' and Children's Lives.” Journal of Marriage and the Family,
       58(3): 693-707.

Datcher-Loury, Linda. 1988. "Effects of Mother's Home Time on Children's Schooling." Review
       of Economics and Statistics 70(3):367-73.

Department of Social Studies, Department of Sociology of the Universidad Catolica of Chile.
       National Council of Science and Technology, Project Number 1980857.


                                                                                            33
Ipsos-RSL and Office for National Statistics, United Kingdom Time Use Survey, 2000 [computer
       file]. 3rd Edition. Colchester, Essex: UK Data Archive [distributor], September 2003.
       SN: 4504.

Etaugh, Claire. 1984. “Effects of Maternal Employment on Children: An Updated Review.”
       Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the Midwestern Psychological Association.

Folbre, Nancy and Jayoung Yoon. 2007. “What is child care?” Lessons From Time-Use Surveys
        of Major English-Speaking Countries” Review of Economics of the Household. 5, 223-
        248.

Folbre, Nancy, Jayoung Yoon, Kade Finnoff, and Allison Sidle Fuligni. 2005. “By What
        Measure? Family Time Devoted to Children in the United States”, Demography, 42(2),
        373-90.

Gauthier, Ann H., Timothy M. Smeeding, and Frank F. Furstenberg, Jr. 2004. "Are Parents
       Investing Less Time in Children? Trends in Selected Industrialized Countries."
       Population and Development Review, 30(4): 647-671.

Han, Wen-Jui, Jane Waldfogel, Jeanne Brooks-Gunn. 2001. “The Effects of Early Maternal
      Employment on Later Cognitive and Behavioral Outcomes,” Journal of Marriage and the
      Family, 63(2) (May): 336-354.

Haveman, Robert and Barbara Wolfe. 1995. "The Determinants of Children's Attainments: A
      Review of Methods and Findings." Journal of Economic Literature, 33(4): 1829-1879.

Hill, C. Russell and Frank P. Stafford. 1974. "Allocation of Time to Preschool Children and
        Educational Opportunity." The Journal of Human Resources, 9(3): 323-341.

Istituto Nazionale di Statistica. National Time Use Survey. 2002-2003.

Joesch, Jutta M. and Katharina Spiess. 2006. “European mothers’ time spent looking after
        children—Differences and similarities across nine countries.” Electronic International
        Journal of Time Use Research, 3(1): 1-27.

Juster, Thomas. 1985 “Preferences for Work and Leisure” in Time, Goods, and Well-Being.
        F.T.Juster and F.P. Stafford, eds., Ann Arbor, MI: Institute for Social Research,
        University of Michigan, pp. 333-51.

Kimmel, Jean and Rachel Connelly, 2007. “Mothers’ Time Choices: Caregiving, Leisure, Home
      Production, and Paid Work” Journal of Human Resources, 42(3), 643-61.

Klerman, Jacob A. and Arleen Leibowitz. 1999. "Job Continuity among New Mothers."
       Demography, 36(2): 145-155.

Krueger, Alan, Daniel Kahneman, David Schkade, Norbert Schwarz, and Arthur Stone (2007).
       “National Time Accounting: The Currency of Life”. Working paper.

Leibowitz, Arleen. 1972. “Women’s Allocation of Time to Market and Nonmarket Activities:
       Differences by Education.” Ph.D. dissertation, Columbia University, 1972.

                                                                                           34
Leibowitz, Arleen. 1974. "Home Investments in Children." Journal of Political Economy 82(2):
111-131.

Leibowitz, Arleen. 1977. "Parental Inputs and Children's Achievement." Journal of Human
       Resources 12(2): 243-51.

Multinational Time Use Study, Version 5.5.2 (released 14 October 2005). Created by Jonathan
       Gershuny, Kimberly Fisher and Anne H. Gauthier, with Alyssa Borkosky, Anita Bortnik,
       Donna Dosman, Cara Fedick, Tyler Frederick, Sally Jones, Tingting Lu, Fiona Lui,
       Leslie MacRae, Berenice Monna, Monica Pauls, Cori Pawlak, Nuno Torres and
       Charlemaigne Victorino. ISER, University of Essex, Colchester, UK.
       http://www.timeuse.org/mtus/

Palestinian Central Bureau of Statistics, Time Use Survey 1999/2000.

Pleck, J. H. 1997. “Paternal Involvement: Levels, Sources, and Consequences. In M. E. Lamb
        (Ed.), The Role of the Father in Child Development (pp. 66-103). New York: Wiley.

Ramey, Garey and Valerie Ramey. 2007. “The Rug Rat Race”. University of San Diego
      Working Paper.

Robinson, John and Geoffrey Godbey. 1999. Time for Life. University Park, PA: Pennsylvania
       State University Press.

Sayer, Liana, Suzanne Bianchi, and John Robinson. 2004. “Are Parents Investing Less in
       Children? Trends in Mothers’ and Fathers’ Time with Children.” American Journal of
       Sociology, 110 (1): 1–43.

Sayer, Liana C, Anne H. Gauthier, and Frank F. Furstenberg, Jr. 2004. “Educational Differences
        in Parents’ Time with Children: Cross-National Variations.” Journal of Marriage and
        Family, 66(5): 1152-1169.

SFI-Survey. The Time Use of Households: a Scheduling of the Danes Daily Use of Time. 2001.

State Statistical Office of Estonia, Tallinn. Time Use Survey. 1999-2000.

Statistics Canada, General Social Survey Cycle 19: Time Use, 12M0019GPE, 2005.

Statistics Canada, General Social Survey Cycle 12: Time Use, 12M0012GPE, 1998.

Steelman, Lala C. and James A. Mercy. 1980. “Unconfounding the Confluence Model: A Test of
       the Sibship Size and Birth Order Effects on Intelligence.” American Sociological Review,
       45(4): 571-582.


Zick, Cathleen D. and W. Keith Bryant. 1996. “A new look at parents' time spent in child care:
       Primary and secondary time use.” Social Science Research 25(3): 260–280.




                                                                                             35
Table 1
Hours Per Week Spent in Child Care by Various Subgroups within the United States: 2003-2006
                                                        All              "Basic"
                                                     Child Care           Child            "Educational"         "Recreational"         “Travel”
                                                                          Care              Child Care             Child Care          Child Care

All Mothers (n = 13,434)                               13.96              7.69                  2.10                  2.27                1.90
All Fathers (n = 9,259)                                6.81               3.17                  0.88                  1.83                0.93

Working Mothers (n = 9,372)                            11.64              6.40                  1.72                  1.66                1.86
Working Fathers (n = 8,553)                             6.53              3.05                  0.82                  1.76                0.91

Non-Working Mothers (n = 4,062)                        18.68              10.32                 2.89                  3.50                1.97
Non-Working Fathers (n = 706)                           9.90               4.65                 1.55                  2.54                1.15

Married Working Mothers (n = 6,323)                     12.00             6.64                  1.74                  1.78                1.84
Married Working Fathers (n = 7,559)                     6.74              3.17                  0.82                  1.85                0.90

Married Non-Working Mothers (n = 3,065)                 19.56             10.73                 2.97                  3.75                2.11
Married Non-Working Fathers (n = 529)                   10.59              5.27                 1.64                  2.46                1.22

Unmarried Working Mothers (n = 3,049)                  10.76              5.80                  1.66                  1.39                1.91
Unmarried Working Fathers (n = 994)                    4.91               2.10                  0.75                  1.04                1.02

Unmarried Non-Working Mothers (n = 997)                15.72              8.87                  2.72                  2.58                1.56
Unmarried Non-Working Fathers (n = 177)                8.03               3.09                  1.50                  2.51                0.93

Mothers with Children under 5 (n = 5,220)               21.03             12.62                 1.73                  4.75                1.93
Fathers with Children under 5 (n = 3,900)               9.69               4.77                 0.75                  3.31                0.85

Notes: This table presents means of time spent in child care activities by different demographic subgroups in the 2003-2006 waves of the American
Time Use Survey. All time use measures are expressed in units of “hours per week”. Samples include all individuals between the ages of 21 and 55
(inclusive) who had time diaries summing to a complete day and at least one child under the age of 18. The final two rows refer to individuals with at
least one child under the age of 5. See Appendix Table A2 and the text for time use category definitions and use of demographic weights to represent
each day of the week equally within subgroups.



                                                                                                                                                         36
Table 2
Hours Per Week Spent in Total Child Care for Women in the United States by Educational Attainment
                                                                 Hours Per Week Spent in Total Child Care
                                                     I. All            II. Non Working                III. Working
                                                                                 Conditional
                               Total    Number                                    (Relative                    Conditional
Years of   Fraction Fraction Market        of                                        To                        (Relative to
Schooling Married Working Work Children Unconditional Unconditional               Ed < 12)    Unconditional     Ed < 12)

< 12             0.63          0.42         14.6         2.2             12.1                 14.9                 -                8.3                  -

12               0.69          0.65         22.3         1.9             12.6                 17.6               2.9                9.8                3.1

13-15            0.69          0.74         25.3         1.9             13.3                 18.9               3.9                11.4               4.2

16               0.87          0.72         23.7         1.9             16.5                 22.6               6.4                14.2               6.1

16+              0.89          0.79         27.4         1.8             17.0                 25.9               9.7                14.4               6.4


Notes: This table presents means of demographic characteristics, total time in market work, and total time spent caring for children by educational attainment in
the 2003-2006 waves of the American Time Use Survey. All time use measures are expressed in units of “hours per week”. Samples include all women between
the ages of 21 and 55 (inclusive) that have at least one child of their own under the age of 18. Samples are restricted to respondents who had time diaries
summing to a complete day (i.e, 1440 minutes). Conditional differences report the coefficients from a regression of total time spent in child care on education
dummies (with less than 12 being omitted), a cubic in age, number of children dummies, a married dummy, and age of youngest child dummies. All means and
regression coefficients are calculated using fixed demographic weights adjusted to equally represent each day of the week within subgroups. Total market work
includes all time spent at work, in work related activities, traveling to work, and looking for work.




                                                                                                                                                             37
Table 3
Ratios of Residual Time Spent in Child Care Categories by Education for U.S. Mothers Relative to High School Dropouts
                      I. Non Working Mothers (n = 4,062)                          II. Working Mothers (n = 9,372)
Years of       Total      Basic     Educational             Recreational      Travel     Total      Basic     Educational                Recreational      Travel
Schooling     Child Care Child Care Child Care               Child Care      Child Care Child Care Child Care Child Care                  Child Care      Child Care

< 12               -             -              -                 -               -             -            -               -                 -               -

12               1.17          1.13           1.37              1.30            0.97          1.37         1.45            1.04              1.78            1.22

13-15            1.23          1.20           1.54              1.24            1.04          1.51         1.57            1.20              1.88            1.43

16               1.34          1.24           1.54              1.71            1.10          1.70         1.73            1.41              2.17            1.62

16+              1.55          1.50           1.72              1.90            1.14          1.72         1.75            1.36              2.45            1.54


Notes: This table presents conditional ratios of each type of child care time use by educational attainment in the 2003-2006 waves of the American Time Use
Survey for working and non-working women. Samples includes all women between the ages of 21 and 55 (inclusive) with at least one child of their own under
the age of 18. Samples are restricted to respondents who had time diaries summing to a complete day (i.e, 1440 minutes). See Table A2 and the text for time use
category definitions. To compute the conditional ratio, we first estimate a regression of time spent in childcare on a cubic in age, number of children dummies, a
married dummy, and age of youngest child dummies. For each observation we take the residual from that regression and add it to the sample mean, and then
average by education level. All regression coefficients are estimated using fixed demographic weights adjusted to equally represent each day of the week within
subgroups as described in the Appendix.




                                                                                                                                                              38
Table 4
Ratios of Residual Time Spent in Child Care Categories By Education for U.S. Fathers Relative to High School Dropouts
                       I. Non Working Fathers (n = 706)                            II. Working Fathers (n = 8,553)
Years of       Total      Basic     Educational            Recreational      Travel     Total      Basic     Educational               Recreational      Travel
Schooling     Child Care Child Care Child Care              Child Care      Child Care Child Care Child Care Child Care                 Child Care      Child Care

< 12               -            -               -                 -              -             -            -              -                 -               -

12               0.76         0.86            0.85              0.62           0.60         1.62          1.65           1.48              1.76            1.41

13-15            0.98         1.01            0.95              0.89           1.09         1.84          1.92           1.93              1.85            1.55

16               1.31         1.09            1.26              1.63           1.45         2.05          2.09           1.93              2.18            1.80

16+              0.86         0.81            1.29              0.51           1.34         2.16          2.12           2.53              2.20            1.93


Notes: This table presents conditional ratios of each type of child care time use by educational attainment in the 2003-2006 waves of the American Time Use
Survey for working and non-working men. Samples includes all men between the ages of 21 and 55 (inclusive) with at least one child of their own under the age
of 18. Samples are restricted to respondents who had time diaries summing to a complete day (i.e, 1440 minutes). See Table A2 and the text for time use category
definitions. To compute the conditional ratio, we first estimate a regression of time spent in childcare on a cubic in age, number of own children dummies, a
married dummy, and age of youngest own child dummies. For each observation we take the residual from that regression and add it to the sample mean, and
then average by education level. All regression coefficients are estimated using fixed demographic weights adjusted to equally represent each day of the week
within subgroups as described in the Appendix.




                                                                                                                                                             39
Table 5
Ratios of Residual of Total Time Spent By Parents in the Presence of Their Children (Using “With Whom” Identifiers)
for Working and Non-Working U.S. Mothers and Fathers By Education Relative to High School Dropouts

                                        Non Working                        Working                       Non Working                         Working
Years of Schooling                        Women                            Women                             Men                              Men

< 12                                           -                                -                                -                                -

12                                           1.00                             0.99                             0.92                            1.01

13-15                                        0.99                             0.96                             1.07                            1.06

16                                           0.99                             0.99                             1.02                            1.03

16+                                          1.00                             0.99                             0.91                            1.04


Notes: This table presents conditional ratios of time spent by parents in the presence of their children using data from the 2003-2006 waves of the American
Time Use Survey separately for non-working women, working women, non-working men, and working men. Samples are identical to the corresponding samples
discussed in Tables 2-4. To compute the conditional ratio, we first estimate a regression of total time spent in the presence of children on a cubic in age, number
of own children dummies, a married dummy, and age of youngest own child dummies. For each observation we take the residual from that regression and add it
to the sample mean, and then average by education level. All regression coefficients are estimated using fixed demographic weights adjusted to equally represent
each day of the week within subgroups as described in the Appendix.




                                                                                                                                                               40
Table 6
Conditional Differences in Hours Per Week Spent in Different Time Use Categories
By Education: Relative to High School Drop Outs
                   I. Non Working                       II. Working
Years       Total      Total              Total     Total       Total
of          Child      Non-     Leisure   Child    Market       Non-     Leisure
Schooling    Care     Market              Care      Work       Market
                       Work                                    Work

                             Panel A: Women (Relative to High School Drop Outs)

12               2.85        -1.35          -3.71        3.09        -0.51          -2.19          -0.71
                (0.88)      (1.15)         (1.39)       (0.62)       (1.83)         (1.01)         (1.44)

13-15            3.88       -1.65          -7.30         4.24         0.35          -2.45          -3.49
                (0.87)      (1.16)         (1.42)       (0.61)       (1.81)         (1.00)         (1.41)

16               6.33        -3.08          -8.05        6.07        -0.27          -2.94          -4.39
                (1.08)      (1.28)         (1.54)       (0.64)       (1.89)         (1.06)         (1.45)

16+              9.70       -6.08          -7.29         6.36         1.67          -4.41          -4.75
                (1.64)      (1.63)         (1.88)       (0.73)       (2.04)         (1.13)         (1.53)

                               Panel B: Men (Relative to High School Drop Outs)

12              -2.57       -1.88           6.33         2.38         0.70          -0.53          -3.61
                (1.67)      (3.03)         (3.57)       (0.42)       (1.64)         (0.79)         (1.40)

13-15           -0.13        2.37          -8.94         3.32        -0.16           1.09          -6.41
                (1.77)      (2.98)         (3.83)       (0.46)       (1.66)         (0.81)         (1.38)

16               3.89        5.48          -10.38        4.27         0.81           0.36           -7.82
                (4.48)      (3.96)         (4.75)       (0.43)       (1.68)         (0.83)         (1.37)

16+             -1.24        5.48          -10.37        4.76         2.16          -1.11          -7.96
                (2.57)      (3.96)         (5.64)       (0.47)       (1.81)         (0.85)         (1.49)

Notes: This table presents conditional differences in time spent in total child care, market work, non-market
work and leisure by educational attainment in the 2003-2006 waves of the American Time Use Survey for
working and non-working women and men. The conditional differences in time use are expressed in units
of “hours per week”. Samples include all men and women between the ages of 21 and 55 (inclusive) that
have at least one child under the age of 18. See text for additional sample restrictions and time use
definitions. Conditional differences report the coefficients from regressions of time spent in each time use
category on education dummies (with less than 12 being omitted), a cubic in age, number of children
dummies, a married dummy, and age of youngest child dummies. Robust standard errors are in parentheses.




                                                                                                         41
Table 7
Time Spent in Child Care, Total Market Work and Leisure by Own Earning Quintiles in the U.S.
                           I. Employed Married Mothers (n = 3,785)           II. Employed Married Fathers (n = 4,829)
                                      Total     Total Non-                              Total     Total Non-
   Adjusted Own       Total Child    Market       Market                Total Child    Market      Market
  Earning Quintiles       Care        Work         Work         Leisure    Care         Work        Work          Leisure

             2                     1.07              1.91             0.42           -3.59            0.92              2.53             0.35             -3.18
                                  (0.64)            (1.90)           (1.12)          (1.46)          (0.56)            (1.97)           (0.99)           (1.62)

             3                     1.63              4.36             -2.70          -3.21            0.44              1.86             0.18             -2.52
                                  (0.62)            (1.88)           (1.02)          (1.47)          (0.54)            (2.12)           (0.98)           (1.86)

             4                     1.66              2.14             -0.22          -4.09            1.19              3.63             0.44             -4.96
                                  (0.63)            (1.99)           (1.11)          (1.56)          (0.53)            (1.96)           (0.96)           (1.63)

             5                     3.58              5.00             -2.04          -6.47            1.64              6.14            -1.58             -5.48
                                  (0.66)            (1.89)           (1.03)          (1.38)          (0.51)            (1.78)           (0.87)           (1.48)


Notes: This table presents conditional differences in time spent in total child care, market work, non-market work and leisure by adjusted earnings quintiles in the
2003-2006 waves of the American Time Use Survey. Samples include women and men, respectively, between the ages of 21 and 55 (inclusive) that have at least
one child under the age of 18 of their own present or not present in the household, work full time, and are married with a working spouse. Samples are restricted
to respondents who had time diaries summing to a complete day (i.e, 1440 minutes). See Table A2 and the text for time use category definitions. Adjusted
earnings quintiles are calculated by segmenting the predicted residuals from a regression of weekly earnings on a cubic in age. Conditional differences report the
coefficients from regressions of time spent in each time use category on the quintile dummies (with the first quintile being excluded), a cubic in age, number of
own children dummies, and age of youngest own child dummies. For women, the computed quintiles are based on the distribution of weekly earnings amongst
women in the sample described above. For men, the computed quintiles are based on the distribution of weekly earnings amongst men in the sample described
above. All regression coefficients are estimated using fixed demographic weights adjusted to equally represent each day of the week within subgroups as
described in the Appendix. Robust standard errors are in parentheses.




                                                                                                                                                                  42
Table 8
Hours Per Week Spent in Child Care across Countries: Ranked by GDP Per Capita
                              GDP        All With     Men With   Women With
Country                    Per Capita    Children      Children    Children

Norway                                  37,200             8.88               5.68               11.70

United States                           34,300             8.93               5.62               11.64

United Kingdom                          24,500             7.23               4.17                9.83

Netherlands                             24,200             6.83               4.36                8.91

Austria                                 23,900             8.33               3.57               12.27

Canada                                  23,600             8.56               5.61               11.20

France                                  21,800             4.43               1.82                6.83

Germany                                 23,100             7.25               3.87               10.49

Italy                                   19,000             7.32               4.03               10.37

Slovenia                                 9,700             5.03               2.75                7.21

Chile                                    4,900             5.65               2.69                7.90

Estonia                                  4,100             6.64               2.97                9.37

South Africa                             2,900             4.03               0.60                5.88

Palestine                                1,200             6.38               2.09               12.35

Notes: This table presents average hours per week spent in total child care for all adults with children, men
with children, and women with children by country. Within each country, the samples include all
individuals between the ages of 21 and 55 (inclusive) with at least one child under the age of 18 present in
the household who had time diaries summing to a complete day (i.e, 1440 minutes). See the data appendix
for a description of each country’s time use data and the corresponding definitions of time spent with
children within each country. All means are calculated using fixed demographic weights adjusted to
equally represent each day of the week within subgroups. The GDP per capita numbers are all expressed in
2000 US dollars.




                                                                                                         43
Table 9
Conditional Hours Per Week Difference in Time Spent in Child Care Relative to the
US: Ranked by GDP Per Capita
                                                  Men With Children                    Women With Children
Country                                             (n = 33,742)                          (n = 43,782)

Norway                                                     -0.56                                   -1.03
                                                          (0.09)                                  (0.12)

UK                                                         -1.40                                   -1.35
                                                          (0.02)                                  (0.04)

Netherlands                                                -1.45                                   -2.59
                                                          (0.07)                                  (0.10)

Canada                                                     0.16                                    0.32
                                                          (0.05)                                  (0.06)

France                                                     -3.60                                   -4.34
                                                          (0.06)                                  (0.13)

Germany                                                    -1.83                                   -2.14
                                                          (0.03)                                  (0.11)

Italy                                                      -1.33                                   -1.35
                                                          (0.06)                                  (0.13)

Slovenia                                                   -2.63                                   -4.11
                                                          (0.06)                                  (0.16)

Chile                                                      -3.09                                   -5.67
                                                          (0.07)                                  (0.21)

SoAfrica                                                   -5.88                                   -8.44
                                                          (0.15)                                  (0.27)

Palestine                                                  -5.16                                   -5.47
                                                          (0.28)                                  (0.43)

Notes: This table presents conditional differences in time spent in total child care relative to the US for all adults with
children, men with children, and women with children. Conditional differences are estimated by regressing total time
spent in child care on country dummies (with the US being omitted), five year age category dummies, number of
children dummies, youngest child under 5 dummy, married dummy, working dummy, female dummy, and a full set of
interactions of the married, working, and female dummies. See Table A1 for information about each country’s time use
data set. Sample includes all individuals between the ages of 21 and 55 (inclusive) with at least one child under the age
of 18 present in the household who had time diaries summing to a complete day (i.e, 1440 minutes). See Appendix for
discussion of how we classified total child care time across countries. Austria and Estonia are dropped from the
analysis because specific control variables are not available (e.g. age of child). Coefficients are estimated using fixed
demographic weights adjusted to equally represent each day of the week and each country within subgroups as
described in the Appendix. Standard errors, presented in parentheses, are clustered at the country level to account for
correlation in unobservables within countries.




                                                                                                                       44
Table 10
Conditional Differences in Hours Per Week Spent in Total Child Care for Women by
Educational Attainment
                   Working Women with Kids             Non-Working Women with Kids
                Fraction      Difference in Time     Fraction    Difference in Time Spent
                  High      Spent on Child Care By     High          on Child Care By
Country         Educated        High Educated       Educated          High Educated

Canada                 0.36                     1.21                     0.29                      2.91
                                               (0.47)                                             (1.35)

Chile                  0.47                     2.18                     0.23                      -0.11
                                               (1.54)                                             (1.21)

France                 0.37                     0.47                     0.24                      1.47
                                               (0.35)                                             (0.70)

Germany                0.35                     0.04                     0.25                      0.81
                                               (0.34)                                             (0.84)

Italy                  0.59                     2.06                     0.33                      1.86
                                               (0.44)                                             (0.62)

Netherlands            0.39                     2.01                     0.24                      0.25
                                               (1.31)                                             (1.33)

Norway                 0.28                     1.15                     0.15                      6.31
                                               (0.64)                                             (2.06)

Palestine              0.63                     1.56                     0.27                      2.89
                                               (0.95)                                             (0.86)

Slovenia               0.31                     1.52                     0.14                      2.31
                                               (0.75)                                             (2.47)

South Africa           0.33                     0.58                     0.21                      0.99
                                               (0.66)                                             (1.12)

UK                     0.35                     1.87                     0.22                      4.17
                                               (0.56)                                             (1.77)

US                     0.31                     3.39                     0.22                      5.43
                                               (0.33)                                             (0.77)

Notes: This Table reports estimated hours per week differences in time spent in child care between women with high
and low levels of education within each country, where “high” is defined as being in roughly the top third of
educational attainment among women in one’s country. Sample includes all individuals between the ages of 21 and 55
(inclusive) with at least one child under the age of 18 present in the household who had time diaries summing to a
complete day (i.e, 1440 minutes). Austria and Estonia are dropped from the analysis because specific control variables
are not available (e.g. age of child). Educational differences from a regression of time spent with children on a high
education dummy and demographic controls. All regressions are estimated using fixed demographic weights to ensure
equal representation across each day of the week within subgroups. Robust standard errors are in parentheses.


                                                                                                                  45
                                       DATA APPENDIX

We use the 2003-2006 American Time Use Surveys for our U.S. analysis. See table A1 for
information about the time use surveys used in the international analysis. This table includes
surveys accessed through the Multinational Time Use Survey (MTUS), a harmonized data set
with consistent time use categories and demographic variables constructed from many time use
surveys. The America Time Use Survey uses a 24-hour recall of the previous day’s activities to
record time diary information. This survey collects diaries for one individual per household.
Below, we briefly summarize the other salient features of these surveys.

The 2003-2006 American Time Use Surveys (ATUS) was conducted by the U.S. Bureau of Labor
Statistics (BLS). Participants in ATUS, which includes children over the age of 15, are drawn
from the existing sample of the Current Population Survey (CPS). The individual is sampled
approximately 3 months after completion of the final CPS survey. At the time of the ATUS
survey, the BLS updated the respondent’s employment and demographic information. Roughly
1,700 individuals completed the survey each month, yielding an annual sample of over 20,000
individuals in 2003. The size of the sample was decreased to about 13,000 individuals annually
for the 2004-2006 surveys.

We restrict our sample to include only those household members between the ages of 21 and 55
with a child present in the household and who had a complete 24-hour time diary. The NBER
working paper version of Aguiar and Hurst (2007) documents that the demographic composition
of the ATUS are similar to that of the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID), once similar
sample restrictions are made. The restriction that all individuals had to have a complete time diary
was innocuous for the ATUS data, but is relevant in surveys from the other countries that we
examine. In total, our United States sample included 23,694 individuals. In Table A1, the sample
sizes, given our sample restrictions, are shown for each time use survey. In surveys in which
individuals completed more than a one day survey, we counted each 24 hour diary as a separate
observation. The one exception to this rule is in the Netherlands Time Use Survey in which each
respondent completes a full week survey. These week long surveys were each counted as one
observation. The total pooled sample across all countries includes 88,033 diary observations.

One challenge in comparing the time use data sets with each other is the fact that the surveys
report time use at differing levels of aggregation. Table A1 shows the number of different time
use sub-categories that are reported in the raw data of each of the surveys. To create consistent
measures of time-use across the surveys, we began by working with the raw ATUS data at the
level of sub-categories as in Aguiar and Hurst (2007). In order to render our analysis tractable we
aggregated an individual’s time allocation into 21 categories described in Table A2. Travel time
associated with each activity is embedded in the total time spent on the activity, except for child
care in which we consider travel for the purpose of child care as a separate classification. For the
purposes of classifying child care time use in the other countries that we analyze, we attempt to
include similar activities to those defined in the ATUS. As noted in the text we only consider total
child care time in the international analysis, because some surveys do not allow classification of
child care time into finer categories. Unfortunately, not all surveys allow for child care related
travel time to be disaggregated from other travel time. The MTUS has already created a child care
time use category and a travel time use category. Because we only have access to these
aggregated time use variables, we cannot include travel time related to child care in our measure
of child care time use for those surveys accessed through MTUS (Austria, France, Germany,
Norway, Slovenia, and South Africa). Furthermore, the time use categories supplied by the
surveys of Chile and Palestine do not allow travel time for the purpose of child care to be
separated from other travel time. In the other surveys (Canada, Italy, US, and UK) we can

                                                                                                 46
identify travel related to child care as a separate time use classification. Because we cannot
always disentangle travel for the purpose of child care from other travel time, but we can separate
travel from other child care activities in Canada, Italy, the US, and the UK, in the international
analysis we will exclude travel time from our total child care measure.

Likewise, we cannot separately identify time spent caring for non-household children in all
countries. The U.S. data, however, does allow us to distinguish between time spent with
household children and time spent with non-household children. In our US sample of adults with
children, time spent with non-household children accounts for only 0.34 hours per week, which
makes up about roughly only 3% of total child care documented in Table 1. Excluding time spent
with non-household children from our analysis does not change the income or education gradients
highlighted in this paper in any way. We chose to include the time spent with non-household
children in our base U.S. analysis for comparability with the international data.

We also attempted to create harmonized demographic variables between the surveys that we
utilized. These demographics include 5 year age categories, sex, and marital status of survey
respondents, the presence of children under 18 years of age in the household, the presence of
children under 5 years of age in the household, the number of children under 18 years of age in
the household, and employment status of the individual. Table A3 describes the demographic
variables utilized in our analysis. This table also describes any difficulties in defining consistent
demographic variables between surveys by summarizing any exceptions in variable definition.
For our working variable, this table describes how we classified an individual as working. In our
international analysis, we will limit number of children dummies to indicators for zero children,
one child, or two or more children, because in the 1998 Canada survey we can only identify up to
two children.

In analysis comparing the education gradient in child care time use between countries we define a
dichotomous variable indicating highly educated individuals. Education variables are defined
very differently in each survey and the number of categories varies from as few as 5 to as many
as 31 as seen in Table A4. To define our harmonized education variable we attempted to
categorize the 30% highest educated individuals in our women with children sample in each
country as highly educated. We chose 30% because this matches the fraction of women with
children in the US data that have 16 years of education or more – the highest category in our US
education gradient analysis. Table A4 lists which education categories fall into the high and low
educated groups for each country. Table 10 shows the fraction of women with children that are
classified has highly educated for each country. As this table shows we were able to get close to
30% in most countries, except for Italy in which the coarseness of the categories only allowed us
to separate the top 47% of women with children. Table 10 also shows the fraction of the working
and non-working women with children samples that are classified as highly educated using the
education assignments from the full women with children sample.

The raw time-use data in most of the surveys are reported in units of “minutes per day” (totaling
1,440 minutes a day). We converted the minute-per-day reports to hours per week by multiplying
the response by seven and dividing by 60. For the Netherlands, in which each observation covers
a full week, we simply divide by 60 to find hours per week. When presenting the means and
regression results we weighted the data using the sampling weights within each of the time-use
surveys. The weights account for differential response rates to ensure the samples are nationally
representative. We make two adjustments to the weights provided by the various data sets. First,
we adjusted weights so that each day of the week is equally represented within each demographic
subcategory analyzed. Second, we adjust weights so each year of data has an equal sample size
within countries with multiple years of data (Canada and the US), and so each country has an

                                                                                                  47
equal sample size in the analysis that pools countries together. Like the first, this adjustment is
made within each subcategory that we analyze.




                                                                                                48
                                            APPENDIX TABLE A1
                                        Description of Time Use Surveys

                                                                                                                  Number
                                                                                              Total   Analysis    of Time
                                           Sample            Survey             Survey       Sample   Sample        Use
 Country      Survey (Source)             Coverage         Methodology         Coverage      Size**    Size**    Categories
Austria    Zeitverwendung 1992           Nationally        Each individual     Mar. and      25,162    5,174        197
           (Beitrage zur                 Representative.   completes one       Sep. 1992
           Osterreichischen Statistik    One individual    diary.
           (STAT))                       from each         Individuals
                                         household over    complete diary
                                         the age of 10     throughout their
                                         completes the     day.
                                         survey.
Canada     General Social Survey         Nationally        Each individual     Feb. 1998 –   10,749    3,105        178
           Cycles 12 and 19: Time        Representative.   completes one        Jan 1999
           Use (Statistics Canada)       Participants      diary.
                                         chosen through    24-hour recall of   Jan. 2005 –   19,597    4,804        182
                                         Random Digit      previous day’s       Dec. 2005
                                         Dialing.          activities.
                                         One individual    Activities
                                         from each         recorded in
                                         household over    respondents
                                         the age of 15     own words and
                                         completes the     then translated
                                         survey.           into categories.

Chile      Use of Time in Chile          Representative    Each individual     Mar. 1999      4,358    1,742          48
           (Department of Social         of population     completes two        – May
           Studies, Department of        over 15 years     one-day diaries       1999
           Sociology of the              old in            – one weekday
           Universidad Catolica of       Santiago.         (Tuesday,
           Chile)                                          Wednesday, or
                                                           Thursday) and
                                                           one weekend
                                                           day.
                                                           Respondents
                                                           complete diary
                                                           using a
                                                           predetermined
                                                           activity codes.

Estonia    Time Use Survey (State        Household         Each individual     Mar. 1999     11,456    3,803        167
           Statistical Office of         members ages      completes two        – Apr.
           Estonia, Tallinn)             10 and above      one-day diaries.      2000
                                         complete          Individuals
                                         survey.           complete diary
                                                           throughout their
                                                           day.
                                                           Activities
                                                           recorded in
                                                           respondents
                                                           own words and
                                                           then translated
                                                           into categories.




                                                                                                                 49
                                                                                                                      Number
                                                                                                  Total   Analysis    of Time
                                               Sample             Survey            Survey       Sample   Sample        Use
  Country        Survey (Source)              Coverage          Methodology        Coverage      Size**    Size**    Categories
Italy         National Time Use Survey       Nationally         Each individual    Apr. 2002     51,206    12,345       265
              (Istituto Nazionale di         representative.    completes one       – Mar.
              Statistica)                    All household      diary.               2003
                                             members            Individuals
                                             complete           complete diary
                                             survey. Parents    throughout the
                                             fill out the       day.
                                             survey for         Activities
                                             those too          recorded in
                                             young to fill it   respondents
                                             out                own words and
                                             themselves.        then translated
                                                                into categories.

France        Time Use Survey                All individuals    Each individual    Feb. 1998 –   15,318    4,600        139
              (INSEE)                        within             completes one       Feb. 1999
                                             household age      diary.
                                             15 and over        Individuals
                                             completed the      complete diary
                                             survey.            throughout their
                                                                day.

Germany       The 1991/92 Time Budget        All individuals    Each individual    Oct., Nov.    25,775    10,213       231
              Survey of the Federal          within             completes two       1991 and
              Republic of Germany            household ages     dairies on         Feb., Mar.,
              (Federal Ministry of           12 and above       successive days.   Apr., Jun.,
              Family Affairs and Senior      complete           Individuals        Jul., 1992
              Citizens Federal Statistical   survey.            complete diary
              Office)                                           throughout their
                                                                day.
                                                                Activities
                                                                recorded in
                                                                respondents
                                                                own words and
                                                                then translated
                                                                into categories.

Netherlands   Time Use Survey (SCP,          Nationally         Each individual    Oct. 2000      1,813     515         270
              Cebuco, Publieke               Representative.    completes a 7
              Omroep, Universiteit van       Participants are   day diary.
              Tilburg, and Adviesdienst      drawn              Individuals
              Verkeer en Vervoer)            randomly from      complete diary
                                             the PTT Post       throughout their
                                             address            day.
                                             database.          Respondents
                                             One individual     complete diary
                                             from each          using a
                                             household over     predetermined
                                             the age of 12      activity codes.
                                             completes the
                                             survey.




                                                                                                                     50
                                                                                                                  Number
                                                                                              Total   Analysis    of Time
                                           Sample             Survey            Survey       Sample   Sample        Use
 Country       Survey (Source)            Coverage          Methodology        Coverage      Size**    Size**    Categories
Norway      Tidsnyttingsundersokelsen    One individual     Each individual    Feb. 1990 –    6,129    2,152        123
            (Central Bureau of           from each          completes two       Jan. 1991
            Statistics)                  household over     dairies on
                                         the age of 16      successive days.
                                         completes the      Individuals
                                         survey.            complete diary
                                                            throughout their
                                                            day.
                                                            Activities
                                                            recorded in
                                                            respondents
                                                            own words and
                                                            then translated
                                                            into categories.

Palestine   Time Use Survey              Representative     Each individual    May 1999       6,863    2,806          94
            (Palestine Central Bureau    of individuals     completes one       – May
            of Statistics)               10 years old an    diary.               2000
                                         over who are       Individuals
                                         usually            complete diary
                                         resident in the    throughout their
                                         Palestinian        day.
                                         Territory.         Activities
                                         Participants are   recorded in
                                         drawn from the     respondents
                                         1997               own words and
                                         Population,        then translated
                                         Housing and        into categories.
                                         Establishments
                                         Census.
                                         Two randomly
                                         selected
                                         individuals
                                         (one male and
                                         one female)
                                         from each
                                         household over
                                         the age of 10
                                         complete the
                                         survey.

Slovenia    Time Use Survey              All individuals    Each individual    Apr. 2000     12,273    3,395        174
            (Statistical Office of the   within             completes two       – Mar.
            Republic of Slovenia)        household ages     one-day diaries      2001
                                         10 and above       – one weekday
                                         complete           and one
                                         survey.            weekend day.
                                                            Individuals
                                                            complete diary
                                                            throughout their
                                                            day.
                                                            Activities
                                                            recorded in
                                                            respondents
                                                            own words and
                                                            then translated
                                                            into categories.




                                                                                                                 51
                                                                                                                      Number
                                                                                                  Total   Analysis    of Time
                                              Sample             Survey             Survey       Sample   Sample        Use
 Country           Survey (Source)           Coverage          Methodology         Coverage      Size**    Size**    Categories
South           Time Use in South Africa    Nationally         Each individual     Feb., Jun.,   14,217    3,767         108
                (Statistics South Africa)   Representative.    completes one        and Oct.
Africa                                      Participants       diary.                2000
                                            drawn by           24-hour recall of
                                            sampling           the previous
                                            addresses.         day’s activities.
                                            Two randomly
                                            selected
                                            individuals
                                            from each
                                            household over
                                            the age of 10
                                            complete the
                                            survey.

United          United Kingdom Time         Nationally         Each individual     Jun. 2000 –   20,981    4,881         250
                Use Survey (Ipsos-RSL       Representative.    completes two        Sep. 2001
Kingdom         and Office for National     Participants are   one-day diaries
                Statistics)                 drawn              – one weekday
                                            randomly from      and one
                                            the Postcode       weekend day.
                                            Address File.      Individuals
                                            All individuals    complete diary
                                            within             throughout their
                                            household ages     day.
                                            8 and above        Activities
                                            complete           recorded in
                                            survey.            respondents
                                                               own words and
                                                               then translated
                                                               into categories.

United          American Time Use           Nationally         Each individual     Jan. 2003 –   20,720    7,924        ~400
                Survey (U.S. Bureau of      Representative.    completes one        Dec. 2003
States          Labor Statistics)           Participants are   diary.                                                (Some minor
                                            drawn from the     24-hour recall of   Jan. 2004 –   13,973    5,156     changes
                                            existing           previous day’s       Dec. 2004                        from year to
                                            sample of the      activities.                                           year)
                                            Current            Activities          Jan. 2005 –   13,038    5,328
                                            Population         recorded in          Dec. 2005
                                            Survey (CPS).      respondents
                                            One individual     own words and       Jan. 2006 –   12,943    5,286
                                            from each          then translated      Dec. 2006
                                            household over     into categories.
                                            the age of 15
                                            completes the
                                            survey.
                                            Survey is
                                            conducted
                                            approximately
                                            three months
                                            after the
                                            individual’s
                                            last CPS
                                            survey.
Notes: Analysis sample refers to the number of observations from each survey that we use in our main empirical
analysis. We restrict the sample to include only individuals between the ages of 21 and 55 (inclusive) with at least one
child under the age of 18 present in the household. We also restrict the sample to include only those individuals who
had time diaries that summed to a complete day (i.e., 1440 minutes). All surveys include sample weights. All weights
are adjusted to ensure each day of the week and each survey are uniformly represented.
**Sample sizes refer to the number of diaries. If each respondent for a given survey completed more than one 24 hour
diary, each diary is considered as a separate observation, except in the case of the Netherlands where each individual’s
full week diary is counted as one observation.


                                                                                                                     52
53
                                  APPENDIX TABLE A2
                                  Time Use Classifications

Time Use Classification                        Examples of Activities Included
Core Market Work             Work for pay, main job (including time spent working at home); Work for
                             pay, other jobs
Total Market Work            Core Market Work plus other work related activities such as: Commuting
                             to/from work; Meals/breaks at work; Searching for a job; Applying for
                             unemployment benefits
Core Non-Market Work         Food preparation; Food presentation; Kitchen/food cleanup;
                             Washing/drying clothes; Ironing; Dusting; Vacuuming; Indoor cleaning;
                             Indoor painting; etc.
Shopping/Obtaining Goods     Grocery shopping; Shopping for other goods; Comparison shopping;
and Services                 Clipping coupons; Going to bank; Going to post office; Meeting with
                             lawyer; Going to veterinarian; etc. (excluding any time spent acquiring
                             medical care)
Total Non-Market Work        Core Non-Market Work plus Shopping/Obtaining Goods and Services”
                             plus all other home production including: Vehicle repair; Outdoor repair;
                             Outdoor painting; Yard work; Pet care; Gardening; etc.
Education                    Taking classes for degree; Personal interest courses; Homework for
                             coursework; Research for coursework; etc.
Sleeping                     Sleeping; Naps
Personal Care                Grooming; Bathing; Sex; Going to the bathroom; etc. (excluding any time
                             spent on own medical care)
Own Medical Care             Visiting doctor’s/dentist’s office (including time waiting); Dressing
                             wounds; Taking insulin; etc.
Eating                       Eating meals at home; Eating meals away from home; etc.
Primary Child Care           Breast feeding; Rocking a child to sleep; General feeding; Changing
                             diapers; Providing medical care to child; Grooming child; etc.
Educational Child Care       Reading to children; Teaching children; Helping children with homework;
                             Attending meetings at a child’s school; etc.
Recreational Child Care      Playing games with children; Playing outdoors with children; Attending a
                             child’s sporting event or dance recital; Going to the zoo with children,
                             Taking walks with children; etc.
Sports/Exercise              Playing sports; Attending sporting events; Exercise
TV                           Watching television
Entertainment (not TV)       Going to movies and theater; Listening to music; Computer use for leisure
Socializing                  Attending/hosting social events; Playing games; Telephone calls
Reading                      Reading books, magazines; Personal mail; Personal email
Gardening/Pet care           Caring for lawn, garden, houseplants, and pets
Hobbies                      Arts and Crafts; Collecting; Playing musical instrument
Religious/Civic Activities   Religious practice/participation; Fraternal organizations; Volunteer work;
                             Union meetings; AA meetings; etc.


                                                                                                       54
                                       APPENDIX TABLE A3
                           Demographic Variables: Definitions and Exceptions

Country    Age:              Male:        Married:        Hv_child:       Child_5:        Num_child:           Working:
           5 year            Equal to 1   Equal to 1 if   Equal to 1 if   Equal to 1      Set of dummies       Equal to 1 if
           categories:       if           respondent is   there is a      if there is a   for number of        respondent is
           <=20, 21-25,      respondent   married.        child <18       child <5        children <18         working.
           26-30,…, 56-      is male.                     years old       years old       years old present
           60, >=61                                       present in      present in      in the household.
                                                          the             the
                                                          household.      household.
Austria*                                  No code                         Cannot          Variable in          Employment
                                          indicating                      identify if     original data set    status as full
                                          common                          there are       only included        time, part
                                          law/cohab. –                    children        children <15 and     time, or
                                          Married may                     under 5 in      did not include      unknown job
                                          or may not                      household.      all respondents      hours.
                                          include these                                   <15. MTUS
                                          individuals                                     recodes variable
                                                                                          to include all
                                                                                          respondents <18
                                                                                          with relationship
                                                                                          of child to HH
                                                                                          head. This may
                                                                                          inflate
                                                                                          num_child=1, as
                                                                                          one cannot know
                                                                                          if this is only
                                                                                          child in
                                                                                          household.

Canada     2005 –                                         Equal to 1 if   Equal to 1      Number of            Main activity
           Categories                                     the             if the          respondent’s         last week was
           off by 1 year                                  respondent      respondent      children. Also, in   working OR
           (20-24, etc.)                                  has a child     has a child     2005 survey, can     paid vacation
                                                          <18 years       <5 years        include children     OR had a
                                                          old.            old.            over 18 if           job/self
                                                                                          youngest child       employed at
                                                                                          <18.                 any time last
                                                                                                               week.

Chile                                                                                                          Main activity
                                                                                                               is paid work.


Estonia    Categories                                                     Cannot          Cannot identify      Worked,
           off by 1 year                                                  identify if     number of            produced
           (20-24, etc.)                                                  there are       children, because    agricultural
                                                                          children        we cannot see        products, or
                                                                          under 5 in      how many             temporarily
                                                                          household.      children <10         absent from
                                                                                          years old reside     work in past
                                                                                          in the household     week.
                                                                                          (only know if
                                                                                          there are any
                                                                                          children <10).
Italy                                                                                                          Only or
                                                                                                               prevailing
                                                                                                               professional
                                                                                                               condition as
                                                                                                               employed.

France*                                   Equal to 1 if                                                        Employment
                                          individual is                                                        status as full
                                          married or                                                           time, part
                                          cohabitating.                                                        time, or
                                                                                                               unknown job
                                                                                                               hours.
Country       Age:             Male:        Married:        Hv_child:       Child_5:        Num_child:           Working:
              5 year           Equal to 1   Equal to 1 if   Equal to 1 if   Equal to 1      Set of dummies       Equal to 1 if
              categories:      if           respondent is   there is a      if there is a   for number of        respondent is
              <=20, 21-25,     respondent   married.        child <18       child <5        children <18         working.
              26-30,…, 56-     is male.                     years old       years old       years old present
              60, >=61                                      present in      present in      in the household.
                                                            the             the
                                                            household.      household.
Germany*      Original                      Equal to 1 if                   Equal to 1      There is not age     Employment
              survey had 5                  individual is                   if there is a   definition for       status as full
              year age                      married or                      child <6        children in          time, part
              groups of the                 cohabitating.                   years old       original data set.   time, or
              form 20-24                                                    present in      Also, variable in    unknown job
              etc. MTUS                                                     the             original dataset     hours.
              converted to a                                                household.      only includes
              continuous.                                                                   children of the
              age variable                                                                  respondent.
              based on                                                                      MTUS recodes
              midpoints of                                                                  variable to
              intervals.                                                                    include all
              Therefore,                                                                    respondents <18
              translation to                                                                with status in
              our 5 year                                                                    household as
              age groups                                                                    child, child in
              will not be                                                                   law, or
              exact for all                                                                 grandchild. This
              respondents.                                                                  may inflate
                                                                                            num_child=1, as
                                                                                            one cannot know
                                                                                            if this is only
                                                                                            child in
                                                                                            household.

Netherlands                                 Equal to 1 if                                                        "yes, currently
                                            respondent is                                                        employed"
                                            living with a
                                            "Permanent
                                            Partner."

Norway*       MTUS                          Equal to 1 if                   Equal to 1      Variable in          Employment
              computes age                  individual is                   if there is a   original dataset     status as full
              by                            married or                      child <7        does not include     time, part
              subtracting                   cohabitating.                   years old       respondents who      time, or
              the year of                                                   present in      are <18. MTUS        unknown job
              birth of the                                                  the             recodes variable     hours.
              respondent                                                    household.      to include all
              from the                                                                      respondents <18
              survey year                                                                   living with one
              (“90”). This                                                                  or two parents.
              is somewhat                                                                   This may inflate
              inaccurate                                                                    num_child=1, as
              given that the                                                                one cannot know
              survey was                                                                    if this is only
              conducted in                                                                  child in
              both 1990                                                                     household.
              and 1991.

Palestine                                                                                                        "Worker from
                                                                                                                 1-14 hours" or
                                                                                                                 "Worker 15
                                                                                                                 hours or
                                                                                                                 more"

Slovenia*                                   Equal to 1 if                                                        Employment
                                            individual is                                                        status as full
                                            married or                                                           time, part
                                            cohabitating.                                                        time, or
                                                                                                                 unknown job
                                                                                                                 hours.


                                                                                                                              1
Country        Age:           Male:        Married:        Hv_child:       Child_5:        Num_child:          Working:
               5 year         Equal to 1   Equal to 1 if   Equal to 1 if   Equal to 1      Set of dummies      Equal to 1 if
               categories:    if           respondent is   there is a      if there is a   for number of       respondent is
               <=20, 21-25,   respondent   married.        child <18       child <5        children <18        working.
               26-30,…, 56-   is male.                     years old       years old       years old present
               60, >=61                                    present in      present in      in the household.
                                                           the             the
                                                           household.      household.
South                                      Equal to 1 if                   Equal to 1      Variable in         Employment
                                           individual is                   if there is a   original data set   status as full
Africa*                                    married or                      child <7        had many            time, part
                                           cohabitating.                   years old       missing cases.      time, or
                                                                           present in      Those               unknown job
                                                                           the             respondents aged    hours.
                                                                           household.      18+ had missing
                                                                                           cases coded as 0
                                                                                           by MTUS. Those
                                                                                           respondents <18
                                                                                           had missing
                                                                                           values coded as 1
                                                                                           by MTUS, which
                                                                                           may inflate
                                                                                           num_child=1, as
                                                                                           one cannot know
                                                                                           if this is only
                                                                                           child in
                                                                                           household.

United                                                                                                         Economically
                                                                                                               active - in
Kingdom                                                                                                        employment.

United                                                                                                         Employed – at
                                                                                                               work
States                                                                                                         Employed –
                                                                                                               absent
Entries in this table represent exceptions to the demographic variable definitions described in the first row.
The “working” column summarizes how an individual is classified as working in each survey.
*Data for these countries were accessed through the Multinational Time Use Survey (MTUS). MTUS has
harmonized many time use surveys into a data set with consistent time use categories and demographic
variables. For these countries, this table describes how




                                                                                                                            2
                                                                    APPENDIX TABLE A4
                                                               Education Classification by Country
Education
Group            Canada                    Chile                  France                                    Germany                                              Italy
Low         10 Elementary            1 Uneducated             0 Without a          101 'lower 2ndary leaving cert, no vocational training'             9 No title (no read and/or
              school/no schooling    2 Basic incomplete         diploma or not     102 'lower 2ndary leaving cert & apprenticeship'                      write)
            9 Some secondary/high    3 Basic complete           declared           103 'lower 2ndary leaving cert & traineeship'                       8 No title (read and write)
              school                 4 Half incomplete        1 CEP, DFEO          104 'lower 2ndary leaving cert & higher vocational diploma'         7 Elementary school
            8 High School Diploma      scientific humanist    2 BEPC               105 'lower 2ndary leaving cert & Fachschule, DDR profess            6 License middle school
                                     5 Half full scientific   3 CAP, BEP             diploma'                                                          5 High School Diploma (2-
                                       humanist               4 Bac technique      201 'intermediate 2ndary leaving cert & no vocational'                 3 years)
                                                                                   202 'intermediate 2ndary leaving cert & apprenticeship'
                                                                                   203 'intermediate 2ndary leaving cert & traineeship'
                                                                                   204 'intermediate 2ndary leaving cert & higher voc diploma'
                                                                                   205 'intermediate 2ndary leaving cert & Fachschule, DDRprofess
                                                                                     dip'
                                                                                   301 'AllgemeinbildendePolytechnischeOberschule,DDR,no voc'
                                                                                   302 'AllgemeinbildendePolytechnischeOberschule,
                                                                                     DDR,apprent'
                                                                                   303 'AllgemeinbildendePolytechnischeOberschule, DDR,trnshp'
                                                                                   304 'AllgemeinbildendePolytechnischeOberschule, DDR,hgr
                                                                                     voc'

High        7 Some trade/technical   6 Half incomplete        5 Bac general        305 'AllgemeinbildendePolytechnischeOberschule, DDR,F DDR'          4 High School Diploma (4-
            6 Some community           technique              6 Bac + 2            401 'tech college entry-level leaving cert, no voc'                   5 years)
              college/CEGEP/nursi    7 Half complete          7 Superior a Bac +   402 'tech college entry-level leaving cert & apprentship'           3 University degree
              ng                       technique                2                  403 'tech college entry-level leaving cert & traineeship'           2 Degree
            5 Some university        8 Technique                                   404 'tech college entry-level leaving cert & higher voc diploma'    1 Doctoral degree or
            4 Diploma/certificate      incomplete higher                           405 'tech college entry-level leaving cert & F, DDR professdip'       postgraduate
              from trade/technical   9 Technique higher                            406 'tech college entry-level leaving cert & tech college degree'     specialization
            3 Diploma/certificate      complete                                    501 'university entry-level leaving cert, no vocational'
              from community         10 Higher Education                           502 'university entry-level leaving cert & apprenticeship'
              college                  incomplete                                  503 'university entry-level leaving cert & traineeship'
            2 Bachelor’s degree                                                    504 'university entry-level leaving cert & higher voc diplma'
            1 Doctorate/masters/                                                   505 'university entry-level leaving cert & F, DDR profess dip'
              some graduate                                                        506 'university entry-level leaving cert & tec college degree'
                                                                                   507 'university entry-level leaving cert & university degree'
                                                                                   601 'still without school leaving cert, no voc'
                                                                                   602 'still without school leaving cert & apprenticeship'
                                                                                   604 'still without school leaving cert & higher voc diploma'
Education
Group       Netherlands   Palestine        South Africa                     Slovenia                              UK                             US
Low         1 LA          1 Illiterate    0 None                 1 No education or incomplete basic     14 Under 16yrs -              31 Less than 1st grade
            2 LB          2 Can read      1 Grade 1/Sub A           education (1-3 grades of primary      ineligible for questions    32 1st, 2nd, 3rd, or 4th
            3 MA            and write     2 Grade 2/Sub B           school)                             13 Eligible - No answer         grade
                          3 Elementary    3 Grade 3/Standard 1   2 Incomplete basic education (4-7      12 No qualifications          33 5th or 6th grade
                          4 Preparatory   4 Grade 4/Standard 2      grades of primary school)           11 Qualifications - Other -   34 7th or 8th grade
                                          5 Grade 5/Standard 3   3 Basic education (finished primary      but DK grade/level          35 9th grade
                                          6 Grade 6/Standard 4      school)                             10 Qualifications - City &    36 10th grade
                                          7 Grade 7/Standard 5   4 Short-term vocational, vocational      Guilds - DK level           37 11th grade
                                          8 Grade 8/Standard        education                           9 Qualifications - GCSE -     38 12th grade - no diploma
                                            6/Form 1             5 Technical secondary education          but DK grade                39 High school graduate -
                                          9 Grade 9/Standard                                            8 Qualifications - but DK       diploma or equivalent
                                            7/Form 2                                                      which                         (GED)
                                          10 Grade 10/Standard                                          7 Other qualification (incl   40 Some college but no
                                            8/Form 3                                                      professional,                 degree
                                          11 Grade 11/Standard                                            vocational, foreign)        41 Associate degree -
                                            9/Form 4                                                    6 Qualification below           occupational/vocational
                                                                                                          GCSE/O level (eg trade      42 Associate degree -
                                                                                                          apprenticeships               academic program
                                                                                                        5 GCSE below grade C,
                                                                                                          CSE, vocational level 1
                                                                                                          & equivalent
                                                                                                        4 O levels, GCSE grade
                                                                                                          A-C, vocational level 2
                                                                                                          & equivalent
                                                                                                        3 A levels, vocational
                                                                                                          level 3 & equivalent (eg
                                                                                                          AS level, NVQ 3)

High        4 MB          5 Secondary     12 Grade 12/Standard   6 General secondary education          2 Higher edn below            43 Bachelor's degree (BA,
            5 HA          6 Assoicate       12/Form 5/Matric     7 Postsecondary vocational               degree level (eg HNC,         AB, BS, etc.)
            6 HB            Diploma                                 education (vocational college,        nursing qual)               44 Master's degree (MA,
            7 HW          7 Bachelor                                university college, university      1 Degree level                  MS, MEng, MEd, MSW,
                            and Above                               college specialization)               qualification or above        etc.)
                                                                 8 Higher undergraduate education                                     45 Professional school
                                                                    – professional                                                      degree (MD, DDS,
                                                                 9 Higher undergraduate education                                       DVM, etc.)
                                                                    – academic                                                        46 Doctoral degree (PhD,
                                                                 10 Higher postgraduate education                                       EdD, etc.
                                                                    (specialization, master’s degree,
                                                                    doctor’s degree)




                                                                                                                                                                   1
