                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       AN EMPIRICAL TEST OF TASTE-BASED DISCRIMINATION
      CHANGES IN ETHNIC PREFERENCES AND THEIR EFFECT ON ADMISSIONS
                     TO THE NYSE DURING WORLD WAR I

                                               Petra Moser

                                         Working Paper 14003
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w14003


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2008




I wish to thank Steve Wheeler at the New York Stock Exchange for granting access to the records
of membership applications and Eric Hilt and Antoinette Schoar for helping me to collect the price
data for this paper. I am grateful to David Autor, Raj Chetty, Stan Engerman, Erik Eyster, Claudia
Goldin, Michael Greenstone, Avner Greif, Bob Margo, Marc Weidenmier, Eugene White, and seminar
participants at Berkeley, Davis, Stanford and the NBER for helpful comments. Ellyn Boukos, Joseph
Goldschmid, Diana Eastman, Kimon Ioannides, Irina Issakova, Sameer Riaz, Irina Talis, Anjani Trivedi,
Alessandra Voena, Maisy Wong, Sui Lin Yap and Mimi Xue provided valuable research assistance.
 I thank the Hoover Institution at Stanford for its generous financial support through the National Fellows
Program. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Petra Moser. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
An Empirical Test of Taste-based Discrimination: Changes in Ethnic Preferences and their
Effect on Admissions to the NYSE during World War I
Petra Moser
NBER Working Paper No. 14003
May 2008
JEL No. J7,N22,N42

                                                ABSTRACT

A significant challenge to empirically testing theories of discrimination has been the difficulty of identifying
taste-based discrimination and of distinguishing it clearly from statistical discrimination. This paper
addresses this problem through a two-part empirical test of taste-based discrimination. First, it constructs
measures of revealed preferences, which establish that World War I created a strong and persistent
shock to ethnic preferences that effectively switched the status of German Americans to an ethnic
minority. Second, the paper uses this shock to ethnic preferences to identify the effects of taste-based
discrimination at the example of traders at the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE). A new data set
of more than 4,000 applications for seats on the NYSE reveals that the War more than doubled the
probability that German applicants would be rejected (relative to Anglo-Saxons). The mechanism
of taste-based discrimination is surprising: Prices are unaffected by ethnic preferences, and discrimination
operates instead entirely through admissions.


Petra Moser
Department of Economics
Stanford University
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and NBER
pmoser@stanford.edu
Although empirical tests of discrimination have shown that minorities are disadvantaged

in hiring decisions (e.g., Goldin and Rouse, 2000; Bertrand and Mullainathan 2004) 1 it

has proven difficult to establish whether such differences result from biased preferences

and thus reflect taste-based discrimination (Becker 1957). Taste-based discrimination is

especially hard to distinguish from statistical discrimination (Phelps, 1972; Arrow 1973;

and Aigner and Cain, 1977), where ethnicity serves as a signal for unobservable

productivity differences. 2 The greatest obstacle to identifying the effects of taste-based

discrimination in labor markets has been the lack of exogenous shocks to ethnic

preferences.

         This paper presents a two-part test of taste-based discrimination that exploits

exactly such a shock. First, it shows that World War I (1914-1918) created a shock to

ethnic preferences, which effectively switched German Americans from a well-

assimilated mainstream ethnicity to an ethnic minority. Then, the empirical analysis uses

this change in preferences to identify the effects of taste-based discrimination on an elite

community that should be less vulnerable to discrimination: applicants for membership in

New York Stock Exchange (NYSE).

         Three measures of revealed preferences establish that World War I resulted in a

large and persistent shock to ethnic preferences. The first measure is constructed from

the records of 1,800 performances at the Metropolitan Opera in New York. These data

1
  Goldin and Rouse (2000) find that gender discrimination limits the hiring of female musicians in major
orchestras, while Bertrand and Mullainathan (2004) show that applicants with black-sounding names are
less likely to be invited for job interviews.
2
  The most direct empirical tests of statistical versus taste-based discrimination come from laboratory
experiments and the market for sports cards: Fershtman and Gneezy (2001) show that differential treatment
is based on poor information (rather than tastes) by randomly assigning ethnicities to players in a dictator
game. In contrast, Nardinelli and Simon (1990) show that collectors of baseball cards pay more for cards
featuring white players, even controlling for performance. Combining experimental evidence with data on
buyers and sellers of sports cards, List (2004) finds that lower offers to minority sellers reflect statistical,
rather than taste-based discrimination.


                                                                                                              1
reveal that the share of operas by German-language composers fell from 50 to less than

10 percent at the beginning of the war, and did not recover until the late 1920s. The

second measure is constructed from the names of newborn boys in the U.S. Census.

These data show that the frequency of German-sounding names dropped dramatically

after the beginning of the war. The third measure relates to the consumption of ethnic

foods. It reveals that the consumption of sauerkraut declined to almost zero after the

beginning of World War I.

       The empirical analysis uses this shock to preferences to test for taste-based

discrimination among applicants to the NYSE. To trade at the NYSE, applicants must

buy one of a limited number of memberships or seats. Prospective buyers negotiate a

purchase price with a seat owner who wants to leave the Exchange. The sale, however, is

conditional on the remaining members’ assessment of the buyer’s “personal and financial

integrity.” This paper uses a differences-in-differences approach to test whether the

probability of approval was affected by a shift in ethnic preferences.

       Data on more than 4,000 applications to the NYSE between 1883 and 1936 show

that the war more than doubled the probability that German Americans would be rejected

(relative to Anglo-Saxons). In regressions of the probability of rejection on ethnicity

variables and a variety of controls, interaction terms between World War I and German

ethnicity are consistently large, positive, and significant. No other ethnicity variables

yield significant effects. Results of differential treatment are robust to controls for stock

market conditions through time-fixed effects.

       Changes in productivity cannot explain the increase in rejections. Specifically,

one may worry that the war lowered the productivity of German American traders if they




                                                                                                2
were more dependent on business with Germany. To test this, I examine rates of

business failures and exits from the Exchange. These data show that Germans who were

already members did not fail in business or exit the NYSE at higher rates than other

members. Moreover, the share of German applicants increased after 1914, which

suggests that Germans did not perceive their productivity to be at risk.

       The data also show that Jewish Germans suffered an even stronger effect than did

other Germans. All Jewish applicants were also more likely to be rejected at all times.

These findings indicate that the war amplified an existing ethnic bias.

       At the same time, the empirical results suggest that discrimination operates

through a mechanism that is somewhat unexpected. The data indicate that prices remain

unaffected by taste-based discrimination, even though admissions change substantially.

This difference stems from the structure of the admissions process. Applicants negotiate

prices with sellers who exit the Exchange, but they are evaluated by their future peers,

whom they cannot compensate. Similar set-ups are present in many labor market settings

where co-workers hold discriminatory tastes. The results of this paper suggest that taste-

based discrimination will continue to affect the labor market outcomes of minorities in

such settings, even if regulation ensures equality in wages.

       The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section I describes the NYSE’s

process of admissions. Section II introduces the data on admissions and on seat prices.

Section III presents three alternative measures to quantify changes in ethnic preferences.

Section IV summarizes the results of linear probability and logit regressions of rejections

on applicants’ ethnicities and controls. Section V presents comparable regressions for

seat prices, and section VI concludes.




                                                                                             3
I. The NYSE’s Process of Admissions

        The first mention of the New York Stock Exchange occurred in The Diary, or

Loudon’s Register in March 1792:

    The Stock Exchange Office is opened at No.22 Wall Street for the accommodation of the
    dealers in Stock, and in which Public Sales will be held daily at noon… (Eames 1894, p.13)

Only two months later, on May 17, traders agreed to deal exclusively with each other.

By 1879, the Exchange had grown to include 1,100 traders (Eames 1894, pp.14 and 43). 3

Membership remained constant until 1929, when the NYSE granted every member the

right to sell one quarter of a new membership during the so-called Quarter Dividend Sale,

which increased the number of seats to 1,375 (Davis, Neale, and White 2007).

        Francis L. Eames, President of the Exchange from 1894 to 1898, describes the

basic requirements of membership:

    Any person, at least twenty-one years of age, and a citizen of the United States, may buy a
    membership in the Stock Exchange from any member desiring to sell, subject to the approval
    of the Committee of Admissions. (Eames 1894, p.68)

Eighty percent of all transactions between 1883 and 1936 were negotiated directly

between sellers and prospective buyers. The remaining twenty percent were sold in an

anonymous auction, which was administered by the Committee of Admissions. These

seats were typically owned by a member who had died, failed in business, or been

expelled. Then,

    …his membership may be sold by the Committee, creditors who are members of the Exchange
    having a first lien upon the proceeds. (Eames 1894, p.68)




3
  Seats had become saleable in 1869, when the first memberships sold for 8,000 dollars (ca. 100,000 dollars
in 2005). Seats within the Exchange had become saleable eight years earlier, in October 1861. At that
time, each member occupied a specific chair on the trading floor (Eames 1894, p.43). The leasing of seats
is a recent phenomenon, which the NYSE began to permit in 1978.


                                                                                                         4
In both types of transactions, the NYSE receives a fixed initiation fee from the buyer,

which is independent of the purchase price. This fee remained stable at around 20,000

year 2005 dollars.

        Once buyers and sellers have agreed on a price, the NYSE’s 15-member

Committee of Admissions evaluates the buyer’s “personal and financial integrity”

(Eames 1894, p.51). Sellers deal with applicants only for as long as it takes to negotiate

the price of the seat. The remaining members, however, who are represented by the

Committee, evaluate buyers as potential trading partners. An anonymous trader explains

the importance of trust in this setting:

    Character is essential to the Stock Exchange member. He buys and sells in a milling, excited
    crowd around a trading post, and his contracts are oral. None is written and he must stand by
    his word of today, even though his transaction will show him a loss tomorrow. (New York
    Times, August 24, 1924)

To ascertain a buyer’s integrity, the NYSE interviews the applicant along with two

members who recommend him “in every way as a proper person to be admitted to the

Exchange” (Minutes of the Committee of Admissions 1904). 4 The committee also asks

whether the sponsors would “accept (the applicant’s) uncertified check for $20,000

(equivalent to 2.8 million in 2005 U.S. dollars) if he were alone in business and a

member of the Exchange” (Minutes of the Committee of Admissions 1904). 5 Buyers also

confirm that they are in good health and not currently members of a competing exchange.

        Typically, the Committee meets every two weeks, interviews two to three

applicants, and decides on them in the next meeting. Until 1936, anonymous ballots are




4
  I use male pronouns because there were no female applicants to the NYSE during this period. The first
female trader, Muriel Siebert, entered the Exchange in 1967.
5
  Prices are converted to real prices using nominal GDP per capita (Williamson 2007).


                                                                                                          5
recorded as white balls in favor of an applicant and black balls against. If more than one

third of the votes are black balls, the application is rejected. 6



II. World War I as a Shock to Preferences

           World War I created a shift in ethnic preferences that can be used to identify the

potential effects of taste-based discrimination. Prior to 1914, German Americans were a

prominent part of the ethnic mainstream.

      Public opinion had come to accept the Germans as one of the most assimilable and reputable
      of immigrant groups. Repeatedly, older Americans praised them as law-abiding, speedily
      assimilated, and strongly patriotic….In 1908, a group of professional people, in rating the
      traits of various immigrant nationalities, ranked the Germans above the English and in some
      respects judged them superior to the native whites. (Higham 1998, p.196)

           After August 5, 1914, when Germany attacked Belgium, respect gave way to

hostility. On April 5, 1918, The St. Louis Globe-Democrat reports the attack of Robert

Praeger: “German Enemy of U.S. hanged by mob.” 7 Praeger’s was the only lynching,

but other types of abuse, such as tarring and feathering, occurred dozens of times. Frank

Brocke, a German American farmer, recalls in an interview:

      I would say you suffered more for the fact if you were of German descent more than anything
      else (sic). That was the hardest part we had to play with it…there was a lot of propaganda
      against the German people. And we had to be so careful…It was just that there was a lot of
      hatred against the Germans and if you were German, you were a little bit tinted, I guess. (Oral
      history project of the Latah County Historical Society, http://users.moscow.com/lchs/)


           During the war Germans were also barred from many social clubs that they had

previously dominated. In New York, the Chemists’ Club, the Lamb Club, and the New

York Athletic Club expelled all German-born members, and banned the use of German

on their premises (New York Times, April 11, 20, and May 5, 1918). The war’s effect on


6
    To vote, the Committee required a quorum of 10 members.
7
    Hickey 1969. Also see Chicago Daily Tribune (April 5, 1918) and New York Times (April 4, 1918).


                                                                                                      6
the use of the German language persisted well into the 1920s. In 1916, 13,800 students

studied German in Cincinnati; by 1917, this number had fallen to 7,000. Mothers lobbied

to prohibit the teaching of German, and in 1919, it became illegal to teach German in

Ohio, Iowa, and Nebraska (Wittke 1936, pp.179-190). These prohibitions remained in

place until 1923, when the Supreme Court ruled them to be unconstitutional (Meyer vs.

State of Nebraska, 262 U.S. 390, 1923). 8

         To measure the strength and persistence of these changes in tastes, I construct two

quantitative measures of ethnic preferences. The first measure counts the share of operas

by German-language composers.



A. The Share of German-language Operas at the Met

         In the early years of the 20th century, German-language composers dominated the

repertoire of the Metropolitan Opera (Figure 1). In 1910, 19 in 44 operas were by

German-language composers. 9 Nine of these were by Richard Wagner, including

Lohengrin, Tannhäuser, and Tristan und Isolde. From 1910 until early 1917, half of the

8
  Changes in the circulation of ethnic newspapers confirm this shift in status. At a time when the number of
mother-tongue publications increased among 13 major ethnic groups, the circulation of German-language
publications decreased (Kirschbaum 1986, p.72; Wittke 1936, p.115). In May 1918, the American Defense
Society and the American Relief Legion petitioned President Wilson to ban the publication of German
language newspapers (New York Times, May 9, 1918). Moreover, American cities, such as Portland,
Oregon, renamed any German-sounding streets, so that Portland’s Kaiser Street became Marne Way (New
York Times, June 2, 1918; Wittke 1936, p.184). In June 1918, Representative Smith of Michigan
introduced a bill demanding that towns named Berlin, Germantown, or Bismarck be renamed Liberty or
Victory. Berlin, Iowa, was christened Lincoln and East Germantown, Indiana, became Pershing.
9
  Data are collected from historical schedules of performances in the online archives of the Metropolitan
Opera in New York. German composers include Carl Maria von Weber, Engelbert Humperdinck,
Friedrich Handel, Friedrich von Flotow, Giacomo Meyerbeer, Hermann Goetz, Jacques Offenbach, Ludwig
van Beethoven, Max von Schillings, Peter Cornelius, Richard Strauss, and Richard Wagner. German-
language composers further include Austrian composers Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart, Ernst Krenek, Franz
von Suppé, Johann Strauss Jr. and Franz Schubert and the Bohemian Christoph W. von Gluck. Composers
are assigned to ethnicities based on their country of birth, which means that Beethoven and Handel are
counted as German, even though Beethoven was also active in Vienna and Handel in London. Multiple
performances of the same opera are counted as one. In addition to opera houses, concert halls and radio
stations also avoided German music, and musicians who performed German pieces risked violent protest
(New York Times, October 3 and 19, 1919).


                                                                                                          7
Met’s operas were German. In 1917 however, the share of German-language operas

declined from 9 in 10 operas prior to the declaration of war to 4 in 33 afterwards. This

change is especially dramatic considering that it can take several years to prepare an

opera. 10 In fact, two of the four German-language operas, Wagner’s Meistersinger and

Tristan und Isolde, were performed within a week after the declaration of war. The

librettos of the two remaining German operas, Gluck’s Iphigenie and Flotow’s Martha,

were translated into Italian. In 1918, only 3 in 40 operas were by German composers.

           Recitals of German-language music continued to decline for a few years after the

Armistice at Compiègne on November 11, 1918. In 1919, only 7 percent of the Met’s

repertoire featured German-language composers. In the following years, the proportion

of German-language pieces recovered slowly, with 10 percent in 1920, 12 in 1921, and

13 percent in 1922. It took until 1923 for the share of German operas to recover to 25

percent of the Met’s repertoire.

           The data also suggest that World War II did not have a similar effect on

preferences. In fact, the share of German-language operas continued to increase up to 46

percent in 1945. In that year, Hans W. Heinsheimer observed:

      The War – in marked contrast to World War I – has not interfered with the production of
      opera in German. One of the marked highlights of last season was the complete presentation
      of Wagner’s ‘Ring,’ so successful that the whole circle had to be repeated. Again, the greatest
      box office success of the current year has been a magnificent production of ‘Meistersinger,’ a
      magnificent success for conductor George Szell, and the stage manager, Herbert Graf. The
      works of Richard Strauss likewise are much in the public favour. (Heinsheimer 1945, p.8)

Thus, the opera data indicate that only the First World War created a significant shock to

ethnic preferences.




10
     E.g., New York Times, January 20, 2008, citing Opera America.


                                                                                                    8
B. Children Named Wilhelm and Otto

        Another measure of ethnic preferences can be derived from naming practices,

which have been found to reflect attitudes towards ethnicities (Lieberson 2000). To

construct these data, I count newborns named Otto or Wilhelm between 1910 and 1919

(United States Census 1920). Both Otto and Wilhelm have prominent German

connotations: Otto von Bismarck was Prussia’s Prime Minister from 1862 to 1890 and

German Chancellor from 1867 to 1890. Bismarck’s namesake was Otto I, King of the

Germans from 936 to 973, who was succeeded by a long line of Ottos. Wilhelm II was

German Emperor at the beginning of the war; he had followed his grandfather Wilhelm I

(1797 – 1888) to the German throne.

        The number of boys named Otto and Wilhelm declined sharply after 1914 (Figure

2). From 1915 to 1916, Otto dropped by 34.7 percent, from 2,133 to 1,394, and Wilhelm

declined by 35.0 percent from to 140 to 91. At the same time, the number of boys named

William, as the English equivalent to Wilhelm, increased by 3 percent from 2,269 to

2,345. 11



C. Sauerkraut

        Data on the consumption of ethnic foods yield additional evidence for a change in

taste. U.S. consumption of sauerkraut – a traditional German cabbage dish – declined by

75 percent between 1914 and 1918, causing New York’s grocers to complain that “There

is enough sauerkraut in stock at the present time to feed a good-sized German army”

(New York Times, April 25, 1918, p.10). Other ethnically German foods were renamed to

11
  As a further robustness check, I have compared the number of boys named Heinrich and Henry in the
U.S. Census of 1910, 1920, and 1930. While the number of Heinrichs declines between 1910 and 1920 and
recovers only after 1920, the number of Henrys continues to increase during World War I.


                                                                                                   9
rescue sales. Butchers marketed hamburgers as “liberty steaks”; pretzel manufacturers

argued that pretzels had originated in an Italian cloister, and cheese merchants

demonstrated that limburger came from Belgium (Wittke 1936, p.186).

        Thus, changes in the consumption of ethnic German foods underscore the

evidence from operas and naming practices, confirming that the war created a strong and

persistent shift in ethnic preferences. I exploit this shift to assess the impact of taste-

based discrimination, using the example of traders at the NYSE.



III. The NYSE Data

        The data consist of 5,097 applications to the NYSE between December 27, 1883

and December 31, 1936, as well as separate data on the ethnicities of buyers and sellers.

From 1883, all attempted sales were recorded in a ledger of transactions, which can be

accessed at the NYSE archives in New York. An entry in the ledger consists of the

buyer’s name, the seller’s name, the price of the seat, the date of the application, the date

of the decision, the decision, and the number of black balls and white balls that were cast.



A. Description of the NYSE Data

        This data set expands existing information on seat prices by including the names

of buyers and sellers, their ethnicities, and the number of votes that were cast in favor and

in opposition to each applicant. 12 The new data also comprise annotations that reveal

whether a seat was auctioned by the Committee of Admissions, whether a seller had died




12
 For example, Schwert (1977), Jarrell (1984), Golbe (1986), Keim and Madhavan (2000), and Davis,
Neal, and White (2007) explore the effects of trading volumes and stock prices on the price of NYSE seats.


                                                                                                       10
or been expelled from the Exchange, and whether a seat was transferred for a nominal

price, typically within a family or firm. 13

         Figure 3 illustrates the movement of seat prices over time. Between 1883 and

1936, the average real price of a seat was 1.6 million dollars. Prices rose from 420,000

dollars in 1883 to 5.2 million dollars in 1929 and declined sharply thereafter. 14 Voting

data show that rejection rates increased from 3 percent before the war to 4 percent during

the war, and returned to 3 percent afterwards (Table 1).



B. Names as a Measure of Ethnicity

         I use names as a proxy for the ethnicity of buyers and sellers. Names are matched

with ethnicities by an algorithm that uses linguistic rules and location-specific naming

practices. 15 For example, surnames ending in “dda” or “ddo” are assigned to Sardinia

and therefore Italy. This process creates unique ethnicity matches for 84.2 percent of

applicants, yielding a total of 4,290 observations. Ethnicities are combined into four

groups, Anglo-Saxon, German, Jewish, and Other Ethnicities. Anglo-Saxon includes

English, Scottish, and Irish names. Other Ethnicities combines Dutch, Italian, Russian,

along with smaller ethnic groups and other unmatched applicants. I keep Jewish names

separate from Other Ethnicities because Jewish applicants include German Jews.

         Name data suggest that the NYSE was dominated by Anglo-Saxons until well into

the 1930s (Figure 4). In 1890, nearly two-thirds of NYSE traders were Anglo-Saxons; by



13
   The share of nominal transfers increased from 11 percent before the war, to 17 percent during, and 21
percent after the war (Table 1). Since nominal transfers typically occurred within firms, they may have
been subject to less stringent reviews by the NYSE, which will make it harder to detect discrimination.
14
   In 2005 U.S. dollars. With the close of the market on December 30, 2005, the NYSE stopped selling
seats in anticipation of becoming a publicly traded company.
15
   List Service Direct, Inc. (LSDI) at http://listservicedirect.com/ethnic_religious.html


                                                                                                           11
1930, Anglo-Saxons continued to account for half of all traders. The share of German

members increased gradually from 6.1 percent in 1890 to 7.7 percent in 1900, 7.8 percent

in 1910, 8.0 in 1920, and 8.4 percent in 1930. The share of Jewish traders declined from

8.6 percent in 1890 to 7.5 percent in 1920 and 7.6 percent in 1930 (Figure 4).



C. Potential Weaknesses of the Data

       The major weakness of the data is that names may be an imperfect measure of

ethnicity. Algorithms that assign names to ethnicities are optimized to match current-day

naming practices; this will make it harder to detect discrimination during World War I.

Expectations of discrimination may also discourage the use of ethnic-sounding names

(Bertrand and Mullainathan 2004; Levitt and Fryer 2004, p.770). Census data have

shown that the war reduced the popularity of German first names such as Otto or

Wilhelm. Similarly, Germans may have anglicized their last names to avoid

discrimination. On June 2, 1918, for example, the New York Times reports that “Loyal

citizens who possess German forms of the patronymic are striking them out.” Applicants

with anglicized names are assigned to Other Ethnicities, which will make it harder to

capture the effect of World War I on the treatment of Germans. For example, Arthur

Rittmaster, who applied to the NYSE in 1924 and was rejected, carried an anglicized

version of the German name Rittmeister, which falls under Other Ethnicities.

       Another problem is that Jewish Germans are classified as Jewish rather than

German applicants, even though they may have been discriminated against as Germans.

To address this issue, I use historical shipping records to separate Jewish Germans from

Other Jewish applicants. In response to a surge in immigration after the British-




                                                                                          12
American War of 1812, Congress passed the Steerage Act of 1819, which required

captains to submit lists of all passengers and ports of origins (Page 1911). These

documents, including Passenger Lists of Vessels Arriving at New York, New York 1820-

1897, enable me to count arrivals by country of origin for each last name. 16 Arthur

Schiff, for example, applied to the NYSE on December 15, 1932, and is identified as

Jewish by the matching algorithm. Shipping records show that 111 of 228 Schiff families

came from Germany, 55 from Russia, 19 from Hungary, 17 from Poland, 13 from

Austria, and 13 from Hessia (which is a German state). Thus, Jewish applicants with the

last name Schiff are assigned to the new ethnicity variable Jewish German. 17



D. Three Time Periods

         To examine the effect of World War I, the data are divided into three periods: pre-

WWI, WWI, and post-WWI. The pre-WWI period begins with the first recorded sale of a

NYSE seat on January 3, 1883, and extends to June 28, 1914, when Archduke Franz

Ferdinand was assassinated in Sarajevo. The NYSE closed for business a few days after

the Archduke’s death and remained closed until November 28, 1914. By that time,

Germany had invaded Belgium and declared war on Russia and France. WWI data

include the 1920s because measures of ethnic preferences indicate that the war’s effect on

preferences persisted through this decade. The post-WWI period begins with the first

Quarter Dividend Sale on February 13, 1929. This final period includes the stock market

16
   Arrival records are available at ancestry.com. Ancestry’s database consists of an index to the passenger
lists of ships arriving from foreign ports at the Port of New York from 1851 to 1891 and from 1935 to
1938, along with the lists of passengers entering through Castle Garden between 1855 and 1890.
17
   The Jewish German variable may be subject to measurement error if a ship’s port of departure differs
from a family’s country of origin. Specifically, the variable may be biased towards countries that are closer
to the United States, and particularly towards Britain. For example, a ship could pick up an immigrant in
Hamburg and make another stop in London before setting sail for the United States. This may lead me to
classify some German Jews as Anglo-Saxon.


                                                                                                          13
crash on Black Thursday, October 24, 1929 and the Great Depression. The data end on

October 1, 1936, when the NYSE stopped recording black balls.

       Data on other exchanges suggest that the NYSE faced significant competition

during the war. Since the early 19th century, the NYSE had competed with an active curb

market, bucket shops, and specialized exchanges, including the Coal Hole, the New York

Gold Exchange, and the Open Board of Stock Brokers (Eames 1894, p.43). Its most

formidable competitor, however, the Consolidated Stock Exchange of New York, was

most active in the 1920s. Close to 2,000 seats at the Consolidated were “available for a

few hundred dollars, no questions asked” (Sobel 1972, p.29). When the Consolidated

began trading NYSE stocks, bid-ask spreads at the NYSE fell by roughly 10 percent;

until 1926, it held nearly a quarter of the market (Brown, Mulherin, and Weidenmier

2006). Thus, competition may have mitigated the effects of ethnic bias during the war.



IV. Effects on the Probability of Rejection

       Applications data show that rejection rates for German applicants nearly doubled

after the beginning of the war (Table 1). Before the war, 4 percent of German applicants

were rejected on grounds of “personal and financial integrity.” After 1914, 8 percent of

Germans were rejected. In the post-war period, rejection rates dropped back to 1 percent.

In contrast, rejection rates for Anglo-Saxons decreased during the war from 2.9 to 2.4

percent and increased slightly after the war to 2.5 percent.

       Linear probability and logit regressions with and without annual fixed effects

measure the effects of time-ethnicity interactions on rejection rates (Figure 6 for linear




                                                                                             14
probability, Tables 2 and 3 for logit models). 18 Four ethnicity variables distinguish

Anglo-Saxon, German, Jewish, and Other Ethnicities. Anglo-Saxons are the control

ethnicity because they are the largest and socially dominant group. The variables pre-

WWI and WWI account for period effects, while post-WWI acts as the control. Time-

ethnicity interactions such as WWI * German Buyer estimate differences-in-differences

over time and across ethnicities.




The last line of equation (1) includes controls for Nominal transactions, Quarter Dividend

Sales, and sales by the Committee of Admissions. Rejection rates may be lower for

nominal sales because such sales typically occurred within firms and may therefore be

subject to less interference by the NYSE. In contrast, rejection rates may be higher

during the Quarter Dividend Sale if the sudden increase in the supply of memberships

lowered the quality of marginal applicants. Finally, rejection rates may be lower for sales

that were administered by the Committee of Admissions if the Committee used discretion

in selecting applicants instead of selling to the highest bidder.

         A linear regression of rejection rates on German Buyer, including these controls,

suggests that rejections for Germans increased significantly at the beginning of the war

(Figure 6). 19 For most years prior to World War I, German ethnicity had no effect on the

probability of rejection. In 1912 and 1914, however, German Americans faced a 40 to 50




18
  Probit regressions yield similar results.
19
  Figure 6 reports coefficients for German Buyer in a linear probability regression, run separately by year,
and controlling for ethnicities, nominal transactions, Quarter Dividend Sales and sales by the Committee.


                                                                                                          15
percent higher risk of rejection than Anglo-Saxons. This effect persisted at a lower level

until 1928, and took off to a second peak in 1934, when Hitler took power in Germany.

         Logit regressions confirm that the war increased rejection rates for Germans. The

coefficient for the time-ethnicity interaction WWI * German Buyer is large and positive at

2.0 to 2.2 (Table 2, significant at 5 percent). In comparison, the coefficient for pre-WWI

* German Buyer stays between 1.1 and 1.3 (Table 2, not statistically significant). These

results imply that World War I more than doubled the differences in the probabilities of

rejection between Germans and Anglo-Saxons from 6 to more than 13 percent. 20 Results

are robust to controlling for stock market conditions with annual fixed effects;

coefficients for WWI * German Buyer are significantly larger than coefficients for pre-

WWI * German Buyer (1.8 to 2.0 at 5 percent, Table 3). 21 Time-ethnicity interactions are

not significant for any other ethnicity, and Quarter Dividend Sale has no effect. 22



A. Analyzing Individual Votes through Black Balls

         Data on black balls make it possible to examine changes in admissions at the level

of individual votes. Ordinary least squares regressions of black balls in Tables 4 and 5

re-estimate the logit regressions in Tables 2 and 3 with black balls as the dependent

20
   Marginal probabilities are calculated from the coefficients at the sample means. For example, the effect
of being German on the probability of rejection is: G(βo+ βGermanXGerman+ βJewisXJewish + … +βNominalXNominal)
- G(βo+ βJewishXJewish …+βNominalXNominal), where G(.) is the cumulative probability function of the logistic
distribution. Chunrong Ai and Edward C. Norton (2003) show that these effects are approximate. Their
correction focuses on interactions between two continuous variables, whereas regressions in the current
paper examine interactions between binary variables. I use Ai and Norton’s algorithm to measure the size
of the bias. It can handle only a single interaction variable, and I estimate a restricted model with
WWI*German as the only interaction variable to match this constraint. In that model, differences between
the approximate calculation and Ai and Norton’s corrected method are negligible.
21
   Regressions with annual fixed effects do not include time dummies because time dummies would only
capture differences within 1914. For example, the variable WWI would measure differences in rejections
before and after June 28, 1914. Data for nine years are dropped from regressions with annual fixed effects
because no applicant was rejected.
22
   I have performed alternative tests breaking up Other Ethnicity into more finely-grained ethnic categories,
including Italian, Russian, and Dutch. None of these ethnicities experience a comparable effect of the war.


                                                                                                           16
variable. These regressions show that the share of black balls against Germans more than

doubled after 1914. Coefficients on the time-ethnicity interaction for German applicants

increase from 0.3 and 0.4 for pre-WWI * German (not statistically significant, Table 4) to

0.7 and 0.8 for WWI * German (significant at 1 percent, Table 4). Regressions with

annual fixed effects confirm these results (Table 5, with an increase from 0.3 and 0.4 for

pre-WWI * German, not statistically significant, to 0.7 for WWI * German, significant at

1 to 5 percent). Thus, the black ball data confirm that World War I significantly lowered

the probability that German Americans would be elected to the NYSE.



V. Did the Increase in Rejections Reflect a Change in Productivity?

       A potential alternative explanation for the increase in rejections of German traders

is that World War I reduced their productivity relative to Anglo-Saxons. The war

impeded business with Germany, and German traders are likely to have conducted a

larger share of this business. As a result, their productivity may have suffered and thus

triggered the increase in rejections. To account for this, I examine changes in the share of

Germans among business failures and exits from the Exchange, as well as in the share of

applications.



A. No Increase in Defaults or Exits of German Traders

       NYSE members who had failed in business or violated trading rules were

expelled. Data on expulsions, however, yield little evidence of an effect of World War I

on Germans. Between 1915 and 1918, the number of expulsions increased from zero to

seven, but only two of these expelled members were German (Figure 7). This share is




                                                                                            17
particularly low considering the negative ex ante assessment of German traders, which

should have made them more vulnerable to expulsion. A second spike follows in 1922,

with six expulsions, including three Germans. At that time, trading restrictions with

Germany had been removed, but ethnic bias may have persisted, as measures of ethnic

preferences suggest.

        Similarly, data on exits from the Exchange do not indicate that the war lowered

the productivity of German traders. The share of German sellers increased sharply in

1898, from less than 9 percent to nearly 16 percent, but there is no effect of World War I.

From 1900 to 1923 the share of German sellers fluctuated between 6 and 12 percent; it

only jumped again in 1924 (to 15 percent, Figure 8).



B. No Decline in German Applications

        An additional check for productivity effects is to compare applications across

ethnicities and over time. Specifically, if World War I lowered the productivity of

German traders, it may have discouraged Germans relative to other applicants. The data,

however, suggest that the share of German applicants increased during the war, from 7.6

before 1914 to 9.1 percent during the war, and 9.2 percent after (Figure 9). 23 The share

of Jewish applicants declined from 7.5 percent to 6.5 percent after 1914, and recovered to

9.3 percent after the war. Unless World War I lowered the productivity of Jewish

applicants, this dip in applications may reflect expectations of discrimination.




23
 Demographic data from the U.S. Census of 1920 suggest that the “quality” of German applicants –
measured by age, marital status, and home ownership – stayed roughly constant.


                                                                                                   18
C. World War I has Even Larger Effects on Jewish Germans

       Comparing the treatment of Jewish Germans and other Germans creates an

additional test of ethnic bias. A potential productivity effect of World War I should have

favored Jewish Germans relative to other Germans if Jewish Germans were more likely

to have established business relations outside of Germany. For instance, historical

records show that Jewish German firms, such as Singer Manasse, figured prominently at

the London Stock Exchange prior to World War I. After 1914, many of these firms

moved from London to New York. Michael Manasse, for example, came to the NYSE in

1916 (Michie 1999, pp.158-159). These arrivals performed well at the Exchange:

   The New York Stock Exchange, bolstered by the repurchase of dollar securities and the arrival
   of expertise from London, now became a serious challenger in international markets. (Michie
   1999, p.160)

       Although Jewish Germans may have been better insulated from the productivity

effects of World War I, the NYSE data suggest that they suffered an even stronger

increase in rejections than other Germans. Logit regressions in Tables 6 and 7 repeat the

analysis of Tables 2 and 3, distinguishing German Jewish from other Jewish applicants.

In these regressions, the interaction variable WWI * German Jewish carries a large

positive coefficient (2.3 to 2.4, significant at 5 percent, Table 6), which implies a 19

percent increase in rejections. In comparison, the interaction variable pre-WWI *

German Jewish carries a coefficient of 0.7 to 0.8, which implies a 3 percent increase for

the pre-war period. Thus, these data suggest that World War I increased the probability

of rejection for German Jews by a factor of six. Logits with annual fixed effects

corroborate these results (Table 7).

       This large increase in rejections suggests that World War I may have intensified a

pre-existing bias against Jewish applicants. The variable Jewish Buyer carries a positive


                                                                                             19
coefficient of 0.7 to 0.8 (significant at 10 percent, Tables 2 and 3), which implies that

Jewish applicants faced rejection probabilities 2 to 3 percent above those of Anglo-

Saxons. 24



VI. Changes in the Ethnic Composition of the Committee of Admissions

        In addition to influencing admissions, ethnic preferences may also have

influenced access to powerful positions within the Exchange. To measure these effects, I

examine changes in the ethnic composition of the Committee of Admissions. Rules for

selecting the Committee, which were in place from 1869 until the reorganization of the

Exchange in 1938, ensured that the ethnic composition of the Committee changed only

gradually. Each May, the three longest-serving members of the Committee of

Admissions were replaced by three new members (Eames 1894, pp.74-75).

        Changes in the ethnic composition of the Committee of Admissions suggest that

World War I reduced the chances that Germans would be elected to influential positions

within the Exchange. 25 In 1880, the 15-member Committee included 3 German traders

(Figure 10). Between 1913 and 1915, the number of Germans declined to 2, and by

1921, only 1 German remained. By 1930, the Committee again included 2 German

members.

        In conjunction with the black ball data, these data indicate that the increase in

rejections reflected a broad-based change in voting patterns at the NYSE rather than a

switch in a small number of votes. During the war, only one applicant was rejected by

24
   When Jewish Buyers are separated into Jewish German and Other Jewish Buyers, black balls against
Jewish German Buyers increase by 0.7 to 0.8 (significant at 1 percent) in regressions with time dummies,
and by 0.6 to 0.7 (significant at 1 percent) in regressions with annual fixed effects.
25
   Committee members were identified from the Minutes of the Committee of Admissions (1904), Eames
(1894), and the New York Stock Exchange Directory (1906, 1909, 1913-15, 1920, and 1930).


                                                                                                       20
less than a two-third majority. On March 13, 1919, George Shaskan was rejected with

three black balls. Shaskan’s rejection, however, may have been due to the NYSE’s

citizenship requirements: Shaskan’s response to the 1920 Census reveals that he had

arrived from Russia in 1891, and that his naturalization was still pending in 1920. All

other applicants were denied by an overwhelming majority.

       In sum, data on admissions decisions, black balls, and internal elections all

indicate that World War I worsened the treatment of Germans at the NYSE. These

results are a strong indicator of taste-based discrimination. The following section

examines whether World War I had a similarly strong effect on the prices that Germans

paid to be admitted to the Exchange.



VII. Ethnicity and the Price of Admission

       This section examines the prices that Germans offered to enter the Exchange. For

the majority of sales, prices were set in direct negotiations between members who

planned to leave the Exchange and prospective buyers who wanted to become members.

Sellers only interacted with buyers for as long as it took to agree on a price. Thus, in

contrast to the remaining members, sellers’ incentives to discriminate may have been

limited. If they did in fact discriminate, the data should show higher prices for Germans

buyers (relative to Anglo-Saxons) during World War I.

       The ideal test of discrimination would compare prices under identical conditions,

for seats that were sold on the same day. Seats were, however, only sold every two

weeks and the number of transactions is too small to estimate effects even on a monthly




                                                                                           21
basis. Thus the data only allow for regressions with annual fixed effects (Table 8), 26 and

regressions with time-period dummy variables provide robustness checks (Table 9). The

analysis replicates that of rejection rates, except that price regressions add a dummy

variable for Same Ethnicity, which tests whether sellers favored buyers of their own

ethnicity, and a dummy variable for Rejected, which tests whether sellers anticipated

rejections and charged higher prices to compensate.




         In contrast to rejection data, price data show no effect of ethnic preferences.

Coefficients for the variable in Table 9 indicate that WWI raised the price for German

applicants by approximately 3 percent (11 to 14 percent for WWI * German Buyer,

compared with 9 to 11 percent for pre-WWI * German Buyer). This effect, however,

disappears in regressions with controls for stock market conditions: With annual fixed

effects the coefficient for WWI * German Buyer is close to zero and not statistically

significant (Table 8, pre-WWI * German Buyer is also close to zero). 27

         Moreover, there is little proof that German sellers favored buyers of their own

ethnicity, and coefficients for same ethnicity interactions are not significant. Without

fixed effects, a coefficient of -0.13 on the interaction German Buyer and Seller * WWI

implies a price reduction of 13 percent (Table 9). This effect, however, is not statistically




26
   Bi-annual fixed effects can compare a larger number of sales, but they do less to control for stock market
conditions. Regressions with bi-annual fixed effects yield results that are qualitatively similar to
regressions with annual fixed effects, albeit with slightly smaller standard errors.
27
   Separating Jewish Germans from other Jews does not show a price increase for Jewish Germans.


                                                                                                          22
significant and disappears with the inclusion of time fixed effects. 28 Buyers whose

applications are rejected offer on average 9 percent less for a seat (Table 9), but this

effect also disappears with the inclusion of time fixed effects.

         There is some evidence, however, that Jewish buyers paid slightly higher prices

during World War I. With annual fixed effects, coefficients for WWI * Jewish Buyer

indicate that Jewish applicants paid a 5 to 7 percent markup during the war, which,

compared with a 2 to 4 percent markup before 1914, implies a price increase of 3 percent

(Table 8). Regressions with period dummies suggest a markup of 16 to 22 percent after

1914 and 5 to 12 percent before, which implies a price increase of 10 percent (Table 9).

         The data also show that seats of deceased or expelled members, which were

auctioned by the Committee of Admissions, sold at a discount (nearly 13 percent, Table

9). This discount, however, also disappears with the inclusion of time fixed effects

(Table 8). 29

         The most significant price effect occurs for buyers who purchased their seats as

part of the Quarter Dividend Sale. In such transactions, buyers negotiated with four

sellers instead of one. The NYSE data show that these buyers paid on average 9 percent

more than they would have paid in a regular sale at the same time (Table 8). These

results suggest that economic considerations were a more powerful determinant of prices

than were ethnic preferences. 30




28
   The corresponding variable Jewish Buyer and Seller * WWI shows no significant effect.
29
   There is no evidence that the Committee favored certain ethnicities in its own sales. Interactions between
ethnicity variables and the Committee of Admissions yield no statistically significant coefficients.
30
   Another characteristic of transactions during the Quarter Dividend Sale is that sellers remained at the
Exchange and may therefore have been more likely to discriminate. Unfortunately, the Quarter Dividend
Sale occurs in 1929, when the effect of World War I on ethnic preferences had already lost its force.


                                                                                                          23
VIII. Conclusions

        Quantitative measures of ethnic preferences based on German-language operas,

naming practices, and food purchases establish that World War I resulted in a strong and

persistent shift in ethnic preferences, which effectively converted German Americans to

an ethnic minority. This paper has analyzed a new data set on more than 4,000 applicants

to the NYSE to test whether this shift in preferences affected the prospects of German

Americans’ to be admitted to the NYSE. Admissions data reveal that the war more than

doubled rejection rates for Germans (relative to Anglo-Saxons).

        Despite the strong effect on rejections, the data yield no evidence that Germans

paid a premium to enter the Exchange. The reason for this divergence is likely to lie in

the institutional characteristics of the admissions process: An applicant to the NYSE

negotiates a price with a member who plans to exit the Exchange. It is, however, not the

seller, but a committee of remaining members, that evaluates his application. Remaining

members do not benefit from higher prices, but they expect to interact with the applicant

for a long time. Thus, applicants cannot compensate their future peers, who are most

affected by their characteristics, for ethnic bias.

        Similar set-ups of separated decision-making on prices and admissions are present

in many labor market settings where co-workers may hold discriminatory tastes. For

instance, minority applicants may be willing to accept lower wages in their negotiations

with the human resource manager of a law firm or investment bank, but their prospective

co-workers, and not human resources, decide whom to admit. Similarly, minority buyers

can offer higher prices to the owner of a condo, but the condo board, and not the seller,




                                                                                            24
decides on applications. The results of this paper suggest that taste-based discrimination

will persist in such settings, even if regulation ensures equal prices and wages.




                                            Sources

Ai, Chunrong, and Edward C. Norton, “Interaction terms in logit and probit models,” Economic
       Letters, LXXX (2003), 123-129.

Aigner, Dennis J., and Glenn Cain, “Statistical Theories of Discrimination in Labor Markets,”
        Industrial and Labor Relations Review, XXX (1977), 749-76.

Altonji, Joseph G., and Rebecca M. Blank, “Race and Gender in the Labor Market,” in Handbook
         of Labor Economics, Edition I, Volume 3, Orley Ashenfelter and David Card, editors
         (Amsterdam: Elsevier, 1999), pp. 3143-3259.

Arrow, Kenneth, “Models of Job Discrimination,” in Collected Papers of K. J. Arrow, Volume 6
       (Cambridge: Harvard University Belknap Press, 1973).

Becker, Gary, The Economics of Discrimination (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1957).

Bertrand, Marianne, and Sendhil Mullainathan, “Are Emily and Greg More Employable Than
        Lakisha and Jamal? A Field Experiment on Labor Market Discrimination,” American
        Economic Review, XCIV (2004), 991-1013.

Brown, William H., J. Harold Mulherin, and Marc D. Weidenmier, “Competing with the NYSE,”
       NBER Working Paper 12343, 2006.

Nardinelli, Clark, and Curtis Simon, “Customer Racial Discrimination in the Market for
       Memorabilia: the Case of Baseball,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, CV (1990), 575-
       595.

Davis, Lance, Larry Neale, and Eugene White, “The Highest Price Ever,” Journal of Economic
        History, LXVII (2007), 705-739.

Eames, Francis L., The New York Stock Exchange (New York: Thomas Hall, 1894).

Fershtman, Chaim, and Uri Gneezy, “Discrimination in a Segmented Society: An Experimental
       Approach,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXVI (2001), 351-377.

Goldin, Claudia, and Cecilia E. Rouse, “Orchestrating Impartiality: The Effect of 'Blind'
        Auditions on Female Musicians,” American Economic Review, XC (2000), 715-741.

Golbe, Devra L., “Has Deregulation Decreased the Risk of NYSE Seat Ownership?” Economic
       Letters, XX (1986), 283-289.



                                                                                                25
Heinsheimer, Hans W., “Opera in America,” Tempo, No.11 (1945), 6-9.

Higham, John, Strangers in the Land (New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press, 1998).

Hickey, Donald R., "The Praeger Affair: A Study in Wartime Hysteria," Journal of the Illinois
        Historical Society, Summer (1969), 126-7.

Jarrell, Gregg A., “Change at the Exchange: The Causes and Effects of Deregulation,” Journal of
         Law and Economics, XXVII (1984), 273-307.

Keim, Donald B. and Ananth Madhavan, “The Relation between Stock Market Movements and
       NYSE Seat Prices,” Journal of Finance, LV (2000), 2817-2840.

Kirschbaum, Erik, The Eradication of German Culture in the United States: 1917-1918
       (Stuttgart: Verlag Hans-Dieter Heinz, 1986).

Levitt, Steve, and Roland Fryer, “The Causes and Consequences of Distinctively Black Names,”
         Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXIX (2004), 767-805.

Lieberson, Stanley, A Matter of Taste: How Names, Fashions, and Culture Change (New Haven:
        Yale University Press, 2000).

List, John A., “The Nature and Extent of Discrimination in the Marketplace: Evidence from the
         Field,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXIX (2004), 49-89.

Michie, Ranald, The London Stock Exchange, A History (Oxford: University Press, 1999).

New York, Passenger Lists of Vessels Arriving at New York, New York, 1820-1897,
      Micropublication M237, Rolls # 95-580, National Archives, Washington, D.C.

New York, Passenger and Crew Lists of Vessels Arriving at New York, New York, 1897-1957,
      Micropublication T715, Rolls # 5592-6267, National Archives, Washington, D.C.

Page, Thomas W., “The Transportation of Immigrants and Reception Arrangements in the
       Nineteenth Century,” The Journal of Political Economy, XIX (1911), 732-749.

Phelps, Edmund, “The Statistical Theory of Racism and Sexism,” American Economic Review,
        LXXII (1972), 659-661.

Schwert, G. William, “Stock Exchange Seats as Capital Assets,” Journal of Financial Economics,
       IV (1977), 51-78.

Sobel, Robert, Amex: History of the American Stock Exchange 1911-1971 (New York, 1972).

United States Supreme Court, Meyer v. State of Nebraska, 262 U.S. 390, 1923.

Williamson, Samuel H., “Five Ways to Compute the Relative Value of a U.S. Dollar Amount,
       1790 - 2006,” MeasuringWorth.com, 2007.

Wittke, Carl, German Americans and the World War (Columbus: The F. J. Heer Printing Co.,
        1936).


                                                                                                26
                    TABLE 1 – APPLICATIONS FOR MEMBERSHIP AT THE NEW YORK STOCK EXCHANGE – SUMMARY STATISTICS
                                                         1883 to               WW1 to             Dividend Sale to                 All years
                                                          WWI                Dividend Sale        December 1936
                                                       (Pre-WWI)                (WWI)               (Post-WWI)

   ANGLO-SAXON
                                   Applications           1,207                    707                   1,085                       2,999
                                      Rejected             2.9%                   2.4%                  2.50%                        2.60%
                                      Nominal             11.0%                  19.2%                  23.00%                      17.30%
   GERMAN
                                   Applications             149                    117                    169                         435
                                      Rejected             4.0%                   7.7%                  1.20%                        3.90%
                                      Nominal              4.0%                  12.0%                  19.50%                      12.20%
   JEWISH
                                   Applications            147                    105                     173                         425
                                      Rejected            3.4%                   10.5%                  5.20%                        5.90%
                                      Nominal             10.2%                  17.1%                  12.10%                      12.70%
   OTHER ETHNICITIES
                                   Applications             467                    309                    462                        1,238
                                      Rejected             3.0%                   5.2%                  3.50%                        3.70%
                                      Nominal             11.3%                  13.9%                  18.80%                      14.80%

   ALL ETHNICITIES
                                   Applications           1,970                  1,238                   1,889                      5,097
                                      Rejected             3.0%                   4.3%                  2.90%                       3.30%
                                      Nominal             10.5%                  17.0%                  20.70%                      15.90%
Notes: Data on the identities of applicants, seat prices and admissions decisions were collected from the Archives at the New York Stock Exchange. Names
were matched to ethnicities by a commercial algorithm that uses linguistic rules and location-specific naming practices. Prices are in year 2000 U.S. dollars.




                                                                                                                                                             1
              TABLE 2 – LOGIT REGRESSIONS; 1883-1936, WITH TIME DUMMIES: COEFFICIENTS
                  DEPENDENT VARIABLE IS 1 FOR REJECTED APPLICANTS, 0 FOR ACCEPTED
                                                 I             II             III            IV              V
German Buyer                                   -0.723          -0.788         -0.785         -0.787         -0.757
                                              [0.739]         [0.738]        [0.738]        [0.738]        [0.738]
Jewish Buyer                                    0.721           0.674          0.673          0.679          0.766
                                             [0.397]+        [0.395]+       [0.395]+       [0.395]+       [0.394]+
Other Ethnicity Buyer                           0.353           0.31           0.313          0.307          0.341
                                              [0.324]         [0.322]        [0.322]        [0.321]        [0.321]
Pre-WWI                                         0.017           0.112          0.124          0.061          0.157
                                              [0.333]         [0.330]        [0.330]        [0.260]        [0.260]
Pre-WWI * German Buyer                          1.292           1.071          1.073          1.075          1.097
                                              [0.876]         [0.865]        [0.865]        [0.865]        [0.864]
Pre-WWI * Jewish Buyer                          -0.27          -0.519         -0.514         -0.521         -0.601
                                              [0.643]         [0.627]        [0.627]        [0.627]        [0.626]
Pre-WWI * Other Ethnicity Buyer                 -0.14          -0.279         -0.276          -0.27         -0.306
                                              [0.468]         [0.455]        [0.455]        [0.454]        [0.454]
WWI                                            -0.127           -0.02         -0.004         -0.067         -0.035
                                              [0.378]         [0.374]        [0.373]        [0.314]        [0.313]
WWI * German Buyer                              2.163           1.958          1.95           1.951          1.975
                                             [0.861]*        [0.852]*       [0.852]*       [0.852]*       [0.851]*
WWI * Jewish Buyer                              1.117           0.881          0.876          0.87           0.792
                                             [0.581]+         [0.565]        [0.565]        [0.565]        [0.563]
WWI * Other Ethnicity Buyer                     0.594           0.445          0.442          0.449          0.455
                                              [0.493]         [0.480]        [0.480]        [0.479]        [0.478]
Nominal                                        -1.166           -1.16         -1.179        -1.192             -
                                            [0.350]**       [0.350]**      [0.349]**      [0.347]**            -
Quarter Dividend Sale                           0.12            0.116          0.094            -              -
                                              [0.300]         [0.299]        [0.297]            -              -
Committee of Admissions                         0.504          0.126             -              -              -
                                             [0.271]+         [0.198]            -              -              -
Constant                                       -3.605          -3.577         -3.554          -3.49         -3.668
                                            [0.285]**       [0.287]**      [0.284]**      [0.197]**      [0.195]**
Committee Ethnicity Interactions                 Yes             No             No             No             No
Observations (Applications)                     5,097           5,097          5,097          5,097          5,097
Pseudo R-squared                                0.034           0.032          0.031          0.031          0.02
Notes: Data were collected from the Archives at the New York Stock Exchange. Names are matched to ethnicities by
a commercial algorithm that uses linguistic rules and location-specific naming practices. The category Jewish
includes German Jewish applicants. During the Quarter Dividend Sale, each existing member received one additional
quarter of a membership which he could sell. These applications are treated as four separate transactions since they
involve different sellers and prices. + denotes significance at 10 percent, * at 5 percent, and ** at 1 percent.




                                                                                                                     2
          TABLE 3 – LOGIT REGRESSIONS; 1883-1936, WITH ANNUAL FIXED EFFECTS: COEFFICIENTS
                  DEPENDENT VARIABLE IS 1 FOR REJECTED APPLICANTS, 0 FOR ACCEPTED
                                                   I              II             III             IV              V
German Buyer                                     -0.747          -0.795          -0.796         -0.784          -0.752
                                                [0.741]         [0.740]         [0.740]        [0.740]         [0.739]
Jewish Buyer                                      0.761           0.722           0.721          0.749           0.831
                                               [0.399]+        [0.397]+        [0.397]+       [0.396]+        [0.395]*
Other Ethnicity Buyer                             0.369           0.336           0.336          0.338           0.387
                                                [0.324]         [0.323]         [0.323]        [0.323]         [0.322]
Pre-WWI * German Buyer                            1.615           1.371           1.37           1.356           1.379
                                               [0.890]+         [0.872]         [0.872]        [0.871]         [0.871]
Pre-WWI * Jewish Buyer                           -0.267          -0.477          -0.477         -0.506          -0.561
                                                [0.654]         [0.636]         [0.636]        [0.635]         [0.635]
Pre-WWI * Other Ethnicity Buyer                  -0.188          -0.326          -0.328         -0.331          -0.377
                                                [0.478]         [0.461]         [0.461]        [0.461]         [0.460]
WWI * German Buyer                                1.98            1.786           1.789          1.763           1.776
                                               [0.861]*        [0.852]*        [0.852]*       [0.850]*        [0.848]*
WWI * Jewish Buyer                                0.968           0.777           0.779          0.727           0.659
                                               [0.578]+         [0.562]         [0.562]        [0.557]         [0.554]
WWI * Other Ethnicity Buyer                       0.489           0.348           0.348          0.333           0.31
                                                [0.488]         [0.473]         [0.473]        [0.471]         [0.469]
Nominal                                           -1.09          -1.091          -1.085        -1.125              -
                                              [0.353]**       [0.353]**       [0.351]**      [0.349]**             -
Quarter Dividend Sale                             0.376           0.371           0.376            -               -
                                                [0.413]         [0.414]         [0.413]            -               -
Committee of Admissions                            0.3           -0.041             -              -               -
                                                [0.281]         [0.207]             -              -               -
Committee Ethnicity Interactions                   Yes             No              No             No              No
Groups (Years)                                     45              45              45             45              45
Observations (Applications)                       4,653           4,653           4,653          4,653           4,653
Pseudo R-squared                                  0.034           0.031           0.031          0.031           0.019
Notes: Data were collected from the Archives at the New York Stock Exchange. Names are matched to ethnicities by
a commercial algorithm that uses linguistic rules and location-specific naming practices. The category Jewish
includes German Jewish applicants. During the Quarter Dividend Sale, each existing member received one additional
quarter of a membership which he could sell to a new applicant. These applications are treated as four separate
transactions because they involve different sellers and prices. + denotes significance at 10 percent, * at 5 percent, and
** at 1 percent.




                                                                                                                         3
                     TABLE 4 – OLS REGRESSIONS; 1883-1973, WITH TIME DUMMIES
                      DISTINGUISHING GERMAN JEWISH AND OTHER JEWISH BUYERS
           DEPENDENT VARIABLE IS NUMBER OF BLACK BALLS (VOTES OPPOSING AN APPLICATION)
                                                   I              II             III            IV              V
German Buyer                                    -0.083         -0.107          -0.106         -0.106         -0.096
                                               [0.173]        [0.172]         [0.172]        [0.172]        [0.173]
German Jewish Buyer                             -0.312         -0.314          -0.314         -0.315         -0.293
                                               [0.216]        [0.215]         [0.215]        [0.215]        [0.215]
Other Jewish Buyer                               0.772          0.734           0.733          0.732          0.772
                                             [0.253]**      [0.252]**       [0.252]**      [0.252]**      [0.252]**
Other Ethnicity Buyer                            0.153          0.136           0.137          0.138          0.15
                                               [0.116]        [0.116]         [0.116]        [0.115]        [0.115]
Pre-WWI                                         -0.139         -0.109          -0.101         -0.096         -0.064
                                               [0.109]        [0.108]         [0.108]        [0.087]        [0.087]
Pre-WWI * German Buyer                           0.36           0.272           0.273          0.273          0.284
                                               [0.257]        [0.249]         [0.249]        [0.249]        [0.249]
Pre-WWI * German Jewish Buyer                    0.29           0.289           0.294          0.294          0.283
                                               [0.331]        [0.316]         [0.316]        [0.316]        [0.317]
Pre-WWI * Other Jewish Buyer                    -0.072         -0.333          -0.333         -0.332         -0.381
                                               [0.382]        [0.368]         [0.368]        [0.368]        [0.368]
Pre-WWI * Other Ethnicity Buyer                 -0.095         -0.149          -0.148         -0.149         -0.162
                                               [0.166]        [0.162]         [0.162]        [0.161]        [0.162]
WWI                                             -0.121          -0.09          -0.081         -0.077         -0.066
                                               [0.119]        [0.118]         [0.118]        [0.100]        [0.100]
WWI * German Buyer                               0.81           0.739           0.735          0.735          0.745
                                             [0.273]**      [0.269]**       [0.269]**      [0.269]**      [0.269]**
WWI * German Jewish Buyer                        0.814          0.802           0.798          0.799          0.785
                                              [0.344]*       [0.338]*        [0.338]*       [0.338]*       [0.338]*
WWI * Other Jewish Buyer                         0.85           0.604           0.602          0.603          0.569
                                              [0.446]+        [0.436]         [0.436]        [0.436]        [0.436]
WWI * Other Ethnicity Buyer                      0.149          0.099           0.097          0.096          0.097
                                               [0.187]        [0.184]         [0.184]        [0.183]        [0.184]
Nominal                                         -0.269          -0.27          -0.279         -0.278            -
                                             [0.082]**      [0.082]**       [0.082]**      [0.080]**            -
Quarter Dividend Sale                            0.002          0.005          -0.007            -              -
                                               [0.101]        [0.101]         [0.100]            -              -
Committee of Admissions                          0.213         0.078              -              -              -
                                              [0.101]*        [0.077]             -              -              -
Constant                                         0.433          0.437           0.451          0.447          0.383
                                             [0.094]**      [0.094]**       [0.093]**      [0.066]**      [0.063]**
Committee Ethnicity Interactions                  Yes            No              No             No             No
Observations (Applications)                      4,998          4,998           4,998          4,998          4,998
Notes: Data were collected from the Archives at the New York Stock Exchange. Votes are by members of the
NYSE’s Committee of Admissions; the Committee has 15 members and votes when at least 10 members are present.
Black balls were recorded until 1936. As a first step, names are matched to ethnicities by a commercial algorithm that
uses linguistic rules and location-specific naming practices. Then, German Jewish last names are identified based on
the most frequent country of origin in the arrival records of ships that entered New York between 1850 and 1950.
During the Quarter Dividend Sale, each existing member received one additional quarter of a membership which he
could sell to a new applicant. These applications are treated as four separate transactions because they involve
different sellers and prices. + denotes significance at 10 percent, * at 5 percent, and ** at 1 percent.




                                                                                                                      4
                TABLE 5 – OLS REGRESSIONS; 1883-1936, WITH ANNUAL FIXED EFFECTS
                    DISTINGUISHING GERMAN JEWISH AND OTHER JEWISH BUYERS
          DEPENDENT VARIABLE IS NUMBER OF BLACK BALLS (VOTES OPPOSING AN APPLICATION)
                                                       I           II         III          IV          V
        German Buyer                       -0.089    -0.114    -0.113    -0.106    -0.097
                                           [0.173]  [0.172]   [0.172]   [0.172]   [0.172]
        German Jewish Buyer                -0.278    -0.278    -0.278    -0.274    -0.253
                                           [0.215]  [0.214]   [0.214]   [0.214]   [0.214]
        Other Jewish Buyer                  0.769     0.732     0.731     0.756     0.794
                                         [0.252]** [0.252]** [0.252]** [0.251]** [0.251]**
        Other Ethnicity Buyer               0.169     0.154     0.155     0.156     0.174
                                           [0.116]  [0.116]   [0.116]   [0.116]   [0.116]
        Pre-WWI * German Buyer              0.442     0.352     0.352     0.344     0.357
                                          [0.257]+  [0.249]   [0.249]   [0.249]   [0.249]
        Pre-WWI * German Jewish Buyer       0.285     0.299     0.300     0.295     0.288
                                           [0.331]  [0.316]   [0.316]   [0.316]   [0.316]
        Pre-WWI * Other Jewish Buyer       -0.092    -0.342    -0.342    -0.367    -0.411
                                           [0.381]  [0.368]   [0.368]   [0.367]   [0.368]
        Pre-WWI * Other Ethnicity Buyer    -0.123    -0.171    -0.170    -0.172    -0.189
                                           [0.166]  [0.162]   [0.162]   [0.162]   [0.162]
        WWI * German Buyer                  0.738     0.665     0.664     0.650     0.657
                                         [0.272]** [0.268]* [0.268]* [0.268]* [0.268]*
        WWI * German Jewish Buyer           0.699     0.696     0.695     0.683     0.669
                                          [0.343]* [0.337]* [0.337]* [0.337]* [0.337]*
        WWI * Other Jewish Buyer            0.902     0.664     0.664     0.620     0.585
                                          [0.446]*  [0.436]   [0.436]   [0.435]   [0.435]
        WWI * Other Ethnicity Buyer         0.105     0.059     0.059     0.052     0.046
                                           [0.186]  [0.182]   [0.182]   [0.182]   [0.183]
        Nominal                            -0.247    -0.246    -0.249    -0.267       -
                                         [0.083]** [0.083]** [0.082]** [0.081]**      -
        Quarter Dividend Sale               0.204     0.208     0.206       -         -
                                           [0.143]  [0.143]   [0.143]       -         -
        Committee of Admissions             0.144     0.019        -        -         -
                                           [0.102]  [0.078]        -        -         -
        Constant                            0.312     0.334     0.339     0.388     0.341
                                         [0.057]** [0.056]** [0.053]** [0.040]** [0.038]**
        Committee Ethnicity Interactions     Yes       No        No        No        No
        Groups (Years)                        54        54        54       54        54
        Observations (Applications)         4,998     4,998     4,998     4,998     4,998
Notes: Data were collected from the Archives at the New York Stock Exchange. Votes are by members of the
NYSE’s Committee of Admissions; the Committee has 15 members and votes when at least ten members are present.
Black balls were recorded until 1936. As a first step, names are matched to ethnicities by a commercial algorithm that
uses linguistic rules and location-specific naming practices. Then, German Jewish last names are identified based on
the most frequent country of origin in the arrival records of ships that entered New York between 1850 and 1950.
During the Quarter Dividend Sale, each existing member received one additional quarter of a membership which he
could sell to a new applicant. These applications are treated as four separate transactions because they involve
different sellers and prices. + denotes significance at 10 percent, * at 5 percent, and ** at 1 percent.




                                                                                                                    5
              TABLE 6 – LOGIT REGRESSIONS; 1883-1936, WITH TIME DUMMIES: COEFFICIENTS
                      DISTINGUISHING GERMAN JEWISH FROM OTHER JEWISH BUYERS
                  DEPENDENT VARIABLE IS 1 FOR REJECTED APPLICANTS, 0 FOR ACCEPTED
                                                   I              II            III            IV              V
German Buyer                                    -0.723         -0.788         -0.786         -0.787         -0.757
                                               [0.739]        [0.738]        [0.738]        [0.738]        [0.738]
German Jewish Buyer                             -0.994         -0.996         -0.996         -0.994         -0.927
                                               [1.026]        [1.024]        [1.024]        [1.024]        [1.024]
Other Jewish Buyer                               1.515          1.454          1.452          1.459          1.573
                                             [0.427]**      [0.425]**      [0.425]**      [0.424]**      [0.422]**
Other Ethnicity Buyer                            0.352          0.309          0.312          0.307          0.341
                                               [0.324]        [0.322]        [0.322]        [0.321]        [0.321]
Pre-WWI                                            0            0.096          0.109          0.061          0.157
                                               [0.333]        [0.330]        [0.329]        [0.260]        [0.260]
Pre-WWI * German Buyer                           1.291          1.072          1.074          1.075          1.097
                                               [0.876]        [0.865]        [0.865]        [0.865]        [0.864]
Pre-WWI * German Jewish Buyer                    0.706          0.743          0.752          0.749          0.712
                                               [1.295]        [1.261]        [1.261]        [1.261]        [1.261]
Pre-WWI * Other Jewish Buyer                    -0.499         -0.891         -0.891         -0.899         -1.041
                                               [0.759]        [0.749]        [0.749]        [0.749]        [0.747]
Pre-WWI * Other Ethnicity Buyer                 -0.139         -0.277         -0.275          -0.27         -0.306
                                               [0.468]        [0.455]        [0.455]        [0.454]        [0.454]
WWI                                             -0.145         -0.036         -0.019         -0.067         -0.035
                                               [0.377]        [0.373]        [0.372]        [0.314]        [0.313]
WWI * German Buyer                               2.162          1.959          1.95           1.951          1.975
                                              [0.861]*       [0.852]*       [0.852]*       [0.852]*       [0.851]*
WWI * German Jewish Buyer                        2.35           2.334          2.328          2.325          2.279
                                              [1.157]*       [1.137]*       [1.137]*       [1.137]*       [1.136]*
WWI * Other Jewish Buyer                         0.906          0.445          0.441          0.434          0.306
                                               [0.707]        [0.691]        [0.690]        [0.690]        [0.686]
WWI * Other Ethnicity Buyer                      0.595          0.447          0.444          0.449          0.455
                                               [0.493]        [0.480]        [0.480]        [0.479]        [0.478]
Nominal                                         -1.168         -1.158         -1.177        -1.186             -
                                             [0.351]**      [0.351]**      [0.349]**      [0.347]**            -
Quarter Dividend Sale                            0.093          0.094          0.071            -              -
                                               [0.301]        [0.301]        [0.299]            -              -
Committee of Admissions                          0.501          0.13             -              -              -
                                              [0.271]+        [0.199]            -              -              -
Constant                                        -3.587         -3.563         -3.539         -3.491         -3.668
                                             [0.285]**      [0.286]**      [0.283]**      [0.198]**      [0.195]**
Committee Ethnicity Interactions                  Yes            No             No             No             No
Observations (Applications)                      5,072          5,097          5,097          5,097          5,097
Pseudo R-squared                                 0.044          0.038          0.038          0.038          0.027
Notes: Data were collected from the Archives at the New York Stock Exchange. As a first step, names are matched to
ethnicities by a commercial algorithm that uses linguistic rules and location-specific naming practices. Then, German
Jewish last names are identified based on the most frequent country of origin in the arrival records of ships that
entered New York between 1850 and 1950. During the Quarter Dividend Sale, each existing member received one
additional quarter of a membership which he could sell to a new applicant. These applications are treated as four
separate transactions because they involve different sellers and prices. + denotes significance at 10 percent, * at 5
percent, and ** at 1 percent.




                                                                                                                     6
          TABLE 7 – LOGIT REGRESSIONS; 1883-1936, WITH ANNUAL FIXED EFFECTS: COEFFICIENTS
                      DISTINGUISHING GERMAN JEWISH AND OTHER JEWISH BUYERS
                  DEPENDENT VARIABLE IS 1 FOR REJECTED APPLICANTS, 0 FOR ACCEPTED
                                                 I              II            III             IV             V
German Buyer                                    -0.742         -0.789          -0.79          -0.78         -0.747
                                               [0.741]        [0.740]        [0.740]        [0.740]        [0.739]
German Jewish Buyer                             -0.947         -0.934         -0.934         -0.928          -0.86
                                               [1.027]        [1.025]        [1.025]        [1.025]        [1.024]
Other Jewish Buyer                               1.575          1.502          1.502          1.546          1.651
                                             [0.433]**      [0.430]**      [0.430]**      [0.426]**      [0.425]**
Other Ethnicity Buyer                            0.37           0.34           0.34           0.342          0.392
                                               [0.324]        [0.323]        [0.323]        [0.323]        [0.323]
Pre-WWI * German Buyer                           1.608          1.363          1.361          1.35           1.372
                                              [0.890]+        [0.872]        [0.872]        [0.871]        [0.871]
Pre-WWI * German Jewish Buyer                    0.785          0.878          0.876          0.869          0.85
                                               [1.305]        [1.268]        [1.268]        [1.268]        [1.268]
Pre-WWI * Other Jewish Buyer                    -0.627         -0.989         -0.988         -1.032         -1.135
                                               [0.778]        [0.765]        [0.765]        [0.763]        [0.761]
Pre-WWI * Other Ethnicity Buyer                 -0.188          -0.33         -0.332         -0.334         -0.381
                                               [0.478]        [0.461]        [0.461]        [0.461]        [0.460]
WWI * German Buyer                               1.968          1.775          1.778          1.757          1.767
                                              [0.861]*       [0.852]*       [0.851]*       [0.850]*       [0.848]*
WWI * German Jewish Buyer                        2.073          2.095          2.096          2.075          2.033
                                              [1.157]+       [1.137]+       [1.137]+       [1.136]+       [1.134]+
WWI * Other Jewish Buyer                         0.913          0.58           0.582          0.508          0.389
                                               [0.720]        [0.698]        [0.698]        [0.688]        [0.683]
WWI * Other Ethnicity Buyer                      0.484          0.342          0.341          0.328          0.302
                                               [0.488]        [0.472]        [0.472]        [0.470]        [0.468]
Nominal                                         -1.098         -1.095         -1.089        -1.121             -
                                             [0.353]**      [0.353]**      [0.352]**      [0.349]**            -
Quarter Dividend Sale                            0.274          0.294           0.3             -              -
                                               [0.413]        [0.413]        [0.411]            -              -
Committee of Admissions                         -0.742         -0.789          -0.79          -0.78         -0.747
                                               [0.741]        [0.740]        [0.740]        [0.740]        [0.739]
Committee Ethnicity Interactions               Yes             No             No             No              No
Groups (Years)                                  45             45             45             45             45
Observations (Applications)                    4,653          4,653          4,653          4,653          4,653
Pseudo R-squared                               0.046          0.04           0.04           0.04           0.028
Notes: Data were collected from the Archives at the New York Stock Exchange. As a first step, names are matched to
ethnicities by a commercial algorithm that uses linguistic rules and location-specific naming practices. Then, German
Jewish last names are identified based on the most frequent country of origin in the arrival records of ships that
entered New York between 1850 and 1950. During the Quarter Dividend Sale, each existing member received one
additional quarter of a membership which he could sell to a new applicant. These applications are treated as four
separate transactions because they involve different sellers and prices. + denotes significance at 10 percent, * at 5
percent, and ** at 1 percent.




                                                                                                                     7
                    TABLE 8 – OLS REGRESSIONS; 1883-1936, WITH ANNUAL FIXED EFFECTS
                   DEPENDENT VARIABLE IS LOG PRICE OF A SEAT IN YEAR 2000 US DOLLARS
                                          I               II            III            IV              V             VI
German Buyer                            0.003           0.003          0.002          0.001          0.001          0.003
                                      [0.014]         [0.014]        [0.013]        [0.013]        [0.013]        [0.013]
Jewish Buyer                           -0.022          -0.022         -0.023         -0.025         -0.025         -0.018
                                     [0.013]+        [0.013]+       [0.012]+       [0.012]*       [0.012]*        [0.012]
Other Ethnicity Buyer                   0.027           0.027          0.025          0.025          0.025          0.025
                                    [0.010]**       [0.010]**      [0.009]**      [0.009]**      [0.009]**      [0.009]**
Pre-WWI * German Buyer                  0.009           0.009          0.008          0.003          0.003          0.001
                                      [0.019]         [0.019]        [0.019]        [0.018]        [0.018]        [0.018]
Pre-WWI * Jewish Buyer                  0.036           0.035          0.035          0.026          0.026          0.02
                                     [0.019]+        [0.019]+       [0.019]+        [0.018]        [0.018]        [0.018]
Pre-WWI * Other Ethnicity              -0.017          -0.017         -0.017         -0.017         -0.017         -0.017
                                      [0.012]         [0.012]        [0.012]        [0.012]        [0.012]        [0.012]
WWI * German Buyer                      0.009           0.009          0.011          0.007          0.007          0.003
                                      [0.021]         [0.021]        [0.020]        [0.020]        [0.020]        [0.020]
WWI * Jewish Buyer                      0.066           0.066          0.066          0.058          0.058          0.047
                                    [0.021]**       [0.021]**      [0.021]**      [0.020]**      [0.020]**       [0.020]*
WWI * Other Ethnicity                 -0.016           -0.015         -0.016         -0.016        -0.016          -0.018
                                      [0.014]         [0.014]        [0.014]        [0.014]        [0.014]        [0.014]
Quarter Dividend Sale                   0.093           0.093          0.093         0.093          0.093             -
                                    [0.011]**       [0.011]**      [0.011]**      [0.011]**      [0.011]**            -
Committee of Admissions                 0.005           0.006         0.005          0.001             -              -
                                      [0.007]         [0.007]        [0.007]        [0.006]            -              -
German Buyer and Seller *               0.017          0.017             -              -              -              -
  WWI                                 [0.053]         [0.053]            -              -              -              -
Rejected                                0.008              -             -              -              -              -
                                      [0.013]              -             -              -              -              -
Constant                              13.939          13.939         13.941         13.942         13.943         13.964
                                    [0.006]**       [0.006]**      [0.004]**      [0.004]**      [0.004]**      [0.003]**
Committee Ethnicity
 Interactions                           Yes            Yes            Yes            No             No             No
Same Ethnicity Interactions             Yes            Yes            No             No             No             No
Groups (Years)                          54             54             54             54             54             54
Observations (Applications)            4,210          4,210          4,210          4,210          4,210          4,210
 Notes: Data were collected from the Archives at the New York Stock Exchange. Names are matched to ethnicities by
 a commercial algorithm that uses linguistic rules and location-specific naming practices. “Jewish” includes German
 Jewish as well as other Jewish applicants, following the original classification. During the Quarter Dividend Sale,
 each existing member received one additional quarter of a membership which he could sell to a new applicant. These
 applications are treated as four separate transactions because they involved different sellers and prices. Prices for
 these transactions are multiplied by a factor of four. + denotes significance at 10 percent, * at 5 percent, and ** at 1
 percent.




                                                                                                                        8
                       TABLE 9 – OLS REGRESSIONS; 1883-1936, WITH TIME DUMMIES
                   DEPENDENT VARIABLE IS LOG PRICE OF A SEAT IN YEAR 2000 US DOLLARS
                                         I              II             III             IV              V              VI
German Buyer                             0.012          0.013           0.013          0.009          0.007         -0.012
                                       [0.048]        [0.048]         [0.045]        [0.044]         [0.045]        [0.048]
Jewish Buyer                            -0.064         -0.067          -0.061         -0.062          -0.061         -0.012
                                       [0.046]        [0.046]         [0.043]        [0.042]         [0.043]        [0.046]
Other Ethnicity Buyer                    0.026          0.025           0.02           0.023           0.02         -0.029
                                       [0.033]        [0.033]         [0.030]        [0.030]         [0.030]        [0.033]
Pre-WWI                                 -0.978         -0.977          -0.977         -0.978          -0.989         -1.479
                                     [0.029]**      [0.029]**       [0.029]**      [0.029]**       [0.029]**      [0.024]**
Pre-WWI * German Buyer                   0.108          0.106           0.102          0.091           0.087          0.106
                                      [0.064]+        [0.064]         [0.064]        [0.062]         [0.062]        [0.067]
Pre-WWI * Jewish Buyer                   0.118          0.121           0.112          0.105            0.1           0.051
                                      [0.065]+       [0.065]+        [0.065]+       [0.062]+         [0.062]        [0.067]
Pre-WWI * Other Ethnicity                0.014          0.014           0.014          0.021          0.019          0.068
                                       [0.042]        [0.042]         [0.042]        [0.041]         [0.041]        [0.045]
WWI                                     -0.613         -0.612          -0.612         -0.613          -0.629         -1.119
                                     [0.032]**      [0.032]**       [0.032]**      [0.032]**       [0.032]**      [0.029]**
WWI * German Buyer                       0.143          0.138           0.121          0.113           0.12           0.138
                                      [0.073]+       [0.073]+        [0.070]+        [0.069]        [0.069]+       [0.075]+
WWI * Jewish Buyer                       0.218          0.212           0.209          0.203           0.207          0.158
                                     [0.072]**      [0.072]**       [0.072]**      [0.070]**       [0.070]**       [0.076]*
WWI * Other Ethnicity                    0.015          0.012           0.012          0.019           0.022          0.071
                                       [0.048]        [0.048]         [0.048]        [0.047]         [0.047]        [0.051]
Quarter Dividend Sale                    0.699          0.698          0.698          0.697            0.72             -
                                     [0.027]**      [0.027]**       [0.027]**      [0.027]**       [0.027]**            -
Committee of Admissions                 -0.127         -0.129         -0.129         -0.127              -              -
                                     [0.025]**      [0.025]**       [0.025]**      [0.019]**             -              -
German Buyer and Seller *              -0.127         -0.132              -              -               -              -
 WWI                                   [0.183]        [0.183]             -              -               -              -
Rejected                                 -0.09            -               -              -               -              -
                                      [0.045]*            -               -              -               -              -
Constant                               14.357         14.355            14.36        14.361          14.338         14.828
                                     [0.028]**      [0.028]**       [0.025]**      [0.025]**       [0.025]**      [0.018]**
Committee Ethnic. Interact.               Yes            Yes             Yes            No              No             No
Same Ethnicity Interactions               Yes            Yes             No             No              No             No
Observations (Applications)              4,210          4,210           4,210          4,210           4,210          4,210
R-squared                                0.67           0.67            0.67           0.67            0.66            0.6
 Notes: Data were collected from the Archives at the New York Stock Exchange. Names are matched to ethnicities by
 a commercial algorithm that uses linguistic rules and location-specific naming practices. The category Jewish
 includes German Jewish last names, following the original classification. During the Quarter Dividend Sale, each
 existing member received one additional quarter of a membership which he could sell to a new applicant. These
 applications are treated as four separate transactions because they involve different sellers and prices. Prices for these
 transactions are multiplied by four. + denotes significance at 10 percent, * at 5 percent, and ** at 1 percent.




                                                                                                                           9
                             FIGURE 1 – THE SHARE OF GERMAN-LANGUAGE OPERAS FROM 1900 TO 1950
                    60%
                                              August 4, 1914
                                                                                                                                                                   May 8, 1945
                                              Germany
                                                                                                                                                                   V-E Day
                                              invades Belgium


                    50%




                    40%
  Share of Operas




                    30%
                                                                                                                             September 1, 1939
                                                                                                                             Germany invades
                                                                                                                             Poland


                    20%




                    10%


                                                                              November 11, 1918
                                                                              Armistice at Compiègne

                    0%
                          1900      1905        1910            1915            1920             1925          1930           1935               1940           1945             1950

                                                German Composers                                  German-Language Composers


Notes: Data on operas are collected from historical schedules of performances in the online archives of the
Metropolitan Opera in New York. German-language composers include Austrian and Bohemian composers.

                            FIGURE 2 – BOYS NAMED OTTO, WILHELM, AND WILLIAM FROM 1911 TO 1919
  3000

                                                                                                                                  November 11, 1918
                                                                                                                                  Amistice at Compiegne
                                                                               August 4, 1914,
                                                                               Germany invades Belgium
  2500

                                                                                                                                                 William


  2000




  1500

                                                                                                                                                  Otto


  1000




                                                                                                                                       Wilhelm
          500




                    0
                             1910      1911          1912              1913            1914             1915          1916            1917               1918          1919


Notes: Data are constructed by counting the number of children with the name Otto or Wilhelm born between
1911 and 1919 and recorded in the United States Census of 1920. To scale the series in one graph, the number
of Ottos is multiplied by 10 and the number of Williams is divided by 20.
                                                                                                                                                                                    1
                                                                     FIGURE 3 - NYSE SEAT PRICES, 1883-1936




                                      6000000
                                      5000000
                                      4000000
  Seat Price (in year 2000 dollars)
                                      3000000
                                      2000000
                                      1000000
                                      0




                                            1882             1892                   1902                  1912                   1922                  1932



Notes: Price data are collected from the ledgers of transactions at the Archives of the NYSE.




                                                   FIGURE 4 –ETHNIC COMPOSITION OF THE NYSE FROM 1886 TO 1936
                          100%


                                      90%
                                                                                                Other Ethnicities

                                      80%


                                      70%                                                            Jewish

                                                                                                    Germans
                                      60%


                                      50%


                                      40%


                                      30%                                                          Anglosaxon


                                      20%


                                      10%


                                      0%
                                        1886 1888 1890 1892 1894 1896 1898 1900 1902 1904 1906 1908 1910 1912 1914 1916 1918 1920 1922 1924 1926 1928 1930 1932 1934 1936

Notes: The ethnic composition is computed by adding buyers to the stock of existing members and subtracting
sellers. Buyers’ and sellers’ names are collected from the ledgers of transactions in the archives of the NYSE.
Names are matched to ethnicities by a commercial algorithm that uses linguistic rules and location-specific
naming practices.


                                                                                                                                                                            2
                                                         FIGURE 5 - REJECTED APPLICANTS BY ETHNICITY, 1883-1936
  15%




                                                                                                      10.5%

  10%

                                                                                             German
                                                                                              7.7%




                                                                                                               5.2%                                  5.2%
       5%                                             German
                                                       4.0%
                                                               3.4%                                                                                          3.5%
                                               2.9%                     3.0%
                                                                                      2.4%                                          2.5%
                                                                                                                                            German
                                                                                                                                             1.2%


       0%
                                                         Pre-WWI                                 WWI                                              Post-WWI


                                                                               Anglo-Saxon   German   Jewish    Other Ethnicities

Notes: Data on names and election outcomes are collected at the archives of the NYSE. Names are matched to
ethnicities by a commercial algorithm that uses linguistic rules and location-specific naming practices.



                                               FIGURE 6 – EFFECT OF GERMAN ETHNICITY ON PROBABILITY OF REJECTION
                                 0.6




                                 0.4
  Coefficient for German Buyer




                                 0.2




                                   0
                                        1883                     1893                 1903                     1913                        1923                     1933




                                 -0.2

Notes: Coefficients per year for the variable German Buyer in a linear probability regression that controls for
ethnicities, Nominal transactions, Quarter Dividend Sales and sales carried out by the Committee of Admissions.



                                                                                                                                                                           3
                                                                                     FIGURE 7 – EXPULSIONS FROM THE NYSE, 1883 TO 1936
                                          0.8



                                          0.7


                                                                                                                                                                                                   Other German
                                          0.6
 Share of Expelled Sellers by Ethnicity




                                                                                                                                                                                                   German Jewish

                                          0.5



                                          0.4



                                          0.3



                                          0.2



                                          0.1



                                                      0
                                                             1885          1890           1895          1900          1905          1910          1915          1920          1925          1930              1935


Notes: Names of expelled members are collected from annotations in the ledgers of transactions at the NYSE
archives. German and Jewish members are identified by a commercial algorithm that uses linguistic rules and
location-specific naming practices. German Jews are distinguished from other Jews using passenger lists of
immigrant ships that arrived at the port of New York between 1850 and 1950 (available at ancestry.com).




                                                                                         FIGURE 8 – SELLERS OF NYSE SEATS, 1883 TO 1936

                                                      0.18

                                                                                                                                                                                                   Other German
                                                      0.16
                                                                                                                                                                                                   German Jewish

                                                      0.14
                       Proportion of German Sellers




                                                      0.12


                                                      0.10


                                                      0.08


                                                      0.06


                                                      0.04


                                                      0.02


                                                      0.00
                                                                    1885          1890           1895          1900          1905          1910          1915          1920          1925          1930              1935




Notes: Sellers’ names are collected from the ledgers of transactions at the NYSE archives. German and Jewish
members are identified by a commercial algorithm that uses linguistic rules and location-specific naming
practices. German Jews are distinguished from other Jews using passenger lists of immigrant ships that arrived
at the port of New York between 1850 and 1950 (available at ancestry.com).




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            4
FIGURE 9 – SHARES OF APPLICANTS BY ETHNICITY BEFORE, DURING, AND AFTER WORLD WAR I
70%


          61.3%
60%                                               58.2%
                                                                                                  57.1%



50%



40%



30%
                                                                            25.2%                                           24.6%
                                   23.7%

20%                                                       German
                   German                                                                                 German

                                                          9.8%                                             9.1%
10%                                                                                                                8.5%
                   7.5%     6.9%                                   6.3%



 0%
                     Pre-WWI                                 WWI                                            Post-WWI

                                             Anglo-Saxon    German        Jewish    Other Ethnicities

Notes: Applicants’ names are collected from the ledgers of transactions in the archives of the NYSE. Names are
matched to ethnicities by a commercial algorithm that uses linguistic rules and location-specific naming
practices.




              FIGURE 10– ETHNIC COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE OF ADMISSIONS
           100%



            90%



            80%



            70%



            60%



            50%



            40%



            30%



            20%



            10%



             0%
                  1880                     1894                    1904        1909      1913              1920      1920           1930
                                                     Anglo-Saxon   German     Jewish    Other

Notes: The Committee of Admissions had 15 members, whose names are drawn from the Minutes of the
Committee of Admissions (1904), Francis Eames (1894), and the New York Stock Exchange Directory.
Members are matched to ethnicities by a commercial algorithm that uses linguistic rules and location-specific
naming practices; this information was supplemented with information from obituaries in the New York Times
and census records.

                                                                                                                                           5
