                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     THE GLOBALIZATION OF ADVANCED ART IN THE TWENTIETH CENTURY

                                         David Galenson

                                       Working Paper 14005
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w14005


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2008




I thank Robert Jensen for discussions. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by David Galenson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
The Globalization of Advanced Art in the Twentieth Century
David Galenson
NBER Working Paper No. 14005
May 2008
JEL No. J00

                                            ABSTRACT

The twentieth century was a time of rapid globalization for advanced art. Artists from a larger number
of countries made important contributions than in earlier periods, and they did so in a larger number
of places. Many important innovations also diffused more rapidly, and more widely, than in earlier
times. The dominance for much of the century of conceptual forms of art, from Cubism and Dada
to Pop and Conceptual Art, was largely responsible for the greater speed with which innovations spread:
conceptual techniques are communicated more readily, and are generally more versatile in their uses,
than experimental methods. There is no longer a single dominant place in the art world, comparable
to Paris for the first century of modern art, but it is unlikely that a large number of places will join
New York and London as centers of artistic innovation in the future.


David Galenson
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
galenson@uchicago.edu
                                                  3




Art and Globalization

               The whole work, called art, knows no borders or nations, only
               humanity.
                                      Wassily Kandinsky and Franz Marc, 19111

        During the twentieth century, the center of the advanced art world shifted from Paris to

New York. Yet Paris and New York were not the only places where important innovations were

produced. A number of other major cities also served, more briefly, as centers of creative

activity.

        Throughout the modern era, important artists have originated in diverse places: no one

nativity has had a monopoly. During the twentieth century, however, there was a marked

increase in the diversity of the geographic origins of innovative artists.

        Both the proliferation of artistic centers and the growing number of nationalities

represented by important modern artists are important aspects of the globalization of advanced

art in the twentieth century. Both are also consequences of the increased diffusion of artistic

innovations. Over time, new artistic techniques and styles have spread both more rapidly and

more widely than previously. This increased diffusion has in turn been a consequence of the

increasingly conceptual nature of advanced art during the past century.

        This paper will provide an overview of how and when the central locations of advanced

art changed during the twentieth century. This will be done by surveying some of the key

movements. For each, the sources and implications of its principal innovations will be

considered. Before examining this chronology, however, it is necessary to understand the role of

location: how does place matter to the creation of advanced art?
                                                   4




The Importance of Place

               No artist is known – at least not where the evidence is clear enough
               – to have arrived at important art without having effectively
               assimilated the best new art of the moment, or moments, just
               before his own.
                                                         Clement Greenberg, 19712


       Globalization involves not only the movement of goods, but also the movement of people

and ideas. For advanced art, a central element of globalization has been the spread of important

innovations – the geographic diffusion of new techniques and styles. In considering the role of

location, there are two basic questions. First, how does location affect the ability of artists to

make new discoveries? And second, what affects the spread of these discoveries?

       Art scholars typically contend that no general understanding of the conditions

surrounding artistic innovation is possible: they argue that these innovations are too diverse and

too idiosyncratic to be reduced to systematic patterns. Yet this is wrong: it is no more true of art

than of any other intellectual activity. There are general conditions under which artistic

innovations occur, and identifying these conditions leads to a recognition of how location matters

for the production of advanced art.

       Location matters to artists primarily early in their careers, because of the need for contact

with other artists. Important contacts are of two types. Significant new contributions to advanced

art – changes in existing practices – can only be made by artists who understand the advanced

techniques or styles they are trying to add to, or replace. Apprenticeship with an important artist

of an earlier generation is the best route to this understanding. These apprenticeships can occur
                                                  5


within formal art schools or in informal relationships, but in either case they normally occur in

artistic centers.

        After they have learned the state of existing artistic practice from one or more older

artists, young artists need to develop their art with other like-minded and talented artists of their

own generation. The crucial role of collaboration in the development of all the important

movements in the history of modern art has long been a commonplace of art history. The

Abstract Expressionist Barnett Newman in fact argued that the first of these great movements set

the pattern for later ambitious young artists, for “it was not until the impressionists that a group

of artists set themselves a communal task: the exploration of a technical problem together.”3

Location matters for these collaborations because it is only in artistic centers that groups of

talented young artists can be formed and sustained. Whether small or large, it is in these groups

that young artists can develop, or begin to develop, the innovations that will become their

contributions.

        A key to understanding the accelerating pace of globalization of advanced art in the

twentieth century lies in recognizing that both of these necessary forms of contact between artists

can differ, depending on the nature of the art in question. The goals of experimental artists are

imprecise, and not readily formulated or expressed, so older artists typically influence younger

ones by demonstrating how they work. Instruction occurs gradually, face to face. In contrast,

conceptual teachers can often simply tell their students why and how they work, and young

artists can consequently learn conceptual approaches more quickly. For these same reasons,

collaborations among young artists may proceed at very different rates. Experimental artists, who

work by trial and error to develop new physical processes of making art – for example, devising
                                                  6


new ways of applying paint to canvas to achieve a desired visual effect –develop their art more

slowly than conceptual artists, who can exchange ideas and produce innovations more quickly.

       As conceptual approaches become more extreme, these relationships can be altered even

more. Most notably, direct contact between teacher and student might not only be reduced, but

eliminated altogether, as craft and technique give way to ideas. A talented young conceptual

artist might learn a new technique simply by visiting the studio of an older conceptual innovator.

Direct contact between older and younger artists might not even be necessary: the younger artist

might learn merely by seeing an innovative conceptual work, or even by hearing, or reading, a

description of it. In these latter instances, the importance of location for apprenticeships can

disappear, for conceptual artists can learn from artists they have never met, and this learning can

occur anywhere.

       The basic difference in the ways that experimental and conceptual innovations can be

produced implies that conceptual innovations can not only be created more quickly, but can also

be transmitted more quickly, than experimental contributions. This recognition provides a basis

for understanding the accelerating pace of artistic globalization in the twentieth century.

The Age of Manifestos4

               It is from Italy that we launch through the world this violently
               upsetting incendiary manifesto of ours.
                                                              F.T. Marinetti, 19095

       In two leaflets published in 1910, five young Italian painters – Umberto Boccioni, Carlo

Carrà, Luigi Russolo, Giacomo Balla, and Gino Severini – issued an artistic call to arms.

Declaring that they would “Destroy the cult of the past, the obsession with the ancients, pedantry

and academic formalism,” and “Sweep the whole field of art clean of all themes and subjects

which have been used in the past,” they promised a new form of painting that would capture the
                                                   7


speed of contemporary life: “The gesture which we would reproduce on canvas shall no longer

be a fixed moment in universal dynamism. It shall simply be the dynamic sensation itself.”6

George Heard Hamilton later observed that “These were brave words with which to attack

academic idealism and naturalism, but the pictorial and sculptural correlatives for them had still

to be found.”7

        These two leaflets, the first two manifestos of futurist painting, were the first instances of

a novel conceptual device that would have a profound impact on the globalization of visual art

for the next six decades. Futurism was the first important movement in visual art that began as a

literary movement. It was founded by the Italian poet F.T. Marinetti, who made the manifesto,

written with what he called “precise accusation, well-defined insult,” into the characteristic

literary form of the movement. Marjorie Perloff observed that “as what we now call a conceptual

artist, Marinetti was incomparable … The novelty of Italian Futurist pronouncement, sufficiently

aestheticized, can, in the eyes of the mass audience, all but take the place of the promised art

work.”8

        As vivid descriptions of new – or intended – forms of conceptual art, the manifestos

became powerful tools for the rapid diffusion of Futurist innovations. Thus John Golding noted

that Kazimir Malevich and other Russian artists “first learned of Futurism through its pamphlets

or manifestos. These were invariably blueprints for art that was about to be produced, rather than

justifications or explanations of literature, painting and sculpture already in existence, and this

explains why the influence of Italian Futurism was to be incalculable and yet entirely

disproportionate to that of its artistic and intellectual achievements: it provided artists all over the

world with instant aesthetic do-it-yourself kits.”9 As Golding implied, the Futurist manifestos’

ideas were often more compelling to their audience than their associated works of art. So for
                                                  8


example the German Expressionist painter Franz Marc wrote to his friend Wassily Kandinsky in

1912 that “I cannot free myself from the strange contradiction that I find their ideas, at least for

the main part, brilliant, but am in no doubt whatsoever as to the mediocrity of their works.”10

       The key to the success of the Futurist manifestos stemmed from their ability to give

verbal expression to visual art, and this was a direct consequence of the movement’s highly

conceptual motivations and methods. Perloff stressed that “it is not enough to say of … Futurist

manifestos that theory preceded practice … For the real point is that the theory … is the practice

… To talk about art becomes equivalent to making it.”11 And to read about art became equivalent

to seeing it. Once this was true, artistic innovations could diffuse much more rapidly than

previously, for mailing and reading pamphlets could be done much more quickly and

inexpensively than transporting paintings and presenting them in formal exhibitions.

       The Futurist manifesto proved a more influential innovation than Futurist painting.

Malevich was among the earliest painters outside Italy to recognize the value of published

statements to fledgling conceptual art movements. Thus in 1915, when he launched his own new

movement in an exhibition in Petrograd, it was accompanied by a manifesto titled From Cubism

and Futurism to Suprematism. Although he praised Futurism in his manifesto, Malevich was at

pains to emphasize that he had now gone beyond it: “We have abandoned Futurism: and we, the

most daring, have spat on the altar of its art” – in itself, as Golding noted, a very Futurist thing

to say.12 For decades thereafter, manifestos became a distinctive feature of nearly all self-

respecting conceptual art movements, and the manifestos often contain echoes of Marinetti or his

intellectual heirs. So for example Perloff remarked that “From [Marinetti’s] Down with the

Tango and Parsifal (1914) to Tristan Tzara’s first Dada manifesto, the Manifesto of Monsieur

Antipyrine (1916), is a shorter step than the Dadaists would have liked us to think,” and in turn
                                                 9


Tzara’s manifesto influenced Dada’s artistic successor: “its coterie address, its complex network

of concrete but ambivalent images, and its elaborate word play and structuring look ahead to

André Breton’s first Surrealist manifesto of 1924.” Of a later era, Perloff observed of the 1967

essay in which Robert Smithson first published the word “earthworks,” that was to become the

emblem of his artistic movement, “ ‘The Monuments of Passaic’ is reminiscent of Russian

Futurist manifestos, especially Malevich’s From Cubism and Futurism to Suprematism.”13

Paris

               There is a theory I have heard you profess, that to paint it is
               absolutely necessary to live in Paris, so as to keep up with ideas.

                                          Paul Gauguin to Camille Pissarro, 188114

        Early in the modern era, Paris was the exclusive source of advanced art. Thus in 1913 the

poet Guillaume Apollinaire, who was perhaps the most sophisticated critic of his time, could

look back on the history of modern painting and conclude that “in the nineteenth century Paris

was the capital of art.” The credit went primarily to French citizens: “The greatest names in

modern painting, from Courbet to Cézanne and from Delacroix to Matisse, are French.” Yet

Paris’ artistic greatness was not exclusively a national achievement: “Englishmen like Constable

and Turner, a German like Marées, a Dutchman like van Gogh, and a Spaniard like Picasso have

all played major roles in this movement, which is a manifestation not so much of the French

genius as of universal culture.”15

        No artist of the late nineteenth century who did not go to Paris to study the most

advanced art of the moment could become an important figure in the development of modern art.

The artistic education and maturation of Vincent van Gogh illustrate this necessity. As an

aspiring artist in Holland in 1884, van Gogh had never seen Impressionist paintings, the most

important recent advanced artistic innovation. Nor could he not understand Impressionism from
                                                 10


the written descriptions he received from his brother Theo, who was an art dealer in Paris: “from

what you told me about ‘impressionism,’ I have indeed concluded that it is different from what I

thought, but it’s not quite clear to me what it really is.”16 Van Gogh joined his brother in Paris in

1886, and his art was transformed, as the instruction of Camille Pissarro changed not only his use

of color but his entire conception of the possible uses of art. Thus Meyer Schapiro remarked that

“In Paris he discovered the senses, the world of light and color which he had lacked, and which

he now welcomed as a release from past repressions and a narrow, no longer vital, religion and

village world.”17 Van Gogh was fully aware of the importance of this education for his art, as

early in his stay in Paris he wrote to a fellow painter who had remained in Antwerp that “There is

but one Paris … What is to be gained is progress and what the deuce that is, it is to be found

here.” He cautioned that living in Paris was costly, and that art dealers there neglected young

artists in favor of established masters, “But for adventurers as myself, I think they lose nothing in

risking more.”18 In Paris, van Gogh also met Paul Gauguin, Emile Bernard, and a number of

other young artists who were developing a new Symbolist art. Having accepted the brilliance of

Impressionist color, these artists were beginning to use these colors for expressive purposes, and

this adaptation became the basis for van Gogh’s distinctive contribution to modern art. He left

Paris in 1888 for Arles, where he soon arrived at what Schapiro called “his first new art …

transfigured by what he had learned in Paris, or could now learn by himself thanks to his Paris

experience.”19 Mark Roskill observed that for both van Gogh and Gauguin “impressionism

provided a basic vocabulary … which they in turn built upon and manipulated for special

purposes.”20 Van Gogh realized that his teacher Pissarro would be dismayed by his departure

from Impressionist goals and practices, as he wrote to Theo from Arles that “I should not be

surprised if the impressionists soon find fault with my way of working … Because instead of
                                                  11


trying to reproduce exactly what I have before my eyes, I use color more arbitrarily, in order to

express myself forcibly.”21

       Van Gogh’s experience is remarkable for the astounding rate at which he assimilated the

advanced art of the moment, and then used it as the basis for his own contribution. This speed is

an obvious consequence not only of his great talent, but also of his highly conceptual approach to

art. But his experience is typical in its structure, for ambitious young artists of his time needed to

gain a Paris education in advanced art before going on to their personal achievements. Thus at

the other end of the artistic spectrum, 14 years before van Gogh’s arrival in Paris, Paul Cézanne

left his home in Aix to live in Pontoise, a village near Paris, where, in Roger Fry’s words, he

“became in effect apprentice to Pissarro.”22 Just as he would later do for van Gogh, Pissarro

initiated Cézanne into the motives and means of Impressionism, and Cézanne’s palette and his

conception of art were transformed. Fry explained that Pissarro’s instruction “turned him away

from the inner vision and showed him the marvelous territory of external vision, a country which

invited his adventurous spirit to set out on the discovery of new experiences.”23 Because of

Cézanne’s visual and experimental approach, this discovery required not merely a few months or

years, as for van Gogh, but instead decades, and Cézanne did not achieve his greatest innovations

until more than 30 years after he first travelled to Pontoise. But throughout his life he remained

acutely aware of the crucial role of the education he had received from “the humble and colossal

Pissarro,” as in an exhibition catalogue in Aix in 1902 he had himself listed as “Pupil of

Pissarro,” and in 1906, a month before his death, he wrote to his son “long live … Pissarro, and

all those who have an impulse towards color.”24 The persistent gratitude of van Gogh and

Cézanne to Pissarro did not arise from personal idiosyncrasies, but rather from their

understanding that their education in the advanced art of the moment had been necessary for
                                                 12


their own artistic achievements. And the basis of that education was not created by one person,

but by many artists working in one place, as Pissarro reflected when economic necessity forced

him to give up his Paris studio: “I shall much regret no longer having one foot in Paris. This was

very useful for me, since it enabled me to keep up with everything that concerns painting.”25

        Paris retained its position as the center of the advanced art world into the twentieth

century. The first two important movements of the new century – Fauvism and Cubism – both

originated there. Both were conceptual in nature, both were created by small groups of young

artists, and both spread rapidly. Cubism proved to be the more influential of the two, and its

career created a new model of artistic globalization.

Cubism

                This creative tendency is now spreading throughout the universe.

                                                        Guillaume Apollinaire, 191326

        Cubism originated in a partnership between the young Spaniard Pablo Picasso and the

young Frenchman Georges Braque. Picasso later stressed “how closely we worked together. At

that time our work was a kind of laboratory research from which every pretension or individual

vanity was excluded.”27 Braque similarly recalled that “Picasso and I were engaged in what we

felt was a search for the anonymous personality. We were inclined to efface our own

personalities in order to find originality.”28

        Several themes frequently recur in art scholars’ discussions of Cubism. One is the great

speed at which Cubism spread. A second is how widely it diffused. And a third is that many of

the artists who adopted Cubism put it to uses very different from those for which it was initially

developed. So for example all three of these themes appear in a brief introductory statement by

Douglas Cooper to his book, The Cubist Epoch:
                                                 13


               Cubism originated in Paris between 1906 and 1908 and was the
               creation of Picasso and Braque … Within four years, however, the
               pictorial methods and technical innovations of those two young
               painters had been seized on by other artists – in France, Germany,
               Holland, Italy, Czechoslovakia, Russia, America and, to a much
               lesser degree, in England – who either imitated them or tried to
               transform them by imaginative efforts into new types of artistic
               expression. A knowledge of Cubist methods and possibilities
               spread rapidly, and by this means Cubism played some part in the
               technical and stylistic adventures which constitute virtually all the
               avant-garde developments in western art between 1909 and 1914.29

       These same themes also recur in discussions of one specific innovation of the Cubists,

collage. So for example Marjorie Perloff wrote that “The rapid dissemination of [collage] … is in

itself remarkable … [T]he first collages, Picasso’s Still Life with Chair Caning and Braque’s

Fruit Dish, were both made in 1912 … Within a few years, collage and its cognates – montage,

construction, assemblage – were playing a central role in the verbal as well as the visual arts.”30

       Cubism is a highly conceptual artistic language, based on the thoughts of artists rather

than their perceptions. Thus John Golding remarked that “The Cubism of Picasso and Braque

was to be essentially conceptual. Even in the initial stages of the movement, when the painters

still relied to a large extent on visual models, their paintings are not so much records of the

sensory appearance of their subjects, as expressions in pictorial terms of their idea or knowledge

of them.”31 The shock that many contemporary artists and critics experienced upon first exposure

to the radical appearance of Cubist paintings has often obscured the fact that the most distinctive

stylistic devices of the new art – the faceting of objects, and the juxtapositions of images viewed

from different vantage points – could quickly be understood and adopted by artists who wanted

to work in a Cubist idiom. This understanding did not require contact with Picasso or Braque, but

could be acquired simply by seeing Cubist paintings, and the rapid spread of Cubism was the

product in large part of the display of paintings by Picasso, Braque, and their Paris followers at
                                                 14


exhibitions throughout Europe and the United States in the years between 1910 and the outbreak

of World War I.32

       The device of collage was even simpler, and even more readily adapted to alternative

purposes, than the style of Cubism in general. Collage was so highly conceptual that it could be

adopted by artists who had not even seen examples of its use, but who had merely heard

descriptions of it. A remarkable demonstration of this is contained in a recollection by the Italian

painter Gino Severini of his first acquaintance with collage (which he refers to by the name of its

close relative, papier collé, the device in which Braque began to paste pieces of paper to his

canvases, shortly after Picasso had created collage by pasting a piece of oil cloth to one of his

paintings). Severini, who had been living in Paris at the time, provided a description of a

sequence of conversations that served to carry the new technique from Paris to Italy, and to

translate it from Cubism to Futurism:

               As regards the so-called papiers collés I can tell you with precision
               that they were born in 1912 in the zone of Montmartre. As I
               remember it, Apollinaire suggested the idea to me after having
               spoken of it to Picasso, who immediately painted a small still-life
               onto which he applied a small piece of waxed paper (the type that
               was used for the tablecloths in the bistros of Paris). I tried to glue
               some paillettes [spangles] and multicolored sequins onto forms of
               ballerinas in movement. I next saw a collage of Braque, perhaps
               the first, made of what seemed to be wood and large sheets of
               white paper on which he had sketched to a large extent with black
               crayon. During my trip to Italy in August of 1912 I naturally spoke
               about the technique to Boccioni and he, in turn, to Carrà. During
               1913 the first futurist experiments in this field saw the light of
               day.33

Severini’s narrative provides vivid evidence of the highly communicable nature of collage. Thus

by his account his own first use of the technique resulted not from contact with Picasso, or even

the sight of one of Picasso’s works, but rather from a conversation with a friend of Picasso’s,

Guillaume Apollinaire, who was not a painter, but a poet. Severini could in turn pass on verbal
                                                15


instructions that allowed Boccioni to make his own use of collage, and to continue the process of

diffusion by word of mouth.

       Severini’s experience also demonstrates the extreme versatility of collage. In 1912, as he

described, he attached sequins to a painting of dancers – Dynamic Hieroglyphic of the Bal

Tabarin, which became his most celebrated painting.34 Thus unlike Picasso and Braque, who

consistently used fragments of newspaper, wallpaper, and other scraps of waste materials in their

collages to evoke the dark and tranquil atmosphere of cafes, Severini used sparkling sequins to

recreate the excitement of “the fairy ambiance of light and color” that he experienced in the night

clubs of Paris.35 And although collage was devised by Picasso and Braque for the purposes of

Cubism, which was an art of still life and subdued colors, Severini could immediately adapt it to

Futurism, which instead stressed speed, motion, and bright colors.

Futurism

               We may declare, without boasting, that the first Exhibition of
               Italian Futurist Painting … is the most important exhibition of
               Italian painting which has hitherto been offered to the judgment of
               Europe.
                       For we are young and our art is violently revolutionary.

                                                     Umberto Boccioni, Carlo Carrà,
                                                      Luigi Russolo, Giacomo Balla,
                                                              Gino Severini, 191236

       Speed – the dynamism, excitement, and novelty of modern city life and technology – was

the hallmark of Futurism. It was the theme of Marinetti’s founding manifesto in 1909, and it later

became the theme of Futurist painting and sculpture. Futurist painting rejected the aims of

Cubism, but borrowed its formal devices. Unlike the Cubists, who painted still lifes by analyzing

arrangements of studio props, the Futurists wanted to make art from the streets of the city, and to

paint riots, carnivals, and speeding trams. Yet in creating images that would capture the
                                                 16


interaction of objects in motion, Futurist painters found the multiple viewpoints and intersecting

planes of Cubism to be valuable tools.

       Apart from Severini, who moved to Paris in 1906, the Futurist painters lived in Italy.

Their knowledge of the innovations of Cubism was acquired primarily on short visits to Paris.

An example of how quickly these young conceptual artists could assimilate the art of the

moment is afforded by a brief visit Boccioni made to Severini in Paris early in 1912, on his way

back to Milan from an exhibition in Berlin. Neither of the two painters had ever made sculptures,

but Severini recalled that during this visit Boccioni “expressed a particular interest in sculpture.

All day every day he would discuss the subject. To sate his appetite for exploring the problems

of sculpture, I took him to visit Archipenko, Agero, Brancusi, and Duchamp-Villon, who were

the most daring avant-garde sculptors of the moment.” Severini and Boccioni were close friends,

having met a dozen years earlier when both were teenaged art students in Rome, and Severini

afforded Boccioni the full benefit of his knowledge of Paris: “I took him along, like a brother,

everywhere I usually went myself … He lived like a real Parisian in Paris, not like a visitor.”37

       After a few frenetic days of visiting artists’ studios by day and bars and clubs by night,

Boccioni returned to Milan. Severini was stung when, only two weeks later, Boccioni published

in Milan his Technical Manifesto of Futurist Sculpture: “During our discussions and visits to

various sculptors in Paris, Boccioni had not once mentioned this manifesto, so it surprised and

saddened me to have to acknowledge that these speed ‘records,’ these feverish searches for

novelty for the sake of novelty itself, and a lack of sincerity on his part, would inevitably cause

deep wounds in our relationship.”38 In typical Futurist fashion, Boccioni’s manifesto stridently

rejected the sculpture of the time – “All the sculpture … to be seen in all European cities presents

such a pathetic spectacle of barbarism, ineptitude and tedious imitation that my Futurist eyes turn
                                                  17


away from it with the deepest loathing” – so Severini also felt deeply embarrassed before his

colleagues in Paris: “it seemed to all my friends who had recently received him that I had been

his accomplice, and I must confess that I found this very distasteful.”39

       The sculptors whose work Boccioni had seen in Paris were concerned with extending

Cubism to three dimensions, and Boccioni wanted to go beyond their experiments to create the

appearance of motion. Over the course of the next year, he completed 11 sculptures. Several of

these were dramatically fragmented striding figures that appeared to be blown by powerful winds

created by their own rapid progress. Boccioni arranged for these sculptures to be exhibited at a

Paris gallery in June of 1913, barely a year after he had first taken up the art.

       Apollinaire reviewed Boccioni’s new work favorably, crediting him with introducing

movement into sculpture: “Varied materials, sculptured simultaneity, violent movement – these

are the innovations contributed by Boccioni’s sculpture.”40 Boccioni was elated, writing to a

friend that “Apollinaire is completely won over to Futurism.” He described a dinner that he had

had with Apollinaire and Marinetti: “We talked from seven until three in the morning. We came

out drunk and exhausted. After these discussions, which are true conquests by magnetism, I end

up sad and discouraged. I think about what I would have done by now if I had grown up with

Paris or Berlin as my environment.”41

       This episode affords a number of insights into the progress of globalization in the highly

charged European art world immediately before World War I. A few days of inspecting the most

advanced sculpture of the time in Paris were sufficient to serve as the point of departure for

Boccioni’s own conceptual efforts to make new innovations in sculpture. He then accomplished

this successfully – so successfully that one of these sculptures became one of the most important

works of art of the twentieth century – in a period of barely more than one year, in spite of the
                                                  18


fact that he had never sculpted before.42 Yet beyond the remarkable speed of Boccioni’s

internalization of the state of the art, and the no less remarkable speed of his own contribution,

the episode also gives an interesting glimpse into the psychology of a young conceptual artist,

who was willing to embarrass his closest friend in order to gain publicity for his own art, in

pursuit of what Severini ruefully called “speed records” – “feverish searches for novelty.” And

finally, the highly pressured atmosphere of the art world is suggested by Boccioni’s ambivalent

reaction to his critical success in Paris. Although the artist was only 31 years old, he could not

simply enjoy Apollinaire’s praise and his own knowledge of his accomplishment, but instead

immediately reflected sadly that he could have made greater contributions even earlier if he had

grown up in a center of the art world.

Expressionism

                There is an artistic tension all over Europe. Everywhere new artists
                are greeting each other; a look, a handshake is enough for them to
                understand each other!
                                                                  Franz Marc, 191243

       The earliest of the groups that came to be identified with German Expressionism

originated in Dresden in 1904, when four art students formed the Brücke, or Bridge. These

young painters rejected the formal art of the academies, and wanted to create a more passionate

art of self-expression, portraying the excitement and anxiety of modern urban life by devising

new means that would replace description of contemporary subjects with psychological

statements.

       The artists of the Brücke were young revolutionaries, anxious to deny any influence of

earlier artists in order to stress their own originality. Yet art scholars have found strong visual

evidence of influence of a kind that underscores the rapid transmission of conceptual

innovations. Thus late in 1905 a Dresden art gallery exhibited 50 paintings by Vincent van Gogh,
                                                 19


and early the next year a Dresden art association presented 20 paintings by Edvard Munch.44 A

biographer of Ernst Kirchner, the leading member of the Brücke, identified a series of specific

influences of van Gogh and Munch on Kirchner’s paintings of 1906-08, including his use of

symbolism, his composition, the thick impasto of the paint surface, the large size and unusual

length of brush strokes, and the expressive and often arbitrary use of color.45 A historian of

German Expressionism observed that in spite of the denials of the young painters, “it would

seem that Munch and van Gogh influenced the Brücke artists in their formative years,” and that

when the Galerie Arnold exhibited van Gogh’s work in 1905, “The violence of van Gogh’s

expression must have made an enormous impression on the young Dresden painters … The

ecstatic expression of a personal symbolism, leading to a subjective unity of form and content,

made van Gogh of the greatest importance to the expressionists.”46 The speed with which the

innovations of van Gogh and Munch could be assimilated by the young conceptual painters

simply upon seeing examples of their art was a direct result of the conceptual clarity of those

innovations. Thus Robert Jensen has argued that van Gogh’s art could become influential so

rapidly throughout Europe precisely because of its highly conceptual nature: “much of van

Gogh’s stylistic contributions to modern art can be summarized by a few characteristics that

could easily be taken up by other artists.”47 For young painters impatient to make a new art that

allowed them to express powerful emotions, the innovations of van Gogh and Munch came as a

powerful and immediate revelation of new means of expression.

       Over time, the innovative bold use of color by Matisse and the Fauves also became a

major influence on the Brücke and other German expressionist painters. Matisse was in fact

invited, but declined, to contribute an essay to the Blaue Reiter Almanac, which was published in

1912 by a group of artists who collectively called themselves the Blue Rider. The Almanac was a
                                                 20


rare case in which an important experimental artist – Wassily Kandinsky – made common cause

with a group of conceptual painters, most notably his younger co-editor Franz Marc, to produce a

group manifesto. In keeping with the unusual intellectual basis of this alliance, the Almanac was

an unusual manifesto. Rather than a highly focused and precise description of a new style or

artistic project, the Almanac was eclectic in the extreme. Thus for example none of its 15 essays

was coauthored, and less than half were written by members of the Blue Rider group. Four of the

essays were about music rather than visual art, and the Almanac also included a poem, and a

script for a stage performance written by Kandinsky. But perhaps the most remarkable dimension

of the Almanac’s eclecticism lay in its many illustrations, which totaled more than 140 images.

George Heard Hamilton summarized them as follows:

               Reproductions of paintings and drawings by members of the group,
               principally the two editors, by Macke, Campendonk, Kubin, and
               Klee, and by the North German Expressionists were outnumbered
               three to one by illustrations of primitive, folk, and children’s art. In
               addition to objects from Africa and the South Seas, examples of
               medieval German sculpture and woodcuts (“primitive” in the
               stylistic sense), Egyptian paper puppets, Japanese woodcuts and
               drawings, and Russian popular prints and sculpture, there were no
               less than seventeen examples of Bavarian hinterglas painting
               (devotional images painted on the reverse of panes of glass) and
               other votive paintings … Nine drawings by children constitute one
               of the first instances of the publication of such work for artistic
               reasons. There were also seven reproductions of paintings by Henri
               Rousseau … Of the Post-Impressionists there were only five
               reproductions after Cézanne, Gauguin, and van Gogh.

       Hamilton’s comment on this surprising collection of images was that “emphasis fell on

the psychological immediacy of unsophisticated expression, supposedly to be found in the direct

statements of persons artistically untrained or belonging to less complex societies.”48 Although

neither Kandinsky nor Marc was directly influenced by most of the forms of primitive art

illustrated in the Almanac, the selection did reflect the appreciation for Russian folk art that
                                                 21


Kandinsky had developed while doing ethnographic research in northern Russia during his

university studies. More generally, the images may have been part of Kandinsky’s justification

for his challenge to conventional western art. When the Almanac was published, Kandinsky was

in the process of abandoning representation, an iconoclastic act that he rationalized at the time as

the product of his need to follow his own intuition: “The most important thing in the question of

form is whether or not the form has grown out of inner necessity.”49 Decades later, in a memorial

for Marc, Kandinsky explained that the artistic forms included in the Almanac demonstrated that

what was important in art was not adherence to rules or conventional styles, but the expression of

genuine feeling born of spiritual motivation: “My idea then was to point out by means of

examples that the difference between ‘official’ and ‘ethnographic’ art had no reason to exist; that

the pernicious habit of not seeing the organic inner root of art beneath outwardly different forms

could, in general, result in total loss of reciprocal action between art and the life of mankind.”50

The many forms of primitive art illustrated in the Almanac, like the inclusion of music and

poetry in the book, were thus a plea by the editors for tolerance and freedom in art. A new era of

art lay ahead – Marc wrote in the Almanac that “we are standing today at the turning point of two

long epochs” – but a genuinely spiritual art could emerge only with liberation from the

restrictions of the past, as Kandinsky concluded that “The future can be received only through

freedom.”51

       The Blaue Reiter Almanac was a product of the age of manifestos, but unlike those of the

Futurists or Suprematists, it did not advocate a specific style or program, and it cannot have

communicated equally specific ideas to its readers. Yet in spite of its diffuse message, its

inclusive approach to art, not only over time but also across space, must have impressed many in

its audience as a powerful appeal for the globalization of advanced art. As Kandinksy and Marc
                                                 22


wrote of their planned volume in 1911, “It should be almost superfluous to emphasize

specifically that in our case the principle of internationalism is the only one possible.”52

Moscow

               The center of political life has moved to Russia … A similar center
               must be formed for art and creativity.
                                                         Kazimir Malevich, 191953

       Malevich left Russia only once, in 1927, when his greatest innovations were well in the

past, and he never visited Paris. Yet early in his career, he worked in Moscow with a number of

talented young artists, including the painters Mikhail Larionov, Natalia Goncharova, and

Vladimir Tatlin, and his early development came at a time when two wealthy Russian merchants,

Sergei Shchukin and Ivan Morozov, were building great collections of modern French art in

Moscow.54

       Shchukin and Morozov made their collections available for young artists to study, and

their impact on Russian art was considerable. Malevich was an extremely fast learner: John

Golding commented that his “intellect, though untutored, was voracious and quick.”55 Within

barely a decade, Malevich systematically worked his way through nearly every significant

development of modern art, in chronological order. His paintings not only bear strong evidence

of the influences he absorbed, but in many cases this influence can be traced to specific paintings

he saw in Moscow. Thus for example two of Malevich’s self-portraits, of 1907 and 1909, used

colors and compositional devices favored by Gauguin, whose paintings filled a wall in

Shchukin’s mansion; Malevich’s Bather of 1911 in subject and form resembled the recent work

of Matisse, who carried out major commissions for Shchukin, and 21 of whose paintings hung in

Shchukin’s “Matisse room”; and by 1912 Malevich’s paintings demonstrated an acquaintance

with Cubist paintings owned by Shchukin and Morozov.56 In 1912-13, the particular form of
                                                 23


Cubism developed by Fernand Legér in Paris became an important influence on Malevich’s art.

In this case, Malevich knew the geometric, tubular forms of Legér’s recent work not only from

paintings, but also from photographs carried from Paris to Moscow by a young Russian painter,

Alexandra Exter, who divided her time between the cities, and who studied with Legér during

her visits to Paris.57 Malevich’s Woman at a Tram Stop of 1913 clearly demonstrated an

acquaintance with Picasso’s recent synthetic Cubism, and his 1914 Woman at a Poster Column

used Cubist collage forms and techniques.58

       Malevich made his own artistic breakthrough in 1915, when he created his distinctive

form of abstraction. Yet his paintings from the preceding decade clearly reveal the direct

influence of the most recent innovations of the most important painters in Paris, in spite of the

fact that he had never worked with, or even met, any of these artists. Even Malevich’s radical

leap of 1915, in which he launched the Suprematist movement with an exhibition that included

his painting Black Square, demonstrated his full understanding of the process of conceptual

innovation as it had developed in Western Europe. Thus not only did the flat geometric shapes of

his abstractions reflect his analysis of the synthetic Cubist paintings and collages of Picasso and

Braque, but the exhibition was accompanied by a Suprematist manifesto, which stated an

ambitious intellectual rationale for the art, reflecting lessons Malevich had learned from the

Futurists about the value of published theoretical declarations for new conceptual art

movements.59

       Malevich was the first major innovator of the modern era to make an important

contribution to the mainstream of advanced art, based on a firm understanding of the most

significant recent developments in that art, without having travelled to the center of the art world,

or having contact with the artists whose work provided the basis for his own discoveries. He was
                                                 24


clearly aided in this by the stimulation and companionship of a number of other talented young

artists who were going through a similar development. But that he was able to become a major

innovator without ever leaving Moscow was due to his strong conceptual orientation, which

allowed him to assimilate the conceptual innovations that dominated advanced art in the late

nineteenth and early twentieth centuries without learning them at their source. And in this he

became a prototype for other young conceptual innovators later in the century, whose ability to

understand the conceptual innovations of others at a distance, and to use them as the basis for

their own discoveries, would speed the globalization of advanced art.

        Unlike Malevich, Vladimir Tatlin did visit Paris, where he spent one month in the spring

of 1913. This brief visit not only changed the form of Tatlin’s art, but also led to a fundamental

change in his artistic philosophy.

        John Milner wrote that Tatlin “travelled west as a mature painter. He returned the

constructor of reliefs.”60 Tatlin was 28 at the time of his visit to Paris. He had been a boyhood

friend of Mikhail Larionov, and since 1910 he had lived in Moscow studying art and working

with Larionov and a group of his peers. Like Malevich and the other young Russian painters in

this group, Tatlin had been influenced by the French paintings that had been brought to Moscow.

The geometric forms of Cubism had a particularly large impact on Tatlin’s painting, because of

his conceptual orientation. Thus Milner observed that “The distinction between observing the

visual world and constructing visual objects had become a recurrent dichotomy in Tatlin’s

painting and drawing by 1912 … As Tatlin grew less concerned with observation and the

recording of visual impressions, his art became an investigation, in visual terms, of the process of

creativity.”61
                                                  25


        Marjorie Perloff described Tatlin’s visit to Picasso’s Montparnasse studio in Paris in

1913 as “legendary.”62 In fact, he probably visited the studio several times, perhaps with the

Lithuanian sculptor Jacques Lipchitz, who lived in Paris, as translator.63 Upon his return to

Moscow, Tatlin ceased making paintings, and began making sculptures, out of found materials,

that appear to be based on small works that Picasso had made during the preceding year. George

Heard Hamilton observed that one of these sculptures, Tatlin’s Relief, of 1914, “composed of a

worn board, a broken piece of glass, a bit of old iron, and a tin can with part of its label still

attached, was, if the date is correct, one of the first ‘works of art’ in Western culture to have been

assembled of untreated junk.”64

        Tatlin’s conversion changed his career definitively, as he soon gained prominence as a

sculptor. The ideas he had taken from Picasso’s studio proved to be the key to the form of his

sculptures, as he made what he called counter-reliefs in a Cubist idiom, and he followed

Picasso’s practice in making them from materials that had originally been intended for non-art

purposes. These humble materials in turn came to be the basis for his new philosophy of art,

which occasioned a break with Malevich. The Suprematist Malevich stood for the idea that

painting could make a contribution to the new Soviet society by remaining apart from daily life,

whereas Tatlin rejected painting as decadent and bourgeois, and advocated making art an

immediate part of workers’ daily lives. In the new art of Constructivism, works would be made

from common materials, using industrial manufacturing techniques, and would consist of three-

dimensional objects that would not hang flat on walls, but would instead project outward into

real space.

        Tatlin’s trip to Paris, and particularly the visits he made to Picasso’s studio, could change

the course of his career so precipitously because of the highly conceptual nature of the Cubist
                                                 26


works he saw, and his own extremely conceptual approach to art. Scholars have consistently

emphasized not only the speed with which Tatlin assimilated the Cubist innovations he saw in

Paris, but also how quickly he adapted them to his own purposes, to make a closely related but

clearly distinct contribution of his own. Thus whereas Picasso remained committed to

representation, and used found objects to make visual puns that suggested recognizable forms,

Tatlin constructed his works abstractly, so that scraps of wood, metal, or glass no longer

suggested familiar objects.65 But Tatlin did not simply make novel sculptures, for his conceptual

inclination led him to create a philosophy and an entire artistic movement, Constructivism, based

on the insights he had gained in a few visits to Picasso’s studio.

Dada

               Dada was not an artistic movement in the accepted sense; it was a
               storm that broke over the world of art as the war did over nations.

                                                                      Hans Richter66

       Like Futurism, Dada was a highly conceptual movement that originated in literature

before spreading into visual art. Unlike Futurism and nearly all other previous movements,

however, Dada did not begin with a positive program, but as a protest. One of the most important

Dada painters, Jean Arp, explained that “Revolted by the butchery of the 1914 World War, we in

Zurich devoted ourselves to the arts. While the guns rumbled in the distance, we sang, painted,

made collages and wrote poems with all our might. We were seeking an art based on

fundamentals, to cure the madness of the age.”67 Dada had no coherent philosophy. The painter

Hans Richter described its goals as “riot, destruction, defiance, confusion … In art, anti-art.”68

Many Dadaists considered it their purpose to attack all conventional values and practices: thus

Arp stated that “The Dadaist thought up tricks to rob the bourgeois of his sleep.”69 The poet

Hugo Ball observed that “Art is for us an occasion for social criticism.”70 Although the Dadaists
                                                 27


would have liked to have an impact on society at large, their true target was advanced art. Thus

the historian Dietmar Elger remarked that “While the Dadaists could not abolish war, the

political power structures, or the class system in society, they could make their point by

smashing the formal structure of pictures and poems.”71

       Because Dada was not tied to specific products or practices, there is considerable

imprecision in tracing its origins. Thus in his history of Dada written in 1965, Richter remarked

that “Where and how Dada began is already almost as hard to determine as Homer’s birthplace.”

He explained that the uncertainty arose from the fact that “around the year 1915 or 1916, certain

similar phenomena saw the light of day (or night) in different parts of the globe, and … the

general label of ‘Dada’ can be applied to all of them.” He continued, however, by remarking that

“it was only in one of these that the magic fusion of personalities and ideas took place which is

essential to the formation of a movement.”72 This was Zurich, where in February of 1916 Hugo

Ball founded the Cabaret Voltaire, which he described in a public announcement as “a group of

young artists and writers … whose aim is to create a center for artistic entertainment.”73 Ball was

soon joined by the poet Tristan Tzara and a host of other enthusiastic young artists, so that within

a month of the first performance at the Cabaret Voltaire, Ball recorded in his journal that

“Everyone has been seized by an indefinable intoxication. The little cabaret is about to come

apart at the seams and is getting to be a playground for crazy emotions.”74 Considerable debate

would later arise over how and when the movement gained its name, but a widely accepted

version is that Ball and the poet Richard Huelsenbeck found the word “dada” by chance in a

French-German dictionary. Huelsenbeck later explained that “Dada means hobby-horse in

French. We were impressed by its brevity and suggestivity, and in a short time dada became the

label for all the artistic activities we were engaging in at the Cabaret Voltaire.”75 The Cabaret
                                                 28


Voltaire became associated with the outrageous and the absurd, as young artists created new

forms, including the “simultaneous poem,” which Ball described as “a contrapuntal recitative in

which three or more voices speak, sing, whistle, etc., at the same time in such a way that the

elegiac, humorous, or bizarre content of the piece is brought out by these combinations.” From

the beginning, however, the absurdity of Dada had a somber undertone, as Ball reflected that

“What we are celebrating is both buffoonery and a requiem mass.”76

       Dada was created by young artists. Among the early members of the group in Zurich in

1916, Ball was 30, as was Tzara, Arp was 29, Huelsenbeck was 24, the Romanian painter Marcel

Janco was 21, and Richter was 28. Richter reflected that this was not an accident: “we were all

in our twenties and ready to defy all the fathers in the world in a way that would rejoice the heart

of Freud’s Oedipus.”77 Their defiant and iconoclastic attitude quickly produced a flow of

conceptual innovations in literature and visual art, as Richter explained that “our freedom from

preconceived ideas about processes and techniques frequently led us beyond the frontiers of

individual artistic categories … As the boundaries between the arts became indistinct, painters

turned to poetry and poets to painting. The destruction of the boundaries was reflected

everywhere. The safety-valve was off.”78

       The rapid geographic spread of Dada has often been remarked by art scholars. So for

example William Rubin observed that Dada “arose in a number of cities in Europe, and in New

York, in part spontaneously and in part through the interchange of ideas.”79 Specific Dada

techniques equally spread rapidly. So for example the Berlin Dada artist Hannah Höch reflected

that “When, in 1919, the Dadaists grasped the possibility of forming new shapes and new works

through photography and made their aggressive photomontages, it happened, strangely enough

and simultaneously, in a number of quite diverse countries, in France, Germany, Russia, and
                                                29


Switzerland.”80 Throughout Dada’s history, the movement of ideas was facilitated by the many

small magazines that the group’s members produced. Table 1 presents a partial listing of Dada

magazines. Some of these were published monthly, over several years, while others lasted only

one or two issues. But the large numbers of both titles and editors clearly reflect the movement’s

enthusiasm for the genre, as the 25 magazines listed in Table 1 had almost as many different

editors. Contributors to the magazines numbered in the hundreds: few Dada artists failed to

contribute texts or images to Dada magazines, and many contributed both. In Zurich, Dada

magazines began to appear within a few months after the opening of the Cabaret Voltaire, and

Tzara soon emerged as the primary editor. Richter recalled that “Tzara was the ideal promoter of

Dada, and his position as a modern poet enabled him to make contact with modern poets and

writers in other countries … It was … through these contacts that Dada later became something

more than a solitary Alpine flower, became in fact an international movement.”81

       Dada was also spread by the frequent travels of its rootless young practitioners. The

movement was initially created by refugees from World War I, as Elger noted that it was no

coincidence that the young artists who founded Dada in Zurich did not include a single native-

born Swiss.82 As they continued on their travels, they carried with them ideas and examples that

could quickly influence young artists elsewhere. Thus Richter observed that “when Richard

Huelsenbeck arrived in Berlin from Zurich at the beginning of 1917, he found the right setting

and the right colleagues to set off the Dada bomb which had been perfected and tested in

Zurich.”83 Dada had already effectively been created in America in 1915, when Francis Picabia

and Marcel Duchamp, who had worked together as young artists in Paris, were reunited in New

York, and were joined by the young American artist Man Ray as the central figures in what

became an influential branch of the movement.”84
                                                   30


        Although Dada artists often attempted to avoid stylistic consistency, themes did appear in

the art of the major Dada centers. In Zurich, accident played an important role in many of the

literary improvisations of the Cabaret Voltaire, and chance also became a concern for a number

of visual artists.85 So for example Arp incorporated accident into his paintings and collages by

allowing fragments of paper to fall freely onto a surface; although he adjusted their positions

before fixing them in place, he contended that chance had influenced the final patterns. This

innovation later influenced the Surrealist practice of beginning paintings with random markings.

In New York, the interests of Duchamp and Picabia focused Dada on creating works that posed

intellectual puzzles, often using enigmatic mechanical abstract forms. In Berlin, which suffered

much more intensely than the neutral Zurich or New York, German artists responded to Richard

Huelsenbeck’s call “to make literature with a gun in hand,” using their new technique of

photomontage to make violent and bitter political statements.86 In spite of these marked

differences in the interests of artists in different places, however, many artists in all these cities

consistently identified themselves as members of the international Dada movement, in

recognition of the fact that they were united by a common attitude of protest that they expressed

in highly conceptual approaches to art.

        In an incisive analysis of the achievements of Dada, Werner Haftmann observed that

Dada’s formal innovations and techniques can be traced almost exclusively to three major

movements that immediately preceded it. Thus Dada’s improvisatory cabaret technique, its use

of manifestos as a literary genre, the typography of its publications, and its development of

photomontage all derived from Futurist practices and concepts; Dada’s use of collage was

inspired by Cubism; and Dada’s free use of color and spontaneous use of artistic materials

derived from Expressionism. Haftmann argued that Dada’s originality lay in synthesis: “Dada
                                                 31


took up all these separate ideas, assembled them and established them as a unified expression of

experiences and emotions that were wholly of the present.” These connections produced Dada’s

most basic contribution: “Dada led to a new image of the artist.”87 George Heard Hamilton

concluded that Dada, “as much as any artists since and more than most, proved that the artist’s

decision alone determines what art is, and what is art. They inserted deep in the aesthetic of

modern times the inescapable conviction that even if the material existence of the work of art

claims our attention first, the work itself originates only in the confrontation of matter with

mind.”88 The conclusions of Haftmann and Hamilton underscore the fact that Dada was a

quintessentially conceptual movement, that innovated in classic conceptual fashion by creating

unexpected syntheses of elements drawn from earlier art.

       The highly conceptual nature of Dada eventually resulted in a number of fundamental

ironies. Dada was intended to be anarchic, spontaneous and ephemeral, without regard for

history: Marcel Janco declared that “No Dadaist will write his memoirs!”89 In fact, the literary

orientation of the movement’s members and the verbal character of many of its activities led to

an outpouring of published memoirs and histories of the movement by former participants that is

matched by few, if any, other artistic movements.90 Dada was intended not as art, but as anti-art.

So for example John Heartfield declared that Berlin Dada “was not, and did not want to be art or

an art movement … it was a political renunciation of art,” Georges Hugnet concluded that “Dada

was against art,” and Georges Ribemont-Dessaignes described Dada as “a permanent revolt of

the individual against art.”91 Yet as Richter recognized, the goal of making anti-art was

impossible: “A work of art, even when intended as anti-art, asserts itself irresistibly as a work of

art. In fact, Tzara’s phrase ‘the destruction of art by artistic means’ means simply ‘the

destruction of art in order to build a new art.’ This is precisely what happened.”92 Objects
                                                 32


produced by Dada artists rose inexorably in value, and hundreds of Dada works were exhibited at

New York’s orthodox Museum of Modern Art as early as 1936, when it presented an

encyclopedic survey, “Fantastic Art, Dada, Surrealism.”93 And finally, several basic ironies were

caused by the effect stressed by the present study, that Dada could diffuse rapidly, often almost

spontaneously, because of its highly conceptual nature. Thus for example a bitter dispute raged

for decades over who founded the Dada movement.94 Another, equally bitter, focused more

narrowly on who first used the word “Dada” to refer to the movement.95 And yet another was an

extended argument over whether Raoul Hausmann and Hannah Höch or George Grosz and John

Heartfield should be credited with the invention of photomontage.96 The irony of these debates is

considerable, for Dada was intended to abolish bourgeois values and traditional conceptions of

artistic invention: in Jean Arp’s account of the movement’s youthful idealism, he recalled that

“We wanted an anonymous and collective art.”97 But as in many other instances, youthful

revolutionaries became aging reactionaries, and this manifested itself in a concern for property

rights, the most bourgeois of values, as Elger observed that “In the battle of priorities – and not

just in the disputes concerning the origins of the word Dada – most Dadaists suddenly became

deadly serious.”98 The difficulty of establishing where and when the highly conceptual practices

of Dada originated meant that, once begun, battles over intellectual property rights would be

nearly impossible to resolve.

Surrealism

               Surrealism is not a new means of expression … It is a means of
               total liberation of the mind.
                        We are determined to make a Revolution.

                                                Louis Aragon, André Breton, et al.,
                                                      Declaration of the Bureau de
                                                   Recherches Surréalistes, 192599
                                                  33


       Although Dada outlived World War I, with the end of the war its true raison d’etre had

disappeared, and the movement’s energy quickly dissipated. Surrealism soon emerged as Dada’s

successor: in Hans Richter’s succinct formulation, “Surrealism devoured and digested Dada.”100

In a number of ways, Surrealism resembled its predecessor. So for example Surrealism was also

initiated as a literary project, and only later added visual art to its program. Unlike Dada,

however, Surrealism was created primarily by a single poet, who remained firmly in charge of

the movement throughout its career, formally recruiting new members to its cause, and

excommunicating those who failed to conform to its requirements. Also unlike Dada, for most of

its history Surrealism was located entirely in a single place.

       André Breton, who was often called the pope of Surrealism, did not present Surrealism as

simply a new artistic movement, but instead as a way of freeing artistic imagination from reason

and convention. Thus in his initial Manifesto of Surrealism in 1924, he defined Surrealism as

“Psychic automatism in its pure state, by which one proposes to express – verbally, by means of

the written word, or in any other manner – the actual functioning of thought. Dictated by

thought, in the absence of any control exercised by reason, exempt from any aesthetic or moral

concern.”101 Breton did not restrict Surrealism to future actions, so he felt free retroactively to

appropriate the work of earlier artists, as he did in his manifesto, describing such authors as

Hugo, Poe, Rimbaud, and Jarry as Surrealists, as well as such painters as Seurat, Matisse,

Picasso, Duchamp, and de Chirico.102

       Breton created Surrealism in Paris, and the first visual artists who formally affiliated

themselves with the movement were former Dada painters who returned to the city in the years

following the end of World War I. Over time, Breton added a number of younger artists,

including practitioners of such other arts as sculpture and photography. Although all
                                                34


Surrealism’s artists were recruited in Paris until World War II forced Breton to flee to New

York, the visual movement of Surrealism was not dominated by French nationals. Of the most

important Surrealist artists, only André Masson and Yves Tanguy were French, whereas Max

Ernst and Jean Arp were German, Salvador Dali and Joan Miró were Spanish, René Magritte and

Paul Delvaux were Belgian, Giorgio de Chirico was Italian, Alberto Giacometti was Swiss,

Roberto Matta was Chilean, and Man Ray was American. Although Paris remained the center of

the advanced art world during the 1920s and ’30s by attracting talented artists from all over

Europe, the heterogeneous origins of the artists who comprised its most important movement

during these decades already pointed to France’s decline as a producer of great modern artists.

       Surrealism was exceptional among twentieth-century visual art movements in including

both experimental and conceptual branches. George Heard Hamilton remarked that “There are

such painters as Masson and Miró who have investigated the spontaneous reaction of the hand to

the medium, and there are those who have found for their hallucinations visual metaphors of

great clarity and precision, among them Tanguy, Dali, Magritte, Delvaux, and Brauner.”103 The

first group, who stressed spontaneity, worked visually and experimentally, whereas the second,

who privileged precision, carefully planned their conceptual works. As Hamilton’s summary

suggests, conceptual Surrealists predominated numerically over their experimental counterparts,

though over time the experimentalists would prove at least as influential, if not more so.

       William Rubin observed that “During the thirties Surrealist art sustained its position as

the leading vanguard movement largely through default. Its pioneer years in the previous decade

had witnessed a phenomenal variety of stylistic and iconographic inventions; but like many other

modern movements, Surrealism could not sustain momentum for more than five or six years.”104

The lack of new art movements as challengers to Surrealism must have been in large part a
                                                35


consequence of the great economic depression of the ’30s, while the decline of Surrealist

creativity reflected the exhaustion of the early creativity of its many conceptual members. When

Breton moved to New York in 1941, he officially took Surrealism with him, and several New

York galleries exhibited the work of Surrealist artists in exile, including Ernst, Masson, Matta,

and Tanguy. Yet the movement’s importance as a creator of new art lay in the past, as World

War II produced a vacuum in the world of advanced art. The remaining significance of Surrealist

artists would be in influencing a new generation of artists who would come to prominence after

the war.



Abstract Expressionism

               Q: Would you like to go abroad?
               A: No. I don’t see why the problems of modern painting can’t be
               solved as well here as elsewhere.

                                           Interview with Jackson Pollock, 1944105

       In 1946, the American critic Clement Greenberg respectfully declared that “The School

of Paris remains still the creative fountainhead of modern art, and its every move is decisive for

advanced artists everywhere else – who are advanced precisely because they show the capacity

to absorb and extend the preoccupations of that nerve-center.”106 Just two years later, however,

new evidence from both sides of the Atlantic had caused Greenberg to change his mind, and in

1948 he proclaimed the fall of Paris and the rise of New York:

               If artists as great as Picasso, Braque, and Léger have declined so
               grievously, it can only be because the general social premises that
               used to guarantee their functioning have disappeared in Europe.
               And when one sees, on the other hand, how much the level of
               American art has risen in the last five years, with the emergence of
               new talents so full of energy and content as Arshile Gorky, Jackson
               Pollock, David Smith … then the conclusion forces itself, much to
               our own surprise, that the main premises of Western art have at last
                                                 36


               migrated to the United States, along with the center of gravity of
               industrial production and political power.107

Not surprisingly, the emerging American artists were aware of this shift in the art world’s center

before it was recognized even by sympathetic critics. Thus in 1945 the painter Barnett Newman

had observed that whereas Paris’ status in the art world had been severely damaged by the war,

New York’s stature had actually been increased by the war’s effects:

               With the large immigration of refugee painters who have acted as a
               stimulus, New York artists have begun to feel themselves the
               leaders and bearers of the artistic tradition of Europe instead of, as
               heretofore, only its reflection. The longstanding inhibiting position
               that made New York a mirror of Paris disappeared in 1940, and
               suddenly the artists of New York had to stand on their own feet.108

       During the 1930s and ’40s, New York was the scene of the development of the most

important experimental art movement of the century, as a large group of painters gradually

created a novel form of abstract art. They were aware that their progress was slow and

painstaking, as for example in 1945 Mark Rothko wrote to Barnett Newman that the recent

development of his work had been exhilarating even though it had caused him many headaches:

“Unfortunately one can’t think these things out with finality, but must endure a series of

stumblings toward a clearer issue.”109 They were also aware that few outside their circle of

fellow artists took any interest in their efforts. Adolph Gottlieb later recalled that “We were like

the people who are nothing but chess players or tennis bums and who refuse to do anything

useful. And we felt that we were willing to go all our lives and do this despised kind of painting

without any hope of success.”110 Yet in retrospect the Abstract Expressionists recognized that the

absence of attention to their work in the early years had allowed them the necessary time to

develop their art without external pressure. Thus in 1969, when the famous 66-year-old Mark

Rothko was honored with an honorary degree by Yale University – from which Rothko had
                                                  37


dropped out 46 years earlier, in anger at the school’s anti-Semitism and anti-intellectualism – he

spoke briefly and nostalgically of the golden age he had found in the art world of his youth, that

no longer existed because of the very success of his own cohort:

               When I was a younger man, art was a lonely thing: no galleries, no
               collectors, no critics, no money. Yet it was a golden age, for then
               we had nothing to lose and a vision to gain. Today it is not quite
               the same. It is a time of tons of verbiage, activity, a consumption
               … I do know that many who are driven to this life are desperately
               searching for those pockets of silence where they can root and
               grow. We must all hope that they find them.111

       The freedom afforded them by the art world’s indifference to their early efforts was a

common theme among the Abstract Expressionists. So for example Adolph Gottlieb recalled that

“Nothing could have been worse than the situation in which we were, so we tried desperate

things,” and Robert Motherwell reflected that “No one thought we could ever produce truly great

modern painting, only Europeans could. So we had nothing to lose by risking all.”112 But it

wasn’t merely critics, dealers, and collectors who lacked confidence in the young American

artists, for they themselves were dogged by the persistent uncertainty of experimental innovators.

Thus for example the experimental Abstract Expressionists failed to produce the manifestos that

earlier conceptual movements had used to attract attention to their art, and Motherwell later

explained that “the very nature of a manifesto is to affirm forcefully and unambiguously, and not

to express the existential doubt and the anxiety that we all felt.”113

       Many of the leading Abstract Expressionists served informal apprenticeships in New

York with a few key figures. Rothko, Gottlieb, Newman, and a number of their peers attended

weekly sketching sessions throughout the 1930s and early ’40s at the New York apartment of the

older American painter Milton Avery. Avery was an experimental painter who had been deeply

influenced by Matisse early in his career, and had spent decades developing his own mature style
                                                 38


based on the expressive use of subtle color harmonies. Although Avery never fully abandoned

representation, the simplified shapes and blurred outlines of the objects in his images could be

seen by his younger protégés as a step toward the creation of textured and flattened fields of

color that were not constrained by figuration. The importance of the younger painters’ direct

contact with Avery was eloquently expressed in a eulogy in which Rothko paid tribute to his

friend and teacher: “‘This conviction of greatness, the feeling that one was in the presence of

great events, was immediate on encountering his work. It was true for many of us who were

younger, questioning, and looking for an anchor … The instruction, the example, the nearness in

the flesh of this marvelous man – all this was a significant fact – one which I shall never

forget.”114 Several others among the Abstract Expressionists were influenced by a painter closer

to their own age, but who brought to New York a charismatic personality and an impressive

Paris reputation as the youngest of André Breton’s recruits to Surrealism. Motherwell described

Roberto Matta as “the most energetic, enthusiastic, poetic, charming, brilliant young artist that

I’ve ever met,” and recalled that during a trip the artists made together to Mexico, “In the three

months of that summer of 1941, Matta gave me a ten-year education in surrealism.”115 The

Abstract Expressionists often spoke of their desire to create images from the subconscious, yet

their interest in Surrealism was not in the work of the artists who produced precise dream

images, but rather in that of those who used paint spontaneously. Thus they admired the

paintings of Miró and Masson, and they learned about those painters’ techniques from Matta,

who had developed his personal experimental form of Surrealism using fluid color and shallow

spaces in an abstract tradition that had been initiated by Kandinksy.116 In addition to Motherwell,

Matta’s technique had a direct impact on Pollock, William Baziotes and Arshile Gorky.

Motherwell gave credit to Matta for introducing the Abstract Expressionists to the use of
                                                   39


automatism, which he identified as the key to the development of their art: “my conviction is

that, more than any other single thing, the introduction and acceptance of the theory of

automatism brought about a different look into our painting … It was the germ, historically, of

what later came to be called abstract expressionism.”117

        In spite of the great differences in their mature styles, during the 1940s and early ’50s the

Abstract Expressionists shared a strong common identity as members of a collective enterprise.

In regular meetings at a series of galleries, cafeterias, and bars, including the now-legendary

Cedar Street Tavern, the artists argued and discussed their work, and in the process both

encouraged and challenged one another. In 1954, Baziotes described this: “Contact with other

artists has always been of great importance to me. When the artists I know best used to meet ten

or twelve years ago, the talk was mostly of ideas in painting. There was an unconscious

collaboration between artists. Whether you agreed or disagreed was of no consequence. It was

exciting and you were compelled to paint over your head. You had to stay on a high level or

drown.”118 Similarly, a biographer of Rothko observed that “all of these artists knew each other,

viewed each other’s work and formed a social network … During the late forties, in the absence

of sales and critical recognition, this loose field of social relations, with artists attending each

other’s shows, engaging in conversations, spending Saturday afternoons at a gallery like Parsons’

or Saturday evenings in an apartment like Ferber’s – all these provided a stimulating, supportive

context for innovation as well as relief from ‘crushing’ isolation.”119

        The Abstract Expressionists were not concerned primarily with ideas or the philosophy of

painting, but rather with the process of painting and the discovery of new images. For them,

innovations emerged from physical activity: thus Robert Motherwell could declare that “I think

the deepest discoveries in art have to do with the artist’s materials, the liquids, grounds,
                                                40


instruments, brushes, sticks, palette knives, pen points, whatever.”120 The experimental art that

emerged triumphant in New York in the early 1950s was widely copied by artists elsewhere. In

1955, for example, William Seitz observed that “it is impossible to convey fully the degree to

which Abstract Expressionism has become a universal style,” so that “the uniting features of the

style can now be found in England, France, Germany, Italy, Spain, and even Japan.”121 Abstract

Expressionism did not travel well, however. Only in Paris did an important group of painters

emerge who shared the attitudes and values of the American Abstract Expressionists, and their

art was developed independently of that of New York, with considerably less impact on the

advanced art world than that of the Americans.122 The only group of followers of the Abstract

Expressionists who came to be considered important contributors to advanced art were the

younger artists who worked in New York during the 1950s and ’60s, who were labeled the

second-generation Abstract Expressionists, and their importance was also considerably less than

that of their first-generation predecessors.123 The experimental character of Abstract

Expressionism appears to account for the inability of artists outside New York to make important

contributions by emulating the school’s methods and images, for Abstract Expressionism was

based on subtle and complex uses of materials, that could not be systematized or even precisely

described. So for example in 1948, when four of the leading Abstract Expressionists established

a school – that proved unsuccessful and short-lived – they offered no formal courses because, as

Robert Motherwell explained, “The way to learn to paint … is to hang around artists.”124

Aspiring artists who were unable to hang around the pioneering Abstract Expressionists proved

unable to use their discoveries as the basis for any significant new contributions to advanced art.

And even those young experimental artists who were able to spend time with their first-
                                                 41


generation predecessors in New York quickly found their own innovative efforts overshadowed

by the bolder and more radical innovations of a new generation of young conceptual artists.



Pop Art

               Pop is Instant Art.
                                                            Robert Indiana, 1963125

       Pop Art burst on the New York art world in 1962. A New York Times review of one

group exhibition in that year opened with the statement “It’s mad, mad, wonderfully mad,” and

an article in Art International, titled “‘Pop’ Culture, Metaphysical Disgust, and the New

Vulgarians,” declared that “The truth is, the art galleries are being invaded by the pin-headed and

contemptible style of gum chewers, bobby soxers, and worse, delinquents.”126

       The contrast between Pop Art and Abstract Expressionism could hardly have been

greater. The Abstract Expressionists had complex and uncertain goals, and pursued them

cautiously by developing highly personal gestures; the Pop artists had simple goals, which they

accomplished summarily with straightforward execution. The Abstract Expressionists rejected all

preconception, for they wanted to discover images, and their own identity, in the process of

painting; the leading Pop artists reproduced existing images – often familiar, commercial

products – using impersonal, and often actually mechanical, techniques. The Abstract

Expressionists considered art to be an existentialist quest, with the goal of asserting the freedom

of the individual; Pop was an art about mass production, that often used techniques of mass

production in its own execution. Andy Warhol explained that “I’m for mechanical art. When I

took up silk screening, it was to more fully exploit the preconceived image through the

commercial techniques of multiple reproduction,” while Roy Lichtenstein stated that “I want my

painting to look as if it had been programmed. I want to hide the record of my hand.”127
                                                  42


       Unlike Abstract Expressionism, which depended critically on the subtleties of the

application of paint and the creation of personal forms by the individual artist, Pop was so

completely preconceived that a number of Pop artists, including Warhol, did not have to execute

their own paintings. In view of the fact that the artists could fully communicate their intentions to

assistants, it is not surprising that the work could readily be understood by others. Thus the Pop

painter Robert Indiana described Pop as “straight-to-the-point, severely blunt, with as little

‘artistic’ transformation and delectation as possible,” and he observed that “Its comprehension

can be as immediate as a Crucifixion.”128 A younger artist, Larry Bell, remarked in 1963 on the

rapid diffusion of Pop: “It is quite unique to these past few years that a generation of artists

should have its influence on a second generation before it has even resolved its own philosophy.

Modern means of communication and Pop Art are a romance that must have been made in

heaven.”129 To understand and emulate Pop art, other artists not only didn’t have to have direct

contact with the innovative Pop artists, they didn’t even have to see their original works: Pop’s

images were taken directly from magazines and other modern means of communication, and as

Bell recognized, they were readily transmitted by those same means.

       In 1963, Roy Lichtenstein predicted that Pop would spread to Europe: “Everybody has

called Pop Art ‘American’ painting, but it’s actually industrial painting … Europe will be the

same way soon, so it won’t be American; it will be universal.”130 Although Lichtenstein didn’t

know it at the time, his prediction had already come true. In 1962, Gerhard Richter and Sigmar

Polke were students at the Düsseldorf Academy of Art. The most influential teacher at the

academy, Joseph Beuys, was proselytizing for his new conception of Social Sculpture, and he

denounced painting as a reactionary activity. Richter and Polke reacted in the perverse fashion of

young conceptual innovators: “Polke and Richter thought long and hard about whether they were
                                                 43


‘allowed to paint,’ decided they were not, and for that reason took it up with a vengeance.”131

The troublesome question remained, however, of how to paint without embracing past traditions.

The key discovery occurred in 1962, when a fellow student, Konrad Lueg, showed Polke and

Richter an art magazine that contained illustrations of Pop paintings by Lichtenstein and Warhol.

Richter almost immediately began to base his paintings on photographs: “I had had enough of

bloody painting, and painting from a photograph seemed to me the most moronic and inartistic

thing that anyone could do … I simply copied the photographs in paint and aimed for the greatest

possible likeness to photography.”132

       Working together, the young German painters created a new art they variously called

Capitalist Realism, German Pop, or Pop Art. Richter noted that “We have worked out our ideas

largely by talking them through … And so the exchange with other artists – and especially the

collaboration with Lueg and Polke – matters a lot to me: it is part of the input that I need.”133 In

the spring of 1963, Richter, Polke, Lueg, and a fourth young painter presented an exhibition of

their work in Düsseldorf. In a press release, Richter declared this the “first exhibition of ‘German

Pop Art.’” He explained that Pop had inaugurated an aesthetic revolution: “Pop Art has rendered

conventional painting … entirely obsolete, and has rapidly achieved international currency and

recognition.” Curiously, he went on to argue that “Pop Art is not an American invention, and we

do not regard it as an import – though the concepts and terms were mostly coined in America and

caught on more rapidly there than in Germany. This art is pursuing its own organic and

autonomous growth in this country.”134

       Richter has not denied the importance of American Pop art for his early development.135

Although he did not explain his claim that Pop was not an import to Germany, it is likely that

what he had in mind was that he and Polke did not simply follow the styles of Warhol or
                                                   44


Lichtenstein, but that they adapted the innovations of the Americans to their own purposes. Thus

although the Photo Paintings Richter began to produce in 1962 are generally recognized as his

first significant contribution, they do not in any way resemble the paintings of any American Pop

artist, and Richter went on in later years to make paintings, based on photographs, in a variety of

other styles. Polke’s early Pop paintings not only did not resemble American Pop, but also had

little in common with those of Richter. Polke seized particularly on Lichtenstein’s mimicry of

the benday dots that create newspaper photographs, but his paintings were very different in

appearance from those of Lichtenstein.136 Thus Richter’s claim that Pop art had had “its own

organic and autonomous growth” in Germany may have been a reference to the flexibility of the

ideas and techniques of Pop, for artists anywhere could readily understand the practices of

Warhol and Lichtenstein, and could equally readily transform them according to their own tastes.

Richter and Polke would go on to become two of the most important painters of the late

twentieth century, and their success would rest largely on the practice of painting from

photographs, with techniques that often imitated photographic elements, but both would use

motifs and methods that made their paintings distinctively their own.

       In an amusing anecdote, Arthur Danto reported a later instance of the diffusion of Pop,

similar to that of its adoption by Richter and Polke, that underscores even more forcefully the

unimportance of the actual appearance of the original art for its ability to influence artists in

distant places:

                  The dissident artists, Vitaly Komar and Alexander Melamid told
                  me that they discovered Pop Art from seeing it in half-tone
                  illustrations in various art magazines that had clandestine
                  circulation in the Soviet Union, and appropriated its strategies for
                  their own subversive purposes in a movement they called “Zotz
                  Art.” One result of Glasnost was the ceremonial exchange of art
                  exhibitions, which is one of the ways in which nations
                  symbolically express friendship for one another; and the Zotz
                                                45


               artists could scarcely contain their excitement when a show of
               American Pop Art in Moscow was announced. What they were
               unprepared for, Alex Melamid remembers, was how beautiful Pop
               Art was!137

       An early debate about Pop art, never resolved, concerned whether Pop was intended to

celebrate or to mock contemporary commercial culture.138 Another perennial dispute has

questioned whether Pop’s use of photography was sincere or ironic. The ambiguities that have

fuelled these debates appear to have made a sizeable contribution to the influence of Pop art.

Thus since the invention of Pop, commercial motifs could become subjects for artists with a wide

range of ideologies. The Pop practice of painting from existing photographs equally created a

vast new store of images for advanced artists: as David Sylvester observed, “all of Warhol’s

mature work is as if inspired by a revelation that a modern painter could and should exploit the

photograph as Renaissance painters exploited classical antiquities.”139 It was because Pop opened

up these new conceptual opportunities that its influence not only spread rapidly, but has

continued to resonate in the advanced art world for decades.

Conceptual Art

               In conceptual art the idea or concept is the most important aspect
               of the work.
                                                                Sol LeWitt, 1967140

       During the late 1960s a number of artists in New York began to identify their work as

Conceptual Art. In a number of respects, Conceptual Art paralleled the earlier Dada movement.

Like Dada, Conceptual Art was a protest. Thus in 1968 Sol LeWitt, a key member of the

movement, observed that “American life is rapidly breaking down. We have riots, wars, etc. The

middle class morality is breaking down … There is no reason that the artist should feel he is part

of something that is so decadent and so completely without any purpose.”141 Another important

Conceptual artist, Joseph Kosuth, later explained that Conceptual art was “the art of the Vietnam
                                                 46


war era.”142 Like Dada, Conceptual artists attacked the values of advanced art. The critic Lucy

Lippard explained that “it was usually the form rather than the content of Conceptual art that

carried a political message … Anti-establishment fervor in the 1960s focused on the de-

mythologization and de-commodification of art, on the need for an independent (or ‘alternative’)

art that could not be bought and sold by the greedy sector that owned everything that was

exploiting the world and promoting the Vietnam war.”143 And like Dada, Conceptual art spread

rapidly across space. The critic Peter Wollen observed that “To grasp the spread of

conceptualism as a broad global movement, it is essential to understand both that it was multi-

polar in its origins and that it was the creation of a very small, but very vocal and productive,

phalanx of artists, strategically situated in New York and committed to a typically avant-garde

strategy, complete with manifestos, journals and theoretical statements.”144

       Although its rhetoric often exceeded its practices, Conceptual art went beyond Dada in

defining new artistic forms that would be more highly conceptual than any earlier art. In a

famous early manifesto in 1967, LeWitt declared that in Conceptual Art execution would be

strictly subordinated to conception: “When an artist uses a conceptual form of art, it means that

all of the planning and decisions are made beforehand and the execution is a perfunctory affair.

The idea becomes a machine that makes the art.” Two years later, LeWitt explained that

execution was in fact not a necessary element of art: “Ideas can be works of art … All ideas need

not be made physical.”145 Kosuth made parallel statements, in 1967 declaring that “All I make

are models. The actual works of art are ideas,” and in 1969 observing that “art’s viability is not

connected to the presentation of visual (or other) kinds of experience.”146 On the basis of

theoretical statements in this vein, in 1968 Lucy Lippard and John Chandler, two critics who

were supporters of Conceptual Art, made a bold prediction: “a number of artists are losing
                                                 47


interest in the physical evolution of the work of art. The studio is again becoming a study. Such a

trend appears to be provoking a profound dematerialization of art, especially of art as object, and

if it continues to prevail, it may result in the object’s becoming wholly obsolete.”147

       Inspired by the concept of dematerialization, in 1968 the dealer Seth Siegelaub created an

exhibition titled The Xerox Book, that had no physical manifestation other than a Xeroxed book.

Each of seven Conceptual artists – Kosuth, LeWitt, Carl Andre, Robert Barry, Douglas Huebler,

Robert Morris, and Lawrence Weiner – was asked to submit 25 pages of material on standard

sheets of paper, with whatever texts or images they pleased, and their submissions were

Xeroxed.148 Siegelaub chose Xeroxing instead of higher quality reproduction because it was

“really just for the exchange of information … Xerox just cuts down on the visual aspect of

looking at the information.” He believed that he had successfully dematerialized the art gallery:

“I’ve just, in a sense, eliminated the idea of space. My gallery is the world now.”149

       The rapid geographic diffusion of Conceptual Art was highlighted by a 1970 exhibition at

New York’s Museum of Modern Art, titled “Information.” Intended as “‘an international report’

of the activity of younger artists,” over 100 artists from more than a dozen countries were invited

to submit their work. The show’s curator, Kynaston McShine, observed that the artists shared a

concern with “the general social, political, and economic crises that are almost universal

phenomena of 1970. If you are an artist in Brazil, you know of at least one friend who is being

tortured; if you are one in Argentina, you probably have had a neighbor who has been in jail for

having long hair, or for not being ‘dressed’ properly; and if you are living in the United States,

you may fear that you will be shot at, either in the universities, in your bed, or more formally in

Indochina.”150 The seven artists from the Xerox Book were all included in “Information,” and

they were joined by such other prominent artists as the Germans Bernd and Hilla Becher and
                                                   48


Joseph Beuys, the French Daniel Buren, the English Gilbert and George, the Dutch Jan Dibbets,

the Italian Michelangelo Pistoletto, the Japanese On Kawara, and a host of other Americans

including John Baldessari, Bruce Nauman, Yoko Ono, Ed Ruscha, and Robert Smithson. Many

of the submissions consisted exclusively of written texts, while many combined texts and

photographs.

       In the catalogue for “Information,” McShine observed that with modern technologies of

communication and transportation, “it is now possible for artists to be truly international;

exchange with their peers is now comparatively simple … It is no longer imperative for an artist

to be in Paris or New York.”151 In an interview the previous year, Seth Siegelaub had given an

enthusiastic and detailed analysis of the connection between the new Conceptual Art and

globalization:

                 I like the idea of things, information, people, ideas moving back
                 and forth. And now that has much to do with a quality of the art,
                 too. It can travel very easily, and it can be seen on a primary level,
                 not just photographs of something but the something itself. The
                 idea of primary information as opposed to secondary or tertiary
                 information. Or hearsay. It’s happening very, very quickly. And it
                 makes communications even quicker. Just send a letter in the mail
                 and you know what it’s about. You don’t have to wait for a
                 painting to arrive, like someone in Paris wouldn’t see a Pollock
                 until the late fifties or early sixties, whenever the show took one
                 over. Those days are over. And the idea that people can make art
                 wherever they live, that they don’t have to necessarily come to
                 New York and be part of the scene, I like that too.152

       Conceptual Art proved no more successful than Dada in destroying the commercial

values of advanced art. As early as 1973, Lucy Lippard acknowledged her disappointment that

“Hopes that ‘conceptual art’ would be able to avoid the general commercialization, the

destructively ‘progressive’ approach of modernism were for the most part unfounded.” The

formerly anti-materialist Conceptual artists had been co-opted: “the major conceptualists are
                                                 49


selling work for substantial sums here and in Europe; they are represented by (and still more

unexpected – showing in) the world’s most prestigious galleries.” Lippard was forced to concede

that “art and artist in a capitalist society remain luxuries.”153 Yet although ideas had not replaced

objects, texts had not replaced images, and Xeroxed copies had not replaced paintings, the

Conceptual Art movement did demonstrate how rapidly highly conceptual artistic practices could

spread. The catalogue of the Museum of Modern Art’s 1970 “Information” show provides

powerful evidence of this. Thus just a few years after New York artists had begun to provide

formal definitions of Conceptual Art, the movement had made converts, or at least attracted

adherents, in more than a dozen different countries, and artists throughout Western Europe and

South America could use written texts, diagrams, and newspaper photographs to create works

that can hardly be distinguished in style or substance from the products of the movement’s

pioneers in New York.

London

               The center of the f…ing art world’s in England. You know that,
               don’t you?
                                                           Damien Hirst, 2000154

       In the late 1990s, a number of English critics began to claim that London had displaced

New York as the center of the advanced art world, as a result of the achievements of the young

British artists, or yBas. The yBas first burst onto the art scene in 1988, in “Freeze,” a group

exhibition of 16 young artists held in the vacated Port of London Authority Building in London’s

Docklands. The show was curated by Damien Hirst, who was then an art student at London’s

Goldsmiths College, and the exhibitors were Hirst’s fellow students or recent graduates of

Goldsmiths.155 “Freeze” was soon followed by a series of similar group exhibitions, which were

held in empty warehouses, and the artists involved, with others of their generation, gained a
                                                 50


common identity as a new movement. The label for the group was cemented by a series of five

group shows presented by the collector and dealer Charles Saatchi, beginning in 1992, titled

“Young British Artists.”

       In 1995 Richard Cork, the art critic for The Times, wrote that “New art in this country

enjoys an outstandingly high reputation today. Curators, critics and collectors in many different

countries are excited about the vitality of British artists.” With some surprise, Cork observed that

the yBas “have proved that Britain is capable of producing a remarkably self-assured and

inventive generation busily redefining accepted ideas about what art can be,” and he speculated

that “they may well go on to win for modern British art an even higher reputation than the one it

already enjoys.”156 In 1997, London’s Royal Academy of Arts hosted “Sensation,” an exhibition

of the work of 44 young British artists, drawn entirely from the collection of Charles Saatchi. In

surveying the accomplishments of these artists, Norman Rosenthal, the Royal Academy’s

Exhibitions Secretary, observed that “the latest new generation of British artists is having

considerably more impact than its predecessors.” He cautiously raised the possibility that the

yBas had already elevated London to art world preeminence:

               Can London become the unchallenged center for the practice and
               presentation of contemporary art? In the past, Paris, New York and
               even Düsseldorf have been able aggressively to claim this role, by
               virtue of the density of activity in each city over considerable
               periods of time, with many artists, as well as collectors and
               galleries, contributing to the debate with originality and daring. If
               London could now claim such a position, that would be a first, and
               surely grounds for celebration.157

And in 1998, in an early example of the definite assertion of English success, the critic Matthew

Collings flatly declared: “Always remember, New Yorkers, young British art now dominates the

world, even your world.”158
                                                51


       The art of the yBas is extremely diverse, and does not share any common style. The critic

Richard Shone generalized about the yBas:

               none was motivated by didactic, socio-political issues; all took for
               granted the lessons of conceptual and minimal art; none was … a
               legibly figurative artist; and many introduced autobiographical and
               personal elements into their work. Materials used were invariably
               demotic, drawn from their immediate environment … Most
               difficult of all to characterize is perhaps a shared directness and
               confidence in their imagery, whether dealing in grand, universal
               themes or in more particular observations from contemporary
               life.159

Michael Craig-Martin, an artist and teacher at Goldsmiths College who is often considered the

godfather of contemporary British art because he was the key tutor for the “Freeze” exhibitors,

stressed the clarity of their work in explaining its broad appeal: “In my view it never occurred to

artists of this generation to make art that people wouldn’t get and wouldn’t like. They thought

that if people didn’t get it, then they must have done something wrong. Now that is not what

artists of my generation behaved like. There is now a transparency to it all.”160 The art of many

of the yBas was eclectic, moving freely from style to style, and often from one medium or genre

to another. One source of this eclecticism was a decision by Goldsmiths College in the 1970s to

abolish divisions between departments, so students would feel free to work in any medium they

chose.161

       The yBas were young and confident. Surveying their work in 1999, Arthur Danto saw

“the brashness of art students the world around. There is an exuberance, a confidence, a swagger

unfortunately not to be found in the demoralized American art world of today.”162 Damien Hirst

epitomized this attitude, as in 1999 he looked back on the yBas’ early achievements: “I mean, all

us lot, we f…ing caned the f…ing art world. Absolutely totally phenomenal. We caned the

f…ing art world as kids.”163 It was their brashness that allowed the highly conceptual yBas to
                                                 52


revolutionize British art, and to circumvent existing art world constraints by presenting their

work directly to the public.

       The art of the yBas had what Julian Stallabrass called “an accessible veneer,” with many

references to mass culture that the general public would understand.164 Beneath the veneer,

however, the yBas made liberal use of art history. Nearly all the yBas were trained in art schools

that stressed a highly conceptual approach to artistic practice, so they were thoroughly familiar

with earlier art even though they often feigned ignorance of it. So for example Damien Hirst,

who has cultivated a public image based on the oafish and boorish behavior of punk rock

musicians, with an appropriately irreverent disrespect for artistic traditions, acknowledged that

one of his most celebrated early works was influenced by several leading American conceptual

artists: “in my fly-killer piece [A Thousand Years, 1990], the lights were like Dan Flavin and the

box was like Sol LeWitt. I put all that in knowingly.” He explained that he and his peers did not

base their art on a single predecessor, but on many: “at a certain point everyone at Goldsmiths

believed that rather than avoiding taking directly, we could take from everybody … It was just

getting all these influences and piling them together into our own thing.”165 Like many other

conceptual artists, the yBas consistently based their innovations on syntheses of earlier art. Thus

Chris Townsend and Mandy Merck observed that “For a movement so relentlessly appraised in

terms of novelty, … the yBas seemed to depend upon strategies of the ‘re.’ Think reprise; think

reply; think repeat; think reinterpretation.”166 And as is also common among conceptual artists,

the yBas often based their innovations on the art of their immediate predecessors. So for example

Tracey Emin and Sarah Lucas both borrowed from the American conceptual artist Bruce

Nauman in specific works, and Rachel Whiteread’s trademark practice of casting negative

spaces, that runs through her entire oeuvre, has been seen as a reaction to a single work Nauman
                                                    53


made in 1968, A Cast of the Space Under My Chair.167 In recognition of the yBas’ debt to

American artists of the generations preceding theirs, after Matthew Collings informed New York

of the end of its reign over the world of advanced art, he added: “we bow the knee to you and

salute you, for your past achievements. We got all the ideas for our present achievements from

you.”168

        One of the most distinctive features of the yBas is their celebrity: few contemporary art

movements have been of such great interest to so large a public. As one English journalist

remarked, “Fame is part of their story.”169 This is not merely incidental, but is part of a conscious

strategy. Damien Hirst, the most prominent yBa, explained that he deliberately set out to change

the public’s perception of artists: “I grew up in box office … When I decided I wanted to be an

artist, art became box office. I went in there and thought, ‘I want to entertain, with art.’ Not: ‘I

want to rot in a garret and chop my ear off.’” Hirst’s attitude toward publicity is simple: “I think

all publicity helps everything.”170 But the celebrity of the yBas is not limited to Hirst. Michael

Craig-Martin remarked on a change in emphasis: “British contemporary art has shifted its focus

from an interest in the object itself to an interest in the artist as genius.”171

        Julian Stallabrass has argued that there is a paradox at the center of much of

contemporary art: “while the means by which that art is pursued are steadily less expressive of

the artist’s personality, more reliant on conventional ideas than feelings, more the assemblage of

ready-made elements than the creation of organic compositions, the personality of the artist, far

from shrinking, has greatly expanded, sometimes overshadowing the work.”172 In fact, however,

this is not at all paradoxical. In most cases, the fame of the yBas has been a direct product of

shocking works of art, including Hirst’s dead, often sectioned, animals, suspended in

formaldehyde; Tracey Emin’s soiled bed, littered with blood-stained underwear and used
                                                  54


condoms; Jake and Dinos Chapman’s mocking images of mutilated corpses, taboo sexual

fantasies, and Nazi symbolism; and Chris Ofili’s painting of the Virgin Mary surrounded by

lumps of dried elephant dung and pornographic photographs. The shocking content of these

works raised the same question about the intentions of these artists that had echoed throughout

the world of advanced art ever since Marcel Duchamp submitted a porcelain urinal to the first

exhibition of the American Society of Independent Artists in 1917: is he serious or is he joking?

For the yBas, as for Duchamp, Beuys, Warhol, and a series of later conceptual artistic tricksters,

that question of intent necessarily led to a consideration of the personality of the artist.173 As

attentive students of art history, Hirst, Emin, and a number of their peers learned this lesson from

their illustrious predecessors, just as they learned that the publicity value of the debate

engendered by that question would grow over time if they could avoid resolving the issue. Hirst,

Emin, the Chapmans, and Ofili are conspicuous among those yBas who have carefully

constructed public personas that allow the debates over their sincerity to be rekindled with each

new exhibition, and in the process raising their profiles ever higher among the British public.

       In 2001, the American critic Jerry Saltz wrote of the yBas as a group in a way that is

reminiscent of earlier descriptions of the Abstract Expressionists, an earlier group of important

artists who did not share a common style: “the British have something we lack, and that is

community, by which I mean a small group of people who spend a fair amount of time together,

stay up late, and probably drink and argue about art with one another … [T]here’s a sense of

camaraderie that’s absent here.” In Saltz’s account, the East End of London appears to have

become as central to contemporary art as Greenwich Village was in the 1950s: “The Chapmans

run a tiny gallery out of Jake’s house, next door to Chris Ofili’s, a block from Gilbert &

George’s. Tracey Emin lives nearby; so do Peter Doig, Marc Quinn, Gary Hume, Wolfgang
                                                 55


Tillmans, Tim Noble and Sue Webster, and Rachel Whiteread. Locals boast ‘the highest

concentration of working artists in Europe’.”174 There is little doubt that London has been a more

important artistic center than New York for the cohort of artists born during the 1960s: Hirst,

Whiteread, Emin, Lucas, the Chapmans, Ofili, and their peers have had considerably greater

success than most of their American contemporaries.175 Yet it may be premature to conclude that

London has definitively replaced New York as the major generative center for advanced art. As

Norman Rosenthal recognized, during the 1960s and early ’70s Düsseldorf’s Academy of Art

produced a remarkable series of painters, including Gerhard Richter, Sigmar Polke, Blinky

Palermo, Jörg Immendorff, Anselm Kiefer, and Markus Lüpertz. Yet Düsseldorf could not

sustain this level, and is no longer considered a major artistic center. As a major international

center for finance and culture, London has obvious advantages over Düsseldorf that bode well

for its continued success in advanced art, but it will require at least another generation to

demonstrate that London will become the next New York rather than the next Düsseldorf.

Globalization, Nativity, and Identity

               Basquiat was intent on being a mainstream artist. He didn’t want to
               be a black artist.
                                                                   Arden Scott176

       In recent decades, there has been a considerable amount of discussion in the art world

about the globalization of advanced art. These discussions have often failed to distinguish among

three separate phenomena.

       One of these is a consequence of recent increases in the prosperity of a number of places

that were traditionally not connected to mainstream western art. In these countries, including

conspicuously China and India, increasing wealth has led to the rise of thriving markets for local
                                                 56


contemporary art. In a number of instances, young artists in these countries have created new

forms of conceptual art, based in part on borrowing from western styles.

       A prime example of this is the painter Wang Guangyi, who is a leading member of

China’s New Art Movement, that began in the late 1980s.177 In 1988, at the age of 31, Wang

established himself as a rebel artist with a daring series of eight large paintings of Chairman

Mao, that mimicked the billboard portraits that had been widely displayed during Mao’s reign,

but had disappeared after his death. In 1990, Wang began a new series of large paintings that

became his trademark works. These combined Chinese socialist propaganda with Pop art. The

most famous of these juxtaposed an image of revolutionary soldiers with the Coca-Cola logo.

Each painting in the series combined the main title Great Criticism – an ironic reference to

Mao’s constant criticism of bourgeois values – with a subtitle that was the name of a famous

western brand– e.g. Canon, Swatch, and M&Ms. In a special tribute, one of the paintings was

subtitled Andy Warhol. Wang’s work became the basis for a new genre in Chinese art, Political

Pop.

       Wang Guangyi wanted to become famous in order to improve China’s image: “From the

start, I was determined to produce art that was contemporary, Chinese, and that would be

accorded international respect.” He believed that Chinese artists had to demonstrate their

familiarity with western art to dispel the image of China as culturally backward: “We wanted to

engage the West on equal terms. To do this we had to understand western art theories.”178 He and

other contemporary Chinese artists did this, borrowing both the techniques and the ironic

attitudes of American Pop art. Wang’s work gained international recognition as a new and

innovative form of Chinese art, and it has sold for high prices in both western and Chinese

markets. Yet it has had little impact on western artists.179 This has been a general pattern. Young
                                                 57


conceptual artists who have remained in their countries of origin have borrowed styles and

techniques from advanced western art, and many have gained fame and fortune in their home

countries. Yet to date few developments created by those working outside western centers have

had a significant impact on the mainstream of advanced western art.

       Two other facets of globalization have affected the form and content of recent western

art, however. One of these is a continuation and extension of a process that has been important

throughout the modern era, the migration to western artistic centers of young artists from an

increasingly wide range of countries. Prominent recent examples include the Cuban-born Felix

Gonzalez-Torres (1957-96) , who spent his career in New York, and the Chinese artist Cai Guo

Quiang (1957- ), who left his native country for Japan, and later New York. Other important

contemporary artists, including the Italian Maurizio Cattelan (1960- ) and the Japanese Takashi

Murakami (1963- ), have maintained studios both in their native countries and New York.

       To date there has been no systematic study of the changing composition by nativity of

leading contemporary artists, but there are some indications that this aspect of globalization has

progressed in recent times. So for example Table 2 is based on an analysis of a textbook

published in 2002 titled Art Since 1960, written by an English art historian named Michael

Archer. The present analysis was done by identifying the country of birth of every artist

mentioned in the text. Table 3 presents the number of different countries of origin of these artists,

distributed according to the artists’ birth cohorts. The evidence shows a substantial increase in

the number of countries represented over time. So for example the artists considered in the book

who were aged 41-50 in 1960, the book’s starting point, had been born in a total of just eight

different countries, whereas those aged 31-40 came from 18 different countries, and those aged

21-30 were from 27 different countries. Disaggregated analysis of the evidence reveals that a
                                                 58


number of Asian and African countries, including China, India, Korea, Morocco, and Tunisia,

were represented for the first time in Archer’s book by artists born in the 1930s, who were in

their 20s and 30s during the 1960s, when conceptual approaches became dominant in advanced

western art.

       A third aspect of globalization that has become increasingly important in recent times is

related to the last one mentioned, but is conceptually distinct from it. This is the adoption of

visual elements from the art of places that have not been part of the western mainstream, by

artists who are working in western centers. This practice has of course been present throughout

the modern era, as Gauguin, Picasso, and others drew elements of their styles from art forms they

considered “primitive.”180 The novel aspect of this practice in recent times, however, is that these

borrowings have increasingly been done by artists who assert that they are reclaiming their own

national or ethnic heritage. Thus whereas some of the artists who have engaged in this practice

are themselves migrants to the West, others were born in the West, but are drawing on the art of

their parents’ countries of origin, or on their ethnic backgrounds more generally.

       Consider several examples of immigrants who drew on the art of their countries of origin.

Ana Mendieta (1948-85) arrived in the United States as a Cuban refugee at the age of 12. After

attending art school, while working as an artist in New York she pursued her long-time interest

in Afro-Cuban iconography, and her art was directly influenced by her study of the rituals of

Santería. She explained that “In my work I am in a sense reliving my heritage. My sources are

memories, images, experiences, and beliefs that have left their mark in me.”181

       Anish Kapoor (1954- ) was born in India, but attended art school in London, and settled

permanently in England. On a trip to India in 1979, he saw the curved forms that Hindu art used

to represent the feminine deity, and these had a major impact on the development of his style. He
                                                  59


has become one of the most important sculptors working today, and was awarded the Turner

Prize in 1991.182

       Takashi Murakami combined a childhood love of Japanese animation art with the Pop

commercial aesthetic of Jeff Koons that he discovered in New York. As the self-proclaimed

Japanese Andy Warhol, Murakami created a conceptual fusion of style and content that he calls

“superflat,” in a joint reference to the traditional flat appearance of Japanese visual art and to the

Japanese tendency to flatten or disregard the boundaries between artistic genres.183

       It is no more difficult to find significant examples of western-born artists who imported

artistic elements they considered their inheritance. Jean-Michel Basquiat (1960-88) was born in

New York, but his art reflected both his father’s Haitian nativity and his mother’s Puerto Rican

origins. Thus many of his paintings included words in the Caribbean Spanish his mother spoke to

him, and a number of his paintings portrayed the suffering of Africans in the transatlantic slave

trade.184 Basquiat explained that these works were personal: “I’ve never been to Africa … But I

have a cultural memory. I don’t need to look for it; it exists. It’s over there, in Africa. That

doesn’t mean that I have to go live there. Our cultural memory follows us everywhere.”185

       Yinka Shonibare (1962- ) was born in London to Nigerian parents. He attended art school

in London, and settled there. In art school, he was doing a series of works about Soviet

perestroika, when a tutor remarked that “it’s not really you though, is it?” Thinking “Okay, you

want ethnic, I’ll give you ethnic,” Shonibare went to Brixton Market, where he bought ankara,

African-print cloth, and he has featured this cloth in nearly all his subsequent work. He has

explained that although this cloth is African, it was originally made in Indonesia, and was later

produced industrially in Manchester. Shonibare thus actually uses ankara “to challenge the idea
                                                 60


of authenticity in arts … so the fabrics are for me a metaphor for something which is

multicultural and essentially hybrid like my own identity.”186

        Chris Ofili (1968- ) was born in Manchester, to parents who were natives of Nigeria. At

the age of 24, as a student at London’s Royal College of Art, Ofili visited Zimbabwe on a

traveling scholarship. There he saw ancient cave paintings made with brightly colored dots. And

it was in Zimbabwe that he had the idea of adding an African material – dried elephant dung – to

his paintings, to lend an African element to his western surfaces. Both brightly colored dots and

dried elephant dung subsequently became key characteristics of Ofili’s paintings, which won him

the Turner Prize in 1998.187

Globalization in a Conceptual Era

                The art of the world has come out of the capitals of the world,
                because it is only in the capitals of the world, at certain favored
                periods, that the best minds among the older men and the ready
                minds of the younger enthusiasts have mingled and taken fire from
                one another.
                                                                  Ezra Pound, 1913188

        Overall, much of the twentieth century was a time of rapid globalization for advanced art.

Artists who originated in a larger number of countries than in earlier periods made important

contributions, and they did so in a larger number of places than their predecessors had earlier in

the modern era. Many important innovations also diffused much more rapidly, and widely, than

in earlier times.

        The dominance of conceptual forms of art during most of the twentieth century was

largely responsible not only for the increased speed with which innovations were made, but also

for the greater speed with which they diffused geographically. Collage was an early example of a

major innovation that was so highly conceptual, and so versatile in its uses, that artists could

adapt it to their own purposes simply after hearing descriptions of it, without even seeing actual
                                                  61


examples. The innovations of such movements as Dada and Pop put greater emphasis on ideas

relative to execution than virtually any earlier artistic movements, and this allowed many of their

new practices to spread almost spontaneously. Throughout much of the century, the great

importance of written manifestos was symptomatic of the centrality of conceptual innovation,

and these manifestos contributed to the rapid spread of the conceptual practices of the

movements that produced them.

       The dominance of artistic centers was reduced by the progress of globalization. During

the twentieth century it became possible, for the first time in the modern era, for artists to make

important contributions to the artistic mainstream without working in the art world’s central

place. For most of the first century of modern art, Paris was the single source of important

innovations in advanced art. Today, in an era of highly conceptual art, it appears unlikely that

any one place could again hold this position so completely for so long. Yet predictions like those

that some art scholars and critics made in the late 1960s, that place would no longer matter for

artistic innovation, appear to have been wrong. As in the past, it remains true today that artists

who have already created novel styles or methods can work nearly anywhere they please, but

also as in the past, it is unlikely that any contemporary artist can develop, or at the very least

begin to develop, significant innovations anywhere other than in one of the central locations of

the art world. The mainstream of western art still runs through central places. There may no

longer be one single central place: as discussed above, both New York and London have been

places where artists could make important innovations in recent times. And it is possible that the

number of these artistic centers may increase in future, particularly if advanced art remains

highly conceptual. Yet it is unlikely that this number will increase greatly. With the highly

conceptual emphasis of recent art, direct contact with the leading innovators of the preceding
                                                  62


generation has become less important for aspiring artists than in the past, but contact with

talented peers is still essential, and the places where this is possible will remain limited.
                                               63



Footnotes

I thank Robert Jensen for discussions.

1.     Wassily Kandinsky and Franz Marc, The “Blaue Reiter” Almanac (New York: Viking
       Press, 1974), p. 251.

2.     Clement Greenberg, Late Writings (Minneapolis: University of Minneapolis Press, 2003),
       p. 15.

3.     Barnett Newman, Selected Writings and Interviews (Berkeley: University of California
       Press, 1992), p. 80.

4.     Arthur Danto, After the End of Art (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1997), pp. 28-
       30.

5.     Umbro Apollonio, ed., Futurist Manifestos (New York: Viking Press, 1973), p. 22.

6.     Apollonio, Futurist Manifestos, pp. 24-31.

7.     George Heard Hamilton, Painting and Sculpture in Europe, 1880-1940 (Harmondsworth:
       Penguin, 1972), p. 280.

8.     Marjorie Perloff, The Futurist Moment (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1986), pp.
       82-85.

9.     John Golding, Paths to the Absolute (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2000), p. 53.

10.    Apollonio, Futurist Manifestos, p. 7.

11.    Perloff, The Futurist Moment, p. 90.

12.    K.S. Malevich, Essays on Art, 1915-1933, Vol. 1 (London: Rapp and Whiting, 1968), pp.
       19-41; Golding, Paths to the Absolute, p. 60.

13.    Perloff, The Futurist Moment, pp. 111, 114, 217.

14.    John Rewald, The History of Impressionism, revised edition (New York: Museum of
       Modern Art, 1961), p. 458.

15.    Guillaume Apollinaire, Apollinaire on Art (Boston: MFA Publications, 2001), p. 267.

16.    Vincent van Gogh, The Complete Letters of Vincent van Gogh, Vol. 2 (Greenwich,
       Conn.: New York Graphic Society, 1959), p. 295.
                                                 64



17.   Meyer Schapiro, Vincent van Gogh (New York: Harry N. Abrams, 1994), p. 13; also see
      Mark Roskill, Van Gogh, Gauguin and the Impressionist Circle (Greenwich, Conn.: New
      York Graphic Society, 1970), pp. 41-42.

18.   Van Gogh, The Complete Letters of Vincent van Gogh, Vol. 2, p. 515.

19.   Schapiro, Vincent van Gogh, p. 13.

20.   Roskill, Van Gogh, Gauguin, and the Impressionist Circle, p. 53

21.   Van Gogh, The Complete Letters of Vincent van Gogh, Vol. 3, p. 6.

22.   Roger Fry, Cézanne (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1989), p. 33.

23.   Fry, Cézanne, pp. 33-34.

24.   Michael Doran, ed., Conversations with Cézanne (Berkeley: University of California
      Press, 2001), p. 150; John Rewald, Paul Cézanne (New York: Simon and Schuster,
      1948), pp. 188-89; Paul Cézanne, Letters (New York: Da Capo Press, 1995), p. 320.

25.   Camille Pissarro, Letters to his Son Lucien (New York: Da Capo Press, 1995), p. 36.

26.   Apollinaire, Apollinaire on Art, p. 270.

27.   Françoise Gilot and Carlton Lake, Life with Picasso (New York: Doubleday, 1964), p.
      77.

28.   Marilyn McCully, ed., A Picasso Anthology (Princeton: Princeton University Press,
      1982), p. 64.

29.   Douglas Cooper, The Cubist Epoch (London: Phaidon Press, 1970), pp. 11-12.

30.   Perloff, The Futurist Moment, p. 46.

31.   John Golding, Cubism: A History and an Analysis, 1907-1914, revised edition (Boston:
      Boston Book and Art Shop, 1968), p. 60.

32.   Cooper, The Cubist Epoch, Chapters 2-3.

33.   Perloff, The Futurist Moment, p. 45.

34.   Hamilton, Painting and Sculpture in Europe, p. 287; David Galenson, “Toward
      Abstraction: Ranking European Painters of the Early Twentieth Century,” Historical
      Methods, Vol. 39, No. 3 (Summer 2006), p. 101.

35.   Hamilton, Painting and Sculpture in Europe, p. 288.
                                                65



36.   Apollonio, Futurist Manifestos, p. 45.

37.   Gino Severini, The Life of a Painter (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1995), p.
      110.

38.   Severini, Life of a Painter, p. 111.

39.   Apollonio, Futurist Manifestos, p. 51; Severini, Life of a Painter, p. 111.

40.   Apollinaire, Apollinaire on Art, pp. 320-21.

41.   Ester Coen, Umberto Boccioni (New York: Metropolitan Museum of Art, 1988), p. 204.

42.   David Galenson, “The Most Important Works of Art of the Twentieth Century,” NBER
      Working Paper 12058 (2006).

43.   Kandinsky and Marc, The “Blaue Reiter” Almanac, p. 252.

44.   Donald Gordon, Ernst Ludwig Kirchner (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1968), p.
      20.

45.   Gordon, Ernst Ludwig Kirchner, pp. 48-54.

46.   Peter Selz, German Expressionist Painting (Berkeley: University of California Press,
      1974), pp. 81-82.

47.   Robert Jensen, “Van Gogh als Erzieher: Early Chapters in the Globalization of
      Conceptual Art,” (unpublished paper, University of Kentucky, 2007).

48.   Hamilton, Painting and Sculpture in Europe, pp. 215-16.

49.   Kandinsky and Marc, The “Blaue Reiter” Almanac, p. 153.

50.   Wassily Kandinsky, Complete Writings on Art (New York: Da Capo Press, 1994), p. 796.

51.   Kandsinky and Marc, The “Blaue Reiter” Almanac, pp. 69, 187.

52.   Kandinsky and Marc, The “Blaue Reiter” Almanac, p. 251.

53.   Malevich, Essays on Art, Vol. 1, p. 68.

54.   John Milner, Kazimir Malevich and the Art of Geometry (New Haven: Yale University
      Press, 1996), pp. 1-2.

55.   Golding, Paths to the Absolute, p. 55.

56.   Milner, Kazimir Malevich and the Art of Geometry, pp. 2, 8-9, 21, 41.
                                             66




57.   John Golding, Visions of the Modern (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1994), p.
      173.

58.   Milner, Kazimir Malevich and the Art of Geometry, pp. 81, 108.

59.   Golding, Visions of the Modern, pp. 171-77.

60.   John Milner, Vladimir Tatlin and the Russian Avant-Garde (New Haven: Yale University
      Press, 1983), p. 80.

61.   Milner, Vladimir Tatlin, pp. 59-61.

62.   Perloff, The Futurist Moment, p. 67.

63.   Milner, Vladimir Tatlin, p. 76; John Richardson, A Life of Picasso, Vol. 2 (New York:
      Random House, 1996), p. 256.

64.   Hamilton, Painting and Sculpture in Europe, p. 316.

65.   Milner, Vladimir Tatlin, pp. 82-83; Perloff, The Futurist Moment, pp. 69-71; Hamilton,
      Painting and Sculpture in Europe, pp. 315-16.

66.   Hans Richter, Dada: Art and Anti-Art (London: Thames and Hudson, 1965), p. 9.

67.   Richter, Dada, p. 25.

68.   Richter, Dada, p. 48.

69.   Richter, Dada, p. 37.

70.   Richter, Dada, p. 48.

71.   Dietmar Elger, Dadaism (Cologne: Taschen, 2006), p. 11.

72.   Richter, Dada, pp. 11-12.

73.   Hugo Ball, Flight Out of Time: A Dada Diary (New York: Viking Press, 1974), p. 50.

74.   Ball, Flight Out of Time, pp. 51-52.

75.   Elger, Dadaism, p. 11.

76.   Ball, Flight Out of Time, pp. 56-57.

77.   Richter, Dada, p. 49.
                                             67



78.   Richter, Dada, p. 57.

79.   William Rubin, Dada, Surrealism, and Their Heritage (New York: Museum of Modern
      Art, 1968), p. 12.

80.   Maud Lavin, Cut With the Kitchen Knife: The Weimar Photomontages of Hannah Höch
      (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1993), p. 219.

81.   Richter, Dada, p. 33.

82.   Elger, Dadaism, p. 8.

83.   Richter, Dada, p. 102.

84.   Richter, Dada, Chap. 2.

85.   Rubin, Dada, Surrealism, and Their Heritage, p. 41; Richter, Dada, p. 51.

86.   Hamilton, Painting and Sculpture in Europe, p. 378.

87.   Richter, Dada, pp. 217-19.

88.   Hamilton, Painting and Sculpture in Europe, p. 388.

89.   Lucy Lippard, ed., Dadas on Art (Mineola, NY: Dover Publications, 2007), p. 35.

90.   Robert Motherwell, ed., The Dada Painters and Poets: An Anthology, second ed.
      (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1981), p. xxi and passim.

91.   Lippard, Dadas on Art, p. 96; Motherwell, Dada Painters and Poets, pp. 102, 127; also
      see Elger, Dadaism, p. 22.

92.   Richter, Dada, p. 164.

93.   Alfred Barr, ed., Fantastic Art, Dada, Surrealism (New York: Museum of Modern Art,
      1936).

94.   Richter, Dada, pp. 11-12.

95.   Richter, Dada, pp. 31-32; Elger, Dadaism, pp. 10-11.

96.   Richter, Dada, pp. 116-17; Dawn Ades, Photomontage (London: Thames and Hudson,
      1986), pp. 19-20.

97.   Lippard, Dadas on Art, p. 24.

98.   Elger, Dadaism, p. 10.
                                               68




99.    Charles Harrison and Paul Wood, eds., Art in Theory, 1900-2000 (Malden, MA:
       Blackwell, 2003), p. 457.

100.   Richter, Dada, p. 194.

101.   André Breton, Manifestoes of Surrealism (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press,
       1972), p. 26.

102.   Breton, Manifestoes of Surrealism, p. 27.

103.   Hamilton, Painting and Sculpture in Europe, p. 391.

104.   Rubin, Dada, Surrealism, and Their Heritage, p. 128.

105.   Pepe Karmel, ed., Jackson Pollock: Interviews, Articles, and Reviews (New York:
       Museum of Modern Art, 1999), p. 15.

106.   Clement Greenberg, The Collected Essays and Criticism, Vol. 2 (Chicago: University of
       Chicago Press, 1986), p. 87.

107.   Greenberg, Collected Essays and Criticism, Vol. 2, p. 215.

108.   Barnett Newman, Selected Writings and Interviews (Berkeley: University of California
       Press, 1992), p. 150.

109.   James Breslin, Mark Rothko (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1993), p. 232.

110.   David Sylvester, Interviews With American Artists (New Haven: Yale University Press,
       2001), p. 30.

111.   Breslin, Mark Rothko, pp. 47-54, 539.

112.   David Sylvester, Interviews with American Artists (New Haven: Yale University Press,
       2001), p. 30; Robert Motherwell, The Writings of Robert Motherwell (Berkeley:
       University of California Press, 2007), p. 339.

113.   Motherwell, Writings of Robert Motherwell, p. 334.

114.   Mark Rothko, Writings on Art (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2006), p. 149.

115.   Robert Motherwell, The Collected Writings of Robert Motherwell (New York: Oxford
       University Press, 1992), pp. 158-59.

116.   Motherwell, Collected Writings of Robert Motherwell, p. 165; Newman, Selected
       Writings and Interviews, p. 152; Harold Rosenberg, Arshile Gorky (New York: Sheep
                                              69



       Meadow Press, 1962), p. 113; Dore Ashton, The New York School (Berkeley: University
       of California Press, 1992), p. 124.

117.   Motherwell, Collected Writings of Robert Motherwell, pp. 161-66.

118.   Lawrence Alloway, William Baziotes (New York: Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum,
       1965), p. 41.

119.   Breslin, Mark Rothko, pp. 257-58.

120.   Motherwell, Writings of Robert Motherwell, p. 8.

121.   William Seitz, Abstract Expressionist Painting in America (Cambridge: Harvard
       University Press, 1983), pp. 165-66.

122.   David W. Galenson, “The New York School versus the School of Paris: Who Really
       Made the Most Important Art After World War II?,” Historical Methods, Vol. 35, No. 4
       (Fall 2002), pp. 141-53.

123.   E.g. see Irving Sandler, The New York School: The Painters and Sculptors of the Fifties
       (New York: Harper and Row, 1978), p. ix; David W. Galenson, “Was Jackson Pollock
       the Greatest Modern American Painter? A Quantitative Investigation,” Historical
       Methods, Vol. 35, No. 3 (Summer 2002), pp. 117-28.

124.   Motherwell, Collected Writings of Robert Motherwell, pp. 294-95; Motherwell, The
       Writings of Robert Motherwell, p. 79.

125.   Steven Madoff, ed., Pop Art: A Critical History (Berkeley: University of California
       Press, 1997), p. 106.

126.   Madoff, Pop Art, pp. 32, 41.

127.   Kenneth Goldstein, ed., I’ll Be Your Mirror: The Selected Andy Warhol Interviews (New
       York: Carroll and Graf, 2004), p. 9; Madoff, Pop Art, p. 198.

128.   Madoff, Pop Art, pp. 105-106.

129.   John Russell and Suzi Gablik, eds., Pop Art Redefined (New York: Frederick A. Praeger,
       1969), p. 115.

130.   Madoff, Pop Art, p. 109.

131.   David Thistlewood, ed., Sigmar Polke (Liverpool: Liverpool University Press, 1996), p.
       34.
                                                70



132.    Gerhard Richter, The Daily Practice of Painting (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1995), pp. 22-
        23.

133.    Richter, The Daily Practice of Painting, pp. 16, 24.

134.    Richter, The Daily Practice of Painting, p. 16.

135.    E.g. Richter, The Daily Practice of Painting, p. 138.

136.    E.g. see Gill Perry and Paul Wood, eds., Themes in Contemporary Art (New Haven: Yale
        University Press, 2004), pp. 99-131.

137.    Arthur Danto, The Abuse of Beauty (Chicago: Open Court, 2003), p. 6.

138 .   Lawrence Alloway, American Pop Art (New York: Macmillan, 1974), p. 47; Lucy
        Lippard, ed., Pop Art (New York: Frederick A. Praeger, 1966), pp. 32, 82-87.

139.    Sylvester, About Modern Art, p. 384.

140.    Sol LeWitt, Critical Texts (Rome: Editrice Inonia, 1994), p. 78.

141.    LeWitt, Critical Texts, p. 84.

142.    Joseph Kosuth, Art After Philosophy and After (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1991), p. 139.

143.    Lucy Lippard, Six Years: The dematerialization of the art object from 1966 to 1972
        (Berkeley: Unviersity of California Press, 1997), p. xiv. Also see Peter Wollen, Paris
        Manhattan (London: Verso, 2004), p. 29.

144.    Wollen, Paris Manhattan, pp. 15-16.

145.    LeWitt, Critical Texts, pp. 78, 88.

146.    Kosuth, Art After Philosophy and After, pp. 3, 22.

147.    Lippard, Six Years, pp. 42-43.

148.    Lippard, Six Years, p. 64.

149.    Alexander Alberro and Patricia Norvell, eds., Recording Conceptual Art (Berkeley:
        University of California Press, 2001), pp. 38-39.

150.    Kynaston McShine, ed., Information (New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1970), p. 138.

151.    McShine, Information, p. 140.

152.    Alberro and Norvell, Recording Conceptual Art, p. 53.
                                               71




153.   Lippard, Six Years, p. 263.

154.   Damien Hirst and Gordon Burn, On the Way to Work (New York: Universe Publishing,
       2002), p. 165.

155.   Brooke Adams, et al., Sensation: Young British Artists from the Saatchi Collection
       (London: Thames and Hudson, 1997), pp. 16-17.

156.   Richard Cork, Breaking Down the Barriers: Art in the 1990s (New Haven: Yale
       University Press, 2003), pp. 121-28.

157.   Adams, Sensation, pp. 8-9.

158.   Matthew Collings, It Hurts: New York Art from Warhol to Now (London: 21 Publishing,
       1998), p. 33.

159.   Henry Meyric Hughes and Gijs van Tuyl, eds., Blast to Freeze: British Art in the 20th
       Century (Wolfsburg, Germany: Kunstmuseum Wolfsburg, 2002), p. 293.

160.   Rosie Millard, The Tastemakers: U.K. Art Now (London: Scribner, 2002), pp. 18-21.

161.   Louisa Buck, Moving Targets 2: A User’s Guide to British Art Now (London: Tate
       Publishing, 2000), p. 142.

162.   Arthur Danto, The Madonna of the Future (Berkeley: University of California Press,
       2001), p. 393.

163.   Hirst and Burn, On the Way to Work, p. 100.

164.   Julian Stallabrass, High Art Lite: The Rise and Fall of Young British Art, new edition
       (London: Verso, 2006), p. 9.

165.   Ann Temkin, ed., Contemporary Voices (New York: Museum of Modern Art, 2005), p.
       58.

166.   Mandy Merck and Chris Townsend, eds., The Art of Tracey Emin (London: Thames and
       Hudson, 2002), p. 8.

167.   Merck and Townsend, The Art of Tracey Emin, p. 76; Matthew Collings, Sarah Lucas
       (London: Tate Publishing, 2002), p. 44-46; Buck, Moving Targets 2, p. 41; Charlotte
       Mullins, Rachel Whiteread (London: Tate Publishing, 2004), p. 72-73.

168.   Collings, It Hurts, p. 33.

169.   Millard, The Tastemakers, p. 65.
                                               72



170.    Hirst and Burn, On the Way to Work, pp. 170, 223.

171.    Millard, The Tastemakers, p. 22.

172.    Stallabrass, High Art Lite, p. 18.

173.    David Galenson, “You Cannot be Serious: The Conceptual Innovator as Trickster,”
        NBER Working Paper 12599 (2006).

174.    Jerry Saltz, Seeing Out Loud (Great Barrington, Mass.: The Figures, 2003), p. 200.

175.    David Galenson, “Do the Young British Artists Rule?,” World Economics, Vol. 7, No. 1
        (January-March 2006), pp. 175-84.

176.    Phoebe Hoban, Basquiat (New York: Viking, 1998), p. 13.

177.    Karen Smith, Nine Lives: The Birth of Avant-Garde Art in New China (Zurich: Scalo
        Verlag, 2005), pp. 37-77.

178.    Smith, Nine Lives, pp. 63, 65.

179 .   So for example Wang’s work is not discussed even in as comprehensive a survey of
        western art history as H.H. Arnason, History of Modern Art, fifth ed., (Upper Saddle
        River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2004).

180 .   Robert Goldwater, Primitivism in Modern Painting (New York: Harper and Brothers,
        1938).

181.    Olga Viso, Ana Mendieta (Washington D.C.: Hirshhorn Museum, 2004), pp. 36, 63.

182.    Virginia Button, The Turner Prize: Twenty Years (London: Tate Publishing, 2003), pp.
        80-82.

183.    Sam Hunter, John Jacobus, and Daniel Wheeler, Modern Art, third ed. (New York:
        Vendome Press, 2004), pp. 432-33.

184.    Richard Marshall, ed., Jean-Michel Basquiat (New York: Whitney Museum, 1992), p.
        30; Kobena Mercer, ed., Exiles, Diasporas and Strangers (London: Iniva, 2008), pp. 134-
        35.

185.    Rudy Chiappini, ed., Jean-Michel Basquiat (Milan: Skira, 2005), p. 119.

186.    Yinka Shonibare, Double Dutch (Rotterdam: NAi Publishers, 2004), p. 46.

187.    Button, The Turner Prize, pp. 144-46; Buck, Moving Targets 2, pp. 83-85.
                                             73



188.   Harriet Zinnes, ed., Ezra Pound and the Visual Arts (New York: New Directions Books,
       1980), p. 4.
fTable 1: Dada Magazines

Title                      Editors                    Place                  Dates

Cabaret Voltaire           H. Ball                    Zurich                 1916
Dada                       T. Tzara                   Zurich                 1917-18
Anthologie Dada            T. Tzara                   Zurich                 1919
Bulletin Dada              F. Picabia                 Paris                  1920
Dadaphone                  T. Tzara                   Paris                  1920
Dada Intirol               T. Tzara                   Tarrenz, Austria       1921
                           O. Flake, W. Serner, T.
Der Zeltweg                                           Zurich                 1919
                           Tzara
The Blindman               M. Duchamp, Man Ray        New York               1917
Rongwrong                  M. Duchamp, Man Ray        New York               1919
New York Dada              M. Duchamp, Man Ray        New York               1921
                           R. Huelsenbeck, F.
Club Dada                                             Berlin                 1918
                           Jung, R. Hausmann
                           R. Hausmann,, J.
Der Dada                                              Berlin                 1919-20
                           Heartfield, G. Grosz
Jedermann Sein Eigner
                           W. Herzfelde               Berlin                 1919
Fussball
                           J. Hoexter, C. Einstein,
Der Blutige Ernst                                     Berlin                 1919-20
                           G. Grosz
Die Pleite                 C. Einstein                Berlin                 1919-20
Die Freie Strasse          J. Heartfield, J. Booder   Berlin                 1916-18
Der Ventilator             J. Baargeld, M. Ernst      Cologne                1919
Bulletin D                 J. Baargeld, M. Ernst      Cologne                1919
Die Schammade              J. Baargeld, M. Ernst      Cologne                1920
                           K. Schwitters, El
Merz                                                  Hanover                1923-32
                           Lissitzky
                                                      Barcelona, New York,
391                        F. Picabia                                        1917-20
                                                      Zurich, Paris
Pilhao-Thibaou             F. Picabia                 Paris                  1921-24
Cannibale                  F. Picabia                 Paris                  1920
La Pomme de Pins        F. Picabia               St. Raphael               1922
                        L. Aragon, A. Breton, P.
Littérature                                      Paris                     1919-24
                        Soupault
Sources: Dawn Ades, Dada and Surrealism Reviewed (London: Arts Council of Great Britain, 1978);
Hans Richter, Dada (London: Thames and Hudson, 1965).
Table 2: Number of Different Countries of Birth of Artists Mentioned in Art Since 1960, by Birth Cohort

                          Decade of Artist’s Birth   Number of Countries

                          1890-99                               6
                          1900-09                               5
                          1910-19                               8
                          1920-29                               18
                          1930-39                               27
                          1940-49                               22
                          1950-59                               26
                          1960-69                               23


Sources: Michael Archer, Art Since 1960, second ed. (London: Thames and Hudson, 2002).
