                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     UNDERSTANDING INTERNATIONAL PRICE DIFFERENCES USING BARCODE
                               DATA

                                           Christian Broda
                                          David E. Weinstein

                                         Working Paper 14017
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w14017


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2008




The authors wish to thank the NSF (grant #0820536) and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York for
providing financial support for this project. We would like to thank the Director of Research at the
FRBNY, Joseph Tracy, for his early support of this project. We would also like to thank ACNielsen’s
vice-president of Pricing Research Frank Piotrowski, Ivan Rocabado, and Maura Elhbretch for their
careful explanation of the data. Jean Imbs, Sam Kortum, Virgiliu Midrigan, Haroon Mumtaz, Morten
Ravn, Helene Rey, and Serena Ng provided excellent comments on an earlier draft. Jesse Handbury
provided us with outstanding research assistance. In addition, we would like to thank the Global Financial
Markets Initiative at the University of Chicago GSB and the Center for Japanese Economy and Business
at the Columbia Business School for research support. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Christian Broda and David E. Weinstein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Understanding International Price Differences Using Barcode Data
Christian Broda and David E. Weinstein
NBER Working Paper No. 14017
May 2008
JEL No. F1,F15,F31

                                               ABSTRACT

The empirical literature in international finance has produced three key results about international
price deviations: borders give rise to flagrant violations of the law of one price, distance matters enormously
for understanding these deviations, and most papers find that convergence rates back to purchasing
power parity are inconsistent with the evidence of micro studies on nominal price stickiness. The data
underlying these results are mostly comprised of price indexes and price surveys of goods that may
not be identical internationally. In this paper, we revisit these three stylized facts using massive amounts
of US and Canadian data that share a common barcode classification. We find that none of these three
main stylized facts survive. We use our barcode level data to replicate prior work and explain what
assumptions caused researchers to find different results from those we find in this paper. Overall, our
work is supportive of simple pricing models where the degree of market segmentation across the border
is similar to that within borders.


Christian Broda
University of Chicago
Graduate School of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
cbroda@chicagogsb.edu

David E. Weinstein
Columbia University, Department of Economics
420 W. 118th Street
MC 3308
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
dew35@columbia.edu
                                                 I. Introduction


         Data limitations have prevented researchers from comparing the prices of identical goods
systematically within and across borders. This restriction has led researchers to infer the extent
of market segmentation from the behavior of price indexes, aggregate prices of goods that may
not be identical internationally, and a non-random selection of particular goods (e.g. Big Macs).
Most papers in this literature have emphasized three key results about international price
deviations: borders give rise to flagrant violations of the law of one price (LOP), distance matters
enormously for understanding these deviations, and convergence rates back to purchasing power
parity (PPP) are inconsistent with the evidence of micro studies on nominal price stickiness (c.f.,
Rogoff (1996)). In this paper we revisit these three stylized facts using massive amounts of US
and Canadian barcode data. Our findings suggest that none of these conventional facts survive
scrutiny of micro data. The law of one price in its absolute form holds as well across the border
as it does within countries, distance coefficients are five to ten times larger in aggregate data than
in micro data, and rates of price convergence within and across borders are fast and completely
in line with micro studies. In short, the data is supportive of simple pricing models where the
degree of market segmentation across the border is similar to that within borders.
         While the use of micro data in international pricing has become more widespread (see
Atkeson and Burstein (2008), Gopinath and Rigobon (2007) and Goldberg and Verboven (2001)
for important applications), comparing identical goods internationally has remained a challenge.
We take advantage of the fact that the US and Canada share a common barcode system to
compare prices of a vast number of products. Using data within and across 10 cities in the US
and 6 regions in Canada we revisit the main facts in international pricing. Our data includes
around 40 percent of all expenditures on goods in consumption, and is also vastly richer at the
micro level than that used in national statistics.1 Moreover, unlike all prior work, we have both
price and quantity data, which lets us form theory based, as opposed to ad hoc, indexes of PPP.
         One important feature of the data is that it lets us compare the extent of international
market segmentation with segmentation within countries. We confirm the early finding by Isard
(1977) that the LOP is flagrantly violated in international data. However, we can show that that
the LOP is also flagrantly violated across cities in the same country. Thus, the observation that
1
 For example, our data contains 700,000 price quotes for the US in a typical year. By contrast the sample is only 5
percent as large.


                                                                                                                      2
an identical can of soda sells at different prices in different countries is not very informative
about border barriers because prices vary substantially across space even within borders.
       Obviously, the more interesting question is how much larger are international violations
than domestic ones. Here we find the answer to be – not much. In their seminal work, Engel and
Rogers (1996) compare border barriers with regional ones by expressing the “width” of the
border in terms of distance equivalents. Using barcode data and the same methodology as they
do, we find the distance-equivalent border effect to be 3 miles – roughly what one might expect
if trucks crossing to border had to stop briefly to fill out some paperwork. In other specifications
the “width” of the border rises to a few hundred miles, but never anything close to the tens of
thousands of miles found in the original paper and in subsequent work (e.g., Parsley and Wei
(2001)).
       Our second contribution is to explain why micro data reveals small border effects but
aggregate data reveals much larger impacts. We begin by demonstrating that if we form price
indexes using our barcode data and then replicate Engel and Rogers (1996), our results are quite
similar to theirs. Clearly, something about aggregating micro data causes the border effect to
appear larger. We argue that a vast amount of information about market segmentation across
space is lost when one uses price indexes. In particular, because aggregate indexes collapse the
large within-country idiosyncratic variation of relative goods prices while preserving the
variation due to exchange rate movements, they make the cross-country variation appear much
larger than the within country variation. Thus, aggregation of individual goods’ prices
mechanically serves to amplify the measured impact of the borders on prices. In our data, this
unintended consequence of aggregating individual prices into disaggregate product categories is
entirely responsible for the large size of the border when using price index data.
       We also find a tiny border effect when we look at deviations in the LOP. Here we
compare international LOP deviations with those within the US after controlling for distance.
Our finding is particularly surprising given that the impact of distance on the price deviations of
identical goods is only about one tenth as high as that obtained using price index data. This
underscores the role that compositional effects have in explaining the relationship between price
dispersion and distance previously found in the literature. We document that the set of common
goods across cities varies systematically across space and borders and therefore unless all
individual prices within the index move together, price indexes will appear to deviate across



                                                                                                      3
space and borders simply due to the fact that the underlying weights and goods are different. We
next document that the underlying prices within indexes vary enormously across time even for
narrowly defined product categories, e.g. “fresh eggs.” This implies that the majority of the
increased dispersion in aggregate prices that we observe as the distance between cities rises is
not the result of actual deviations from the LOP but rather from compositional effects in the set
of goods used to compute city-specific price indexes.
        Finally, we turn our attention to understanding what Rogoff (1996) has termed “The PPP
Puzzle”: the fact that international price adjustment occurs at much slower rates than what one
would expect from micro data. We first use our barcode data to confirm that convergence rates to
long-run levels are fast using disaggregate data but slow to non-existent using aggregate data
formed from our barcode data. Once again, the question arises of why the aggregate results differ
so much from those using micro data. We show that strong non-linearities in the response to
shocks are behind Rogoff’s puzzle. We confirm on our disaggregate barcode data the finding that
convergence rates are highly non-linear (see, for example, Obstfeld and Taylor (1997) and
Parsley and Wei (1996)). Large relative price deviations disappear very rapidly but small ones
are quite persistent. This implies that when calculating the average convergence speed for
individual goods OLS puts a large weight on observations with big price deviations which
converge rapidly. By contrast, when the data is aggregated, large negative and positive price
deviations cancel each other and a larger weight is given to observations where price deviations
are small. We show that the pervasiveness of the non-linear responses can explain all the
differences in the rates of convergence found at the aggregate versus disaggregate level. In
particular, we also show that in our data heterogeneity of the convergence coefficient across
goods does not generate a quantitatively important aggregation bias.2
        The structure of the paper is as follows. In Section II we provide a review of the theory
and the empirical literature on international pricing. In Section III we describe the data and
preview some of the main results and in Section IV we examine the width of the border at the
aggregate and micro level and explain the sources of the different results. In Section V we
examine the issue of convergence rates to PPP within and across the border both at the aggregate


2
  A number of papers have examined whether heterogeneity of the convergence coefficient across goods can explain
this aggregation bias and have found mixed success . Most prominently Imbs et al (2005) suggest that heterogeneity
in the coefficients across goods is important to explain the PPP puzzle, while Chen and Engel (2005), Parsley and
Wei (2007), Reidel and Szilagyi (2005), and Choi, Mark and Sul (2007) find otherwise.


                                                                                                                 4
and micro level. In Section VI we provide an explanation for the difference in convergence rates
between different levels of aggregation.




                                      II. Theory and Literature Review


         The empirical literature on international pricing is vast, and it is useful to have an
organizing framework for understanding the prior work. We find it useful to write down the
simple prediction of the theory of the LOP in its “exact” form and then contrast these equations
with their “approximate” forms, i.e. the equations that are estimated in the literature. The
difference between both forms will be instructive in understanding where the problems in the
existing tests of this theory lie. Unfortunately, the empirical literature has not been consistent in
its usage of terms like LOP and PPP, especially when narrow aggregates of products are
compared. In order to avoid any confusion, we will use the terms LOP and PPP in the same way
as in Rogoff (1996) – i.e. if the prices of a good in two different locations are compared, we will
refer to that as a test of LOP, and if two price aggregates are compared, we will refer to that as a
test of PPP.3
          “Absolute LOP” states that the price of an identical good should be the same across
locations when denominated in a common currency. Formally, this suggests that Puct (i.e. the
price of good u in city or region c in time t) can be written as
(1)                                                 Puct = Ecc 't Puc 't

where Puc´t is the price of the good in a different region or country and Ecc´t is the exchange rate
which equals unity if the two cities or regions are in the same country.
         Tests of equation (1) have been extremely limited. Previous studies have found that
commodities that are traded on organized exchanges, e.g. gold, tend not to have large deviations
in the LOP. For the handful of goods that have also been studied, authors have typically found
large deviations from the LOP. Examples include the work on Big Macs by Cumby (1996),



3
  One of the drawbacks of this approach is that we will refer to some papers as tests of PPP even though the authors
refer to their work as tests of LOP. This is regrettable, but because many of the results in this paper turn crucially on
what exactly is being tested, we feel it necessary to be precise about our terminology.



                                                                                                                        5
IKEA sales by Haskel and Wolf (2001), and The Economist magazine by Ghosh and Wolf
(1994).
          A second class of studies has sought to test what might be called “Approximate Absolute
LOP:”
(2)                                             Puct = Ecc 't Pu ' c 't
                                                                          ,
where goods u and u’ belong to a similar product category but are not identical goods. Since
different goods are being compared, tests based on equation (2) (as opposed to equation (1))
cannot distinguish violations in the LOP from violations of the assumption that good u and good
u´ enter into consumer utility identically. For example, interesting recent work based on the
Eurostat database (c.f., Crucini, Telmer, and Zachariadis (2005) and Crucini and Shintani
(2006)) test this form of the LOP. However, it is difficult to know how much of an observed
violation in the LOP is due to the fact that borders prevent arbitrage from eliminating price
differentials for goods like “lady’s boots” and how much is due to the sample of lady’s boots
varying across countries.4
          Concern over this unobserved heterogeneity has motivated researchers to examine
“Relative LOP,” which we define as follows:
(3)                                         Δpuct = Δecc 't + Δpuc 't
                                                             ,
where lower case letters refer to natural logarithms of the upper case letters, and the Δ’s refer to
time differences. Tests of equation (3) relax the assumption that prices must converge to the
same level (perhaps due to a constant trade barrier), and only test whether prices tend to remain a
constant level apart.
          The micro studies in the literature have typically worked with an equation that might be
termed “Approximate Relative LOP:”
(4)                                 Δpuct = Δecc 't + Δpu ' c 't .
The major advantage of using equation (4) relative to equation (3) is that it corrects for any
unobserved heterogeneity that causes good u and good u´ to enter into consumer utility
differently. This is what motivated Parsley and Wei (1996) to use this form of the LOP in their
pioneering study of urban prices in the US. Differencing the data does not come without a cost.


4
 While efforts to compare goods of comparable quality are usually highlighted in survey manuals, the comparison
of identical goods is generally impossible.



                                                                                                                  6
One can easily imagine that the heterogeneity between two different goods contains a constant
component and a time varying component. To the extent that the time varying component is
small, estimating equation (4) will be similar to estimating equation (3), but if different goods
experience very different shocks across time, it is easy to see how equation (3) might hold
closely but equation (4) might be violated severely.
        Much of our theory only requires average prices to equilibrate; hence we turn our
attention to PPP. We can derive Absolute PPP by weighting equation (1), summing and then
taking logs to produce:
                                 ⎛            ⎞                  ⎛               ⎞
(5)                           ln ⎜ ∑ wuc Puct ⎟ = ln Ecc 't + ln ⎜ ∑ wuc Puc ' t ⎟
                                 ⎝ u∈Ic       ⎠                  ⎝ u∈Ic          ⎠.
Alternatively, one can first take logs of equation (1) and then sum to produce
(6)                              ∑w
                                 u∈I c
                                         uc   ln ( Puct ) = ln Ecc 't + ∑ wuc ln ( Puc 't )
                                                                       u∈I c
                                                                       .
There are two important features of equation (5) and (6). First, there is no intellectual content to
equations (5) and (6) that is not captured in equation (1). If equations (5) and (6) hold but
equation (1) does not, this simply is a statement that there is a weighting scheme that can cause
the deviations in equation (1) to cancel. Second, assuming the Absolute LOP holds, Absolute
PPP will hold only if one uses the same weights in both locations.5
        Given the data limitations to find price levels across countries, the literature has in
general tended to focus more on Relative PPP. The theoretical version of Relative PPP can be
written down by first differencing equation (5):
                             ⎛            ⎞                       ⎛              ⎞
(7)                     Δ ln ⎜ ∑ wuc Puct ⎟ = Δ ln Ecc ' t + Δ ln ⎜ ∑ wuc Puc 't ⎟
                             ⎝ u∈Ic       ⎠                       ⎝ u∈Ic         ⎠
However, all previous work on PPP has focused on what might be termed “Approximate
Relative PPP:”
                                  ⎛            ⎞                       ⎛                ⎞
(8)                          Δ ln ⎜ ∑ wuc Puct ⎟ = Δ ln Ecc ' t + Δ ln ⎜ ∑ wuc ' Puc 't ⎟
                                  ⎝ u∈Ic       ⎠                       ⎝ u∈Ic '         ⎠.




5
 It is hard to classify studies like Goldberg and Verboven (2001, 2005) and Lutz (2004) that have examined variants
of equation (2) and (6) in which the prices are aggregated together using hedonically adjusted price indexes.



                                                                                                                 7
Prominent studies include Isard (1977) Giovannini (1988), and Knetter (1989, 1993) on average
import prices, and Engel (1993), Froot, Kim, and Rogoff (1995), and Rogers and Jenkins (1995)
on price indexes.
           There are three important differences between equation (8) and equation (7). First,
equation (7) may hold but equation (8) will not if the price changes of the set of goods Ic and Ic´
are different because of idiosyncratic shocks. Second, equation (7) may hold but equation (8)
may not if the log price changes of goods u and u´ do not equal the simple price changes.6 Third,
equation (8) may not hold because the weights on the left hand side do not equal those on the
right. This last critique is particularly important because statistical agencies make no effort to
insure that international or even urban price indexes use the same weights and/or goods.
           Finally, Engel and Rogers (1996) seminal work deserves special mention. Working
around the limitations of existing price data they have instrumented a useful test based on the
“variance ratio” of price changes. In the simplest form, one can imagine taking the variance of
equation (3) and seeing if the variance is larger when c and c´ are in different countries relative
to when they are in the same country. However, instead of taking the variance of equation (3),
Engel and Rogers are forced to work with the variance of equation (8). In section IV we explore
the unintended consequences of their tests of (3) based on the relative volatility of the terms in
equation (8).
           The foregoing analysis provides a simple roadmap for understanding the way this paper
is structured. First we will examine the LOP and PPP in their absolute and relative “exact” forms
using thousands of barcode products both within and across borders. Next, every time we find a
difference between our results and those of other papers that have examined these relationships
in their “approximate” forms we will investigate whether we can replicate the results and
pinpoint to the assumption that gives rise to the failure or anomaly. This enables us to not only
do precise testing but also understand the previous literature.




6
    For example, some CPI indexes are based on Laspeyres and others incorporate on geometric averages.



                                                                                                         8
                                      III. Data Description
III. A. Overview
       A major difference between this paper and prior work is that we bring barcode data to
bear on the question of international price differences. We use three datasets that are extracts of
ACNielsen’s Homescan database. The Homescan database is collected by ACNielsen in the
United States and ACNielsen Canada in Canada. In each country Universal Product Code (UPC)
scanners are given to a demographically representative sample of households. In the US,
approximately 60,000 households in 23 cities receive these scanners and approximately 15,000
households in 6 regions receive them in Canada. Households then scan in every purchase they
make. If the purchase is made from a store with ScanTrak technology, the prices of each good
are downloaded directly from the store’s database. If the good is purchased elsewhere, e.g. on the
internet, the household directly enters the price. As such, the database provides us with a vast
array of goods with barcodes. The majority of these goods are in the grocery, drug, and mass
merchandise sectors.
       Because the full dataset is extremely expensive, we purchased three extracts that we will
make use of in this study. The first one is the database that we will refer to as the “US National
Database” and was used in Broda and Weinstein (2007). In this extract, we had ACNielsen
collapse the city and household dimension of the database, and thus we have price and quantity
data on every UPC purchased by the US sample of households for every quarter between
2001:Q1 and 2003:Q4 at the national level. This database contains information on approximately
700,000 goods each year.
       The second database, we refer to as the “US Cross-Sectional Database,” is new. In this
database, we have household level data on every purchase in the fourth quarter of 2003 by a
subsample of 3,000 households evenly divided across 10 US cities. In each city, the households
were randomly selected from the full sample so that their demographic characteristics match
those of the city as a whole.
       Finally, the third database, which we shall call the “Canadian Regional Database”, is also
new. ACNielsen Canada provided us with average price and quantity data by region in Canada
for every quarter between 2001:Q1 and 2004:Q4. Table 1 describes the basic statistics of each of
these three different databases. As one can see from the table, our data provides a much richer
breakdown of prices for this sample of goods than is available in national statistics.



                                                                                                      9
        These databases have three key features that lend themselves to the study of pricing in
different markets. The first is that we identify different goods using barcodes. Since companies
only use one barcode per good, when we compare goods internationally, we can be confident
that we are comparing precisely the same goods (see Table A1 in the appendix for examples of
the level of detail in our database). Second, we can also compare variation of prices across cities
within and across borders. This lets us precisely examine the border effect in levels; something
no one has done before. Third, because we have both price and quantity data, we know exactly
how to weight the goods when building price indexes, which allows us to examine the role that
compositional effects play in studies that use national statistic data.


III.B. Data Preview
        Before plunging into the econometrics, it is useful to examine the raw data to obtain some
intuition for how prices vary across regions and time. The first point that is important to
contemplate is the vastness of barcode information that is included in our database. In the US
National and Canadian Regional Database there are 700,000 and 490,000 UPCs available,
respectively. Even within narrow product categories, consumers have access to an enormous
number of different goods. We made use of the US National Database to examine how many
UPCs were sold in each of the 123 “Product Groups” in the US. In the ACNielsen classification
system, a product group is a highly disaggregated subset of the total database. For example, fresh
eggs, ice, and milk are all different product groups. We plot a histogram of the count of the
number of UPCs per product group in Figure 1. The first thing that is immediately apparent from
the figure is the vast number of UPCs per product group. With the exception of a few product
groups – yeast, meal starters, road salt, canning supplies, and contraceptives – all products in the
US are comprised of over 200 different UPCs. The typical product group has 2700 different
UPCs. Even relatively homogeneous goods like fresh eggs are comprised of 2275 different
varieties.
        The simple fact that there are many UPCs per product group would be an intellectual
curiosity if it weren’t for the fact that the degree of sample overlap varies systematically with
variables of interest. In Figure 2, we plot the share of UPCs that are common between cities in
the US and regions in Canada and the distance between those two locations. For expositional
purposes, the bilateral city data is shown in three different plots: comparisons within city pairs in



                                                                                                    10
the US, within region pairs in Canada and between cities in the US and regions in Canada. The
pattern observed in each of these plots is unmistakable: as distance between cities rise, the share
of common identical goods between cities falls. Within the US, the share of common goods
across cities is over 28 percent between New York and Philadelphia – the closest city pair in our
data – and is less than 18 percent for goods between New York and Los Angeles – the two cities
further apart. Within Canada, Ontario and Quebec share almost 60 percent of goods while British
Columbia and Maritimes share less than 45 percent of the goods. 7 In Table A3 in the appendix
we show regressions of the share of common goods in terms of the simple count of the number
of goods and in value terms against bilateral distance between cities.
        Despite the large sample of goods that are included in each city, only around 25 percent
of the UPCs are common between any two cities in the US. While this probably understates the
true degree of overlap in the US because some UPCs might not have been purchased by the
sample households included in our data but did exist in the city, it underscores the importance of
compositional effects when comparing prices of similar “product categories” across cities within
a country. Our sample of over 50,000 UPCs per city is around 40 times larger than those used by
the Bureau of Labor Statistics when computing regional price indexes.8 This suggests that the
amount of overlap in city or regional price indexes in national statistics data is quite small.
        Figure 2C shows the importance of compositional effects across the border. A large
number of the products sold in the US are not sold in Canada in identical form. In the typical
bilateral city/region comparison between the US and Canada only 7.5 percent of the goods are
common, this is less than one third the common set of goods available between city pairs of
equal distance within the US (Figure 2A and 2C are directly comparable). This means that the
composition of a random sample of goods sold in the US is likely to differ substantially with the
composition of a sample of goods sold in Canada. By the same token, more proximate locations
have more similar consumption bundles than distant locations.
        The fact that price indexes across regions or countries are largely composed of different
goods would not be a problem for understanding the LOP or PPP if goods within categories are
fairly homogenous. In this case, one could have a reasonable degree of confidence that similar

7
  The levels of the share of common goods within cities are not directly comparable between Figures 2A and 2B.
This is because our data is based on different household sizes per city/region in the US and Canada, and because
regions in Canada include several large cities.
8
  The BLS collects around 34,000 price quotes (for the same categories included in our database) over 23 different
cities. This implies that they collect around 1,260 price quotes per city.


                                                                                                                 11
goods would have similar prices or at least these prices would move together. In Figure 3, we
plot the kernel density of quarterly UPC relative price changes and quarterly UPC relative price
changes after controlling for product group-time fixed effects.9 Formally, let pugc ,t be the log

price of UPC u that belongs to product group g in city c and period t. We denote the relative log
price of a UPC with respect to a region or city c’ as qugcc’,t = pugc,t – pugcc’,t. Both prices are
expressed in US dollars when city c and c’ are in different countries.10 For simplicity, we drop
the c’ subscript when we use Ontario, Canada’s largest region, as the reference region.
         The red line in Figure 3 shows the distribution of Δqugc,t for all UPCs in all time periods
in Canada. The blue line shows the kernel distribution of Δqugc ,t where qugc ,t = qugc ,t − qgc ,t , where

qgc,t is the average relative price differential between UPCs in group g, city c, in time t. The blue
distribution shows the log relative price change of a particular UPC in a particular city and time
once it has been purged of common group-city-time effects. As one can see from the plot, there
is enormous dispersion of prices within product groups as both distributions lie almost on top of
each other. In other words, common product-group and time factors play a tiny role in explaining
the observed time-series volatility of UPC prices. The standard deviation of the UPC specific
component of prices is close to 15 percent, which is almost identical to the standard deviation of
the raw price changes. If we focus our attention on a relatively homogeneous good like fresh
eggs, the standard deviation falls to 10 percent, but it is pretty clear that one cannot even treat a
relatively homogeneous good like fresh eggs as a single item.11
         The preceding analysis suggests that even though goods may have identical prices, goods
categories might exhibit very different average prices and price changes. Fortunately, the use of
UPC data means that we can be precise about the prices that we are comparing. In Table 2, we
compare the prices of individual UPCs across cities and regions in the fourth quarter of 2003. In
the first panel, we focus on the US. Since we have data for 10 cities, we can make 45 bilateral
comparisons of prices across city pairs. The middle and lower panels examine all bilateral
9
  The time series properties of disaggregated data have been examined extensively in Broda and Weinstein (2007)
and Klenow and Kryvtsov (2007), so here we will just review a few key stylized facts uncovered in those papers.
10
   We adjust Canadian prices downwards by 7 percent because Canadian prices are inclusive of the VAT.
11
   These numbers imply that there is vastly more volatility in the raw price data than in exchange rates. The typical
quarterly exchange rate change among developed economies with flexible exchange rates is less than 2 percent (see
Calvo and Reinhart (2004)). The large volatility of the raw price data relative to exchange rate data has an important
implication for examining convergence. It implies that a large share of the fluctuations in the prices of individual
goods across countries is likely to come from UPC specific shocks that are ignored at the aggregate level.



                                                                                                                  12
comparisons between regions in Canada and between cities in the US and regions in Canada. As
the first column indicates, we typically have 10,616 prices of common UPCs for every city pair
in the US, 25,094 goods in the typical bilateral region comparison within Canada and 1,531
identical goods between bilateral pairs across countries. Columns 2-3 of Table 2 present
medians, averages, and standard deviations of bilateral city comparisons for several sample
statistics (in Table A3 in the appendix we present all city pair comparisons). In Column 2, we
first computed the median price differential for each city pair. In Column 3, we compute the
standard deviation of log relative prices of the same UPCs consumed in each city pair.
        The table shows that the typical price differential between city pairs in the US is 0, with a
standard deviation of 0.016 (upper panel). We repeat the same exercise for Canadian regions and
obtain very similar results (middle panel). These results suggest that the typical price differential
does not vary much across cities.12 The typical difference in prices of identical goods does seem
to rise as we cross borders, but the rise is quite modest (lower panel). The median price
difference in the 4th quarter of 2003 for a given UPC in a US city relative to a Canadian region is
only 1.9 percent higher on average.13
        We present the standard deviation of the log relative prices in Column 3. The table
reveals that the typical standard deviation of log price differences between any two cities is 22.3
percent in the US and 18.7 percent in Canada. These numbers reveal something very important
about the LOP: even within a country the standard deviation of prices of identical goods is
typically 20 percent. To put this number in perspective, consider the results of Froot, Kim, and
Rogoff’s [1995] study of international violations of the law of one price. In that study, they
concluded, “the volatility of law of one price deviations is both remarkably high (typically on the
order of 20% or more per year for most commodities in most centuries) and remarkably stable
over time.” The important fact to bear in mind is that the LOP deviations that these authors found
internationally are approximately the same magnitude as those we observe within countries. In
other words, the prices of individual goods vary substantially across space regardless of whether
two regions are in the same country or not.



12
  This finding is present in our data in all quarters for which we have regional Canadian data.
13
  This result, however, is not robust to the time period being studied, as large cumulative exchange rate movements
over this period have made absolute PPP fluctuations vary from around 15 percent to 2 percent.



                                                                                                                 13
       This point notwithstanding, we can see that the dispersion of prices of individual goods
vary slightly more when crossing the border. The lower panel of Table 2 shows that the standard
deviation of prices of identical goods across the border is typically 26.7 percent, roughly 4
percentage points larger than within the US and 8 percentage points larger than within Canada.
Results are similar using the typical absolute price difference between cities. One can also
inspect the importance of the border visually in Figure 4. Here we plot the kernel densities of all
relative prices across cities within the US, within Canada, and between the US and Canada. As
the plot makes clear, prices in the US are a bit higher than prices in Canada, and there is
evidence of greater dispersion in international prices than in domestic prices, but the distributions
are not radically different. Rather the border seems to add a small amount to the very large
within-country dispersion in prices across cities. This creates some tension with the results of
Engel and Rogers (1996), and is a point that we will need to explore more systematically.
       In sum, the sample statistics reveal a number of important lessons for understanding
international pricing. First, there are a vast number of goods in the market and the composition of
consumption varies systematically with distance and across borders. This implies that one must
take great care about how samples are constructed when comparing relative price movements
across space and borders. Second, the prices of these goods vary substantially even for narrowly
defined commodities. This implies that absolute deviations in the LOP will be quite sensitive to
whether precisely the same goods are compared. Third, one should not equate the international
violation of the law of one price with a barrier at the border. The data strongly suggests that there
are substantial violations of the law of one price within countries and that these violations are of
similar magnitudes as international violations. Fourth, there is vastly more volatility in individual
price quotes than in price indexes. This means that much of the price variation is eliminated
when one focuses on price indexes. As we will see in the next few sections, each of these
stylized facts will play a key role in understanding why absolute price convergence holds and
why it has been so hard to find evidence in favor of it.




                                                                                                   14
                                     IV. The Width of the Border Redux


         In order to understand the magnitude of international deviations of the LOP, we need to
think of a benchmark. One of the simplest and most compelling reasons why prices may differ
spatially is that it is difficult to transport goods. Thus, one might expect smaller LOP deviations
in close cities than in distant cities. In their seminal work, Engel and Rogers [1996] developed
this concept further by expressing border effects in terms of distance – a convention we will
adopt here.
         A simple way of computing the “width” of the border is to regress a measure of the price
dispersion on the log of distance and a dummy variable that is one if the price difference is
computed for a good purchased in cities that are located in different country. In this case one can
compute the width of the border by dividing the border coefficient by the distance coefficient
and then exponentiating. In Table 3, we present the results for a similar regression as that in
Engel and Rogers. The only difference is that we use two different measures of price dispersion.
First, we look at a price variance measure: the square of the log price difference of a UPC

purchased in two different cities, i.e. ( qugcc ',t ) = ( pugc ,t − pugc ',t ) ; second, we look at the absolute
                                                                  2                       2




log price difference paid for the same UPC in two cities, i.e. qugcc ',t = pugc ,t − pugc ',t .

Specifically, we run the following regression:

                               (q            )
                                                 2
(9)                               ugcc ',t           = α c + β ln distcc ' + γ Bordercc ' + ε ugcc ',t

(10)                             qugcc ',t = α c + β ln distcc ' + γ Bordercc ' + ε ugcc ',t

where α c are city dummies, and standard errors are clustered by city pair. The “width” of the

border adopted by Engel and Rogers is given by exp(γˆ / βˆ ) , where circumflexes indicate
estimated parameters.
         One of the problems of this approach is that this measure of the border is unitless, and
hence one cannot strictly interpret it in terms of a mileage equivalent.14 However, the coefficient
can be interpreted in terms of the relative distance between any two cities.15 This point

14
  For instance, whether we measure distance in inches or in miles would imply the same γ and β coefficients.
15
  This can most easily be understood in terms of an example. Suppose there are three cities: A, B, and C. Let |qugAC,t|
and |qugBC,t| be the absolute relative price differences between city pairs AC and BC, respectively. If the distance
between cities A and C is 2 log units more than the distance between cities B and C and the border coefficient is 2,


                                                                                                                    15
notwithstanding we will stick with convention for the purposes of comparability with prior
research and sometimes express the “width” of the border in terms of miles. At times we will
focus on the magnitude of the border coefficient, which is a less colorful, but more meaningful
measure of the border.
         The results of this exercise are presented in Table 3. The first panel presents the raw
regression results and the second panel presents results in which we weight the observations by
the sales of the UPC.16 The weighted regression results are probably more reasonable because
the forces of goods arbitrage are probably much greater for a good with a large amount of sales
than for a good that is only purchased by a few people. In all regressions, distance contributes
significantly to price dispersion and there is a positive and significant border effect. This is
comforting because our priors strongly suggest that borders and distance interfere with the law of
one price.
         What is most interesting in the table, however, is our estimate of the impact of the border.
If we look at the regressions with the absolute log price difference as the dependent variable, we
see that the border introduces a price wedge of seven percent between the US and Canada. We
can obtain some sense of how small this is compared to prior work by computing the “width” of
the border. In the unweighted regressions, the width of the border ranges from 720 miles to 328
miles depending on the specification. By contrast the point estimate in Engel and Rogers was
75,000 miles for all goods and 3.8 million miles for food at home – the category closest to our
sample of goods. Similarly Parsley and Wei (2001) estimate that the width of the border vis à vis
Japan is 43 quadrillion miles. Of course, the unweighted estimates are likely to overstate the
border for the reasons we have highlighted above. If we turn to the weighted regression results,
we find that that width of the border ranges between 36 and 106 miles. In other words, Canada is
not located midway between the Earth and the Moon – it’s really just a few miles north of
Buffalo. We show in Figure A1 in the appendix that this result is robust to the quarter we use.
         The fact that we find the border effect to be so small strikes us as both deeply comforting
and confounding. On the one hand given Canada’s proximity to the US, the existence of a Free

then the impact of crossing the border would have the same impact on absolute relative price differences as
comparing relative prices in city B with those in city A. Note that the critical factor driving the width of the border is
not the distance from B to C but the relative differences from C of A and B. Thus, if there were two additional cities
A´ and B´ that were twice as far from C as A and B respectively, the border effect would have an identical impact on
relative prices as travelling from A´ to B´.
16
   We use the average value of consumption of each UPC between city pairs as a weight.



                                                                                                                       16
Trade Agreement, and the similarity of the economies suggests that we should expect small
border effects. However, it is puzzling why we should find such a small border effect when so
many other studies have not.
       One possible explanation harks back to our earlier discussion of the heterogeneity of
products within product categories. If categories like “fresh eggs” are very heterogeneous, then a
basket of fresh eggs in one country is likely to contain very different eggs than a basket of eggs
in another country. We have already seen that this compositional effect becomes more important
with distance and when one crosses a border. We can now examine the importance of this effect
in three stages. Our first task is to demonstrate that carefully aggregating the data does not affect
the estimates of the border effect. In order to do this, we need to be precise about what goods and
weights are used to compute city price indexes. We first define Igcc’ as the set of commonly
consumed UPCs in city pair cc´ that belong to product group g. We first construct a common
weighted index as a Geometric index of the relative prices of common goods within every
product group in every bilateral city pair:
                                                                               1
                                                                                   ( sugc + sugc ' )
                                                                 ⎛ Pugct      ⎞2
(11)                     Common Weight Index gcc 't   = ∏⎜                    ⎟⎟
                                                                 ⎜
                                                       u∈I gcc ' ⎝ Pugc ' t    ⎠
where sugct is the share of expenditure in product group g on UPC u in city c in time t. Note that
the log of equation (11) can be expressed in terms of the actual log price difference of a UPC
purchased in two different cities ln(Common Weight Index gcc 't ) = ∑ u∈I
                                                                                                gcc '
                                                                                                        1
                                                                                                        2   (s
                                                                                                             ugc   + sugc ' ) qugcc ',t .

The two key characteristics of this index is that it only uses prices for common UPC across cities
and it only depends on the average share of consumption in the two cities and not on the city
specific expenditure shares.
       The second index we consider is the city-specific index:

                                                                   ∏ (P )
                                                                                         sugc
                                                                              ugct
                                                                 u∈I gcc '
(12)                     City-Specific Weight Index gcc 't =
                                                                  ∏ (P )
                                                                                          sugc '
                                                                              ugc ' t
                                                                 u∈I gcc '
                                                                                                   .
In contrast to the common-weight index, the city-specific index can vary with the market shares
of expenditures in two locations even if the average expenditure level is the same. The
distinction is important because it lets us examine whether simply allowing the weights of



                                                                                                                                            17
common goods to vary has an effect on the results. We would expect distance to have a different
effect on this index if compositional effects are important.
       Finally we form an all-goods price index defined below:

                                                           ∏ (P )
                                                                               sugc
                                                                     ugct
                                                           u∈I gc
(13)                           All-Goods Index gcc 't =
                                                          ∏ (P )
                                                                               sugc '
                                                                     ugc ' t
                                                          u∈I gc '
                                                                                        .
where Igc is the set of UPCs available in city c and product group g. The major difference
between this equation and equation (12) is that we now allow all goods in each city to enter the
index, not just the common ones.
       Our basic tests involve re-estimating the regressions in equations (9) - (10) using the log
of the price indexes at the product group level instead of the log price differences of individual
UPCs to see whether the simple act of aggregation creates a problem. As one can see in the first
panel of Table 4, simply using common goods price indexes has almost no impact on our
measure of the border. The estimated border effects do not move by much and the “width” of
the border stays within 100 miles of the estimates that we obtained with the UPC-level data.
       However, it is important to remember that the data used by researchers to examine border
effects is not based on a common set of goods, but rather on non-overlapping samples of the
goods available in each country. Panels 2 and 3 in Table 4 can help us understand the impact of
using price indexes to assess the border effect. The second panel shows the impact that
compositional effects through city-specific weights can have on the distance and border
coefficients. The impact of distance on the square log price differences is over 5 times larger
than in the first panel and the border dummy jumps by a factor of 3. The difference between the
two panels can be traced directly to compositional effects. The prices of disaggregated goods
categories may vary a lot even if the underlying prices hardly vary at all. The border dummy also
rises to almost 3 times its value when common-weights are used. Since compositional effects
tend to raise both the log distance and border coefficients the impact on the “width” of the border
is not strongly affected by using city-specific weights.
       The importance of distance and the border rises dramatically when we use an index
composed of all goods. Now the distance and border coefficients rise by at least an order of
magnitude. Interestingly, when goods that are specific to each city are included, the width of the
border dummy jumps to literally astronomical values. Most of this is driven by an enormous


                                                                                                  18
jump in the border coefficient. The width of the border ranges from 23 million miles to 7.9
billion miles depending on the specification. The difference between this set of results and the
previous one arises solely from the fact that the composition of goods within a product group
differs across the border sufficiently to affect the average price. This large border effect results in
apparent rejections of the law of one price or PPP because the Canadians drink RC Cola and
Americans drink Coca-Cola. While one may hope that RC Cola and Coca-Cola move together in
the time series, there are many reasons to worry that this may not be the case. At the very least,
one can see ample reasons why LOP might hold precisely, but the way in which aggregate
indexes are formed produces failures of PPP. This establishes that it can be very misleading to
estimate deviations from the law of price or PPP using even highly disaggregated product
categories.
        This explanation, however, is unsatisfactory to explain the results of Engel and Rogers
(1996) because those results are based on the time-series volatility of price indexes as opposed to
the dispersion of price levels. For instance, if prices in a product group all move together, it is
possible for the levels to deviate across regions but the time series not to show a large border
effect. In order to examine what role is played by aggregation in the results by Engel and Rogers
we exploit the fact that we have time series data at the UPC level in the US National Sample and
for each of six Canadian regions in the Canadian Regional Sample. Following Engel and Rogers,
for each region pair, we compute the standard deviation of the relative log price changes of the
goods common to that pair. In particular, we calculate sd ( Δqugcc ',t ) where

Δqugcc ',t = qugcc ',t − qugcc ',t −1 . This is the same statistic that Engel and Rogers use in their study but

computed at the UPC level rather than at the product group level. We then regress these standard
deviations on the log of distance between the regional pairs (counting the US as another region)
and a border dummy, using the average distance between the Canadian region and our sample of
cities as a proxy for the Canadian region’s distance to the US. That is, we just use this time-series
proxy for market segmentation as the dependant variable in regression (9).
        The results from this exercise are presented in Table 5. At first glance, the results are
quite similar to those of Engel and Rogers (1996) – we find that the standard deviation of relative
inflation rates rises with distance and jumps discretely at the border. This result is suggestive of
trade costs and border effects mattering for price arbitrage. However, what is most striking is the
magnitude of the border. While Engel and Rogers found a border effect of 3.8 million miles for


                                                                                                                  19
the “food at home” sector, we find a more modest border that is 3 miles wide. Thus the UPC
level data also suggests much smaller relative border effects even when we use the same proxy
for market segmentation as Engel and Rogers.
       But why do these results differ so much? Before we begin our investigation of the cause
for the much smaller border effect, it is useful to first focus on why it is likely that disaggregated
data would produce different results. The major difference between Engel and Roger’s use of
price indexes and our use of UPC level data is that price indexes are averages of individual price
quotes. We have already seen in our analysis of the sample statistics that individual price
movements exhibit enormous volatility in the time series but there is not much difference in the
average price level across cities. Thus, averaging the prices of UPCs together tends to eliminate
much of the idiosyncratic variance of UPCs and leaves us with only the relatively small levels of
variance of average prices across cities. Internationally, however, the impact of exchange rate
fluctuations is not compressed by averaging because the impact is common to all UPCs in a
country. This causes the border coefficient to fall less slowly than the distance coefficient. Since
we divide by the distance coefficient when computing the border effect, ceteris paribus, this will
tend to make the border appear wider.
       We can see this formally by conducting the following exercise. We can decompose the
change in the relative price as follows:
(14)                                  Δqugcc 't = δ cc 't + δ et + ε ugcc 't ,

where the δ’s correspond to city pair and exchange rate shocks, and εugcc’t is the idiosyncratic
shock to a UPC. Similarly if two cities are in the same country, we decompose the price
movement using the same terms with the exception that δet = 0. If we assume that all these terms
are independent, then we can write
(15)                                Var ( Δqugcc 't ) = σ cc2 ' + σ e2 + σ ε2

in the case when the cities are in different countries and
(16)                                   Var ( Δqugcc 't ) = σ cc2 ' + σ ε2

when the cities are in the same country. In this case the border effect (expressed in terms of
ratios of variances instead of standard deviations) would be




                                                                                                    20
                                   (
                               Var Δqugcc 't
                                                International
                                                                )=σ    2
                                                                         + σ e2 + σ ε2
                                                                       cc '

                                       (                    )
(17)                                                                                   .
                                Var Δqugcc 't                           σ cc2 ' + σ ε2
                                                 Domestic


However, if there are n UPCs in a product group and we first average the data before computing
the variances, the ratio of the variances will be
                                                                                         σ ε2
                                   (
                               Var Δqugcc 't
                                               International
                                                                )=   σ cc2 ' + σ e2 +
                                                                                          n ,
                                       (                    )
(18)
                                Var Δqugcc 't                                       σε
                                                                                     2
                                                 Domestic               σ cc2 ' +
                                                                                    n
which is strictly larger than the expression given in equation (17) for n > 1. This suggests that if
one computes border effects by comparing the variances of relative prices using price indexes,
one will tend to find larger effects than if one uses the underlying micro-data. Moreover in
datasets like ours, where the variance of the idiosyncratic shocks is likely to be large and the
variance of bilateral city-pair shocks small, one would expect this effect to be substantial for
large n.
       In Table 6, we examine this aggregation bias by running the same regressions that we ran
in Table 5, but first pooling the UPC level data to form product group averages and then
computing the standard deviations in the movements of the product group level prices. We
present two sets of results based on the two different ways of pooling the data given by equations
(11) and (13). As one can see from the upper panel of this table, the coefficient on the border
dummy quadruples and the “width” of the border rises substantially (relative to Table 5).
Averaging the data causes the width of the border to rise to 1000 to 100,000 miles depending on
the specification.
       Although these numbers are much larger, they are still smaller than the typical border
effects of millions, if not quadrillions of miles, that often appear in studies. The lower panel of
Table 6 shows the width of the border based on aggregate city-specific price indexes. A key
distinction between these aggregate prices and those used in the upper panel is that each product-
group index is an average of a much larger number of UPCs than in the upper panel. This is
because the share of common goods across the border is less than 5 percent the size of the
sample of goods in each region in Canada. As we noted earlier, this suggests that we might
expect to see even larger border effects if we just formed indexes based on the set of UPCs
consumed within a city in a particular product group. We verify that using indexes based on all


                                                                                                      21
the UPCs within a city widens the border substantially. The border with Canada now rises to
between 16 billion to 120 billion miles – still not in the quadrillion mile range but much further
away than the 3 miles suggested by the UPC-level data.
        Finally, the last two columns of the lower panel show the impact that the exchange rate
fluctuations have on the measure of market segmentation based on aggregate price indexes. We
replicate the results in Columns 2 and 4 but drop the exchange rate from the relative price terms,
i.e. we simply compute the US price index in US dollar terms and the Canadian price index in
Canadian dollar terms. Not surprisingly we find no border effect in this case. This result
underscores the importance of exchange rates shocks that are common across all UPCs when
using aggregate data that collapses the UPC specific shocks.




                      V. Absolute Convergence Within and Across Countries


        Having established that border effects are small, we now turn our attention to
convergence. We have two objectives in this section. First, we want to estimate convergence
rates using barcode data and second we want to explain why our results differ from those in other
studies that use more aggregate data.
        Our measure of relative prices is the log difference between the price of the UPC in a
particular region and the price of the same UPC in Ontario. In modeling deviations of relative
prices from their long-run levels we start by estimating the following regression equation that
include higher order auto-regressive terms as in Dickey-Fuller (1979):

                                qugc ,t = α c + β qugc ,t −1 + ∑ s =1 γ s Δqugc , s −1 + ε ugc ,t
                                                                     S
(19)

where Δqugc ,t −1 = qugc ,t −1 − qugc ,t − 2 and S is the number of lags included in the regression, αc is a

city-specific dummy and β denotes the speed of convergence. Under the null of no convergence,
β is equal to one. In this case, a shock to qugc ,t , i.e. ε ugc ,t , is permanent. Convergence implies that

β is less than one, with the approximate half-life of a shock to log prices given by ln(0.5)/lnβ.17

17
  As Goldberg and Verboven (2005) note, this formula is only correct for AR1 processes. In general, the correct
half-life can be computed from the impulse response functions. However, we will follow the literature and drop the
word “approximate” in future discussions of the half-life.



                                                                                                                22
If β is less than one, the long-run level of relative prices is given by αc/(1 – β). If αc = 0 and β <
1, then we can say that we observe absolute convergence in the data. This means that not only
are shocks to relative prices transitory, but that eventually relative price differences between
cities disappear. In the case where α c ≠ 0 and β < 1 then we observe relative convergence in the

data, i.e. shocks to qugc ,t are transitory but relative price differentials will persist. The dummies

αc capture city fixed effects that account for non-time dependent price differences across cities
(and countries). In addition to the speed of convergence, β, we are also interested in examining
the absolute values of αc. If these are zero or small (and β is less than one), then markets are not
very segmented, and absolute price convergence is a good description of the data.
        Since we are interested in studying the different convergence speeds of prices within and
across countries, we allow for the convergence and autocorrelation terms to vary by country.
Specifically, we estimate the following equation:

                     qugc ,t = α c + β w qugc ,t −1 + β a qugc ,t −1 × Border + ∑ s =1 γ ws Δqugc , s −1
                                                                                     4

(20)
                                   + ∑ s =1 γ as Δqugc , s −1 × Border + ε ugc ,t
                                          4



where Border is a dummy that takes the value of 1 when city c is not in Canada, β w is the

convergence parameter “within” countries, β w + β a is the convergence parameter “across”

countries, and four is the optimal amount of lags as given by the Schwarz criterion. In each of the
specifications we run several tests: 1) whether α c = 0 within countries and α c = 0 for cities

across countries; 2) whether β w = 1 , that is if there is a unit root within countries; 3) whether

 β w + β a = 1 , that is if the data supports a unit root process across countries; and 4) whether
β a = 0 , that is if the convergence rates within country are the same as across country.
        Table 7, Column 1, reports the results for equation (20) estimated on all the set of
common UPCs between cities assuming a homogenous panel (i.e., α c = 0 ∀c ). The coefficient

estimate for β is 0.789 with a standard error of 0.021. Since we have a limited time series
dimension (12 – 16 quarter), it is inappropriate to employ conventional panel unit root tests that
rely on large T asymptotics. Instead, we employ a unit root test for short panels developed by
Harris and Tzavalis (1999). In the homogeneous panel case we can reject the unit-root test within




                                                                                                           23
and across borders at the 1 percent level. This suggests that prices revert back to their long-run
level. In particular, the implied half-life for convergence is 2.9 quarters.
            A notable feature of our data is that we can compare the rates of convergence back to
PPP across as well as within countries. The second column allows for the β coefficient to vary
within and across countries. In particular, we find that β a , the difference in the autoregressive

coefficient within and across the border to be around 0.08 and statistically significant. This
suggests that while prices take longer to converge back to PPP when cities are across the border
as opposed to within countries, the increase in the half-life of the shock is less than 2 quarters!
Overall this implies a half-life for convergence of shocks across the border in this specification is
4.5 quarters.
            Column 3 repeats the regression in Column 2 but weights each UPC by how important
they are in consumption in each pair of city.18 Half-lives for shocks within Canada rise to 4.8
quarters as UPCs with large weights in consumption seem to have slightly slower convergence
rates. The rate of convergence for UPCs across country also rises, but the difference between
convergence rates between and within countries is only 3 quarters. While we discuss the
magnitude of city-specific effects below, when these are included in the regression convergence
rates across countries rise to around 8 to 9 quarters, while within country convergence rates
remain around 4 quarters. Overall, we find estimates for the rate at which PPP deviations
diminish of between 3 to 4 quarters within borders and 4 to 9 quarters across borders. These
numbers are broadly consistent with the micro price evidence on sticky prices. For example, Bils
and Klenow (2004) find that half of domestic goods' prices last less than 4.3 months while the
median duration in prices (including sales) in Nakamura and Steinsson (2007) is around 4.6
months. Gopinath and Rigobon (2007) find that price stickiness in US import prices can last up
to 11 months. 19
            Given that we have price data on identical goods across cities within and across countries
we can assess the economic magnitude of the deviations from absolute PPP within and across


18
     The actual weight used is wugc = 0.5 × valueugc ,t + 0.5 × valueugOnt ,t where t0 is 1999.
                                                       0                     0
19
  As an additional robustness check, we can also test whether exchange rate shocks have a different impact than
idiosyncratic price shocks. To do this we added the lagged log exchange rata and the log differences in the exchange
rate as independent variables in equation (20). The coefficient on the lagged exchange rate was 0.03 and the
convergence coefficient hardly changed. This indicates that both exchange rate and non-exchange rate shocks
dissipate similarly.


                                                                                                                 24
countries. As mentioned above, α c /(1 – β ) defines the long-run level of ln qugc ,t . In Columns (4)

– (6) we compare test whether the absolute deviations from PPP between the average Canadian
province and Ontario is systematically different than that between the US and Ontario. We find
that prices in the average Canadian province converge back to levels that are between 3.4 percent
and 13.6 percent lower than those in Ontario. However, while prices of the US converge to even
lower levels, in two out of the three specifications we cannot reject the hypothesis that there is a
difference between the average US and Canadian long run levels. This is strong evidence in
favor of a small role played by the border in terms of market segmentation.




                     VI. Aggregation and Non-Linear Convergence Rates


       With the notable exception of Imbs et al (2005), studies have not investigated why the
convergence results are so dependent on the level of aggregation of the data. For example,
Crucini and Shintani (2006) find faster half lives when using more disaggregated data than is
typically found using aggregate data, but after rejecting the aggregation bias explanation of Imbs
et al (2005), they do not offer an explanation reconciling these two findings. We now turn to
trying to understand this puzzle
       The evidence presented in Table 7 suggests that when individual product data is used, we
find estimates for the rate at which PPP deviations diminish is between 3 to 6 quarters within
borders and 4 to 9 quarters across borders. In particular, in the next two tables we not only assess
whether half-lives estimated using aggregate data are large but also examine what are the reasons
behind any difference between results at different level of aggregations.
       Table 8 re-estimates equation (20) using product-group price indexes across cities instead
of UPC price ratios. In particular, we run the following specification:

                      qgc ,t = α c + β w qgc ,t −1 + β a qgc ,t −1 × Border + ∑ s =1 γ ws Δqgc , s −1
                                                                                   S

(21)
                                    + ∑ s =1 γ as Δqgc , s −1 × Border + ε gc ,t
                                          S



where we define the price ratio at the product group level as
                                                             ⎛ Pgc ,t    ⎞
                                                 qgc ,t = ln ⎜           ⎟⎟ ,
                                                             ⎜P
                                                             ⎝ gOnt ,t    ⎠



                                                                                                        25
where Pgc,t is a product-group price index. We will vary the method we use to compute this
index to obtain a better understanding of how aggregation affects the data.
         We consider two ways of computing these price indexes. First, we consider an index in
which we allow all goods in each city to be averaged together.

                                            Pgc ,t          ∑   u∈I gc
                                                                         wugc ,0 pugc ,t
(22)                                                   =
                                           PgOnt ,t        ∑u∈I gOnt
                                                                       wugOnt ,0 pugOnt ,t

where wugc ,0 is the weight of UPC u in product group g in city c in 1999 and I gc includes all the

set of available UPCs in product group g in city c. Second, we build an index that aggregates
only those goods that are common in Ontario and the region:

                                             Pgc ,t        ∑   u∈I gc
                                                                   Com       w ugc pugc ,t
(23)                                                   =              −Ont

                                            PgOnt ,t       ∑ u∈I gc
                                                                 Com
                                                                    −Ont
                                                                           w ugc pugOnt ,t

where wugc ≡ 12 wugc ,0 + 12 wugOnt ,0 .

         Table 8 shows the convergence results under the these different aggregation schemes. For
simplicity we will focus our discussion on Columns 8 and 12 but results are similar in the other
specifications with fewer controls. Aggregation of the micro data produces significantly higher
half lives. If we aggregate the data using only common goods, the convergence coefficient rises
from 0.85 (Table 7 Column 6) to 0.95 (Table 8 Column 8). Despite the increase in half-lives, the
rich panel nature of our data allows us to reject the presence of a unit-root in all cases (using the
Harris and Tzavalis (1999) distributions). The implied half-life of price shocks rises from 4 to
13 quarters within Canada and from 9 to 49 quarters across the border. If we form the index
using all goods within the product group instead of just the common ones, the half lives jump to
138 quarters within Canada, and we fail to find convergence across the border.
         These results suggest that whatever causes the discrepancy between aggregate results and
those of micro data studies is present in our data. However, we can immediately rule out one
source of this bias. Since we were consistent in the construction of the price indexes, we know
that the difference between aggregate results and those obtained with the UPC-level variation is
not due to differences in how aggregate indexes are constructed internationally. Compositional
effects may explain why indexes comprised of disjoint samples of goods exhibit unit roots (e.g.




                                                                                                      26
the difference between Columns 8 and 12), but they do not explain why the results in Column 8
of Table 8 differ from those in Column 6 of Table 7.
           A second hypothesis for what might be driving aggregation bias has been suggested by
Imbs et al (2005). Their explanation relies on the convergence coefficients varying
systematically across goods. However, it is difficult to see how it could apply here. The bias we
have identified is present even though we estimate only one β in the UPC-level regressions and
only one β in the aggregate regressions.
           Nonetheless, we can examine the importance of this form of aggregation bias in our data.
In particular, the type of aggregation bias they study can be briefly explained using a general
version of equation (19):

                        qugc ,t = α cu + β u qugc ,t −1 + ∑ s =1 γ su Δqugc ,t − s + ∑ s =1 γ su Δqt − s + ε ugc ,t
                                                               4                          4
(24)

where Δqt is the average log price difference between periods t and t–1. The main difference

between equation (24) and (19) is that the parameters are allowed to vary with each UPC u, i.e.
we have βu instead of β, and that we allow for common correlated effects through the lagged
price changes.20 For simplicity, we can define β u = β + δ u , where E (δ u ) = 0 . In the case where

the true model is that given by (24) but instead equation (19) is estimated, then Imbs et al. (2005)
argue that the estimated βˆ from (19) has a bias. In particular, under certain conditions

     ( )
E βˆ = β + χ where χ > 0 .

           Estimation of equation (24) requires us to truncate the data because we do not always
have many observations for each UPC. Secondly, because some of the parameters are estimated
very imprecisely, we compute the Mean Group-Common Correlated Effects (MG-CCE) estimate
by taking a weighted average of the coefficients according to the following formula:
                                                                          βu

                                                                   =∑
                                                                          σˆ u
(24)                                                      β   MG
                                                                                      ,
                                                                     u   ∑σ
                                                                         u
                                                                                 1
                                                                                 ˆu


Where σˆ u is the estimated standard error of the estimate.

           We first estimated a pooled version of equation (24) on only UPCs in which we had at
least 30 usable observations and constrained the coefficients to be equal for every UPC. Still this
leaves us with over one hundred thousand observations. Our estimate of the pooled convergence
20
     Equation (24) is identical to the benchmark regression used in Imbs et al (2005).


                                                                                                                      27
coefficient was 0.84 (with a standard error of 0.002), which corresponds to an approximate half-
life of 3.9 quarters and is quite similar our earlier estimates. We then computed the MG-CCE
estimate given by equation (24). The mean group estimate was 0.82, which implies a half-life of
3.7 quarters. Similarly, when we estimated the across border convergence coefficients we
obtained estimates of 0.94 and 0.92 for the pooled and MG-CCE estimates. Despite the small
positive aggregation bias, standard tests reject the equality of the mean group coefficient with the
homogenous coefficient. Hence, like Crucini and Shintani (2006), who also looked at the
importance of this form of aggregation bias, we conclude that heterogeneity of the convergence
coefficient across goods does not generate a quantitatively important aggregation bias in our
data21
         If the aggregation bias does not resolve the PPP puzzle in our data, how can we explain
the large differences in estimated persistence at different levels of aggregation? An attractive
explanation is the presence of strong nonlinearities in response to shocks. Nonlinearities have
been found in other studies, e.g. Parsley and Wei (1996), but no one has conjectured that these
nonlinearities can explain the difference between national and international convergence results.
We do so by first verifying the importance of nonlinearities in our data. We can estimate their
importance by running the following regression

                    qugc ,t = α c + β1qugc ,t −1 + β 2 qugc ,t −1 qugc ,t −1 + ∑ s =1 γ ws Δqugc, s −1 + ε gc ,t ,
                                                                                   S
(24)

which is identical to the regression run in Parsley and Wei (1996). Here, if β2 is less than zero,
then this implies that larger shocks dissipate faster than small ones. In this case, the decay rate
can be written as β1 – 1 + 2β2|qugc,t-1| and the approximate half-life is ln(0.5)/ln(β1 + 2β2|qugc,t-1|).
We run this regression separately for within Canada relative prices and relative prices across the
border. Table 9 reports the results of these regressions. β2 is less than zero regardless of the data
set used, indicating that there is strong evidence in favor of non-linear price adjustment both
within countries and across the border. The importance of these nonlinearities can be assessed by
considering a number of different-sized shocks. The standard deviation of qugc,t-1 is 26 percent
which implies an approximate half-life of two quarters within Canada and about 6 quarters
across the border. This implies that the typical price shock dissipates quite rapidly.


21
  Other studies have also found small biases (c.f. Chen and Engel (2005), Parsley and Wei (2007) and Reidel and
Szilagyi (2005)).


                                                                                                                     28
       Given these non-linearities, smaller price shocks are obviously more persistent. In
particular, quarterly exchange rate shocks over this period had a standard deviation of 4 percent.
Small shocks like these are estimated to have a half-life of 4 quarters in Canada but 23 quarters
(5.75 years) across the border. In other words, the UPC-level data is completely consistent with
the observation that prices respond very slowly to exchange rate shocks. The nonlinearity of
price adjustment implies that these shocks should be very persistent.
       As attractive as this explanation seems, it still does not resolve why the convergence
coefficient rises as we move to aggregate indexes. In order to see this result more clearly, it is
useful to draw a picture that summarizes our findings. In particular the non-linearity implies that
the persistence of relative price deviations will drop off as the absolute magnitude of the
deviation rises. We portray this in Figure 5. The implication of this non-linearity is that the slope
of a regression of current relative prices on past relative prices will depend on the amount of
dispersion observed in the relative prices of the past period. The convergence coefficient, β, will
be strongly influenced by this non-linearity because the OLS estimates will place a heavy
emphasis on the observations where |qugc,t-1| was large. However, if we aggregate the data, these
large positive and price deviations are likely to cancel and hence the relative weight given to
goods with small price deviations will rise. To the extent that these goods converge at a slower
rates, this means that the use of aggregated data such as a price index will produce estimates of
the convergence coefficient that are larger than those produced using disaggregated data.
       In Table 10 we present an illustrative example of this effect. We assume that there are
three goods purchased in US cities and Ontario that initially have log price deviations of 0.5, –
0.5, and 0.05 (i.e. two goods with initial prices that are two standard deviations above and below
zero and one with an initial price equal to the median log price difference). Each of these goods
has a non-linear decay rate whose coefficients are identical to those estimated in Column 4 of
Table 9. If a researcher had access to the microdata for the three goods and estimated a standard
linear convergence regression with one lag of the relative price, the estimate of the convergence
coefficient would be 0.903 and the corresponding approximate half-life would turn out to be 7
quarters. However, the researcher performed the same estimation on the price averages, the
convergence coefficient would jump to 0.968 and the half-life would equal 21 quarters or just
over 5 years. As this simple example illustrates, one can observe significant aggregation biases
even though the parameters determining the convergence rates of every good are identical.


                                                                                                     29
         One final way to see that this is what is driving the aggregation bias is to form our
aggregates in such a way that we preserve much of the underlying volatility of the UPC level
data and then see if this causes us to recover our disaggregated estimates. In order to do this, we
form our product group price indexes according to equation (23) but only use 5 UPCs chosen at
random to form the product group level price indexes. By using a small number of UPCs we
allow the product group prices to be affected by large outliers. As one can see from the estimates,
the rate of convergence in this table hardly differ from those of Table 7. The contrast with Panel
2 of Table 8 is striking, however. Increasing the number of UPCs in the aggregate price index
drives up the convergence coefficient significantly because the individual relative price
deviations cancel out in the larger sample. As a result, the estimated convergence coefficient
rises in all specifications and the corresponding half-lives rise as well.




                                          VII. Conclusion


       The use of barcode data reveals a very different picture of international price differences
than what one sees with coarser data. In particular we find that the LOP and PPP hold in their
absolute forms as well across the border as they do within countries. Moreover, the importance
of distance for price differences is five to ten times larger in aggregate data than in barcode data.
Much of this is driven by the fact that the set of common goods falls systematically with distance
leading price indexes to diverge because their composition diverges. Finally, we find that rates of
price convergence within and across borders are fast and completely in line with micro studies.
       Our study also explains why prior work has failed to identify these facts. Given our use
of microdata for a large sample of goods, we are in a unique position to examine the impact that
price indexes can have on our understanding of price differences across locations. Our
examination of barcode data reveals that there is enormous heterogeneity in the individual goods
that enter these price indexes even when one examines product categories that strike most
researchers as homogeneous. In particular, this gives rise to a biased picture of how distance and
borders affect the degree of market segmentation when based on aggregate price index data. We
argue that the problems underlying the use of price indexes to study these issues are related to
two factors: 1) the systematic link between the composition of goods sold in different cities and



                                                                                                   30
the distance between cities, and 2) the implications of collapsing the large idiosyncratic
component of price changes.
       We are also able to demonstrate that in our data non-linearities in the rate of price
convergence can resolve the PPP puzzle suggested by Rogoff (1996). We show that the
pervasiveness of the non-linear responses can explain all the differences in the rates of
convergence found at the aggregate versus disaggregate level. In particular, heterogeneity of the
convergence coefficient across goods does not generate a quantitatively important aggregation
bias in our data.
       Finally, the non-linearity of price adjustment is present both when we look within and
across borders. These results imply that the relatively small price differences generated by the
typical exchange rate movement will tend to be quite persistent, but larger ones will be short
lived. This may have important implications for understanding why prices sometimes seem to
respond to exchange rate changes but other times do not. Obviously more work is needed to
understand the implications of this for local versus producer currency pricing.




                                                                                                   31
                                         References



Atkeson, Andrew and Ariel Burstein, “Pricing to Market, Trade Costs, and International Relative
      Prices,” Forthcoming American Economic Review.

Bils, Mark and Peter Klenow, “Some Evidence on the Importance of Sticky Prices,” Journal of
       Political Economy, CXII (2004), 947–985.

Broda, Christian and David Weinstein, “Product Creation and Destruction: Evidence and Price
       Implications,” NBER Working Papers No.13041, 2007.

Calvo, Guillermo and Carmen Reinhart, "Fear Of Floating," The Quarterly Journal of
       Economics, CXVII (II) (2002), 379-408.

Chen, Shiu-Sheng and Charles Engel, “Does ‘Aggregation Bias’ Explain the PPP Puzzle?”
       Pacific Economic Review, X (2005), 49-72.

Choi, Chi-Young, Nelson C. Mark and Dongyu Sul, “Unbiased Estimation of the Half-Life to
       PPP Convergence in Panel Data,” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, Vol. 38, No. 4
       (June 2006), pp. 921-938.

Crucini, Mario, Telmer, Chris and Marios Zachariadis, “Understanding European Real Exchange
       Rates,” American Economic Review, VC (III) (2005), 724-738.

Crucini, Mario and Mototsugu Shintani, "Persistence in Law-Of-One-Price Deviations: Evidence
       from Micro-Data," Working Papers 0616, Department of Economics, Vanderbilt
       University, 2006.

Cumby, Robert E., “Forecasting Exchange Rates and Relative Prices with the Hamburger
     Standard: Is What You Want What You Get with McParity?” NBER Working Papers: No.
     5675, 1996.

Dickey, D.A. and W.A. Fuller, “Distribution of the Estimators for Autoregressive Time Series
      with a Unit Root,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, LXXIV (1979), 427–
      431.

Engel, Charles, “Real Exchange Rates and Relative Prices: An Empirical Investigation,” Journal
       of Monetary Economics, XXXII (I) (1993), 35–50.

Engel, Charles and John H. Rogers, “How Wide Is the Border?” American Economic Review,
       LXXXVI (V) (1996), 1112–25.

Froot, Kenneth A., Michael Kim, and Kenneth Rogoff, “The Law-of-One-Price over 700 Years,”
       NBER Working Papers: No.1532, 1995.


                                                                                              32
Ghosh, Atish and Holger Wolf, “Pricing in International Markets: Lessons from the Economist,”
       NBER Working Papers: No. 4806, 1994.

Giovannini, Alberto, “Exchange Rates and Traded Goods Prices.” Journal of International
      Economics, XXIV (I/II) (1988), 45–68.

Goldberg, Pinelopi and Frank Verboven, “The evolution of price dispersion in the European car
      market. Review of Economic Studies, 811 –848 (October) 2001.

Goldberg, Pinelopi and Frank Verboven, “Market integration and convergence to the Law of
      One Price: evidence from the European Car Market,” Journal of International Economics,
      LXV (2005), 49-73.

Gopinath, Gita and Roberto Rigobon, “Sticky Borders,” NBER Working Paper No. 12095, 2007.

Harris, Richard and Elias Tzavalis, “Inference for unit roots in dynamic panels where the time
        dimension is fixed,” Journal of Econometrics, XCI (1999), 201-226.

Haskel, Jonathan and Holger Wolf, “The Law of One Price—A Case Study,” Scandinavian
       Journal of Economics, 2001, CIII (IV), 545–58.

Imbs, Jean, Haroon Mumtaz, Morten O.Ravn and Hélène Rey, “Aggregation Bias Does Explain
       the PPP Puzzle,” NBER Working Papers 11607, 2005.

Imbs, Jean, Haroon Mumtaz, Morten O.Ravn and Hélène Rey, "PPP Strikes Back: Aggregation
       and the Real Exchange Rate," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXX (I) (2005), 1-
       43.

Isard, Peter, “How Far Can We Push the Law of One Price?” American Economic Review, LXVI
        (V) (1977), 942-48.

Klenow, Peter J. and Oleksiy Kryvstov, “State-dependent or Time-dependent Pricing: Does it
      matter for recent U.S. inflation?”, working paper, 2007.

Knetter, Michael M., “Price Discrimination by U.S. and German Exporters.” American
       Economic Review, LXIX (I) (1989), 198–210.

Knetter, Michael M., “International Comparisons of Price-to-Market Behavior.” American
       Economic Review, LXXXIII (III) (1993), 473–86.

Lutz, Matthias, “Pricing in Segmented Markets, Arbitrage Barriers, and the Law of One Price:
       Evidence from the European Car Market,” Review of International Economics, XII (III)
       (2004), 456–75.

Nakamura, Emi and Jon Steinsson, “"Five Facts about Prices: A Reevaluation of Menu Cost
     Models", manuscript, Harvard University, 2007.


                                                                                                 33
Obstfeld, Maurice and Alan M. Taylor, “Nonlinear Aspects of Goods-Market Arbitrage and
       Adjustment: Heckscher’s Commodity Points Revisited,” Journal of the Japanese and
       International Economies, 11 (1997), pp. 441-479.

Parsley, David C. and Shang-Jin Wei, “Convergence to the law of one price without trade
       barriers or currency fluctuations,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXI (IV) (1996),
       1211– 1236.

Parsley, David C. and Shang-Jin Wei, “A Prism into PPP Puzzles: The Micro-Foundations of
       Big Mac Real Exchange Rates,” The Economic Journal, 117 (October, 2007), 1336–1356.

Parsley, David C. and Shang-Jin Wei, “Explaining the Border Effect: The Role of Exchange
       Rate Variability, Shipping Costs, and Geography.” Journal of International Economics,
       LV (I) (2001), 87-105.

Reidel, Demian and Jan Szilagyi (2005) “A Biased View of PPP” Harvard University mimeo
        2005.

Rogers, John H. and Michael Jenkins, “Haircuts or Hysteresis? Sources of Movements in Real
       Exchange Rates” Journal of International Economics, XXXVIII (III-IV) (1995), 339–60.

Rogoff, Kenneth. “The Purchasing Power Parity Puzzle,” Journal of Economic Literature,
       XXXIV (II) (1996), 647–68.




                                                                                              34
                                    Figure 1


                   Distribution of UPCs Within Product Groups
          15
          10
Percent
          5
          0




               0         5000          10000           15000    20000
                           Number of UPCs per Product Group
                                                                                               Figure 2

                                                        Share of Common UPCs, Distance and Border
                            Figure 2A: Within Cities in the US                                            Figure 2C: Between Cities in US and Regions in Canada
           .3




                                                                                                                 .3
                           NY-Phi

                                                              LA-Pho
                                                          Chi-Det       Hou-Atl
                                                                       Atl-Det
                                                                               Hou-Pho
                                                           Bos-Phi
                                                                                 Hou-Det
                                                            Phi-Roc                   Atl-Pho
                                                       Bos-NY            Atl-Phi
                                                                        Chi-Phi
                                                                             Chi-Hou
                                                              Bos-RocNY-Det Atl-Roc Chi-Pho
Share of Common UPCs




                                                                                                          Share of Common UPCs
                                                                      Bos-Det
                                                                       Chi-Atl
                                                            NY-Roc Det-Phi         Hou-PhiLA-Det
                                                                    Chi-RocBos-Chi       Roc-Pho
                                                            Det-Roc           Bos-Atl
                                                                                   Hou-LA
                                                                                    Bos-Hou
                                                                                       Det-Pho
                                                                                          Phi-Pho
                                                                                            Bos-Pho
               .2




                                                                                                                         .2
                                                                           NY-Atl Hou-Roc LA-Atl
                                                                                       Chi-LALA-Phi
                                                                                           NY-Pho
                                                                        Chi-NY                Bos-LA
                                                                                   Hou-NYLA-Roc
                                                                                             LA-NY
           .1




                                                                                                                 .1                                   NY-Ont
                                                                                                                                                       Bos-Ont
                                                                                                                                 Roc-Ont
                                                                                                                                      Det-Ont         Phi-Ont                        Pho-Ont
                                                                                                                                                                                       LA-Ont
                                                                                                                                                       Chi-Ont              Hou-Ont
                                                                                                                                                                 Atl-Ont               Bos-Alb
                                                                                                                                                                                           Bos-BC
                                                                                                                                                 NY-Que
                                                                                                                                             Bos-Que                   LA-BC Pho-BC
                                                                                                                                                                            Pho-Alb       NY-BC
                                                                                                                                                                                      NY-Alb
                                                                                                                                              Roc-Que       Bos-Mar          LA-Alb
                                                                                                                                                                               Bos-Man  Roc-BC
                                                                                                                                                                                    Roc-Alb
                                                                                                                                                                                    Chi-BCPhi-BC
                                                                                                                                                                                      Det-BC
                                                                                                                                                                                 Det-Alb
                                                                                                                                                    Phi-Que        Roc-Mar
                                                                                                                                                                NY-Mar        Chi-Alb
                                                                                                                                                                             NY-Man   Phi-Alb
                                                                                                                                                                                       Hou-BC
                                                                                                                                                                                       Pho-Que
                                                                                                                                                                                  Pho-ManLA-Que
                                                                                                                                                                                    Hou-Alb
                                                                                                                                                        Det-QueChi-Que
                                                                                                                                                               Chi-Man    Roc-Man
                                                                                                                                                                    Det-Man
                                                                                                                                                                  Phi-Mar
                                                                                                                                                                       Det-Mar     LA-Man
                                                                                                                                                                                Hou-Que
                                                                                                                                                                             Phi-Man      Atl-BC
                                                                                                                                                                                      Atl-AlbPho-Mar
                                                                                                                                                                           Hou-Man
                                                                                                                                                                             Chi-Mar
                                                                                                                                                                      Atl-Que Atl-Mar          LA-Mar
                                                                                                                                                                             Atl-Man Hou-Mar
           .05




                                                                                                                 .05




                       4                    5                     6              7              8                                5                    6              7                      8
                                                             Log Distance                                                                                 Log Distance




                                                                             Figure 2B: Within Regions in Canada
                                           .6




                                                                                                    Mar-Ont
                                                                                                         Man-Ont
                                Share of Common UPCs
                                                .5




                                                                                                                                         Alb-Ont
                                                               Ont-Que                                                                         BC-Ont
                                                                                Alb-BC
                                                                                         Mar-Que
                                                                                          Alb-Man


                                                                                                          BC-Man
                                   .4




                                                                                                              Man-Que                       Man-Mar


                                                                                                                                            Alb-Que Alb-Mar
                                                                                                                                                  BC-Que
                                                                                                                                                         BC-Mar
                                           .3




                                                         6                            7                                              8                               9
                                                                                              Log Distance
                                                   Figure 3

          3
          2              Distribution of Quarterly UPC Relative Price Changes
Density
          1
          0




                     -.75          -.5         -.25    -.1   0   .1   .25   .5   .75

                                   Quarterly UPC Relative Price Changes
                                   Quarterly De-Meaned UPC Relative Price Changes
              kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = .07
                                           Figure 4

       3              Within and Across Country Distribution of Relative Prices
            np
            2
 kdensity dln
1      0




                 -1            -.5               0                .5                1
                                                 x

                        Within US Distribution               Within Canada Distribution
                        Across US-Canada Distribution
 Figure 5

qugc,t




              Regression Line



                       Data



            qugc,t-1
                                            Table 1: Descriptive Statistics

                                                              US National       US Cross-Section Canada-Regional

Number of Cities/Regions                                          1                     10                 6
Number of Households per City/Region                           55,000                  300               2500
Time Period                                                1999Q1 - 2003Q4           2003Q4          2001Q1-2004Q4

Number of UPCs per City/Region                                  697,312               50,628              57784

Number of Product Groups per City/Region                           123                 118                    156

Number of UPCs per Product Group per City/Region                  5,669                429                    370

Number of CPI Individual Quotes per ELI per City/Region             -                   10                    30

Cities included in the US: Boston, Chicago, Houston, Los Angeles, New York, Atlanta, Detroit, Philadelphia,
Buffalo-Rochester, and Phoenix.
Regions included in Canada: Alberta, British Columbia, Manitoba, Maritimes, Ontario and Quebec.
Source: ACNielsen Homescan US and ACNielsen Homescan Canada.
              Table 2: Law of One Price Deviations within City/Region Pairs in the U.S. and Canada

                                         Number of         Price Differences across Cities Common UPCs Only
                                       Common UPCs                 Median                 Standard Deviation
                                            (1)                       (2)                        (3)

                                           Upper Panel: U.S. - U.S.
All 45 US city comparisons:
Median                                     10,616                  0.000                       0.223
Average                                    10,730                  -0.001                      0.224
St. Deviation                              1,303                   0.016                       0.012

                                       Middle Panel: Canada - Canada
All 15 Canadian region comparisons:
Median                                     25,094                   0.003                      0.187
Average                                    25,980                   0.007                      0.181
St. Deviation                              4,682                    0.010                      0.015

                                         Lower Panel: U.S. - Canada
All 60 U.S. City-Canada region comparisons:
Median                                      1,531                 0.021                        0.267
Average                                     1,634                 0.019                        0.266
St. Deviation                                328                  0.020                        0.008
                                      Table 3: Deviations in the Prices of UPCs
                                                      Upper Panel: Unweighted Regression
Dependent Variable                  Square of log Price Difference               Absolute Log Price Difference
Data                            All             US-US           Can-Can          All        US-US        Can-Can
Log Distance                  0.0047            0.0028           0.0083        0.0120       0.0068        0.0213
                            [0.0006]**        [0.0007]**       [0.0006]**    [0.0015]**   [0.0016]** [0.00165]**
Border Dummy                  0.0312                                           0.0694
                            [0.0009]**                                       [0.0020]**
Observations                 970338            482869           389701        970338       482869         389701
R-squared                      0.02              0.00             0.01          0.03         0.00          0.01
"Width" of the Border          720                                              328



                                                       Lower Panel: Weighted Regression
Dependent Variable                  Square of log Price Difference               Absolute Log Price Difference
Data                            All             US-US           Can-Can          All        US-US         Can-Can
Log Distance                  0.0062            0.0024           0.0084        0.0182       0.0058         0.0245
                            [0.0006]**        [0.0008]**       [0.0007]**    [0.0019]**   [0.0019]**     [0.0023]**
Border Dummy                  0.0290                                           0.0654
                            [0.0013]**                                       [0.0027]**
Observations                 970338            482869           389701        970338       482869         389701
R-squared                      0.04              0.00             0.01          0.05         0.00           0.03
"Width" of the Border          106                                               36
All Regressions include city dummies. Robust standard errors in brackets. All standard errors are clustered by city
pair. ; * significant at 5% level; ** significant at 1% level.
                         Table 4: Border Effects for Product Group Level Price Indexes


                                            Panel 1: Common Weighted Index of Common Goods
Dependent Variable               Square of log Price Difference          Absolute Log Price Difference
Data                                All       US-US      Can-Can           All        US-US       Can-Can
Log Distance                      0.003          0          0.004         0.02        0.004         0.03
                               [0.001]**      [0.000]    [0.000]**     [0.003]**     [0.002]*     [0.002]**
Border Dummy                      0.018                                  0.064
                               [0.002]**                               [0.005]**
Constant                         -0.019        0.002       -0.023       -0.119        0.028        -0.148
                                [0.007]*      [0.002]    [0.003]**     [0.033]**     [0.013]*     [0.017]**
Observations                     12471         5211         2333        12471          5211         2333
R-squared                         0.12         0.02         0.08          0.15         0.04         0.14
"Width" of the Border              403                                     25



                                         Panel 2: City-Specific Weighted Index of Common Goods
Dependent Variable              Square of log Price Difference              Absolute Log Price Difference
Data                               All       US-US      Can-Can               All         US-US      Can-Can
Log Distance                     0.016        0.004        0.024            0.048         0.011        0.07
                               [0.002]**    [0.001]** [0.003]**          [0.006]**      [0.004]**    [0.006]**
Border Dummy                     0.063                                      0.109
                               [0.005]**                                 [0.010]**
Constant                        -0.086        0.017       -0.141           -0.232         0.094       -0.365
                               [0.017]**     [0.013]    [0.019]**        [0.051]**       [0.039]*    [0.046]**
Observations                    12471         5211         2333            12471           5211        2333
R-squared                        0.06         0.02          0.1              0.12          0.06        0.17
"Width" of the Border              51                                         10


                                        Panel 3: City-Specific Weighted Index Composed of All Goods
Dependent Variable               Square of log Price Difference               Absolute Log Price Difference
Data                                All       US-US      Can-Can                All        US-US       Can-Can
Log Distance                      0.162        0.013        0.15              0.103         0.023        0.173
                                [0.071]*     [0.004]** [0.032]**           [0.024]**      [0.011]*     [0.034]**
Border Dummy                      3.693                                       1.746
                               [0.100]**                                   [0.029]**
Constant                         -0.973        0.016       -1.188            -0.387          0.16       -1.207
                                [0.453]*      [0.032]    [0.289]**          [0.156]*       [0.089]     [0.308]**
Observations                     12471         5211         2333             12471          5211         2333
R-squared                         0.34         0.02         0.19               0.54          0.09        0.25
"Width" of the Border          7.95E+09                                   2.30E+07
Robust standard errors in brackets; * significant at 5% level; ** significant at 1% level.
                                 Table 5: Engel and Rogers at the UPC level

                                                                      All UPCs
Dependent Variable                     St. Deviation over time of the Log of Price Ratio between Cities
Data                                    Within Canada            All          Within Canada          All
Weighted                                      No                 No                 Yes             Yes

Log Distance                                  0.01              0.009               0.014         0.012
                                           [0.0010]**         [0.0008]**          [0.0018]**    [0.0013]**
Border Dummy                                                    0.012                             0.012
                                                              [0.0048]**                        [0.0039]**
Observations                                 99444             116744               99444        116744
R-squared                                     0.01               0.01                0.01          0.01
"Width" of the Border                                             3.8                               2.7
Robust standard errors in brackets; * significant at 5% level; ** significant at 1% level.
                        Table 6: Engel and Rogers at the Product Group level using only Common UPCs across Cities

                                              All Product Groups - Common UPCs - Common Weights
Dependent Variable                     St. Deviation over time of the Log of Price Ratio between Cities
Data                                    Within Canada            All          Within Canada           All
Weighted                                      No                 No                 Yes              Yes

Log Distance                                  0.01               0.004              0.003           0.002
                                           [0.0017]**          [0.0019]*          [0.0007]**      [0.0009]*
Border Dummy                                                     0.046                              0.014
                                                              [0.0036]**                         [0.0027]**
Observations                                 1213                4336               1213            4336
R-squared                                    0.01                 0.07              0.01             0.02
"Width" of the Border                                            98716                              1097


                                                                All Product Groups - All UPCs - City-Specific Weights
Dependent Variable                                         St. Deviation over time of the Log of Price Ratio between Cities
Currency of Canadian Prices                  US $                US $                US $              US $       Canadian $   Canadian $
Data                                    Within Canada             All           Within Canada           All           All         All
Weighted                                      No                  No                 Yes               Yes            No          Yes

Log Distance                                 0.007              0.002               0.007          0.002            0.002         0.002
                                           [0.0007]**         [0.0006]**          [0.0007]**     [0.0006]**      [0.0006]**    [0.0006]**
Border Dummy                                                    0.051                              0.047           -0.005        -0.003
                                                              [0.0000]**                         [0.0000]**        [0.005]       [0.003]
Observations                                 1268               11941               1268           11941           11941         11941
R-squared                                    0.01                0.27               0.01            0.27            0.18          0.18
"Width" of the Border                                         1.19E+11                           1.61E+10             .             .

Robust starndard errors in brackets; * significant at 5% level; ** significant at 1% level.
                                               Table 7: Convergence Rates at the UPC Level

Dependent Variable                                              Log of UPC Price Ratio Relative to Ontario
City Dummies                          No                No               No                Yes                  Yes                   Yes
Value Weights                         No                No               Yes               No                   No                    Yes
                                      (1)               (2)              (3)               (4)                  (5)                   (6)

qugc,t-1                             0.787             0.779              0.866              0.772              0.762             0.853
                                    [0.002]           [0.002]            [0.005]            [0.020]            [0.002]           [0.006]
qugc,t-1 * Border                                      0.079               0.05                                 0.156             0.071
                                                      [0.006]            [0.020]                               [0.008]           [0.024]

Dummy ALB                                                                                   -0.013             -0.014            -0.020
                                                                                            [0.001]            [0.000]           [0.001]
Dummy BRC                                                                                   -0.017             -0.018            -0.020
                                                                                            [0.000]            [0.001]           [0.002]
Dummy MAN                                                                                   -0.009              -0.01            -0.014
                                                                                            [0.000]            [0.001]           [0.002]
Dummy MAR                                                                                    0.004              0.003            -0.006
                                                                                            [0.001]            [0.001]           [0.002]
Dummy QUE                                                                                    0.003              0.003            -0.005
                                                                                            [0.001]            [0.001]           [0.001]
Dummy US                                                                                    -0.005             -0.030            -0.019
                                                                                            [0.005]            [0.002]           [0.007]
Constant                            -0.005            -0.006             -0.012
                                    [0.000]           [0.000]            [0.000]

Observations                        399879            399879             399879            399879             399879             399879
R-squared                            0.39              0.39               0.61               0.4                0.4               0.62

Half-life Within Canada               2.9               2.8               4.8                2.7                2.6                4.4
p-value (†)                          0.000             0.000             0.000              0.000              0.000              0.000

Half-life Across Border                .                4.5               7.9                  .                8.1                8.8
p-value (†)                            .               0.000             0.000                 .               0.000              0.001

Long-Run Convergence
                                    -0.026            -0.026             -0.090             -0.029             -0.029             -0.088
Coefficient within Canada
Absolute Convergence Test
                                     0.000             0.000             0.000              0.000              0.000              0.000
within Canada (p-value)

Equality Test between Within
and Across Absolute                                                                         0.677              0.000              0.291
Convergence (p-value)

(†) P-value for a standarized normal coefficient test based on the asymptotic distribution estimated by Harris and Tzavalis (1999).
(‡) This is the average of the dummies for canada divided by the coefficient on L1dlnp. Standard errors are computed using the
delta method.
Robust standard errors in brackets.
                                                                                       Table 8: Results from Aggregating UPC prices at the product group level

                                               Common UPCs - Common Weights - Small Sample                            Common UPCs - Common Weights - Large Sample               All UPCs - City-Specific Weights - Large Sample
Dependent Variable                            Log of Product Group Price Ratio Relative to Ontario                    Log of Product Group Price Ratio Relative to Ontario    Log of Product Group Price Ratio Relative to Ontario
City Dummies                                  No             No             Yes               Yes                     No             No             Yes               Yes         No              No            Yes          Yes
Product Group Weights                         No            Yes              No               Yes                     No            Yes              No               Yes         No             Yes            No           Yes
                                              (1)            (2)             (3)              (4)                     (5)            (6)             (7)              (8)         (9)            (10)           (11)        (12)

qugc,t-1                                     0.821           0.843            0.82                0.83               0.873          0.967            0.848           0.947      0.989           0.999          0.986        0.995
                                            [0.028]         [0.053]          [0.030]            [0.057]             [0.014]        [0.016]          [0.016]         [0.019]    [0.006]         [0.003]        [0.006]      [0.003]
qugc,t-1 * Border                            0.075           0.038            0.138              0.111               0.015         -0.034            0.135           0.039      -0.01           0.001          0.017        0.033
                                            [0.040]         [0.055]          [0.051]            [0.066]             [0.034]        [0.030]          [0.048]         [0.033]    [0.011]         [0.016]        [0.012]      [0.013]

Dummy ALB                                                                     0.013              0.015                                                0.01           0.009                                     0.002        0.007
                                                                             [0.003]            [0.006]                                             [0.002]         [0.003]                                   [0.003]      [0.003]
Dummy BRC                                                                     0.014              0.018                                               0.013           0.009                                     0.006        0.005
                                                                             [0.004]            [0.005]                                             [0.003]         [0.003]                                   [0.003]      [0.003]
Dummy MAN                                                                     0.003              0.003                                               0.006           0.006                                     0.001        0.003
                                                                             [0.004]            [0.006]                                             [0.003]         [0.003]                                   [0.003]      [0.003]
Dummy MAR                                                                    -0.003              0.003                                                 0             0.004                                    -0.002          0
                                                                             [0.004]            [0.007]                                             [0.003]         [0.003]                                   [0.004]      [0.003]
Dummy QUE                                                                    -0.006             -0.001                                              -0.002           0.003                                    -0.001        0.003
                                                                             [0.004]            [0.007]                                             [0.003]         [0.003]                                   [0.003]      [0.003]
Dummy US                                                                      -0.04             -0.022                                               -0.04           -0.03                                    -0.041       -0.033
                                                                             [0.009]            [0.011]                                             [0.009]         [0.010]                                   [0.005]      [0.012]
Constant                                     0.002           0.006                                                   0.003          0.006                                      -0.001           0.004
                                            [0.001]         [0.002]                                                 [0.001]        [0.001]                                     [0.001]         [0.001]

Observations                                 6144            6144             6144               6144                6144           6144             6144            6144       6432           6432            6432         6432
Average UPCs per product group                5               5                5                   5                  80             80               80              80
R-squared                                    0.63            0.71             0.64               0.71                0.73           0.86             0.72            0.87        0.97           0.98           0.97         0.98

Half-life Within Canada                       4               4                 3                  4                   5             21               4                13         63              .             49           138
p-value (†)                                 0.001           0.012             0.000              0.010               0.001          0.012           0.000            0.010      0.214          1.000          0.063         0.161

Half-life Across countries                     6              5                 16                11                   6             10               40              49         33               .              .            .
         †
p-value ( )                                 0.504           0.000             0.000              0.015               0.504          0.000           0.000            0.015      0.125          1.000          1.000         1.000

Long-Run Convergence Coefficient
                                            0.011           0.039             0.022              0.044               0.024          0.182           0.0342           0.149      -0.091         2.628          0.114         0.879
within Canada
Absolute Convergence Test within
                                            0.093           0.000             0.000              0.000               0.002          0.035           0.000            0.011      0.410          0.628          0.083         0.152
Canada (p-value)

Equality Test between Within and
Across Absolute Convergence (p-                                               0.000              0.015                 .              .             0.000            0.043        .               .              .            .
value)
(†) P-value for a standarized normal coefficient test based on the asymptotic distribution estimated by Harris and Tzavalis (1999).
 ‡
( ) This is the average of the dummies for canada divided by the coefficient on L1dlnp. Standard errors are computed using the delta method.
Robust standard errors in brackets; * significant at 5% level; ** significant at 1% level
         Table 9: Non-Linearity in Price Adjustment within and Across the Border
Dependent Variable                         Log of UPC Price Ratio Relative to Ontario
                                            (1)       (2)            (3)         (4)
City Dummies                               Yes        Yes            Yes         Yes
Product Group Weights                      Yes        Yes            Yes         Yes
                                           Within Canada           Across the Border
qugc,t-1                                  0.779      0.845          0.866       0.984
                                         [0.002]    [0.004]        [0.008]     [0.019]
qugc,t-1 * |qugc,t-1|                               -0.221                      -0.17
                                                    [0.012]                    [0.037]

Observations
Average UPCs per product group        389343      389343           10536       10536

Approximate half-life for a one          2.8        2.2             4.8         6.3
standard deviation price shock

R-squared                               0.37        0.37            0.60        0.60
                      Table 10: A Simple Example of the Role of Non-Linearities


                                                  Log Price Difference Relative to Ontario
                                       Initial Log Price Deviation
                                                                        Period 1             Period 2
                                                 (Period 0)
Good 1                                               0.5                  0.450               0.408
Good 2                                              -0.5                 -0.450              -0.408
Good 3                                             0.05                   0.047               0.045

Average                                          0.0159                  0.0155              0.0151

Estimation Results Based on Simulated Data

Aggregate Convergence Coefficient                   0.968
Aggregate Half-Life                                  21
Microdata Convergence Coefficient                   0.903
Microdata Half-Life                                   7
Note: In this table we conduct a assume that all price deviations decay with the non-linear decay rates
given by the across-the-border specification in Table 9. The aggregate convergence rate and half-life
are computed using the average price deviation data assuming the researcher runs a simple
regression of the current log price on its lag and assumes no non-linearities. The microdata
convergence rate and half-life are computed analogously using the microdata for goods 1,2, and 3.
                                                               Appendix Figures and Tables

                                                                          Figure A1


                                                     Distance Equivalent of Border Effect
Distance Equivalent of Border in Miles

                                                        (Weighted Regression Results)
                                     10000
          nfidence Band (DDashed)



                                         1000
               (Solid)




                                         100
   95% Con




                                           10




                                            1
                                                Q1 2001   Q2   Q3    Q4     Q1 2002   Q2     Q3   Q4   Q1 2003   Q2   Q3   Q4
                Table A1: Examples of Common UPCs across the Border

UPC          UPC Descriptor                         Product Group Descriptor

6897829901   PLAYSTATION 2 RF ADAPTER 1S (#         AUDIO/VIDEO/COMPUTER UNITS
6897879500   XBOX UNI RF ADAPTER 1S (#79500         AUDIO/VIDEO/COMPUTER UNITS

1380300201   CANON POWERSHOT A10 DIG CAMERA CAMERAS/FILM/ACCESSORIES
1821070001   NIKON COOLPIX 2000 DIGITAL CAM CAMERAS/FILM/ACCESSORIES

5820038576   LUCERNE BUTTER UNSALTED 454GM          BUTTER & MARGARINE
5574227472   SMART CHOICE SOFT TUB 454 GM(#         BUTTER & MARGARINE

5980061302   NESTLE AFTER EIGHT BISCUIT CAR         COOKIES & SWEET BISCUITS
7241709129   CADBURY CARAMEL FINGERS 125 GM         COOKIES & SWEET BISCUITS

5610015728   PRINGLES REGULAR PLAIN 50 GM           SNACK FOODS
6041002521   LAYS CLASSIC PLAIN BIG GRAB 70         SNACK FOODS

5218132276   SAFETY 1ST FISH N ROD TUB TOY          TOYS
6487432633   MATTEL HOT WHEELS RIPPIN WHEEL         TOYS
           Table A2: Regressions of the Share of Common UPCs on Distance and the Border

                         Share of Common UPCs                    Share of Common UPCs (in terms of the
                     (in terms of the count of UPCs)                        value of UPCs)
                    US-US        Can-Can        US-Can             US-US      Can-Can       US-Can
Ln(Distance)       -0.0301***     -0.0460**     -0.0184***       -0.0301***     -0.0238    -0.0186***
                    [0.0029]       [0.018]        [0.0032]        [0.0028]       [0.027]     [0.0029]
Border Dummy                                     -0.134***                                  -0.157***
                                                  [0.0061]                                   [0.0056]
Constant            0.434***      0.972***       0.347***            0.469***   0.888***    0.387***
                     [0.026]       [0.16]          [0.027]            [0.025]    [0.24]       [0.023]
Observations            45           15              105                 45        15           105
R-squared             0.82          0.88            0.97                0.8       0.83         0.97
Robust standard errors in brackets; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
                                                                    Appendix Table A3: Law of One Price Deviations within City/Region Pairs in the U.S. and Canada

                                        Number of       Price Differences across Cities Common UPCs ONLY                                                           Number of   Price Differences across Cities Common UPCs ONLY
                                      Common UPCs          Median       Standard Deviation Median Absolute                                                       Common UPCs    Median       Standard Deviation Median Absolute
City/Region 1      City/Region 2           (1)               (2)               (3)               (4)                      City/Region 1       City/Region 2           (1)          (2)               (3)               (4)

                                                      U.S. - U.S.                                                                                                       U.S. - Canada

Boston             Chicago                 10,362           0.000             0.226              0.117                    Boston              Alberta                1737         0.018          0.267              0.152
Boston             Houston                 10,235           0.017             0.212              0.107                    Boston              British Columbia       1686         0.021          0.265              0.162
Boston             Los Angeles              9,119           0.000             0.242              0.134                    Boston              Manitoba               1517         0.038          0.256              0.147
Boston             New York                11,503           0.000             0.223              0.115                    Boston              Maritimes              1529         0.031          0.272              0.162
Boston             Atlanta                 10,257           0.001             0.208              0.098                    Boston              Ontario                2513         0.030          0.275              0.164
Boston             Detroit                 10,863           0.000             0.220              0.110                    Boston              Quebec                 1616         0.036          0.275              0.175
Boston             Philadelphia            12,346           0.000             0.220              0.106                    Chicago             Alberta                1569         0.025          0.255              0.145
Boston             Rochester               10,996           0.000             0.214              0.102                    Chicago             British Columbia       1595         0.013          0.256              0.145
Boston             Phoenix                 10,111           0.000             0.227              0.117                    Chicago             Manitoba               1450         0.038          0.259              0.145
Chicago            Houston                 11,102           0.038             0.221              0.123                    Chicago             Maritimes              1407         0.034          0.274              0.155
Chicago            Los Angeles              9,773           0.000             0.234              0.120                    Chicago             Ontario                2275         0.028          0.267              0.160
Chicago            New York                 9,231           0.000             0.232              0.122                    Chicago             Quebec                 1442         0.029          0.274              0.171
Chicago            Atlanta                 10,677           0.021             0.219              0.114                    Houston             Alberta                1548         -0.013         0.249              0.153
Chicago            Detroit                 12,798           0.000             0.222              0.106                    Houston             British Columbia       1552         -0.028         0.250              0.149
Chicago            Philadelphia            11,213           0.000             0.226              0.112                    Houston             Manitoba               1408         -0.003         0.254              0.144
Chicago            Rochester               10,466           0.000             0.214              0.102                    Houston             Maritimes              1375         -0.003         0.267              0.152
Chicago            Phoenix                 10,996           0.000             0.227              0.112                    Houston             Ontario                2191         -0.010         0.269              0.163
Houston            Los Angeles             10,425          -0.039             0.241              0.141                    Houston             Quebec                 1450         -0.007         0.264              0.161
Houston            New York                 8,910          -0.062             0.235              0.143                    Los Angeles         Alberta                1558         0.007          0.257              0.147
Houston            Atlanta                 13,209           0.000             0.193              0.083                    Los Angeles         British Columbia       1558         -0.001         0.262              0.162
Houston            Detroit                 12,322          -0.023             0.213              0.113                    Los Angeles         Manitoba               1356         0.025          0.256              0.156
Houston            Philadelphia            10,823          -0.013             0.214              0.109                    Los Angeles         Maritimes              1337         0.027          0.267              0.154
Houston            Rochester               10,074          -0.018             0.215              0.109                    Los Angeles         Ontario                2210         0.021          0.279              0.169
Houston            Phoenix                 12,853          -0.019             0.218              0.115                    Los Angeles         Quebec                 1437         0.018          0.272              0.158
Los Angeles        New York                 8,346           0.000             0.252              0.136                    New York            Alberta                1514         0.035          0.267              0.159
Los Angeles        Atlanta                  9,494           0.029             0.239              0.133                    New York            British Columbia       1518         0.038          0.271              0.169
Los Angeles        Detroit                 10,116           0.002             0.237              0.124                    New York            Manitoba               1358         0.057          0.257              0.166
Los Angeles        Philadelphia             9,361           0.002             0.245              0.135                    New York            Maritimes              1401         0.067          0.267              0.167
Los Angeles        Rochester                8,449           0.000             0.236              0.124                    New York            Ontario                2313         0.056          0.269              0.168
Los Angeles        Phoenix                 12,752           0.000             0.222              0.102                    New York            Quebec                 1522         0.061          0.273              0.173
New York           Atlanta                  8,963           0.043             0.229              0.131                    Atlanta             Alberta                1383         -0.017         0.251              0.154
New York           Detroit                  9,964           0.001             0.232              0.118                    Atlanta             British Columbia       1363         -0.016         0.257              0.159
New York           Philadelphia            12,893           0.003             0.226              0.116                    Atlanta             Manitoba               1234         0.004          0.257              0.151
New York           Rochester                9,723           0.000             0.233              0.119                    Atlanta             Maritimes              1241         0.014          0.266              0.163
New York           Phoenix                  8,684           0.000             0.240              0.128                    Atlanta             Ontario                1982         0.001          0.273              0.168
Atlanta            Detroit                 12,539          -0.005             0.208              0.105                    Atlanta             Quebec                 1345         0.000          0.265              0.163
Atlanta            Philadelphia            11,280           0.000             0.212              0.098                    Detroit             Alberta                1756         0.007          0.262              0.152
Atlanta            Rochester               10,616           0.000             0.209              0.094                    Detroit             British Columbia       1755         0.010          0.270              0.161
Atlanta            Phoenix                 11,464          -0.007             0.218              0.111                    Detroit             Manitoba               1608         0.022          0.256              0.151
Detroit            Philadelphia            11,984           0.000             0.221              0.107                    Detroit             Maritimes              1617         0.034          0.270              0.159
Detroit            Rochester               11,593           0.000             0.214              0.096                    Detroit             Ontario                2587         0.023          0.276              0.163
Detroit            Phoenix                 11,603           0.000             0.224              0.111                    Detroit             Quebec                 1662         0.024          0.267              0.164
Philadelphia       Rochester               12,196           0.000             0.214              0.100                    Philadelphia        Alberta                1624         0.024          0.254              0.151
Philadelphia       Phoenix                 10,510           0.000             0.231              0.119                    Philadelphia        British Columbia       1616         0.021          0.268              0.163
Rochester          Phoenix                  9,675           0.000             0.226              0.113                    Philadelphia        Manitoba               1464         0.034          0.260              0.165
                                                                                                                          Philadelphia        Maritimes              1455         0.036          0.271              0.159
All 45 US city comparisons:                                                                                               Philadelphia        Ontario                2411         0.031          0.270              0.168
Median                                   10,616             0.000             0.223              0.113                    Philadelphia        Quebec                 1549         0.036          0.265              0.161
Average                                  10,730            -0.001             0.224              0.114                    Rochester           Alberta                1495         0.014          0.265              0.162
St. Deviation                             1,303             0.016             0.012              0.013                    Rochester           British Columbia       1509         0.002          0.272              0.171
                                                                                                                          Rochester           Manitoba               1381         0.021          0.271              0.164
                                                    Canada - Canada                                                       Rochester           Maritimes              1388         0.026          0.274              0.171
                                                                                                                          Rochester           Ontario                2215         0.026          0.282              0.177
Alberta            British Columbia      29014             0.000              0.160              0.063                    Rochester           Quebec                 1455         0.037          0.274              0.170
Alberta            Manitoba              27824             0.000              0.154              0.056                    Phoenix             Alberta                1629         -0.015         0.258              0.154
Alberta            Maritimes             22004             0.022              0.188              0.096                    Phoenix             British Columbia       1667         -0.010         0.268              0.156
Alberta            Ontario               30995             0.003              0.187              0.085                    Phoenix             Manitoba               1483         0.015          0.261              0.156
Alberta            Quebec                22359             0.005              0.193              0.094                    Phoenix             Maritimes              1410         0.016          0.268              0.156
British Columbia   Manitoba              25094             0.007              0.168              0.071                    Phoenix             Ontario                2303         0.006          0.278              0.163
British Columbia   Maritimes             20286             0.031              0.196              0.106                    Phoenix             Quebec                 1532         0.002          0.282              0.169
British Columbia   Ontario               29281             0.016              0.194              0.096
British Columbia   Quebec                21126             0.017              0.200              0.103
Manitoba           Maritimes             20879             0.008              0.189              0.092                    All 60 Uscity-Canadian region comparisons:
Manitoba           Ontario               28757             0.000              0.185              0.083                    Median                                     1,531        0.021          0.267              0.161
Manitoba           Quebec                20994             0.000              0.192              0.089                    Average                                    1,634        0.019          0.266              0.160
Maritimes          Ontario               30914             0.000              0.168              0.066                    St. Deviation                               328         0.020          0.008              0.008
Maritimes          Quebec                24800             0.000              0.171              0.073
Ontario            Quebec                35374             0.000              0.165              0.068

All 15 Canadian Region comparisons:
Median                                   25,094            0.003              0.187              0.085
Average                                  25,980            0.007              0.181              0.083
St. Deviation                             4,682            0.010              0.015              0.016
