                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             ESTIMATION OF DE FACTO EXCHANGE RATE REGIMES:
SYNTHESIS OF THE TECHNIQUES FOR INFERRING FLEXIBILITY AND BASKET WEIGHTS

                                           Jeffrey A. Frankel
                                             Shang-Jin Wei

                                         Working Paper 14016
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w14016


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2008




 The authors wish to thank Danxia Xie for excellent research assistance and Steve Kamin and other
 participants at the IMF Annual Research Conference for useful comments; and to thank the Mossavar-Rahmani
 Center of Business and Government and the Kuwait Fund of the Kennedy School of Government for
 support. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views
 of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

 NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
 reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
 NBER publications.

 © 2008 by Jeffrey A. Frankel and Shang-Jin Wei. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
 exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
 © notice, is given to the source.
Estimation of De Facto Exchange Rate Regimes: Synthesis of the Techniques for Inferring
Flexibility and Basket Weights
Jeffrey A. Frankel and Shang-Jin Wei
NBER Working Paper No. 14016
May 2008
JEL No. F31,F41

                                              ABSTRACT

The paper offers a new approach to estimate de facto exchange rate regimes, a synthesis of two techniques.
One is a technique that the authors have used in the past to estimate implicit de facto weights when
the hypothesis is a basket peg with little flexibility. The second is a technique used by others to estimate
the de facto degree of exchange rate flexibility when the hypothesis is an anchor to the dollar or some
other single major currency, but with a possibly-substantial degree of flexibility around that anchor.
Since many currencies today follow variants of Band-Basket-Crawl, it is important to have available
a technique that can cover both dimensions, inferring weights and inferring flexibility. We try out
the technique on twenty-some currencies, over the period 1980-2007. Most are currencies that have
officially used baskets as anchors for at least part of this sample period. But a few are known floaters
or known simple peggers. In general the synthesis technique seems to work as it should.


Jeffrey A. Frankel
Harvard Kennedy School
Harvard University
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
jeffrey_frankel@harvard.edu

Shang-Jin Wei
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
Uris Hall, Room 619
3022 Broadway
New York, NY 10027-6902
and NBER
sw2446@columbia.edu
                    Estimation of De Facto Exchange Rate Regimes:
      Synthesis of the Techniques for Inferring Flexibility and Basket Weights

                         Jeffrey Frankel, Harvard University
                       and Shang-Jin Wei, Columbia University


        Exchange rate surveillance has moved back to the top of the lists of the IMF’s
mandates and priorities. Before one can evaluate whether a given country is following
the right exchange rate regime, however, one must decide what the regime is that it is
following. This seemingly simple task is far harder than one might think. Perhaps the
Fund staff could use some new analytical tools if it is to pursue this assignment
conscientiously and persuasively. This paper proposes a technique to classify a de facto
regime. It estimates simultaneously the implicit currency weights in the basket that
anchors the home currency, and the degree of flexibility around that anchor.

De facto versus De Jure Classification of Exchange Rate Regimes

        It is by now well-known that there is a big difference between de facto exchange
rate regimes, that is, the regimes that countries follow in practice, and de jure exchange
rate regimes, that is, the regimes that national governments officially claim to be
following and which, at least until 1997, were reproduced by the International Monetary
Fund almost unquestioningly in the table at the front of International Financial Statistics.
The discrepancy between de facto and de jure is pervasive. In the first place, most
countries that claim to “fix” are not, in fact, firmly fixed. Countries declaring a peg,
often abandon it. Obstfeld & Rogoff pointed out in their 1995 article “The Mirage of
Fixed Rates,” that only 6 major economies (leaving aside some with capital controls) had
kept a peg longer than five years. Klein and Marion (1997) reported that the mean
duration of pegs in the Western Hemisphere was only 10 months.
        In the second place, most countries that claim to “float,” are not in fact floating.
Calvo & Reinhart (2002) coined the phrase “Fear of Floating.” They showed that the
variability of foreign exchange reserves relative to the variability of the exchange rate
was not only substantial for those who claimed to be floating (one might expect zero for a
true pure floater), but that it tended to be fully as great as for those who are officially
pegging. Many emerging market countries that claim to float, sometimes under an
official monetary rule of Inflation Targeting, in fact have intervened heavily in recent
years to dampen the appreciation of their currencies.
        In the third place, many countries that claim to be following one of the transparent
intermediate regimes, namely a basket peg (or even a basket with a band), keep the
weights in the basket secret. The most logical motivation is so that the government can
surreptitiously depart from the official regime. When a country declares a basket peg
with a band, it typically would take more than 100 observations for an observer to
distinguish statistically whether it is in fact following this policy (Frankel, Schmukler &
Serven, 2000). The national authorities are no doubt aware of this when they decide to
keep the basket weights secret.




                                                                                          2
        There is no more topical illustration of this problem than the Chinese yuan. The
Beijing authorities announced a change in exchange rate regime in July 2005, a switch
away from a dollar peg and toward a more flexible regime with reference to a basket of
11 currencies, with a small (but cumulative) band. They did not announce what were the
weights on the currencies. As with so many other basket peggers, there is reason to
suspect that the secrecy is not an accidental oversight. It is there deliberately to cloak a
discrepancy between de jure and de facto. That the yuan is not just another currency --
but lies at the heart of the disagreement to which the United States currently chooses to
give top priority in its relations with China -- makes it a particularly relevant example.

    There are by now many attempts to discern the true “de facto” exchange rate regimes
that countries actually follow. Some of the more prominent include Ghosh, Gulde &
Wolf (2002), Levy-Yeyati & Sturzenegger (2005), Reinhart & Rogoff (2003, 2004) and
Shambaugh (2004). Most of these classification schemes depart from the official
classification in the direction of counting as de facto floating a country that has high
variability of the exchange rate (or of the change in the exchange rate), relative to
variability of reserves, and counting as fixed a country that has low variability of the
exchange rate relative to reserves. A recent survey covers 11 studies.1 It divided the
studies into two categories, viewed as:
    z “pure de facto classifications because…assignment of regimes is based solely on
        statistical algorithms and/or econometric estimation.”
    z Vs. “mixed de jure-de facto classifications, because the self-declared regimes are
        adjusted by the devisers for anomalies.” One of the latter is the official product of
        the IMF’s former Monetary and Exchange Affairs Department: Bubula & Otker-
        Robe (2002), where the adjustment is accomplished both by consulting IMF
        economists and by looking at movements in reserves & exchange rates.

    While the discrepancy between the de jure regimes and any given de facto regime is
well-known, it is less widely recognized that the various de facto regimes hardly
correspond any more closely to each other than to the official classification.2 Table 1
reports calculations of correlations or correspondence across different classification
schemes. There are various explanations for the variation in conclusions reached by the
different classification schemes: differences in methodology, different choices as to
where to draw the line between regimes, differences in timing of the data, and so forth.
But perhaps the best way of summarizing the problem is that, apart from a relatively
small number of countries that peg firmly (e.g., countries with institutional commitments
in the form of currency boards) and the handful that float freely (e.g., the United States),
most follow some messy intermediate regime that is not easily identified or
unambiguously classified. This flies in the face of the famous “Corners Hypothesis” that
rapidly became the conventional wisdom in the late 1990s, and has subsequently declined
almost as rapidly. The Corners Hypothesis claimed that countries were abandoning the
intermediate regimes in favor of the two corners: exchange rates fixed institutionally, as
through a currency board, vs. freely floating exchange rates. But it is a fact that a

1
  Tavlas, Dellas & Stockman (2006).
2
  Indeed, in the table computed by Shambaugh (2004), the correspondence among three de facto schemes
tends to be lower than between each of them and the de jure scheme.


                                                                                                       3
majority of countries continue to follow some regime in between firm fixing and free
floating.3

      Table 1a: Correlations Among Regime Classification Schemes

                                  IMF                      GGW                        LY-S      R-R
                                    1.00
          IMF
                                    0.60                      1.00
         GGW
                                    0.28                      0.13                    1.00
         LY-S
                                    0.33                      0.34                    0.41        1.00
          R-R
      Sample: 47 countries.
      IMF ≡ De Jure classification from International Financial Statistics, International Monetary Fund
      GGW≡ De facto classification from Ghosh, Gulde and Wolf (2002)
      LY-S ≡ De facto classification from Levy Yeyati and Sturzenegger (2005)
      R-R ≡ De facto classification from Reinhart and Rogoff (2004)
      Source: Frankel (2004), Table 3, prepared by Marina Halac & Sergio Schmukler.




      Table 1b: Correlations Among Regime Classification Schemes




      Source: Bénassy-Quéré et al (2004).
      BQCM ≡ the authors’ own de facto classification scheme.
      LYS ≡ De facto classification from Levy Yeyati and Sturzenegger
      IMF ≡ De jure facto classification from International Monetary Fund
      BOR ≡ De facto classification from Bubula and Otker-Robe (2003), International Monetary Fund




3
    Masson (2001).


                                                                                                          4
Table 1.c: Percentage agreement of methodologies to code who pegs
                              De Jure             Shambaugh                  LY-S            R-R

        De Jure                  100%


     Shambaugh                   86%                   100%


          LY-S                   74%                    80%                  100%


          R-R                    81%                    82%                   73%            100%

Source: Shambaugh (2004), Table A1.                All codings are collapsed to binary peg and nonpeg.




         One intermediate regime is the basket peg. Often it comes combined with a
managed float that “leans against the wind” to push the current exchange rate back in the
direction of the central parity when it wanders afield, or more specifically with an
announced band (target zone). 4 In any case, the weights in the basket are often kept
secret, as already noted. There exists a branch of the de facto classification literature that
is different from and smaller than the research on flexibility versus fixity cited above.
The second approach applies especially to countries that are thought possibly to use
baskets, for example because they say they do. This approach discerns from actual data
the implicit weights placed on the constituent foreign currencies of the basket. The
simple methodology was first developed in the early 1990s to test whether a country that
announces a basket peg but does not reveal the exact weighting of the component
currencies is acting in a manner consistent with its words: Frankel (1993) and Frankel
and Wei (1994, 1995). The approach has since been used by others, including Bénassy-
Quéré (1999), Ohno (1999), Frankel, Schmukler and Servén (2000), Frankel, Schmukler,
Servén and Fajnzylber (2001) and Bénassy-Quéré, Coeuré, and Mignon (2004).5

        These two branches of the literature have hitherto remained separate, in splendid
isolation. It could be argued that each has its own place. If one is confident that a
country is following a basket peg, and is unsure only of the weights, one should then use
the weight-inference technique. If one is confident of the major anchor currency (dollar,
euro, etc.) in terms of which a government defines the value of its own currency, and is

4
  Williamson (2001) proposes that many Asian countries should adopt combinations of baskets and bands
(and perhaps crawls, which he pioneered).
5
  More recently, it has been applied to China’s yuan: Eichengreen (2006), Shah, Zeileis, and Patnaik
(2005), Yamazaki (2006, p.8) and Frankel and Wei (2007).


                                                                                                        5
unsure only of the strength of the effort to stabilize, then one should use one of the
methods of the larger branch of the literature, such as comparing the variability of the
exchange rate (vis a vis the dollar or euro, etc.) to the variability of reserves. The
problem is that some countries do define a central parity in terms of weights but then
allow variation around that parity. China since 2005 is a good example of a country that
claims to be doing this, and Chile in the 1990s is a good example of a country that
actually did it. And even if one suspects that a country is in truth following a simple peg,
it is always better to have a meaningful alternative hypothesis within which the null
hypothesis is nested. Thus we want to estimate basket weights, rather than presuming we
know the anchor currency, while at the same time allowing for some variation around the
central parity, as in a target zone or managed floating. Hence our proposal for a synthesis
of the two types of techniques in use for estimating de facto regimes.

Inferring the De facto Degree of Flexibility

        It is important when inferring the de facto flexibility of an exchange rate regime
to look beyond the variability of the exchange rate in itself. The korona could show a
higher degree of variability than the thollar, and yet this might be because the korona has
been subject to larger shocks than the thollar, rather than because the authorities intervene
less and allow a given shock to show up more in the form of price movement. Thus we
want to look at the variability of the exchange rate relative to the variability of foreign
exchange reserves, or the monetary base, or some other monetary aggregate.

        Figure 1 is a preliminary look at the data on exchange rate variability and reserve
variability for 15 countries. We selected our sample to emphasize countries that claim to
follow a basket peg, but added in a few that are known to be firm peggers and others that
are known to be floaters, to be able to calibrate the results along the fixed-versus-floating
dimension. We chose nine (small) countries that have been officially identified by the
IMF as following basket pegs: Latvia, Papua New Guinea, Botswana, Vanuatu, Fiji,
Western Samoa, Malta and the Seychelles. We also added several known floaters:
Australia, Canada and Japan, and three peggers of special interest: Hong Kong, China
and Malaysia. The paper emphasizes commodity-exporting countries, such as Norway,
in our list of currencies examined, for reasons that will be obvious later.6 Variances are
computed for 7-year intervals, within the period 1980-2007. The aim in choosing this
length of the interval is that it be long enough to generate reliable estimates of the
parameters, and yet not so long as inevitably to include important changes in each
country’s exchange rate regime. Here, as throughout this paper, we work with
logarithmic changes in the exchange rate.



6
  Before any readers hear faint alarm bells about the absence of a complete or random sample, we will note
that we have no need of a random or complete sample. We have no need of a random sample because,
although we are testing hypotheses about individual currencies, we are not testing any general hypotheses
(like all countries are at the corners). We have no need of a complete sample, because we are not
attempting to offer a complete classification of IMF members as many of the other papers in the literature
have done. Rather we are proposing a new technique. We have chosen to try it out on countries that we
think are of interest for one reason or another.


                                                                                                         6
         An upward-sloping line runs from the origin, and through the point representing
average variance of (logarithmic change in) reserves and the average variance of
(logarithmic change in) reserves. The points that lie well above this upward-sloping line
represent countries that intervened actively in the foreign exchange market to stabilize
their currencies during the period in question, for example, the Seychelles. The points
that lie well below this upward-sloping line represent flexible-rate countries, where the
authorities allow fluctuations in the demand for their currencies to show up primarily as
movements in the exchange rate, for example, Japan. The downward sloping line runs
through the point representing the medians of reserve variability and exchange rate
variability, and is also drawn so that half the points are above and to the right of the line,
and the other half are below and to the left. The points in the first category represent
countries where shocks tend to be large; this tends particularly to be the case with
commodity producers, such as Botswana and Papua New Guinea. The points below and
to the left of the downward-sloping lines represent countries where shocks tend to be
small, for example, Hong Kong.
         Several interesting lessons emerge from the graph, even without further analysis.
The first is the folly of judging a country’s exchange rate regime – specifically, the extent
to which it seeks to stabilize the value of its currency – by looking simply at variation in
the exchange rate. The 1980-86 Australian dollar shows a higher exchange rate
variance than the 2001-07 Japanese yen. But this is not because the Australian dollar
followed a more flexible exchange rate policy at that time. It is rather because Australia
was hit by much larger shocks. One must focus on exchange rate variability relative to
reserve variability to gauge where the country sits on the spectrum from fixed to floating.
Perhaps this is obvious, but some have focused exclusively on exchange rate variability.7
         The second interesting lesson to be drawn from the graph – though a less original
observation than the first – is that countries that specialize in mineral products tend to
have larger shocks, which presumably take the form primarily of volatility in their terms
of trade. The third lesson, which was quite surprising when it was first noticed but
should be familiar by now, is that even countries that float hold and use foreign exchange
reserves in substantial magnitudes, sometimes more actively than countries that peg.8
An example in the graph is Canada in the 1980s. The fourth lesson is a counterpart to
the third: a currency with a firm peg like the Hong Kong dollar can experience very low
variability of reserves, because it has very low variability of shocks. It may in part be
the absence of commodities in Hong Kong’s production portfolio that makes possible the
low level of shocks. But the low variability in international demand for the Hong Kong
dollar must also result in part from the stability and credibility that the currency board has
itself achieved. After all, Hong Kong did experience large shocks in the late 1990s – the
reversion of the territory from Britain to China and the East Asia crisis – and yet the
shocks do not show up in either the exchange rate or reserves. Reassuring nervous



7
  Among the sinners one could point to are the Frankel and Frankel-Wei papers listed in the references.
8
  In the early 1970s, when the international monetary system moved from fixed exchange rates to floating,
the demand for international reserves did not fall as would have been predicted. Early references include
Frenkel (1978) and Bilson and Frenkel (1979). Similarly, when many emerging market countries switched
to more flexible exchange rate exchange rate regimes, or even to outright floating, in the currency crises of
1994-2002, the demand for reserves subsequently did not fall, but rather rose sharply (Rodrik, 2006).


                                                                                                           7
                    Figure 1: Comparison of % Reserve Variability Vs. % Exchange Rate Variability

  Currencies:
      Canadian dollar (cad), Hong Kong dollar (hkd), Malaysian ringgit (myr), Chinese yuan (cny), Japanese yen (jpy), Latvian lat
      (lvl), Papua New Guinea kina (png), Botswana pula (bwp), Vanuatu (vuv), Fiji dollar, Western Samoa tala (wst), Maltese lira
      (mtl), Seychelles rupee (scr), Norwegian kroner (nok), and Australian dollar (aud).

      (Each data point represents a 7-year period, denoted in the suffix by the starting year of each period)
      Periods of countries with yearly inflation rate higher than 40% have been eliminated




                                  Variance of ∆Reserves vs. Variance of ∆Exchange Rate
                                                                                   1980-2007, in 7-year intervals
                    .06
Variance of ∆ log Reserves*




                                                                                                                       vuv80
                                                                                    scr80                                                                                  png94



                                                                                                                       wst81

                                                                                                                                                                               bwp80
                    .04

                                                       scr94
                                                                         scr87
                                                                 scr01

                    .02                            cad80

                                                                                 png80
                                                                                                                               aud80
                                                                 png87
                                                           fiji80
                                                    cad87
                                                                                  vuv87                png01                fiji87
                                                   vuv94
                                                      cad94                         nok94    aud94 aud01        nok80 nok87
                                                 myr87myr80    lvl03 wst88                           aud87
                                                                fiji01
                                                 lvl96wst02 vuv01
                                                            wst95                               fiji94       nok01                                          myr94

                              0        hkd94
                                         myr01
                                       hkd01
                                        cny05
                                                                           mtl01
                                                                            mtl80
                                                                          cad01
                                                                             bwp94
                                                                                          bwp87
                                                                                      jpy01                       mtl87 jpy87
                                                                                                                           mtl94       jpy80   jpy94    bwp01



                                   0                                 .0005                           .001           .0015                                               .002
                                                                                         Variance of ∆ log Exchange Rate (in US$)
                                                           Country from year t to year t+6
                                                                                                    Shocks line                                        Floating/Fix line

                    * Intervention is computed by subtracting imputed interest earnings from reported change in reserves.




                                                                                                                                                                    8
investors presumably was the goal in the first place, when the Crown Colony of Hong
Kong adopted the currency board in 1983.

        It is for just such reasons that the classification schemes of Calvo & Reinhart
(2002) and Levy-Yeyati & Sturzenegger (2005) do not look at exchange rate variability
alone (prices), but rather compare it to variability in reserves or money supplies
(quantities). The question is: when there is a shock that increases international demand
for korona, to what extent do the authorities allow it to show up as an appreciation, and to
what extent as an increase in reserves. In this paper, we frame the issue in terms of the
Exchange Market Pressure variable, which is defined as the percentage increase in the
value of the currency plus the percentage increase in reserves (or the monetary base, or
M1).9 When this variable appears on the right-hand side of an equation and the
percentage increase in the value of the currency appears on the left, a coefficient of 0
signifies a completely fixed exchange rate (no changes in the value of the currency), a
coefficient of 1 signifies a freely floating rate (no changes in reserves) and a coefficient
somewhere in between indicates a correspondingly flexible/stable intermediate regime.

        One limitation of these and other papers that estimate flexibility versus stability of
exchange rate regimes is that they sometimes have to make arbitrary judgments regarding
what is the major currency in terms of which flexibility and stability are to be defined.
The dollar is the most common choice. This may be fine for most Western Hemisphere
countries (though in fact not for Chile, and perhaps not Argentina and Brazil either). But
for European countries, the euro is obviously more relevant. And for many others,
particularly in Asia and the Pacific, and probably also the Middle East and parts of Africa,
the relevant foreign currency is neither the dollar nor the euro, but some (possibly trade-
weighted) basket. It would be better to let the data tell us what is the relevant anchor for
a given country, especially for those that are not clearly in either the dollar or euro camp,
rather than making the judgment subjectively or a priori.10

Inferring De Facto Weights

        So, on the one hand, the main branch of the regime classification literature has the
drawback that -- in its zeal to uncover the true degree of flexibility – it is unable to infer
the relevant anchor. But, on the other hand, the smaller branch of the literature
specializes in inferring the relevant anchor currency or basket under the null hypothesis
of a perfect fit, equally omits to include anything to help make sense out of the error term
under the alternative hypothesis that the country is not perfectly pegged to a major
currency or to a basket. The equation is correctly specified to infer the weights in the
case of a perfect basket peg, with an R2 of 1, but is on less firm ground if the authorities
allow even a relatively small band of flexibility around the central parity. Thus the
contribution of this paper is to bring these two branches of the literature together to
produce a complete equation suitable for use in inferring de facto regimes across the
spectrum of flexibility and across the array of possible anchors.

9
  The progenitor of the Exchange Market Pressure variable, in a rather different context, was Girton and
Roper (1977).
10
   Clearly many of the authors of these papers are fully aware of the issue.


                                                                                                           9
        Assume that the value of the home currency is indeed determined by a currency
basket. How does one then uncover the currency composition and weights in the basket?
This is a problem to which Ordinary Least Squares regression is unusually well suited.
If we know the list of currencies in the basket, or a list that includes as a subset those that
are used in the basket, then we regress changes in the log of H, the value of the home
currency against changes in the log values of the candidate currencies. This technique
from Frankel and Wei (1984, 1985) has recently been applied to the current Chinese
exchange rate regime.11
        The reason to work in terms of changes rather than levels is the likelihood of non-
stationarity. Concern for nonstationarity goes beyond the common refrain of modern
time series econometrics, the inability to reject statistically a unit root, which in many
cases can be attributed to insufficient power. Working in changes, we can also include a
constant term to allow for the likelihood of a trend appreciation (a key question of
interest in the new RMB regime) or trend depreciation (as in the crawling pegs popular in
Latin American and elsewhere in the 80s), whether against the dollar alone or a broader
basket. Algebraically, if the value of the home currency H is pegged to the values of
currencies X1, X2, … and Xn, with weights equal to w1, w2, … and wn, then

logH(t+s)-logH (t) = c + ∑ w(j) [logX(j, t+s) - logX(j, t)]                                                 (1)

If the exchange rate is truly governed by a strict basket peg, then we should be able to
recover the true weights, w(j), precisely, so long as we have more observations than
candidate currencies, and the equation should have a perfect fit.

        One methodological question, before we turn to the new synthesis estimation
specification. How do we define the “value” of each of the currencies? This is the
question of the numeraire. 12

11
   Shah, Zeileis, and Patnaik (2005) adopted the implicit-weight methodology to study the Chinese currency
basket after July 21, 2005 and found that the RMB is still tightly pegged to the dollar and nothing else.
However, they only consider four candidate currencies in the RMB basket (the dollar, the yen, the euro, and
the pound), probably unaware of the eleven-currency disclosure made the Chinese central bank. In addition,
their sample was only the initial few months after July 21, 2005. Frankel and Wei (2006) extended to 11
the components of the basket, but found that the RMB regime in the second half of 2005 was still a tight
dollar peg – as tight as that of the Hong Kong SAR regime. Eichengreen (2006, p. 22-25) had daily
observations of data that ran from July 22, 2005, to March 21, 2006, and found a dollar weight around .9,
but with no evidence of a downward trend in the weight, and no significance on non-dollar currencies.
Each of these three papers was too early to catch the evolution in 2006. Yamazaki (2006, p.8) updated the
estimation, and found some weight had shifted to the euro, yen and won; but he estimated the equation in
terms of levels rather than changes (risking non-stationarity), did not allow for a trend, did not allow for the
other currencies on the list, and had a relatively small number of (bimonthly) observations. Frankel and
Wei (2007) updated the estimation, ran the equation in monthly changes, included the full list of 11
candidate currencies, and allowed for gradual evolution during the sample period in both the basket weights
and the trend term. We were not able to implement the present paper’s methodological innovation in the
case of the post-2005 RMB, because reserve data are only available monthly, and 18 observations are not
enough for estimation.
12
  Frankel (1993) used purchasing power over a consumer basket of domestic goods as numeraire; Frankel
and Wei (1995) used the SDR; Frankel and Wei (1994, 2006), Ohno (1999), and Eichengreen (2006) used


                                                                                                            10
         If the exchange rate is truly a basket peg, the choice of numeraire currency is
immaterial; we estimate the weights accurately regardless. If the linear equation holds
precisely in terms of any one “correct” numeraire, then add the log exchange rate
between that numeraire and any arbitrary unit to see that the equation also holds precisely
in terms of the arbitrary numeraire. This assumes the weights add to 1, and there is no
error term, constant term, or other non-currency variable.
         In practice, few countries take their basket pegs literally enough to produce such a
tight fit. One must then start to think about the nature of the error term and non-basket
factors in the regression (such as the trend term), and about whether they are better
measured in terms of one numeraire or another. The introduction of reserves or the
exchange market pressure variable as explanatory variables should soak up some of the
error term and give better estimates: by including on the right-hand side of the equation
percentage changes in total exchange market pressure (defined as percentage changes in
the value of the currency plus percentage change in reserves), the test can allow for the
fluctuations in demand for the currency that can push the exchange rate away from the
central basket parity. The hope is that this approach may do a better job of answering
the question to what extent the authorities intervene to stabilize the currency, not just the
question what is the basket in terms of which the authorities define stability.

        If the true regime is more variable than a rigid basket peg, then the choice of
numeraire does make some difference to the estimation. Some authors in the past have
used a remote currency, such as the Swiss franc (e.g., Frankel and Wei, 1994). But a
weighted index such as the SDR or a trade-weighted measure is probably more
appropriate. Here is why. If the true regime is a target zone or a managed float centered
around a reference basket, where the authorities intervene to an extent that depends on
the magnitude of the deviation – and this seems the logical alternative hypothesis in
which a strict basket peg is nested -- then the error term in the equation represents shocks
in demand for the currency that the authorities allow to be partially reflected in the
exchange rate (but only partially, because they intervene if the shocks are large). Then
one should use a numeraire that is similar to that used by the authorities in measuring
what constitutes a large deviation. The authorities are unlikely to use the Swiss franc or
Canadian dollar in thinking about the size of deviations from their reference point. They
are more likely to use a weighted average of major currencies. If we use a similar
measure in the equation, it should help minimize the possibility of correlation between
the error term and the numeraire. Similarly, if there is a trend in the exchange rate
equation (a constant term in the changes equation) representing deliberate gradual
appreciation of the currency, then H should be defined in terms of whatever weighted
exchange rate index the authorities are likely to use in thinking about the trend. These
considerations suggest a numeraire that is itself composed of a basket of currencies. We
choose here the Special Drawing Right (SDR).

Results of the Synthesis of Flexibility-Inference and Weight-Inference Techniques.

        Our equation is:

the Swiss franc; Bénassy-Quéré (1999), the dollar; Frankel, Schmukler and Luis Servén (2000), a GDP-
weighted basket of five major currencies; and Yamazaki (2006), the Canadian dollar.


                                                                                                 11
logH(t+s)-logH (t) = c + ∑ w(j) [logX(j, t+s) - logX(j, t)]
                    + ß {emp(t+s)-emp(t)} + u t+s                                          (2)

One way to define the percentage change in total exchange market pressure13 is by
{emp(t+s)-emp(t)} ≡ {logEMP(t+s)-logEMP(t)}
                   ≡ {[logH(t+s)-logH (t)] + [ logRes(t+s)-logRes(t)]}.
The w(j) coefficients capture the de facto weights on the constituent currencies. The
coefficient ß captures the de facto degree of exchange rate flexibility : ß=1 means the
currency floats purely, because there is no foreign exchange market intervention (no
changes in reserves) ; ß=0 means the exchange rate is purely fixed, because it never
changes in value ; and most currencies probably lie somewhere in between.
Endogeneity is a possible problem, and is addressed below.14

        We have tried estimating the equation without imposing a constraint on the sum
of the weights in the basket. But there is a good argument for constraining the weights
on the currencies to add up to unity: ∑ w(j) = 1. However weak one thinks the link to
the reference basket might be and however large or small the weight on the dollar, the
authorities must view movements in the home currency through the metric of distance
from some reference rate or effective exchange rate. There is no point throwing away
the information represented by the summing-up constraint; we only have 48 observations
per regression, and we need every degree of freedom we can get. The easiest way to
implement the adding up constraint is to run the regressions with the changes in the log
value of the home currency on the left-hand side of the equation transformed by
subtracting off the changes in the log value of one of the currencies, say the British pound,
and the changes in the values of the non-pound currencies on the right-hand side
transformed in the same way.

        To see this, we repeat equation (2), with some of the major currencies made
explicit:
logH(t+s)-logH (t) = c + ∑ w(j) [logX(j, t+s) - logX(j, t)]
                     + ß {logEMP(t+s)-logEMP(t)} + u t+s                                            (2’)
                  = c + w(1) Δ log $ t + w (2) Δ log €t + w (3) Δ log ¥t + w (4) Δ log £t +…
                     + ß { logEMP(t+s)-logEMP(t) } + u t
We want to impose the adding up constraint w (4) = 1 - w(1) -w(2)- w(3) - …
We implement it by running the regression equation (3):
[Δ logH t - Δ log£t]
            = c + w(1) [Δ log $t - Δ log £t] + w(2) [Δ log €t - Δ log £t] +
       w(3) [Δ log ¥t - Δ log £t] + … + ß { logEMP(t+s)-logEMP(t) } + u t                           (3)
       The results reported in Table 2 come from the estimation of this equation. One
can recover the implicit weight on the pound by adding the estimated weights on the non-

13
   As noted, another way to define Exchange Market Pressure is by expressing the change in reserves as
fraction of the level of the monetary base rather than as a fraction of the level of reserves. Such regression
results are reported subsequently.
14
   Estimating the regression coefficient ß in equation (3) could be called “running on emp t .”


                                                                                                           12
pound currencies, and subtracting the sum from 1. This coefficient estimate is reported
in the last row of the table. Imposing the constraint sharpens the estimates a bit.
        Tables 2.1 through 2.21, respectively, present the individual results for 20
currencies.15 Again the currencies are those that are hypothesized to have followed a
basket peg, to try out the ability of the technique to infer the weights or reject the null
hypothesis, plus some clear floaters and clear peggers thrown in to calibrate the inference
of flexibility.
        Endogeneity of the exchange market pressure variable is a possible concern. One
would prefer to observe changes in the international demand for the home currency that
are known to originate in exogenous shocks. In the case of countries that specialize in
the production of mineral or agricultural products, there is a ready-made instrumental
variable : changes in the terms of trade reflecting the price of the mineral or agricultural
product on world markets. (This assumes that the home country is too small to affect the
world price, which is a reasonable assumption in all but a few cases, such as Saudi Arabia
and oil.) Accordingly, Table 3 repeats the synthesis estimation technique, but for the
commodity producers it uses changes in the world price of the commodity in question as
an instrumental variable for changes in exchange market pressure.
        There is a good argument, in the definition of exchange market pressure, for
computing the changes in reserves as a percentage of the monetary base, rather than as a
percentage of the level of reserves itself. The problem with the latter approach is that for
a country that holds relatively small levels of reserves, such as Canada and Australia, a
change in reserves that is very small in absolute terms can look like a moderately large
intervention in percentage terms, as we saw in Figure 1. Accordingly, on the vertical
axis of Figure 2 we express reserve changes as a percentage of the monetary base, rather
than as a percentage of themselves. Now Australia and Canada appear close to the
bottom of the range of reserve variability where they belong, well below the upward-
sloping line that demarcates the fixers from the floaters. Correspondingly, Table 4 will
re-run the OLS regressions with reserve changes defined as a percentage of the monetary
base.

         We begin with the estimated equations for three known peggers.

        Table 2.1 reports the results for the Chinese yuan or RMB. It confirms earlier
findings of a perfect peg to the dollar during 2001-04 (dollar coefficient =.99, a flexibility
coefficient insignificantly different from zero, and an R2 of .99). In 2005-07 the EMP
coefficient suggests that only 90% of increased demand for the currency shows up in
reserves rather than 100%; but the dollar weight and R2 are as high as ever.



15
  We omit the yen and other very major currencies from the list of home countries. Such a currency is
sufficiently large in world monetary markets that one cannot take the value of the other major currencies as
exogenous as is necessary to estimate the weights on the right-hand side of our equation. For other smaller
currencies, the assumption that the value of the dollar, euro, and other major currencies can be taken as
exogenous seems reasonable.


                                                                                                         13
Figure 2: Comparison of Reserve Variability versus Exchange Rate Variability
Where changes in reserves are expressed as a percent of the monetary base



                                                                                                      1980-2007, in 7-year intervals
                                              .15
          Variance of (∆ Reserve)/MB in USD


                                                        kwd01
                                              .1




                                                                        kwd87
                                              .05




                                                                                                                       nok94
                                                                                                                                                png01
                                                                                                                                                        nok01
                                                                kwd80
                                                                                clp87                                vuv87
                                                      hkd97
                                                        kwd94                      wst94
                                                                                                                                                           nok80        nok87
                                                                                    fiji80
                                                                                wst01                                                                                        fiji87
                                                                                           clp94
                                                                                                      wst87
                                                         myr01          vuv94                   scr01                scr80               fiji94
                                                                                                                                          clp01 aud01
                                                                                              fiji01 scr87
                                              0




                                                      hkd04               lvl94scr94 lvl01vuv01
                                                                           cad94                           mtl01
                                                                                                             mtl80
                                                                                                          cad01              jpy01
                                                                                                                                     aud94                      mtl87       mtl94
                                                      cny05                                                                                                             jpy87         jpy80   jpy94



                                                    0                                                   .0005                                .001                   .0015
                                                                                                                              Variance of △log(Exchange rate) in USD

                                                                                            Country from t to t+6                                                       Floating/Fix line
                                                                                            Shocks line
                                                    Source: International Financial Statistics, IMF
                                                    Reserve data: after subtracting off the imputed interest




       The Hong Kong dollar is covered by Table 2.2. As one would expect given the
currency board arrangement, it is a simple tight peg to the US dollar: close to complete
weight on the dollar, zero flexibility, and perfect fit.16

        Table 2.3 refers to the Malaysian ringgit. Only in 1996-99 – the period that
includes the East Asia crisis – is there evidence of exchange rate flexibility. During the
years 2000-2003 there is a perfect peg to the dollar (coefficient and R2 both =1). [This
confirms the danger of extreme multicollinearity if one includes the ringgit alongside the
dollar as candidate components of other Asian currencies, such as the Chinese yuan.] In
2004-07 the peg is still fairly strong, but here the weight of the US dollar falls to .6,
partially replaced by the Singapore dollar (with a weight of .4) . Table 3.3 uses for
instrumental variables the prices of tin and semiconductors (which, though a
manufactured good, has the properties of a commodity export). The most important


16
  Estimates in the middle column show the ill effects of near-perfect multilcollinearity between the US
dollar and the Malaysian ringgit during this time interval. We should adopt a rule that whenever the
exchange rate between two potential regressors is virtually fixed, the smaller of the two currencies (in this
case the ringgit) should be dropped from the regression equation.


                                                                                                                                                                                              14
findings remain: a perfect dollar peg during 2000-2003, followed by a shift to a basket
consisting of an average of the US dollar and the Singapore dollar.

       We now turn to a dozen or so countries that are considered to have pegged or
anchored to a basket for at least part of the sample period.

        The results for the Botswana pula are reported in Table 2.4. For 1980-87, the
coefficient on EMP is essentially zero, suggesting very little exchange rate flexibility.
This is the right answer, since Botswana at this time was in a monetary union with South
Africa. One would have needed to use a priori knowledge to include the South African
rand on the right-hand side of the equation, which we did not do, but probably should do.
Botswana’s exit from the currency union shows up as a large increase in the EMP
variable during 1988-2007; in the current decade more than half of fluctations in the
demand for the pula have been allowed to show up in the exchange rate. Botswana is
officially on a basket peg. Indeed, the estimates show significant weights on the dollar
(around .5 during 1988-95, but declining thereafter), and later the yen (.2), the mark or
euro (.3-.6) and the pound (.2-.4), and they show R2s around .8, suggesting a semi-tight
peg. There is a significant negative trend in the value of the pula throughout.

        Table 2.5 applies the synthesis estimation technique to the Chilean peso. The
EMP coefficient shows an intermediate degree of flexibility, consistent with the
proclaimed band of the 1980s and 1990s. The combination of a basket, band and crawl
seems able to explain most of the variation in the value of the peso in the 1990s (R2>.9).
The weight on the dollar is always high, but the yen also gets some weight in some years,
until after 1999 when only the euro complements the dollar. There is a significant
downward trend from 1980 to 1999. Of those countries to follow a BBC (Band-Basket-
Crawl) regime in the 1980s and 1990s, Chile is one of the few that announced explicitly
what were the parameters: basket weights, band width and rate of crawl.17 Our findings
correspond to the official regime, but only rather roughly. The band was officially
centered on the dollar alone in the 1980s, and was broadened to a basket starting in 1992.
Our estimates qualitatively capture the shift in emphasis away from the dollar; but they
find an apparently spurious weight on the yen in the mid-1980s and they miss entirely the
30% weight officially placed on the mark in the mid-1990s. Likewise, Chile officially
moved to full floating in 1999. Our estimates qualitatively show the increase in the
flexibility coefficient in 2000-03, but the estimates do not show the (loose) basket peg
disappearing completely as the Chileans claim is the reality.
        Possible explanations for the lack of a close match between the official regime
and the estimates include: (1) the common disjuncture between de facto and de jure
(though it is much less likely to apply here than for other countries), (2) endogeneity of
the EMP variable, (3) some other shortcoming of the estimation technique, and (4)
changes in the parameters that occur more frequently than the four-year sub-periods
examined here. For the years since the September 1999 move to floating, (5) the failure
of the flexibility coefficient to approach 1.0 might possibly have the same explanation as
for Mexico: copper export earnings that add to reserves and yet are not considered by the
authorities to constitute active foreign exchange intervention.
17
     Details reported in Appendix of Frankel, Schmukler, Servén and Fajnzylber (2001).


                                                                                          15
        Explanation (2) can be addressed by the instrumental variables technique, for
which Chile is a natural candidate since copper is half its exports. Table 3.4 uses the
world copper price as the instrumental variable. At least the spurious significant
coefficient on the yen in the mid-1980s disappears. But the German mark still does not
make the dramatic appearance onstage in 1992-1999 that one would expect from the
official announcements.
        Proposition (4) may be the real explanation, and it is harder to address. The
Chilean authorities announced 18 changes in regime parameters (basket weights, width of
band, and rate of crawl) during the 18-year period 1982 -1999. One could imagine
estimating each year separately, or matching the sub-samples to the official
announcements, or using more sophisticated econometric techniques that allow
endogenously-estimated breakpoints. The obstacle in all cases is that we have only
monthly data, so it is not possible to estimate meaningful parameter values if they change
every 12 months on average. The original Frankel-Wei technique required only
exchange rate data, which allowed estimation at a daily frequency (or even intra-day).
But the synthesis technique requires data on foreign exchange reserves, which are only
available monthly for most countries. Indeed the attempt to estimate six or more
parameters on each set of 48 observations may already be producing too much
“estimation error.”

        Table 2.6 illustrates the Danish krone. The EMP coefficient suggests that a very
high share of fluctuations in currency demand are accommodated from foreign exchange
reserves. The weight on European currencies begins above .8, and rises to 1.0 with the
advent of the euro in 1999. The R2 ranges from .85 to .99. In short the evidence is
consistent with the known regime: Denmark remained behind in the 2 ¼ % band, when
its (non-Scandinavian) neighbors joined the euro.

        Table 2.7 shows the Fiji dollar as being tightly pegged in most of the seven sub-
periods, with only 1984-87 and 1996-99 showing significant flexibility coefficients and
R2s below .9. It is another official basket pegger. High multicollinearity between the
US dollar and the Thai baht in 1988-95 prevents meaningful estimation of the
coefficients during that period. (The baht should be dropped on a priori grounds.) But the
weights are fairly well-estimated during the early and late years of the sample period.
For the sub-period 1980-83, the US dollar receives a weight of .4, with the rest falling on
the yen, Australian dollar and British pound. For the sub-period 2000-2003 they are: .2
on the US dollar, .2 on the euro, and .4 on the Australian dollar. (The New Zealand
dollar should be added on a priori grounds.)

        The Kuwaiti dinar shows a firm peg throughout most of the period: a near-zero
flexibility parameter and R2 mostly above .9 (IV estimates in Table 3.5). In the second
half of the sample, the anchor was usually a simple dollar peg, though a small weight was
assigned to other currencies in the 1980s basket. In a widely watched move, the
Kuwaitis in 2007 abandoned the simple dollar peg that its partners in the GCC (Gulf
Cooperation Council) partners have been wedded to, and returned to a basket peg; but
this shift is probably too recent to have had a substantial effect on any of these estimates.




                                                                                          16
        The Latvian lat, shown in Table 2.9, is officially on a basket peg. Here the
estimation technique appears to work well. The flexibility coefficient is low during the
1990s, and has disappeared altogether since 2000. The R2 exceeds .9 during 1996-2003.
The combination of low flexibility coefficient and a high R2 during 2000-2003 suggests a
particularly tight basket peg during these years. Initially the estimated weights include .4
on the dollar and .3 on the yen, but both decline over time. There is a weight of .3 on the
mark up until 1999, which is then transferred to the euro: .2 in 2000-2003 and .5 in 2004-
07. Latvia is preparing to enter the eurozone. Surprisingly, however, the estimation
shows a coefficient of similar size on the Russian ruble popping up during 2004-07.

        The Maltese lira (Table 2.10) shows a tight peg during 1984-1991 and 2004-07
(low flexibility coefficient and high R2). The share of the dollar varies between .2 and .4
during 1980-2003. The European currencies garner .3-.4 during 1980-1995, the pound
perhaps .2-.3 and the yen .1. At the end of the sample period, the weight on the euro rises
almost to .9, with perhaps bit parts assigned to the dollar and pound. Malta is one of the
ten countries that joined the EU in 2005 and one of two that join the euro in 2008.

        The Norwegian krone (Table 2.11) is one of the few basket peggers in the
developed world. The estimates show heavy intervention, though the R2 never crosses .8.
The weights are initially .3 on the dollar and .4 on European currencies (and perhaps a
little weight on the yen and pound). But the weight on the European currencies rises at
the expense of the dollar, until the latter part of the sample period shows full weight on
the euro and none on the dollar. Table 3.8 uses the world oil price as the instrumental
variable for exchange market pressure, with results similar to OLS.

        Table 2.12 refers to Papua New Guinea. In 2004-07 the flexibility coefficient for
the kina falls to zero and the R2 rises to .97, suggesting a tight peg. The peg is to the US
dollar. (The only other currency ever to receive significant weight is the Australian
dollar, during 1992-95.) Table 3.9 uses prices of gold, copper, oil, gas and timber as
instrumental variables. The only qualitative change relative to OLS is a fall in the
estimated flexibility parameters in 1996-2003

        The Russian rouble (Table 2.13) shows high intervention from the beginning.
There is evidence of an attempt to stabilize around the dollar during 1996-2003, but the
peg is loose; this no doubt reflects both the discrete devaluation of 1998 and the band that
preceded it. More recently, the rouble has acted more like a basket peg, and has assigned
somewhat less weight to the dollar. In table 3.10, which uses the oil price as the
instrumental variable, the flexibility parameter in the current decade drops more rapidly
than under OLS.

        The Seychelles rupee (Table 2.14) confirms its official classification as a basket
pegger, particularly in 1984-1995: not only is the flexibility coefficient essentially zero,
but the R2 exceeds .97. The estimated weights are .4 on the dollar, .3 on the European
currencies, .2 on the yen, and .1 on the pound. After 2004, however, the weight on the
dollar suddenly shoots up to .9 .




                                                                                           17
          Table 2.15 reports the estimation for Thailand. The authorities are seen to have
intervened heavily in the 1980s and 1990s. During 1988-1995 they indeed adhered to a
very tight basket peg (R2=.999). The weight on the dollar reached .75-.88, but there was
still a significant weight of .1 on the yen. That the weight on the dollar falls short of 1.0
may come as a surprise to those who, in the wake of the Thai crisis of 1997, received the
impression that the baht had been explicitly pegged to the dollar. But the official policy
had been a basket peg, not a dollar peg. In the early 1990s, observers had been surprised
that the estimated weight on the dollar was so high, because the earlier orthodoxy had
been that Southeast Asia was rapidly becoming a yen bloc.18 The flexibility parameter
rises sharply in 2000-2007, though there is still plenty of intervention.19 Table 3.11 uses
the price of rice as an instrumental variable. Once again the point estimates of the
flexibility parameter rise, but the significance levels fall.

        Vanuatu (2.16) shows relatively low exchange rate flexibility and a fairly close fit.
This is another official basket pegger. The estimates suggest roughly comparable
weights on the dollar, yen, euro and pound. On a priori grounds, the Australian and New
Zealand dollars ought to be added the equation.

        Finally, Western Samoa (Table 2.17) shows heavy intervention during the first
three sub-periods, around a basket that weights the dollar most and the yen second (and
possibly the pound third). After 1992, however, there is more flexibility. The weights in
the reference basket during 2000-2003 are similar to the earlier period, except that the
euro now receives a large significant weight (.4). Table 3.12 uses the price of coconuts
as an instrumental variable. Again flexibility parameter estimates rise, but significance
levels generally fall.

        We now turn to a set of floaters.

        The estimated equation for the Australian dollar is reported in Table 2.18. The
coefficient on Exchange Market Pressure shows a lower degree of exchange rate
flexibility than one would have expected, given that the currency is thought to have
floated fairly freely throughout this period. The problem may be that reserves are
measured as more variable than seems right. Or the problem may be endogeneity of the
Exchange Market Pressure variable. The Australian dollar is considered a commodity
currency, so world commodity prices are a natural instrumental variable to correct for
endogeneity. Table 3.18 reports the IV estimation for Australia. For each of the sub-
periods the estimated flexibility coefficient is higher than it was under OLS, but they
remain surprisingly low in magnitude and statistical significance.

       As noted in the discussion of Table 2, there is a good argument, in the definition
of Exchange Market Pressure, for computing the changes in reserves as a percentage of
the monetary base, rather than as a percentage of the level of reserves itself. Table 4.14

18
  Frankel (1993), Frankel and Wei (1994), and references cited therein.
19
  Very high multicollinearity between the US dollar and the Malaysian ringgit impedes the
estimation. The won, Australiian dollar, and ringgit probably ought to be dropped on a priori
grounds.


                                                                                                18
uses the alternative definition of Exchange Market Pressure (EMP), with changes in
reserves expressed as percentages of the Monetary Base:
{emp(t+s)-emp(t)} ≡ {[logH(t+s)-logH (t)] + log[Res(t+s)-logRes(t)]/MB(t)}.
As before, a coefficient of ß=1 would means that the currency floats purely, because
there are no changes in reserves) and ß=0 would means the exchange rate is fixed. Now
the estimated coefficient and significance level on the EMP variable are higher. This
tends to confirm the value of this approach, as Australia is known to be a floater. Table
5.18 applies instrumental variables to this same alternate definition of Exchange Market
Pressure, but it is little changed from IV with the first EMP definition.

         The Canadian dollar (Table 2.19) shows up as mostly flexible, though
experiencing some intervention (the EMP coefficient ranges from .1 to .4), with the US
dollar usually receiving the largest weight in the basket that the authorities are treated as
implicitly using as a reference. As with Australia, the other rich commodity-exporting
floater, the IV estimates show estimates of the flexibility parameter in each sub-period
that are higher than they were under OLS, but that are surprisingly insignificant
statistically. Again, when we switch to the alternative definition of Exchange Market
Pressure, with reserve changes expressed as a percentage of the monetary base (Table
4.15), the coefficient estimates and significance levels of exchange market pressure are
generally a bit higher, as is consistent with the floating nature of the Canadian dollar.

        Table 2.20 looks at the Mexican peso. It shows a significant downward crawl
throughout (until 2004), but it shows a peg to the dollar that is otherwise quite tight in
1988-91. Flexibility increases after the mid-point of the sample, which happens to be the
peso crisis years of 1994-95. The flexibility parameter does not climb out of the
range .3-.4, indicating that reserve changes have remained substantial during the latter
three sub-periods, when the peso was supposedly floating. One likely explanation is that
many monthly increases in reserves are associated with revenue earned by PEMEX oil
exports which the authorities leave in the form of dollar deposits, but which are not
conventionally considered foreign exchange intervention. Table 3.20, using the oil price
as an instrumental variable, again finds flexibility parameters estimated higher, but lower
in significance.

        Table 2.21 reports estimation for Indonesia. The rupiah exhibits a downward
trend throughout. Otherwise, the estimates show great rigidity in 1992-95, followed by a
large leap in flexibility beginning in the late 1990s, at the time of the East Asia crisis.
Like some other Asian countries, Indonesia’s flexibility parameter comes back down in
2004-07 (“fear of floating”). Table 3.21 uses world prices of oil and natural gas as the
instrumental variable, but little is learned.


Extensions

       In various extensions of the basic analysis, we have also:
1. allowed coefficients to vary over time, even within the four-year sub-samples ;




                                                                                            19
2. relaxed the constraint that {[logH(t+s)-logH (t)] and [ logRes(t+s)-logRes(t)]} enter
   with the same coefficient ;
3. entered the change in the interest rate alongside the change in reserves and the change
   in the exchange rate;
4. checked for robustness with respect to the numeraire unit used to define currency
   values ; and
5. tried Monte Carlo studies on fabricated currencies (some constructed with the
   monetary authorities leaning halfway against the wind of any fluctuations in EMP,
   and others constrained more narrowly to remain within a 5% band) to see if the
   technique is giving us the right answer.

       The results in the extensions are generally in line with the results reported here.
Using a different numeraire does not make too much difference, for example.

       Tables 6.1-6.10 report the extension that allows the coefficients to vary over time,
even within the sub-periods (extension 1, above). We expand the specification of (3) to
allow for trends in level and in the currency weights :
[Δ logH t - Δ log£t] = f(t)+ w(1) [Δ log $t - Δ log £t] + w(2) [Δ log €t - Δ log £t]
+ w(3) [Δ log ¥t - Δ log £t] + … + ß { Δ logEMP(t) } + u t                     (4)

where f(t) = c0 + c1*t . The time-dependent weight terms can be defined either using
the exponential functional form for the weights w(j) so that they are automatically
bounded by 0 and 1 or, for simplicity, linearly: w(j) = b0(j) + b1(j)* t .

        The case of most interest is probably China (2005-2007). There is no sign in this
monthly data of a downward trend in the coefficient on the dollar: the estimated trend
is .000. But there is a sign that the trend in the value of the yuan itself is rising over
time: since the the dependent variable is first differences, the statistically significant
coefficient on “t” indicates an upward acceleration. The other results are as before: zero
coefficients on non-dollar currencies are zero, zero coefficient on exchange market
pressure, and an R2 of 1.00, all of which indicate a simple dollar peg holding during most
of this period.

        Tables 7.1-7.8 relax the constraint that {[logH(t+s)-logH (t)] and [ logRes(t+s)-
logRes(t)]} enter Exchange Market Pressure with the same coefficient (extension 2
above). The estimation takes into account that the variation of reserve changes is much
larger than the variation of exchange rate changes (as can be seen in Figure 1), so that
giving them equal weight means allowing the former to dominate in the estimates already
reported. We define the new EMP variable as :
   Δ[logEMP] = {[varΔ[logEx]/ (varΔ[logEx]+ Var(Δ[logRes])}· Δ[logRes]
          + { Var(Δ[logRes]/ (varΔ[logEx]+ Var(Δ[logRes]) }·Δ[logEx]
                                                                                  (5)
And λ = var(Δ[logEx])/ Var(Δ[logRes])

   Tables 8.1-8.5 broaden the definition of EMP another step (extension 3 above).
Here the change in the interest rate is entered alongside the change in reserves and the



                                                                                             20
change in the exchange rate, as three alternative ways that the authorities can respond to a
change in demand for their currency (Eichengreen, Rose, and Wyplosz, 1996). We
define the new EMP variable as :
   Δ[logEMP] = {var(Δ[logEx])/ Var(Δ[logRes])}·Δ[logRes]
                 + {var(Δ[logEx])/ Var(Δi)}·Δ i     +Δ[logEx]                       (6)
   λ = var(Δ[logEx])/ Var(Δ[logRes])
   γ = var(Δ[logEx])/ Var(Δ[i])
That is, Δ[logEMP] = λ ·Δ[logRes]+ γ ·Δ i +Δ[logEx]

       Table 9 checks whether the results are robust with respect to the choice of
numeraire, by using the Swiss franc as the standard by which currencies are valued, in
place of the SDR. The results are similar. The choice of numeraire does not appear to
make much difference.

         The last tables report results from the Monte Carlo exercises. We construct
artificial exchange rate series under two regimes: managed float (Table 10.1 - 10.4) and
band (Table 10.5 - 10.8). In the former case we assume that a certain percentage of any
change in exchange market pressure is absorbed in reserves and the rest in the exchange
rate (“leaning against the wind”). In the latter case we restrict the width of the band or
target zone to plus or minus 2 and ½ per cent. Within the band we have tried a random
walk subject to the restriction that the exchange rate can’t wander outside the band. One
could consider other distributions. The Krugman theory of target zones provides a
precise mathematical specification for the distribution within the band ; but it assumes
unrealistically that there is no intervention inside the band (only at the margins) and also
that the band is 100% credible.
         In each case we try one version where the central parity is a basket that puts 1/3
weight on the dollar, 1/3 on the euro and 1/3 on the yen, and we try another version
where the central parity is simply pegged to the dollar. In the estimation, we constrain
the weights to add to 1. Although the disturbances are drawn from a random normal
distribution, the magnitude (variance of the distribution) is drawn from real-world cases.
We try two such cases : we take the Canadian dollar’s parameters as representative of a
floating currency (a low-variance reserve case), and we take Papua New Guinea’s
parameters as representative of a high-variance (attributable to commodity exports) small
country with an intermediate regime.

        In most cases, the estimates correspond well with the parameters that were built in.
For example, the difference between a band with sharp borders and a policy of
consistently leaning against the wind turns out to be not all that important. In every case,
the estimated weights are within one or two standard errors of 1/3-1/3-1/3 for the basket
case, and 1 for the dollar peg case. The technique tends to pick out the correct weights
even though it is not designed for the specific statistical distribution of a band. The
results are especially insensitive to the choice of numeraire, as between SDR and Swiss
Franc. This is reassuring, since previously we have had to rely on the a priori theorem
that the choice of numeraire makes no difference in the special case of a perfect peg.
The technique seems equally robust when estimating the parameter that represents the
degree of exchange rate flexibility.



                                                                                          21
        Typical R2s tend to lie in the range .87-.89. Our conclusion is that the technique
works fairly well and robustly, when the true exchange rate regime is the one assumed (in
this case leaning against the wind, around either a basket or the dollar). The technique
may not always work as well in practice (of which one reflection may be lower R2s in
Tables 1-9), because in practice many countries do not in fact follow a regime such as a
basket band for more than a few years in a row, without devaluing or otherwise changing
the parameters. To allow for changes in parameters within the sample period one would
have to take the technique to the next stage of econometric sophisitication, and perhaps
suffer nonetheless from data frequency insufficient to produce reliable estimates.

Conclusion

        Intermediate exchange rate regimes remain alive and well. Some countries have
announced basket regimes, often with an intermediate degree of flexibility that can be
captured by some combination of a crawl, a band, or leaning-against-the-wind
intervention. Most basket peggers keep the weights in the basket secret, which usually
means they want to preserve a degree of freedom from prying eyes (whether to pursue a
lower degree of de facto exchange rate flexibility, as with China, or a higher degree, as
with others).
        The necessary task of distinguishing de facto from de jure exchange rate regimes
has produced an active recent sub-literature. But inferring de facto weights and inferring
de facto flexibility are equally important, whereas most authors have hitherto done only
one or the other. Thus the main contribution of this paper is to propose a synthesis
specification that allows estimation of true weights at the same time as estimation of the
true tendency of monetary authorities to allow exchange market pressure to show up in
the price, versus the quantity, of foreign exchange.
        We have tried out the technique on some 20 currencies. The majority are
countries reported by the IMF to have declared the use of baskets. But we have also
included some floaters and some simple peggers. For the most part the synthesis
technique seems to work as it should. Known floaters tend to score much higher
flexibility parameters than known peggers, with the BBC countries in between. In some
cases, the inferred behavior differs in some way from the de jure regime. For example
China’s “basket” puts more weight on the dollar than the impression given by the
government, while other declared basket peggers are not as firmly tied to the basket as
they claim. Meanwhile, declared floaters often intervene heavily to dampen exchange
rate fluctuations (fear of floating), but sometimes with reference to an anchor that is not a
simple dollar parity as other authors may have assumed.




                                                                                          22
References
Bénassy-Quéré, Agnès, 1999, “Exchange Rate Regimes and Policies: An Empirical Analysis,” in Exchange
Rate Policies in Emerging Asian Countries, edited by Stefan Collignon, Jean Pisani-Ferry, and Yung Chul
Park (Routledge: London), 40-64.

Bénassy-Quéré, Agnès, Benoit Coeuré, and Valérie Mignon, 2004, “On the Identification of de facto
Currency Pegs,” Journal of Japanese and International Economies.

Bilson, John, and Frenkel, Jacob, 1979, "Dynamic Adjustment and the Demand for International Reserves,"
NBER Working Paper No. 407, November.

Bubula, Andrea, and Inci Otker-Robe, 2003, Exchange Arrangements and Foreign Exchange Markets:
Development and Issues, Monetary and Exchange Affairs Department, IMF.

Calvo, Guillermo, and Carmen Reinhart, 2002, “Fear of Floating,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117,
no. 2, May, 379-408.

Eichengreen, Barry, 2006, "China's Exchange Rate Regime: The Long and Short of It," revision of paper
for Columbia University's conference on Chinese money and finance held in New York on February 2-3.

Eichengreen, Barry, Andy Rose and Charles Wyplosz, 1996, "Contagious Currency Crises,” NBER WP
5681. Revised March 1997. Part of this paper was published in the Scandinavian Journal of Economics 98,
1996.

Frankel, Jeffrey, 1993, "Is Japan Creating a Yen Bloc in East Asia and the Pacific?" in Regionalism and
Rivalry: Japan and the U.S. in Pacific Asia, edited by Jeffrey Frankel and Miles Kahler, University of
Chicago Press, Chicago, 53-85.

Frankel, Jeffrey, Eduardo Fajnzylber, Sergio Schmukler, and Luis Servén, 2001, "Verifying Exchange Rate
Regimes," Journal of Development Economics, vol. 66, no. 2, December: 351-386.

Frankel, Jeffrey, Sergio Schmukler and Luis Servén, 2000, “Verifiability and the Vanishing Intermediate
Exchange Rate Regime,” Brookings Trade Forum 2000, edited by Susan Collins and Dani Rodrik
(Brookings Institution, Washington DC).

Frankel, Jeffrey, and Shang-Jin Wei, 1994, “Yen Bloc or Dollar Bloc? Exchange Rate Policies of the East
Asian Economies,” in Macroeconomic Linkages: Savings, Exchange Rates and Capital Flows, Takatoshi
Ito and Anne O. Krueger, eds., Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 295-329.

Frankel, Jeffrey, and Shang-Jin Wei, 1995, "Emerging Currency Blocs," The International Monetary
System: Its Institutions and its Future, Hans Genberg, ed., Springer, Berlin, 111-143.

Frankel, Jeffrey, and Shang-Jin Wei, 2007, “Assessing China’s Exchange Rate Regime,“ Economic Policy.

Frenkel, Jacob, 1978, "International Reserves Under Alternative Exchange Rate Regimes and Aspects of
The Economics of Managed Float," NBER Working Paper No. 287, October.

Ghosh, Atish, Anne-Marie Gulde, and Holger Wolf, 2002, “Currency Boards: More than a Quick Fix?”
Economic Policy, 31 (October): 270-335.

Girton, Lance and Don Roper, 1977, “A Monetary Model of Exchange Market Pressure Applied to the
Postwar Canadian Experience,” American Economic Review 67, 4 (September): 537-48.




                                                                                                          23
Klein, Michael W. & Marion, Nancy P., 1997. "Explaining the duration of exchange-rate pegs," Journal of
Development Economics, Elsevier, vol. 54(2), pages 387-404, Dec.

Levy-Yeyati, Eduardo, and Federico Sturzenegger, 2003, “To Float or to Trail: Evidence on the Impact of
Exchange Rate Regimes,” American Economic Review, 93, No. 4, September.

Masson, Paul R., 2001, "Exchange Rate Regime Transitions,” Journal of Development Economics,
Elsevier, vol. 64(2), pages 571-586, April.


Ohno, Kenichi, 1999, “Exchange Rate Management in Developing Asia," Working Paper No.1. (January),
Asian Development Bank Institute.

Reinhart, Carmen, and Kenneth Rogoff, 2004, “The Modern History of Exchange Rate Arrangements: A
Reinterpretation.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(1):1-48.

Rodrik, Dani, "The Social Cost of Foreign Exchange Reserves" (January 2006). CEPR Discussion Paper
No. 5483.

Shah, Ajay, Achim Zeileis, and Ila Patnaik, 2005, “What is the New Chinese Currency Regime?”
Unpublished, November.

Shambaugh, Jay, 2004, “The Effect of Fixed Exchange Rates on Monetary Policy,” Dartmouth College;
forthcoming, Quarterly Journal of Economics.

G.Tavlas, H.Dellas & A. Stockman, 2006, “The Classification and Performance of Alternate Exchange-
Rate Systems,” March 2006, Bank of Greece.

Williamson, John, 2001, “The Case for a Basket, Band and Crawl (BBC) Regime for East Asia,” in David
Gruen and John Simon, eds., Future Directions for Monetary Policies in East Asia, Reserve Bank of
Australia, July, 97-109.

Yamazaki, Kazuo, 2006, “Inside the Currency Basket,” Columbia University and Mitsubishi UFJ Trust and
Banking Corp., December.




                                                                                                     24
25
Appendix 1

  Table 2: Estimating the De Facto Exchange Rate Regime with Basic Setup
           Parameters to be estimated: Implicit weights in basket and degree of flexibility
                                          (01/1980 – 06/2007)
            (Values of all currencies are measured in terms of numeraire currency = SDR)


                                        2.1 Chinese yuan (cny)

                                     (1)                             (2)
                                     cny 01-04                       05-08
USD                                  .987917***                      1.055***
                                     (0.0231488)                     (0.110)
JPY                                  -0.0058267                      0.039
                                     (0.0090792)                     (0.035)
KRW                                                                  0.061
                                                                     (0.051)
SGD                                                                  -0.163
                                                                     (0.104)
MYR                                                                  0.025
                                                                     (0.042)
RUB                                                                  -0.131
                                                                     (0.146)
AUD                                                                  0.026
                                                                     (0.026)
THB                                                                  0.036
                                                                     (0.048)
CAD                                                                  -0.052
                                                                     (0.031)
Euro                                 0.0539523                       0.080
                                     (0.0524937)                     (0.081)
Δ [logRes+logEx]                     0.0349175                       0.106*
                                     (0.0382657)                     (0.051)
Constant                             -0.0005595                      0.000
                                     (0.0007976)                     (0.002)
Observations                         48                              23
R-squared                            0.9859                          0.995
GBP                                  -0.036043                       0.024




                                     2.2 Hong Kong dollar (hkd)
                          (1)                       (2)                         (3)
                          97-00                     01-04                       05-08
JPY                       -0.000                    -0.005                      -0.007
                          (0.003)                   (0.011)                     (0.021)
USD                       0.987***                  -326.832                    1.010***
                          (0.016)                   (334.373)                   (0.039)
KRW                       0.003                     0.001                       0.007
                          (0.003)                   (0.014)                     (0.029)
SGD                       0.003                     -0.021                      0.020
                          (0.009)                   (0.022)                     (0.049)
AUD                       0.004                     -0.003                      0.023
                          (0.008)                   (0.006)                     (0.020)



                                                                                              26
MYR                        -0.005                      327.834                     -0.009
                           (0.005)                     (334.370)                   (0.034)
THB                        -0.002                      0.018                       -0.024
                           (0.005)                     (0.018)                     (0.031)
German mark                -0.003
                           (0.008)
Δ [logRes+logEx]           0.001                       -0.027*                     -0.018
                           (0.005)                     (0.014)                     (0.032)
Euro                                                   -0.004                      -0.003
                                                       (0.010)                     (0.033)
Constant                   -0.000                      -0.000                      -0.000
                           (0.000)                     (0.000)                     (0.000)
Observations               23                          48                          30
R-squared                  0.998                       0.998                       0.997
GBP                        0.012                       0.011                       -0.017



                                       2.3 Malaysian ringgit (myr)
                      (1)                   (2)                     (3)                 (4)
                      myr 92-95             96-99                   00-03               04-07
JPY                   -0.072                -0.131                  -0.000              -0.038
                      (0.192)               (0.149)                 (0.000)             (0.057)
USD                   -0.001                0.191                   1.000***            0.619***
                      (2.019)               (0.268)                 (0.000)             (0.097)
KRW                   -0.163                -0.046                  0.000               -0.111
                      (0.447)               (0.063)                 (0.000)             (0.070)
SGD                   0.930*                1.125*                  -0.000              0.441***
                      (0.493)               (0.583)                 (0.000)             (0.148)
AUD                   -0.075                -0.121                  0.000               0.023
                      (0.104)               (0.174)                 (0.000)             (0.046)
THB                   0.487                 0.065                   0.000               0.051
                      (2.145)               (0.244)                 (0.000)             (0.067)
German mark           -0.072                -0.061
                      (0.174)               (0.205)
Δ [logRes+logEx]      0.009                 0.350***                -0.000              0.081**
                      (0.038)               (0.098)                 (0.000)             (0.035)
Euro                                                                -0.000              0.008
                                                                    (0.000)             (0.088)
Constant              -0.001                -0.005                  0.000               0.000
                      (0.003)               (0.005)                 (0.000)             (0.001)
Observations          48                    36                      48                  40
R-squared             0.831                 0.868                   1.000               0.942
GBP                   -0.034                -0.021                  0.000               0.005




                                        2.4 Botswana pula (bwp)
                   (1)            (2)       (3)          (4)            (5)         (6)            (7)
                   bwp 80-83      84-87     88-91        92-95          96-99       00-03          04-07
JPY                0.365**        0.477**   0.062        0.028          0.169***    0.211***       0.190
                   (0.146)        (0.211)   (0.081)      (0.038)        (0.059)     (0.078)        (0.136)
USD                0.654***       0.030     0.470***     0.569***       -0.008      0.296**        0.063
                   (0.076)        (0.281)   (0.063)      (0.041)        (0.206)     (0.110)        (0.149)
French franc       0.022          0.613*    0.417***



                                                                                                             27
                  (0.130)     (0.359)       (0.109)
Δ[logRes+logEx]   -0.010      0.016         0.440***     0.236***     0.566***      0.636***      0.725***
                  (0.064)     (0.031)       (0.064)      (0.053)      (0.078)       (0.053)       (0.096)
German mark                                              0.314***     0.433***
                                                         (0.061)      (0.157)
Euro                                                                                0.312***      0.581***
                                                                                    (0.105)       (0.194)
Constant          -0.009*     -0.018**      -0.009***    -0.006***    -0.009***     0.003         -0.011***
                  (0.005)     (0.007)       (0.002)      (0.001)      (0.003)       (0.003)       (0.003)
Observations      46          48            48           48           36            48            37
R-squared         0.652       0.266         0.827        0.905        0.801         0.783         0.811
GBP               -0.041      -0.120        0.051        0.089        0.406         0.181         0.166



                                             2.5 Chile (clp)

                  (1)         (2)           (3)          (4)          (5)           (6)           (7)
                  clp 80-83   84-87         88-91        92-95        96-99         00-03         04-07
JPY               -0.077      0.638**       0.046        0.201***     0.108***      0.172         -0.031
                  (0.084)     (0.255)       (0.134)      (0.057)      (0.035)       (0.108)       (0.143)
USD               0.642***    0.609**       0.957***     0.644***     0.884***      0.376**       0.755***
                  (0.232)     (0.269)       (0.112)      (0.072)      (0.079)       (0.181)       (0.152)
French franc      0.421       -0.101        -0.233**
                  (0.282)     (0.442)       (0.112)
Δ[logRes+logEx]   0.192**     0.513**       0.036        0.390***     0.228***      0.675***      0.217***
                  (0.081)     (0.222)       (0.052)      (0.062)      (0.037)       (0.100)       (0.050)
German mark                                              0.029        0.109*
                                                         (0.091)      (0.062)
Euro                                                                                0.238**       0.584**
                                                                                    (0.100)       (0.259)
Constant          -0.006*     -0.015**      -0.010***    -0.006***    -0.004***     -0.001        0.002
                  (0.003)     (0.007)       (0.002)      (0.002)      (0.001)       (0.003)       (0.003)
Observations      46          48            48           48           36            48            41
R-squared         0.681       0.768         0.886        0.907        0.911         0.769         0.692
GBP               0.014       -0.146        0.230        0.127        -0.101        0.214         -0.307


                                         2.6 Danish krone (dkk)
                  (1)         (2)             (3)          (4)           (5)           (6)            (7)
                  80-83       84-87           88-91        92-95         96-99         00-03          04-07
JPY               0.063       0.107           -0.015       0.004         0.004         -0.004         0.008
                  (0.060)     (0.083)         (0.053)      (0.038)       (0.008)       (0.021)        (0.017)
USD               0.091       -0.052          0.053*       0.041         0.007         0.000          -0.020
                  (0.091)     (0.047)         (0.030)      (0.037)       (0.014)       (0.018)        (0.017)
French franc      0.833***    0.851***        0.985***
                  (0.118)     (0.102)         (0.047)
Δ[logRes+logEx]   -0.003      0.011           0.016        0.022         0.005         0.001          -0.001
                  (0.020)     (0.010)         (0.013)      (0.021)       (0.005)       (0.008)        (0.007)
German mark                                                0.869***      0.964***
                                                           (0.097)       (0.019)
Euro                                                                                   1.000***       0.939***
                                                                                       (0.023)        (0.055)
Constant          0.000       0.000           0.000        0.000         0.000         -0.000         0.000
                  (0.002)     (0.001)         (0.001)      (0.001)       (0.000)       (0.000)        (0.000)
Observations      46          48              48           48            36            48             41
R-squared         0.852       0.856           0.918        0.838         0.991         0.981          0.965
GBP               0.013       0.094           -0.022       0.086         0.025         0.004          0.073




                                                                                                            28
                                                 2.7 Fiji dollar
                   (1)             (2)          (3)         (4)            (5)       (6)            (7)
                   fiji 80-83      84-87        88-91       92-95          96-99     00-03          04-07
JPY                0.154***        0.057        -0.086      -0.184         0.085     0.086          0.008
                   (0.030)         (0.157)      (0.090)     (0.141)        (0.106)   (0.055)        (0.053)
USD                0.379***        1.435**      -1.517***   -2.401**       0.482**   0.229***       0.317
                   (0.108)         (0.616)      (0.549)     (1.122)        (0.197)   (0.063)        (0.205)
KRW                -0.158*         -0.981       0.050       0.785**        -0.030    0.044          0.137
                   (0.083)         (0.587)      (0.093)     (0.292)        (0.043)   (0.045)        (0.096)
SGD                -0.040          -0.329       0.091       0.121          -0.064    0.064          -0.151
                   (0.092)         (0.273)      (0.122)     (0.204)        (0.276)   (0.090)        (0.208)
AUD                0.266***        0.344**      0.241***    0.214***       -0.195    0.436***       0.436***
                   (0.084)         (0.159)      (0.045)     (0.056)        (0.342)   (0.054)        (0.076)
MYR                0.177*          0.276        -0.074      -0.013         0.330     0.000          0.061
                   (0.100)         (0.352)      (0.180)     (0.074)        (0.237)   (0.000)        (0.261)
THB                0.025           -0.046       2.344***    2.528**        -0.037    -0.075         -0.086
                   (0.023)         (0.050)      (0.681)     (1.171)        (0.099)   (0.069)        (0.080)
French franc       0.007           0.096        -0.092
                   (0.030)         (0.183)      (0.062)
Δ[logRes+logEx]    0.006           0.201***     -0.011      -0.025         0.373*    0.031          0.014
                   (0.006)         (0.059)      (0.016)     (0.017)        (0.212)   (0.021)        (0.020)
German mark                                                 -0.207**       0.186
                                                            (0.087)        (0.183)
Euro                                                                                 0.187***       0.106
                                                                                     (0.042)        (0.103)
Constant           -0.003*         -0.003       -0.001      0.002          -0.006    0.001          -0.001
                   (0.001)         (0.004)      (0.001)     (0.002)        (0.005)   (0.001)        (0.001)
Observations       46              48           48          48             36        48             34
R-squared          0.954           0.730        0.963       0.966          0.562     0.946          0.885
GBP                0.191           0.147        0.043       0.158          0.243     0.029          0.171




                                              2.9 Latvian lat (lvl)
                       (1)                     (2)                     (3)               (4)
                       lvl 92-95               96-99                   00-03             04-07
JPY                    0.319***                0.168***                0.110***          -0.008
                       (0.079)                 (0.012)                 (0.026)           (0.055)
USD                    0.427**                 0.434***                0.338***          -0.096
                       (0.169)                 (0.025)                 (0.088)           (0.124)
RUB                    0.014                   -0.006                  0.118             0.455***
                       (0.039)                 (0.006)                 (0.085)           (0.154)
German mark            0.260                   0.270***
                       (0.148)                 (0.032)
Δ [logRes+logEx]       0.109**                 0.024**                 0.009             0.027
                       (0.045)                 (0.010)                 (0.013)           (0.021)
Euro                                                                   0.197***          0.496***
                                                                       (0.024)           (0.092)
Constant               0.004                   -0.001                  0.000             -0.003
                       (0.002)                 (0.001)                 (0.001)           (0.002)
Observations           16                      36                      48                42
R-squared              0.824                   0.958                   0.925             0.617
GBP                    -0.019                  0.133                   0.237             0.154




                                                                                                              29
                                         2.10 Maltese lira (mtl)

                  (1)         (2)           (3)        (4)         (5)        (6)        (7)
                  mtl 80-83   84-87         88-91      92-95       96-99      00-03      04-07
JPY               0.054*      0.163***      0.011      0.085       0.178      0.041**    -0.002
                  (0.030)     (0.049)       (0.033)    (0.086)     (0.143)    (0.020)    (0.032)
USD               0.405***    0.258***      0.288***   0.242***    0.400**    0.212***   0.055*
                  (0.053)     (0.036)       (0.027)    (0.077)     (0.187)    (0.034)    (0.031)
French franc      0.280***    0.407***      0.381***
                  (0.053)     (0.064)       (0.041)
Δ[logRes+logEx]   0.061**     0.083         0.034      0.212       0.540***   0.073***   0.029
                  (0.028)     (0.089)       (0.039)    (0.162)     (0.126)    (0.026)    (0.021)
German mark                                            0.419***    0.168
                                                       (0.088)     (0.230)
Euro                                                                          0.502***   0.859***
                                                                              (0.024)    (0.054)
Constant          0.001       0.001         0.000      -0.003      -0.002     0.000      -0.000
                  (0.001)     (0.001)       (0.001)    (0.002)     (0.004)    (0.001)    (0.001)
Observations      46          48            48         48          36         45         41
R-squared         0.875       0.918         0.933      0.592       0.724      0.934      0.894
GBP               0.261       0.171         0.321      0.253       0.253      0.245      0.089



                                   2.11 Norwegian kroner (nok)

                  (1)         (2)           (3)        (4)         (5)        (6)        (7)
                  nok 80-83   84-87         88-91      92-95       96-99      00-03      04-07
JPY               0.117       0.119*        0.016      -0.037      -0.074     0.081      0.123
                  (0.073)     (0.068)       (0.058)    (0.048)     (0.051)    (0.079)    (0.168)
USD               0.332***    0.067         0.177***   0.089**     0.260**    0.017      -0.089
                  (0.089)     (0.067)       (0.033)    (0.044)     (0.114)    (0.110)    (0.144)
French franc      0.391***    0.699***      0.578***
                  (0.092)     (0.116)       (0.066)
Δ[logRes+logEx]   0.017       0.106*        0.069**    0.050       0.076**    0.029      0.093**
                  (0.026)     (0.054)       (0.029)    (0.031)     (0.035)    (0.057)    (0.044)
German mark                                            0.776***    0.873***
                                                       (0.066)     (0.100)
Euro                                                                          0.803***   1.135***
                                                                              (0.113)    (0.220)
Constant          -0.003      -0.005**      0.001      -0.002      -0.001     -0.000     0.001
                  (0.002)     (0.002)       (0.001)    (0.002)     (0.002)    (0.003)    (0.003)
Observations      46          48            48         48          36         48         42
R-squared         0.728       0.768         0.781      0.798       0.793      0.624      0.546
GBP               0.160       0.115         0.229      0.171       -0.060     0.100      -0.169




                                                                                                   30
                               2.12 Papua New Guinea kina (png)

                   (1)                 (2)                 (3)           (4)
                   png 92-95           96-99               00-03         04-07
JPY                0.209               0.545**             0.155         0.004
                   (0.285)             (0.200)             (0.319)       (0.048)
USD                1.987               1.148***            14,177.172    1.068***
                   (2.344)             (0.390)             (8,742.646)   (0.093)
KRW                -1.244**            -0.038              0.196         0.009
                   (0.515)             (0.092)             (0.282)       (0.060)
SGD                -0.427              -0.811              -0.147        0.091
                   (0.666)             (0.647)             (0.606)       (0.143)
AUD                0.288**             0.078               0.083         0.013
                   (0.136)             (0.307)             (0.219)       (0.053)
MYR                -0.008              0.365               -14,176.404   -0.191*
                   (0.206)             (0.233)             (8,742.737)   (0.095)
THB                0.189               0.000               -0.092        -0.004
                   (2.626)             (0.099)             (0.392)       (0.062)
German mark        0.140               -0.228
*                  (0.254)             (0.293)
Δ [logRes+logEx]   0.008               0.105**             0.308***      0.010
                   (0.012)             (0.041)             (0.050)       (0.010)
Euro                                                       0.271         -0.017
                                                           (0.309)       (0.070)
Constant           -0.008**            -0.009              -0.009        0.002**
                   (0.004)             (0.006)             (0.006)       (0.001)
Observations       48                  36                  48            41
R-squared          0.725               0.545               0.671         0.965
GBP                -0.134              -0.059              -0.234        0.026


                                       2.13 Russia (rub)

                   (1)                 (2)                 (3)           (4)
                   rub 92-95           96-99               00-03         04-07
JPY                -0.491              -0.272              0.105         0.101**
                   (0.437)             (0.291)             (0.070)       (0.043)
USD                0.873               2.746**             0.787***      0.591***
                   (1.077)             (1.142)             (0.070)       (0.049)
German mark        -0.802              -0.798
                   (1.410)             (0.783)
Δ [logRes+logEx]   0.111               0.379**             0.101***      0.088*
                   (0.141)             (0.145)             (0.019)       (0.048)
Euro                                                       0.064         0.150
                                                           (0.070)       (0.151)
Constant           -0.024              -0.024**            -0.006***     -0.001
                   (0.025)             (0.012)             (0.002)       (0.002)
Observations       11                  36                  48            42
R-squared          0.514               0.602               0.863         0.832
GBP                1.420               -0.675              0.045         0.158




                                                                                    31
                                    2.14 Seychelles rupee (scr)

                  (1)         (2)          (3)        (4)         (5)        (6)           (7)
                  scr 80-83   84-87        88-91      92-95       96-99      00-03         04-07
JPY               -0.068      0.230***     0.178***   0.201***    0.030      0.321***      0.073
                  (0.154)     (0.033)      (0.020)    (0.016)     (0.049)    (0.115)       (0.086)
USD               0.391***    0.417***     0.370***   0.396***    0.586***   0.367***      0.934***
                  (0.099)     (0.024)      (0.021)    (0.016)     (0.113)    (0.125)       (0.080)
French franc      0.430***    0.250***     0.312***
                  (0.135)     (0.038)      (0.028)
Δ[logRes+logEx]   0.015       -0.002       0.002      -0.004      0.013      0.011         0.007
                  (0.018)     (0.003)      (0.002)    (0.002)     (0.015)    (0.017)       (0.009)
German mark                                           0.277***    0.085
                                                      (0.018)     (0.140)
Euro                                                                         -0.030        0.149
                                                                             (0.126)       (0.096)
Constant          0.007       0.000        -0.000     0.000       -0.003     -0.001        -0.003**
                  (0.006)     (0.001)      (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.002)    (0.003)       (0.001)
Observations      46          48           48         48          36         48            42
R-squared         0.530       0.972        0.982      0.992       0.565      0.391         0.833
GBP               0.246       0.103        0.140      0.125       0.299      0.343         -0.156



                                         2.15 Thailand (thb)

                  (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)        (6)           (7)
                  thb 80-83   84-87       88-91       92-95       96-99      00-03         04-07
JPY               0.146       0.093**     0.115***    0.106***    -0.005     0.121         0.034
                  (0.134)     (0.042)     (0.009)     (0.008)     (0.206)    (0.107)       (0.072)
USD               1.033***    0.319       0.754***    0.883***    -0.510     -1,767.883    0.255
                  (0.130)     (0.446)     (0.040)     (0.026)     (0.365)    (2,073.342)   (0.225)
KRW               -0.186      0.238       0.026       -0.099***   0.116      0.022         0.155
                  (0.236)     (0.457)     (0.018)     (0.029)     (0.071)    (0.099)       (0.111)
SGD               -0.291      0.304       0.036*      0.016       0.598      0.068         0.188
                  (0.307)     (0.190)     (0.020)     (0.032)     (0.621)    (0.217)       (0.207)
AUD               -0.090      -0.006      0.014***    0.016*      -0.264     0.107*        -0.014
                  (0.086)     (0.061)     (0.004)     (0.009)     (0.206)    (0.060)       (0.074)
MYR               0.436       0.018       -0.005      -0.003      0.575**    1,768.353     -0.001
                  (0.451)     (0.196)     (0.032)     (0.009)     (0.259)    (2,073.400)   (0.250)
French franc      -0.061      -0.026      0.049***
                  (0.080)     (0.074)     (0.010)
Δ[logRes+logEx]   0.004       -0.093      -0.005      0.012       0.239      0.368***      0.458***
                  (0.014)     (0.089)     (0.007)     (0.008)     (0.185)    (0.114)       (0.076)
German mark                                           0.071***    0.361
                                                      (0.010)     (0.345)
Euro                                                                         0.255**       0.158
                                                                             (0.118)       (0.100)
Constant          -0.005      -0.003      -0.000      -0.001***   0.003      -0.002        -0.006***
                  (0.004)     (0.004)     (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.006)    (0.002)       (0.001)
Observations      46          48          48          48          36         48            42
R-squared         0.840       0.650       0.999       0.999       0.839      0.828         0.861
GBP               0.012       0.059       0.012       0.010       0.128      -0.043        0.225




                                                                                                     32
                                        2.16 Vanuatu vatu (vuv)

                  (1)         (2)           (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)
                  vuv 80-83   84-87         88-91      92-95      96-99      00-03      04-07
JPY               0.074       0.583*        0.242      0.101      0.097**    0.240***   0.035
                  (0.054)     (0.312)       (0.164)    (0.064)    (0.044)    (0.059)    (0.075)
USD               0.407***    0.347*        0.504***   0.744***   0.681***   0.435***   0.463***
                  (0.104)     (0.179)       (0.131)    (0.080)    (0.104)    (0.073)    (0.079)
French franc      0.320***    -0.180        0.557**
                  (0.104)     (0.377)       (0.237)
Δ[logRes+logEx]   0.001       0.010         0.152***   0.100**    -0.009     0.104***   0.153***
                  (0.003)     (0.053)       (0.056)    (0.042)    (0.042)    (0.037)    (0.049)
German mark                                            -0.004     0.039
                                                       (0.087)    (0.084)
Euro                                                                         0.293***   -0.009
                                                                             (0.081)    (0.121)
Constant          0.001       -0.007        -0.002     -0.001     -0.004*    0.002      -0.003**
                  (0.001)     (0.005)       (0.003)    (0.002)    (0.002)    (0.002)    (0.002)
Observations      34          48            48         48         36         44         37
R-squared         0.834       0.461         0.683      0.872      0.675      0.704      0.709
GBP               0.199       0.250         -0.303     0.159      0.184      0.033      0.511



                                  2.17 Western Samoa tala (wst)

                  (1)         (2)           (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)
                  wst 80-83   84-87         88-91      92-95      96-99      00-03      04-07
JPY               0.254***    0.152         0.350***   0.153***   0.211***   0.176***   0.037
                  (0.051)     (0.132)       (0.075)    (0.042)    (0.048)    (0.062)    (0.074)
USD               0.597***    0.400**       0.538***   0.759***   0.710***   0.574***   0.542***
                  (0.104)     (0.193)       (0.136)    (0.047)    (0.154)    (0.079)    (0.070)
French franc      0.075       0.084         0.004
                  (0.129)     (0.228)       (0.209)
Δ[logRes+logEx]   0.007       0.114         0.131      0.099***   0.146**    0.161***   0.094***
                  (0.005)     (0.078)       (0.078)    (0.024)    (0.069)    (0.035)    (0.034)
German mark                                            -0.029     0.172*
                                                       (0.053)    (0.093)
Euro                                                                         0.405***   0.054
                                                                             (0.083)    (0.134)
+Constant         -0.012**    -0.011*       -0.005*    -0.000     -0.003     -0.000     0.000
                  (0.004)     (0.006)       (0.003)    (0.001)    (0.002)    (0.002)    (0.001)
Observations      40          48            48         48         36         48         41
R-squared         0.567       0.447         0.728      0.948      0.717      0.786      0.747
GBP               0.075       0.364         0.108      0.117      -0.093     -0.156     0.367




                                                                                                  33
                                      2.18 Australian dollar (aud)
                     (1)                        (2)                     (3)                      (4)
                     aud 92-95                  96-99                   00-03                    04-07
JPY                  -0.008                     0.210                   0.250**                  0.160
                     (0.102)                    (0.135)                 (0.104)                  (0.150)
USD                  1.036***                   0.676***                0.294                    0.181
                     (0.070)                    (0.236)                 (0.201)                  (0.142)
German mark          -0.171                     -0.140
                     (0.141)                    (0.180)
Δ[logRes+logEx]      0.242***                   0.062                   0.175***                 0.047
                     (0.043)                    (0.070)                 (0.043)                  (0.040)
EUR                                                                     0.554***                 0.107
                                                                        (0.123)                  (0.247)
Constant             0.002                      -0.006                  -0.001                   0.001
                     (0.002)                    (0.005)                 (0.003)                  (0.003)
Observations         48                         36                      48                       42
R-squared            0.833                      0.327                   0.538                    0.171
GBP                  0.143                      0.254                   -0.098                   0.552



                                       2.19 Canadian dollar (cad)

                  (1)                 (2)                  (3)                    (4)               (5)
                  cad 90-93           94-97                98-01                  02-05             06-09
JPY               0.046               0.018                0.035                  0.324***          -0.162
                  (0.058)             (0.080)              (0.076)                (0.092)           (0.283)
USD               0.902***            0.966***             0.321                  0.449***          0.543*
                  (0.049)             (0.095)              (0.322)                (0.112)           (0.282)
German mark       0.007               0.018                0.101
                  (0.066)             (0.075)              (0.313)
Δ[logRes+logEx]   0.106***            0.067***             0.124**                0.366***          0.401**
                  (0.014)             (0.024)              (0.034)                (0.112)           (0.129)
EUR                                                                               0.337*            0.189
                                                                                  (0.179)           (0.522)
Constant          -0.002*             -0.002               -0.008                 0.004             -0.005
                  (0.001)             (0.002)              (0.006)                (0.002)           (0.005)
Observations      48                  48                   8                      48                14
R-squared         0.958               0.790                0.776                  0.708             0.684
GBP               0.046               -0.002               0.543                  -0.110            0.430



                                            2.20 Mexico (mxn)

                  (1)            (2)            (3)          (4)            (5)              (6)           (7)
                  mxn 80-83      84-87          88-91        92-95          96-99            00-03         04-07
JPY               -0.321         -0.168         0.049        0.497**        0.077            0.098         0.179**
                  (0.609)        (0.248)        (0.036)      (0.205)        (0.057)          (0.100)       (0.075)
USD               1.210*         1.358***       0.988***     0.702***       1.110***         0.795***      0.617***
                  (0.675)        (0.154)        (0.026)      (0.226)        (0.259)          (0.146)       (0.134)
French franc      -0.378         -0.189         -0.062
                  (0.592)        (0.239)        (0.047)
Δ[logRes+logEx]   0.212*         0.132**        -0.005       0.212***       0.335***         0.398***      0.336***
                  (0.124)        (0.061)        (0.004)      (0.074)        (0.086)          (0.094)       (0.090)



                                                                                                                  34
German mark                                                 -0.715*        -0.073
                                                            (0.411)        (0.134)
Euro                                                                                   0.229          -0.105
                                                                                       (0.148)        (0.230)
Constant           -0.036**       -0.047***     -0.007***   -0.014**       -0.011***   -0.007**       -0.001
                   (0.017)        (0.004)       (0.001)     (0.006)        (0.003)     (0.003)        (0.002)
Observations       46             48            48          48             36          48             42
R-squared          0.307          0.758         0.979       0.683          0.805       0.774          0.721
GBP                0.489          -0.001        0.026       0.516          -0.113      -0.122         0.310




                                              2.21 Indonesia (idr)

                      (1)                      (2)                     (3)                 (4)
                      idr 92-95                96-99                   00-03               04-07
JPY                   0.056*                   0.298**                 0.111               -0.207
                      (0.029)                  (0.135)                 (0.152)             (0.132)
USD                   1.475***                 -0.118                  -2,355.834          0.213
                      (0.273)                  (0.666)                 (4,298.661)         (0.287)
KRW                   -0.097*                  -0.286***               0.000               0.016
                      (0.048)                  (0.074)                 (0.126)             (0.163)
SGD                   -0.002                   -0.090                  0.657**             0.660*
                      (0.072)                  (0.783)                 (0.263)             (0.331)
AUD                   0.011                    -0.165                  0.051               0.287**
                      (0.015)                  (0.257)                 (0.125)             (0.138)
MYR                   -0.006                   0.286                   2,355.762           -0.017
                      (0.012)                  (0.372)                 (4,298.726)         (0.330)
THB                   -0.486                   0.164                   -0.164              0.584***
                      (0.299)                  (0.313)                 (0.232)             (0.177)
Germany mark          0.042*                   0.345
                      (0.021)                  (0.397)
Δ [logRes+logEx]      -0.006                   0.892***                0.736***            0.226***
                      (0.006)                  (0.065)                 (0.117)             (0.041)
Euro                                                                   0.388**             -0.314*
                                                                       (0.160)             (0.158)
Constant              -0.003***                -0.017*                 -0.005              -0.006**
                      (0.000)                  (0.009)                 (0.003)             (0.002)
Observations          48                       36                      48                  41
R-squared             0.998                    0.952                   0.875               0.892
GBP                   0.008                    0.568                   0.030               -0.222


* Statistically significant at .10 level
** Statistically significant at .05 level
*** Statistically significant at .01 level




                                                                                                                35
Table 3: Estimating the De Facto Exchange Rate Regime with commodity prices as
instrumental variables for the change in EMP in the case of commodity exporters
                   (01/1980 – 06/2007) numeraire currency = SDR




                                  3.3 Malaysia (myr)
IV: average of prices of semiconductors and tin

                      (1)                 (2)                  (3)                (4)
                      myr-IV 92-95        96-99                00-03              04-07
Δ [logRes+logEx]      0.092               -0.154               -0.000             0.253
                      (0.060)             (0.571)              (0.000)            (0.150)
JPY                   -0.137              -0.180               -0.000             -0.033
                      (0.195)             (0.210)              (0.000)            (0.082)
USD                   -0.833              -0.194               1.000***           0.493***
                      (2.205)             (0.627)              (0.000)            (0.168)
KRW                   0.042               -0.120               0.000              -0.086
                      (0.380)             (0.109)              (0.000)            (0.097)
SGD                   0.858*              1.222*               -0.000             0.463**
                      (0.442)             (0.670)              (0.000)            (0.192)
AUD                   -0.110              0.029                0.000              -0.028
                      (0.149)             (0.328)              (0.000)            (0.084)
THB                   1.262               0.542                0.000              0.029
                      (2.428)             (0.482)              (0.000)            (0.094)
German mark           -0.116              -0.206
                      (0.196)             (0.352)
Euro                                                           -0.000             0.103
                                                               (0.000)            (0.167)
Constant              -0.002              -0.004               0.000              -0.004
                      (0.003)             (0.007)              (0.000)            (0.003)
Observations          48                  36                   48                 40
R-squared             0.798               0.784                1.000              0.903
GBP                   0.034               -0.093               0.000              0.059




                                      3.4 Chile (clp)
Instrumental Variable : Price of copper

                   (1)          (2)       (3)       (4)            (5)        (6)            (7)
                   clp-IV 80-   84-87     88-91     92-95          96-99      00-03          04-07
                   83
Δ[logRes+logEx]    0.359***     1.171     0.435     0.333*         0.291***   0.310          -11.766
                   (0.098)      (1.113)   (1.296)   (0.166)        (0.085)    (0.758)        (416.229)
JPY                -0.043       0.883     0.344     0.207***       0.116***   0.113          -5.265
                   (0.126)      (0.574)   (0.955)   (0.059)        (0.034)    (0.190)        (179.614)
USD                0.534***     -0.731    0.422     0.691***       0.843***   0.587          10.803
                   (0.190)      (2.242)   (1.724)   (0.135)        (0.088)    (0.507)        (348.039)
French franc       0.483**      0.576     0.106
                   (0.210)      (1.318)   (1.102)
German mark                                         -0.006         0.131*
                                                    (0.113)        (0.064)
EUR                                                                           0.080          -4.345



                                                                                                      36
                                                                              (0.332)       (173.089)
Constant           -0.004       -0.005      -0.014     -0.006***   -0.004**   -0.002        0.037
                   (0.004)      (0.018)     (0.014)    (0.002)     (0.001)    (0.003)       (1.185)
Observations       46           48          48         48          36         48            41
R-squared          0.566        0.289       0.619      0.905       0.902      0.628
GBP                0.025        0.272       0.128      0.108       -0.089     0.220         -0.192




                                           3.5 Kuwait (kwd)
IV: Price of oil

                   (1)          (2)         (3)        (4)         (5)        (6)           (7)
                   kwd-IV 80-   84-87       88-91      92-95       96-99      00-03         04-07
                   83
Δ[logRes+logEx]    -0.019       0.224       0.030      -0.053      -0.123     0.095         0.028
                   (0.029)      (0.392)     (0.033)    (0.073)     (0.649)    (0.253)       (0.046)
JPY                0.079***     0.305       0.126*     0.041       0.007      0.085         0.038
                   (0.016)      (0.227)     (0.070)    (0.041)     (0.225)    (0.089)       (0.044)
USD                0.814***     0.435       0.637***   0.834***    0.945*     0.723**       0.972***
                   (0.031)      (0.394)     (0.044)    (0.095)     (0.521)    (0.317)       (0.059)
French franc       0.032        0.270       0.155**
                   (0.029)      (0.201)     (0.063)
German mark                                            0.065       0.001
                                                       (0.073)     (0.290)
Euro                                                                          0.084         -0.062
                                                                              (0.110)       (0.052)
Constant           0.000        -0.001      -0.001     -0.001      0.000      -0.001        -0.000
                   (0.001)      (0.003)     (0.001)    (0.001)     (0.002)    (0.002)       (0.001)
Observations       46           48          39         48          36         48            41
R-squared          0.980        0.755       0.953      0.937       0.873      0.931         0.980
GBP                0.075        -0.009      0.083      0.060       0.048      0.107         0.052


                                           3.8 Norway (nok)
IV: oil price

                   (1)          (2)         (3)        (4)         (5)        (6)           (7)
                   nok-IV 80-   84-87       88-91      92-95       96-99      00-03         04-07
                   83
Δ[logRes+logEx]    -0.219       0.097       0.081      -0.182      0.219*     30.036        0.206
                   (0.469)      (0.090)     (0.079)    (0.374)     (0.113)    (2,045.207)   (0.471)
JPY                0.075        0.117*      0.018      -0.121      0.001      14.527        0.155
                   (0.166)      (0.066)     (0.058)    (0.150)     (0.077)    (983.036)     (0.205)
USD                0.178        0.065       0.179***   -0.012      0.279*     7.677         -0.066
                   (0.350)      (0.068)     (0.035)    (0.235)     (0.161)    (523.059)     (0.161)
French franc       0.334***     0.699***    0.578***
                   (0.115)      (0.118)     (0.066)
German mark                                            0.865***    0.779***
                                                       (0.226)     (0.134)
EUR                                                                           -29.766       1.095***
                                                                              (2,086.199)   (0.345)
Constant           0.001        -0.005*     0.001      0.001       -0.000     -0.155        -0.001
                   (0.008)      (0.003)     (0.001)    (0.002)     (0.003)    (10.623)      (0.004)
Observations       46           48          48         48          36         48            41
R-squared          0.327        0.767       0.780      0.203       0.610                    0.493
GBP                0.412        0.118       0.225      0.269       -0.059     8.561         -0.184




                                                                                                      37
                            3.9 Papua New Guinea kina (png)
IV: average price of gold, copper, oil, gas and timber

                   (1)             (2)                (3)         (4)
                   png-IV 92-95    96-99              00-03       04-07
Δ [logRes+logEx]   -0.001          0.139              0.028       -0.042
                   (0.028)         (0.179)            (0.888)     (0.035)
JPY                0.193           0.577**            0.759       0.009
                   (0.325)         (0.248)            (1.952)     (0.056)
USD                2.019           1.185***           1.463       1.243***
                   (2.543)         (0.360)            (2.037)     (0.150)
KRW                -1.264**        -0.047             -0.405      -0.023
                   (0.502)         (0.099)            (1.553)     (0.110)
SGD                -0.457          -0.885             -0.509      0.047
                   (0.666)         (0.615)            (2.016)     (0.229)
AUD                0.311**         0.054              0.300       -0.042
                   (0.141)         (0.316)            (0.894)     (0.061)
MYR                -0.003          0.356              0.000       -0.351**
                   (0.213)         (0.258)            (0.000)     (0.158)
THB                0.205           0.034              -0.335      0.014
                   (2.862)         (0.182)            (0.745)     (0.083)
German mark        0.134           -0.229
                   (0.329)         (0.292)
Euro                                                  0.498       -0.005
                                                      (0.578)     (0.094)
Constant           -0.008**        -0.009             -0.007      0.004**
                   (0.004)         (0.006)            (0.012)     (0.002)
Observations       47              36                 48          41
R-squared          0.715           0.533              0.433       0.941
GBP                -0.138          -0.045             -0.770      0.108



                                  3.10 Russia (rub)
IV: Price of oil

                   (1)             (2)                (3)         (4)
                   rub-IV 92-95    96-99              00-03       04-07
Δ [logRes+logEx]   -0.243          0.661*             0.125**     -0.066
                   (0.280)         (0.353)            (0.047)     (0.552)
JPY                -0.126          -0.381             0.106       0.121
                   (0.496)         (0.411)            (0.071)     (0.117)
USD                1.248           2.353**            0.755***    0.542***
                   (1.278)         (0.921)            (0.083)     (0.197)
German mark        -1.444          -0.059
                   (0.794)         (1.162)
Euro                                                  0.067       0.104
                                                      (0.072)     (0.373)
Constant           0.032           -0.006             -0.007***   0.006
                   (0.051)         (0.021)            (0.003)     (0.024)
Observations       11              36                 48          41
R-squared          0.040           0.399              0.860       0.728
GBP                1.322           -0.912             0.072       0.233




                                                                             38
                                          3.11 Thailand (thb)
IV: rice

                  (1)           (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)       (6)       (7)
                  thb-IV 80-    84-87      88-91      92-95      96-99     00-03     04-07
                  83
Δ[logRes+logEx]   0.716         0.483      0.218      -0.860     0.235     0.596     0.605***
                  (1.159)       (0.957)    (2.012)    (11.002)   (0.258)   (0.534)   (0.178)
JPY               -0.289        0.072      0.237      -0.153     -0.007    0.094     0.069
                  (0.744)       (0.167)    (1.099)    (3.254)    (0.227)   (0.087)   (0.077)
USD               1.459         1.094      0.734***   1.497      -0.515    0.582*    0.419
                  (1.255)       (1.246)    (0.224)    (7.833)    (0.426)   (0.289)   (0.286)
KRW               0.694         0.072      -0.110     -0.444     0.117     0.017     0.065
                  (1.752)       (0.760)    (1.224)    (4.436)    (0.101)   (0.147)   (0.093)
SGD               0.498         -0.081     -0.246     0.680      0.605     -0.109    0.194
                  (1.553)       (0.694)    (2.538)    (8.331)    (0.677)   (0.395)   (0.252)
AUD               -0.011        -0.264     0.028      -0.245     -0.265    0.075     -0.023
                  (0.355)       (0.514)    (0.133)    (3.287)    (0.209)   (0.107)   (0.080)
MYR               -2.301        -0.651     0.151      0.312      0.578**   0.000     -0.176
                  (4.483)       (1.358)    (1.393)    (3.972)    (0.250)   (0.000)   (0.305)
French franc      0.181         0.471      0.192
                  (0.462)       (0.859)    (1.278)
German mark                                           -0.505     0.361
                                                      (7.240)    (0.346)
Euro                                                                       0.373     0.165
                                                                           (0.310)   (0.107)
Constant          0.007         -0.013     -0.005     0.010      0.003     -0.003    -0.007***
                  (0.020)       (0.022)    (0.046)    (0.128)    (0.006)   (0.002)   (0.002)
Observations      46            48         48         48         36        48        41
GBP               0.769         0.286      0.014      -0.141     0.127     -0.032    0.286



                                   3.12 Western Samoa tala (Wst)
IV: Price of coconuts

                  (1)           (2)         (3)       (4)        (5)       (6)       (7)
                  wst-IV 80-    84-87       88-91     92-95      96-99     00-03     04-07
                  83
Δ[logRes+logEx]   -7.677        0.288       0.257     0.262      0.795     1.539     0.225
                  (1,794.239)   (0.262)     (0.460)   (0.167)    (0.596)   (4.821)   (0.228)
JPY               -16.820       0.006       0.398**   0.244**    0.402*    0.366     0.046
                  (3,987.521)   (0.234)     (0.179)   (0.111)    (0.198)   (0.950)   (0.096)
USD               -33.465       0.337       0.414     0.609***   0.010     1.387     0.540***
                  (7,961.609)   (0.205)     (0.490)   (0.176)    (0.751)   (2.984)   (0.082)
French franc      33.903        0.207       0.247
                  (7,902.798)   (0.291)     (0.996)
German mark                                           0.062      0.274
                                                      (0.125)    (0.269)
Euro                                                                       0.335     0.073
                                                                           (0.605)   (0.149)
Constant          0.910         -0.014      -0.006    0.000      -0.004    -0.002    -0.000
                  (215.500)     (0.009)     (0.006)   (0.002)    (0.006)   (0.013)   (0.002)
Observations      40            48          48        48         36        48        41
GBP               17.382        0.450       -0.059    0.084      0.313     -1.089    0.342
R-squared                       0.238       0.660     0.889                          0.540




                                                                                               39
                                            3.18 Australia (aud)
IV: world commodity price index

                        (1)                      (2)                 (3)                  (4)
                        aud-IV 92-95             96-99               00-03                04-07
Δ [logRes+logEx]        0.295**                  0.380               0.632                0.333
                        (0.122)                  (0.471)             (1.034)              (0.905)
JPY                     0.012                    0.202               0.101                0.261
                        (0.109)                  (0.131)             (0.400)              (0.372)
USD                     1.010***                 0.561               0.768                0.263
                        (0.095)                  (0.342)             (1.146)              (0.353)
German mark             -0.144                   -0.058
                        (0.153)                  (0.392)
Euro                                                                 0.507                0.446
                                                                     (0.347)              (1.177)
Constant                0.003                    -0.007              -0.004               -0.004
                        (0.003)                  (0.006)             (0.011)              (0.016)
Observations            48                       36                  48                   41
R-squared               0.829
GBP                     0.123                    0.294               -0.375               0.030

Notes:
1.     Use the level of commodity prices as instrumental variables for the change in EMP
2.     Commodity prices have been converted to SDR
3.     The commodity prices have been deflated by the weighted world CPI:
       we calculate the weighted CPI by using the weights and currencies that are used to define SDR, and
       have adjusted their weights according to their evolution since 1980
4.     Data source: IMF International financial statistics
5.     Indices of Unit Values (Prices) In Terms of US Dollars: 2000=100



                             3.19 Canadian dollar (cad)
IV: world commodity price index

                    (1)                (2)                 (3)                 (4)            (5)
                    cad-IV 90-93       94-97               98-01               02-05          06-09
Δ[logRes+logEx]     0.288              0.292               0.190               0.633          1.333
                    (0.263)            (0.929)             (0.108)             (0.674)        (0.960)
JPY                 0.236              0.055               0.073               0.323***       -0.215
                    (0.300)            (0.156)             (0.157)             (0.105)        (0.841)
USD                 0.672*             0.802               0.225               0.320          -0.038
                    (0.359)            (0.719)             (0.423)             (0.321)        (1.036)
German mark         0.291              0.040               0.051
                    (0.437)            (0.189)             (0.394)
Euro                                                                           0.331*         -0.159
                                                                               (0.183)        (0.713)
Constant            -0.002             -0.005              -0.008              0.003          -0.017
                    (0.003)            (0.016)             (0.007)             (0.002)        (0.019)
Observations        48                 48                  8                   48             13
R-squared           0.835              0.303               0.626               0.627



                                                                                                            40
                                          3.20 Mexico (mxn)
IV: oil price
                   (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)            (5)        (6)           (7)
                   mxn-IV       84-87       88-91       92-95          96-99      00-03         04-07
                   80-83
Δ[logRes+logEx]    2.300        1.056       -0.050      0.573          0.174      1.069         0.389
                   (4.951)      (1.249)     (0.032)     (0.479)        (0.274)    (1.552)       (0.754)
JPY                1.250        0.629       0.095       0.613          0.065      0.557         0.193
                   (3.833)      (1.143)     (0.097)     (0.506)        (0.064)    (1.055)       (0.256)
USD                0.504        -0.418      0.996***    0.143          1.314***   -0.109        0.556
                   (4.467)      (2.482)     (0.039)     (0.811)        (0.388)    (2.031)       (0.903)
French franc       0.618        1.492       -0.117
                   (6.156)      (2.760)     (0.090)
German mark                                             -0.341         -0.174
                                                        (0.928)        (0.194)
Euro                                                                              0.808         -0.050
                                                                                  (1.342)       (0.856)
Constant           -0.003       -0.027      -0.007***   -0.006         -0.010     -0.013        -0.002
                   (0.130)      (0.027)     (0.001)     (0.010)        (0.006)    (0.015)       (0.004)
Observations       46           48          48          48             36         48            41
GBP                -1.373       -0.703      0.027       0.584          -0.205     -0.256        0.301
R-squared                                   0.950                      0.754      0.297         0.714



                                          3.21 Indonesia (idr)
IV: average price of oil and gas
                      (1)                  (2)                    (3)                 (4)
                      idr-IV 92-95         96-99                  00-03               04-07
Δ [logRes+logEx]      0.263                0.869*                 0.334               0.364
                      (0.421)              (0.491)                (0.467)             (0.329)
JPY                   0.007                0.303                  -0.097              -0.142
                      (0.123)              (0.189)                (0.329)             (0.166)
USD                   -0.039               -0.142                 27.967              0.571
                      (1.889)              (0.876)                (51.509)            (1.053)
KRW                   0.043                -0.281*                0.095               -0.004
                      (0.220)              (0.153)                (0.197)             (0.231)
SGD                   0.013                -0.043                 1.374               0.525
                      (0.265)              (1.371)                (1.189)             (0.481)
AUD                   -0.015               -0.188                 0.103               0.320*
                      (0.058)              (0.523)                (0.187)             (0.180)
MYR                   -0.036               0.306                  -28.750             -0.295
                      (0.097)              (0.676)                (51.078)            (0.911)
THB                   0.916                0.169                  0.229               0.440
                      (1.823)              (0.305)                (0.414)             (0.381)
German mark           0.111                0.329
                      (0.207)              (0.529)
Euro                                                              0.116               -0.237
                                                                  (0.354)             (0.292)
Constant              -0.004*              -0.017*                -0.003              -0.006
                      (0.002)              (0.009)                (0.005)             (0.004)
Observations          47                   36                     48                  41
R-squared             0.953                0.952                  0.730               0.858
GBP                   -0.001               0.547                  -0.037              -0.177


* Statistically significant at .10 level
** Statistically significant at .05 level
*** Statistically significant at .01 level


                                                                                                          41
Table 4: Change in reserves defined as percent of monetary base, rather
than as percent of reserves. OLS
Δ EMP defined as:     [res(t)-res(t-1)]/mb(t-1) + [exr(t)-exr(t-1)]/exr(t-1)

1.    Known peggers: China, Hong Kong, Malaysia



                                               4.1 China
                                 (1)                                     (2)
                                 cny 01-04                               05-07
USD                              0.916***                                1.029***
                                 (0.002)                                 (0.106)
JPY                              -0.010                                  0.040
                                 (0.016)                                 (0.031)
KRW                              0.000                                   0.058
                                 (0.010)                                 (0.048)
SGD                              0.104                                   -0.150
                                 (0.091)                                 (0.096)
MYR                                                                      0.027
                                                                         (0.039)
RUB                              0.027                                   -0.100
                                 (0.033)                                 (0.137)
AUD                              0.001                                   0.020
                                 (0.011)                                 (0.025)
THB                               -0.054                                 0.037
                                 (0.050)                                 (0.044)
CAD                               -0.017                                 -0.052*
                                 (0.021)                                 (0.028)
EUR                               0.061                                  0.061
                                 (0.056)                                 (0.077)
EMP defined with MB               0.069                                  0.103**
                                 (0.063)                                 (0.039)
Constant                         0.001                                   0.000
                                 (0.001)                                 (0.001)
Observations                     48                                      23
R-squared                        0.989                                   0.996
GBP                              0.000                                   0.030




                                           4.2 Hong Kong
                       (1)                          (2)                            (3)
                       hkd 97-00                    01-04                          05-07
JPY                    0.000                        -0.002                         -0.009
                       (0.003)                      (0.011)                        (0.019)
USD                    0.987***                     -302.382                       1.015***
                       (0.013)                      (329.462)                      (0.032)
KRW                    0.003                        0.001                          0.012
                       (0.003)                      (0.014)                        (0.029)
SGD                    0.002                        -0.021                         0.023
                       (0.009)                      (0.022)                        (0.047)
AUD                    0.004                        -0.002                         0.023
                       (0.009)                      (0.006)                        (0.019)



                                                                                              42
MYR                          -0.005                   303.372                    -0.017
                             (0.005)                  (329.454)                  (0.036)
THB                          -0.001                   0.018                      -0.016
                             (0.004)                  (0.018)                    (0.030)
DEM (Deutsche Mark)          -0.002
                             (0.007)
EMP defined with MB          0.000                    -0.007*                    -0.013
                             (0.001)                  (0.004)                    (0.010)
EUR                                                   0.004                      -0.007
                                                      (0.008)                    (0.030)
Constant                     -0.000                   -0.000                     -0.000
                             (0.000)                  (0.000)                    (0.000)
Observations                 23                       48                         30
R-squared                    0.998                    0.998                      0.997
GBP                          0.012                    0.013                      -0.024


                                              4.3 Malaysia
                           (1)             (2)                    (3)                 (4)
                           myr 92-95       96-99                  00-03               04-07
JPY                        -0.038          -0.222                 -0.000              -0.046
                           (0.194)         (0.168)                (0.000)             (0.060)
USD                        0.324           0.121                  1.000***            0.648***
                           (1.895)         (0.263)                (0.000)             (0.095)
KRW                        -0.242          -0.071                 0.000               -0.118
                           (0.469)         (0.065)                (0.000)             (0.072)
SGD                        0.928*          1.137**                -0.000              0.458***
                           (0.532)         (0.554)                (0.000)             (0.163)
AUD                        -0.047          -0.075                 0.000               0.030
                           (0.096)         (0.199)                (0.000)             (0.049)
THB                        0.181           0.192                  0.000               0.059
                           (2.016)         (0.241)                (0.000)             (0.068)
DEM                        -0.059          -0.091
                           (0.167)         (0.216)
EMP defined with MB        -0.013          0.219***               -0.000              0.011*
                           (0.016)         (0.067)                (0.000)             (0.007)
EUR                                                               -0.000              -0.030
                                                                  (0.000)             (0.087)
Constant                   -0.001          -0.008                 0.000               0.001
                           (0.003)         (0.005)                (0.000)             (0.001)
Observations               48              36                     48                  40
R-squared                  0.835           0.860                  1.000               0.937
GBP                        -0.047          0.011                  0.000               -0.002




  2. Known basket peggers:
  Chile, Kuwait, Latvia, Malta, Norway, Seychelles, Vanuatu, Western Samoa.

                                                 4.4 Chile
               (1)             (2)        (3)          (4)            (5)         (6)            (7)
               clp 80-83       84-87      88-91        92-95          96-99       00-03          04-07
JPY            0.013           0.566      -0.006       0.225**        0.089**     0.103          -0.068
               (0.102)         (0.461)    (0.103)      (0.091)        (0.041)     (0.159)        (0.159)
USD            0.674**         1.329***   1.040***     0.870***       0.998***    0.619**        0.804***
               (0.251)         (0.381)    (0.075)      (0.101)        (0.090)     (0.261)        (0.172)
DEM            0.275           -0.343     -0.276**     -0.150         0.065
               (0.208)         (0.469)    (0.125)      (0.141)        (0.078)



                                                                                                            43
EMP defined    0.145*       0.081          -0.014            0.053*        0.048***    0.106*        0.090***
with MB
               (0.072)      (0.085)        (0.012)           (0.026)       (0.011)     (0.060)       (0.028)
EUR                                                                                    0.023         0.612**
                                                                                       (0.132)       (0.295)
Constant       -0.010***    -0.023***      -0.008***         -0.006**      -0.005***   -0.003        0.002
               (0.003)      (0.008)        (0.002)           (0.003)       (0.002)     (0.004)       (0.003)
Observations   46           48             48                48            36          48            41
R-squared      0.608        0.502          0.890             0.835         0.864       0.359         0.622
GBP            0.038        -0.551         0.241             0.055         -0.152      0.255         -0.348

                                                     4.5 Kuwait
               (1)          (2)            (3)               (4)           (5)         (6)           (7)
               kwd 80-83    84-87          88-91             92-95         96-99       00-03         04-07
JPY            0.077***     0.177***       0.118**           0.067**       0.049***    0.052***      0.015
               (0.014)      (0.052)        (0.052)           (0.030)       (0.006)     (0.012)       (0.015)
USD            0.800***     0.690***       0.671***          0.779***      0.849***    0.845***      0.997***
               (0.019)      (0.046)        (0.041)           (0.031)       (0.018)     (0.031)       (0.023)
DEM            0.048***     0.140          0.173***          0.072         0.050**
               (0.016)      (0.090)        (0.048)           (0.050)       (0.018)
EMP            -0.004       -0.005         -0.001            -0.002        -0.001      -0.001        -0.000
defined with
MB
               (0.003)      (0.006)        (0.002)           (0.003)       (0.002)     (0.001)       (0.000)
EUR                                                                                    0.048***      -0.036
                                                                                       (0.016)       (0.028)
Constant       -0.000       -0.002*        -0.002*           -0.001        0.000       0.000         0.001
               (0.001)      (0.001)        (0.001)           (0.001)       (0.000)     (0.000)       (0.000)
Observations   46           48             39                48            36          48            41
R-squared      0.982        0.932          0.972             0.968         0.991       0.985         0.991
GBP            0.074        -0.007         0.037             0.083         0.052       0.055         0.024


                                                     4.6 Latvia
                           (1)               (2)                        (3)                (4)
                           lvl 93-96         97-00                      01-04              05-07
JPY                        0.234***          0.152***                   0.056              -0.003
                           (0.046)           (0.019)                    (0.034)            (0.144)
USD                        0.439***          0.429***                   0.048              -0.005
                           (0.069)           (0.067)                    (0.124)            (0.278)
RUB                        -0.012            -0.005                     0.391***           0.256
                           (0.024)           (0.007)                    (0.118)            (0.490)
DEM                        0.268***          0.315***
                           (0.036)           (0.057)
EMP defined with MB        0.081**           0.025                      0.009              0.002
                           (0.032)           (0.015)                    (0.014)            (0.048)
EUR                                                                     0.332***           0.550
                                                                        (0.055)            (0.345)
Constant                   0.000             -0.001                     -0.002             -0.000
                           (0.001)           (0.001)                    (0.001)            (0.003)
Observations               34                18                         48                 24
R-squared                  0.894             0.948                      0.799              0.517
GBP                        0.072             0.110                      0.173              0.202

                                                     4.7 Malta
                           (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)         (5)       (6)          (7)
                           mtl 80-      84-87        88-91        92-95       96-99     00-03        04-07
                           83
JPY                        0.054***     0.090***     0.003        0.067        0.152    0.039*       -0.005




                                                                                                                44
                        (0.020)    (0.033)      (0.029)    (0.077)        (0.147)      (0.020)      (0.032)
USD                     0.352***   0.297***     0.303***   0.223***       0.413**      0.208***     0.049
                        (0.044)    (0.024)      (0.024)    (0.080)        (0.195)      (0.034)      (0.031)
DEM                     0.326***   0.466***     0.349***   0.440***       0.173
                        (0.034)    (0.049)      (0.034)    (0.073)        (0.239)
EMP defined with MB     0.024*     0.004        0.051      0.169          0.491***     0.057**      0.017
                        (0.014)    (0.056)      (0.034)    (0.142)        (0.132)      (0.021)      (0.015)
EUR                                                                                    0.505***     0.867***
                                                                                       (0.024)      (0.053)
Constant                -0.000     0.000        0.000      -0.003         -0.003       0.000        -0.000
                        (0.001)    (0.001)      (0.001)    (0.002)        (0.004)      (0.001)      (0.001)
Observations            46         48           48         48             36           45           41
R-squared               0.919      0.957        0.934      0.563          0.691        0.933        0.892
GBP                     0.267      0.147        0.344      0.269          0.262        0.248        0.089


                                               4.8 Norway
                      (1)          (2)          (3)            (4)          (5)          (6)          (7)
                      nok 80-83    84-87        88-91          92-95        96-99        00-03        04-07
JPY                   0.124*       0.055        -0.007         -0.049       -0.099*      0.055        0.005
                      (0.063)      (0.077)      (0.054)        (0.047)      (0.051)      (0.074)      (0.304)
USD                   0.276***     0.122*       0.185***       0.076*       0.264*       0.008        0.048
                      (0.073)      (0.069)      (0.034)        (0.039)      (0.146)      (0.108)      (0.273)
DEM                   0.451***     0.689***     0.543***       0.795***     0.910***
                      (0.056)      (0.133)      (0.061)        (0.073)      (0.109)
EMP define with MB    0.010        0.027        0.017*         0.012        0.015        -0.009       -0.010
                      (0.014)      (0.018)      (0.009)        (0.011)      (0.009)      (0.012)      (0.028)
EUR                                                                                      0.855***     1.469**
                                                                                         (0.114)      (0.542)
Constant              -0.005**     -0.006*      0.000          -0.002       -0.001       -0.000       0.005
                      (0.002)      (0.003)      (0.001)        (0.002)      (0.002)      (0.003)      (0.008)
Observations          46           48           48             48           36           48           11
R-squared             0.785        0.724        0.758          0.782        0.765        0.625        0.658
GBP                   0.149        0.134        0.279          0.178        -0.075       0.082        -0.522


                                              4.9 Seychelles
                        (1)        (2)          (3)        (4)            (5)          (6)           (7)
                        scr 80-    84-87        88-91      92-95          96-99        00-03         04-07
                        83
JPY                     -0.064     0.188***     0.170***   0.203***       0.047        0.319***      0.077
                        (0.155)    (0.029)      (0.016)    (0.016)        (0.048)      (0.115)       (0.087)
USD                     0.359***   0.442***     0.378***   0.394***       0.539***     0.354***      0.926***
                        (0.096)    (0.018)      (0.019)    (0.017)        (0.100)      (0.127)       (0.081)
DEM                     0.462***   0.288***     0.299***   0.278***       0.131
                        (0.132)    (0.027)      (0.028)    (0.018)        (0.106)
EMP defined with MB     0.046      -0.004       0.006      -0.006         0.144        0.053         0.016
                        (0.046)    (0.005)      (0.007)    (0.005)        (0.104)      (0.042)       (0.015)
EUR                                                                                    -0.006        0.160
                                                                                       (0.119)       (0.102)
Constant                0.005      0.000        -0.000     0.000          -0.003       -0.001        -0.003**
                        (0.005)    (0.000)      (0.000)    (0.000)        (0.002)      (0.003)       (0.001)
Observations            46         48           48         48             36           48            42
R-squared               0.556      0.985        0.985      0.992          0.621        0.414         0.836
GBP                     0.243      0.081        0.154      0.125          0.284        0.333         -0.163




                                                                                                                45
                                                  4.10 Vanuatu
               (1)             (2)            (3)         (4)           (5)            (6)            (7)
               vuv 81-84       85-88          89-92       93-96         97-00          01-04          05-07
JPY            0.111           0.418          0.055       0.145**       0.019          0.014          0.084
               (0.079)         (0.314)        (0.190)     (0.066)       (0.028)        (0.034)        (0.061)
USD            -0.220          0.124          0.637       0.670***      0.422***       -314.737       0.128
               (0.502)         (0.408)        (0.602)     (0.188)       (0.063)        (1,037.297)    (0.112)
KRW            0.454           0.348          -0.359      0.035         0.015          -0.030         0.027
               (0.421)         (0.411)        (0.480)     (0.134)       (0.010)        (0.038)        (0.051)
SGD            0.374           0.405          -0.158      0.023         -0.120         0.054          0.010
               (0.269)         (0.472)        (0.700)     (0.313)       (0.095)        (0.077)        (0.096)
AUD            -0.054          0.029          0.299**     0.338***      0.308***       0.329***       0.200**
               (0.109)         (0.088)        (0.127)     (0.090)       (0.061)        (0.055)        (0.075)
NZD            -0.010          -0.011         0.468**     0.076         0.104          0.185***       0.156***
               (0.028)         (0.127)        (0.214)     (0.096)       (0.064)        (0.038)        (0.036)
MYR            -0.049          -0.577         -0.163      -0.368***     0.036          315.063        0.187
               (0.267)         (0.577)        (0.201)     (0.133)       (0.035)        (1,037.284)    (0.156)
DEM            0.286***        0.056          0.424**     0.060         0.084
               (0.081)         (0.273)        (0.160)     (0.069)       (0.054)
EMP defined    0.002           -0.005         -0.028      0.009         -0.000         0.029**        0.030
with MB
               (0.007)         (0.017)        (0.027)     (0.016)       (0.007)        (0.012)        (0.018)
EUR                                                                                    0.018          0.051
                                                                                       (0.047)        (0.076)
Constant       0.001           -0.013         -0.001      -0.000        -0.002         0.001          -0.001
               (0.002)         (0.008)        (0.004)     (0.002)       (0.001)        (0.001)        (0.001)
Observations   46              48             48          48            24             48             25
R-squared      0.807           0.460          0.820       0.909         0.968          0.941          0.961
GBP            0.108           0.209          -0.204      0.021         0.131          0.105          0.157

                                              4.11 Western Samoa
wst                      (1)       (2)         (3)        (4)         (5)          (6)             (7)
                         80-83     84-87       88-91      92-95       96-99        00-03           04-07
JPY                      0.061     0.194*      0.238***   0.068*      0.131**      0.004           0.001
                         (0.052)   (0.102)     (0.087)    (0.036)     (0.057)      (0.032)         (0.052)
USD                      0.357     -0.291      1.022*     0.503***    0.600***     3,517.899***    0.492***
                         (0.313)   (0.369)     (0.516)    (0.177)     (0.148)      (903.940)       (0.139)
KRW                      -0.275    0.625*      -0.378     0.098       -0.010       -0.035          -0.003
                         (0.296)   (0.322)     (0.253)    (0.161)     (0.023)      (0.037)         (0.069)
SGD                      -0.058    0.041       -0.096     -0.204      -0.209       0.073           0.039
                         (0.189)   (0.148)     (0.174)    (0.130)     (0.153)      (0.122)         (0.147)
AUD                      0.337     -0.054      0.095*     0.049       -0.003       0.316***        0.195***
                         (0.525)   (0.081)     (0.049)    (0.047)     (0.111)      (0.038)         (0.054)
NZD                      0.545     0.491***    0.481***   0.420***    0.504***     0.181***        0.275***
                         (0.651)   (0.094)     (0.102)    (0.062)     (0.132)      (0.043)         (0.052)
MYR                      0.226     -0.020      -0.485     0.018       0.041        -3,517.487***   -0.063
                         (0.258)   (0.192)     (0.460)    (0.040)     (0.064)      (903.980)       (0.165)
DEM                      -0.073    -0.075      -0.050     -0.033      0.035
                         (0.093)   (0.128)     (0.165)    (0.049)     (0.075)
EMP defined with MB      0.004     0.020       0.042      0.012       0.010        0.001           0.004
                         (0.004)   (0.014)     (0.030)    (0.010)     (0.022)      (0.004)         (0.004)
EUR                                                                                0.106***        0.087
                                                                                   (0.029)         (0.070)
Constant                 -0.010    -0.008**    -0.003     -0.001*     -0.002       -0.000          0.000
                         (0.006)   (0.003)     (0.002)    (0.001)     (0.002)      (0.001)         (0.001)
Observations             40        48          48         48          36           48              41
R-squared                0.736     0.869       0.801      0.978       0.854        0.963           0.928
GBP                      -0.119    0.089       0.174      0.079       -0.089       -0.056          -0.024




                                                                                                                 46
                                                 4.12 PNG
                           (1)                 (2)                    (3)                        (4)
                           png 92-95           96-99                  00-03                      04-07
JPY                        0.199               0.522**                0.443                      0.005
                           (0.252)             (0.201)                (0.370)                    (0.048)
USD                        1.692               1.121***               13,625.661                 1.073***
                           (2.127)             (0.376)                (10,523.706)               (0.095)
KRW                        -1.327**            -0.050                 -0.023                     0.013
                           (0.533)             (0.100)                (0.277)                    (0.061)
SGD                        -0.349              -0.774                 -0.222                     0.085
                           (0.657)             (0.674)                (0.742)                    (0.143)
AUD                        0.285**             0.132                  0.197                      0.012
                           (0.131)             (0.312)                (0.244)                    (0.053)
MYR                        -0.045              0.368                  -13,624.594                -0.190*
                           (0.200)             (0.240)                (10,523.750)               (0.095)
THB                        0.563               -0.030                 -0.232                     -0.006
                           (2.394)             (0.095)                (0.523)                    (0.062)
DEM                        0.135               -0.202
                           (0.224)             (0.290)
EMP defined with MB        0.025               0.062**                0.129***                   0.003
                           (0.020)             (0.026)                (0.032)                    (0.003)
EUR                                                                   0.378                      -0.018
                                                                      (0.358)                    (0.070)
Constant                   -0.008*             -0.010                 -0.009                     0.002**
                           (0.004)             (0.006)                (0.007)                    (0.001)
Observations               48                  36                     48                         41
R-squared                  0.732               0.519                  0.553                      0.965
GBP                        -0.154              -0.086                 -0.608                     0.025

                                                  4.13 Fiji
                      (1)           (2)        (3)            (4)              (5)       (6)               (7)
                      fiji 80-83    84-87      88-91          92-95            96-99     00-03             04-07
JPY                   0.157***      0.129      -0.096         -0.192           0.024     0.082             0.008
                      (0.030)       (0.164)    (0.080)        (0.138)          (0.137)   (0.055)           (0.053)
USD                   0.363***      1.510**    -1.661***      -2.417**         0.365**   332.309           0.313
                      (0.129)       (0.706)    (0.504)        (1.084)          (0.175)   (1,233.864)       (0.202)
KRW                   -0.146        -1.154     0.052          0.794***         -0.054    0.048             0.137
                      (0.103)       (0.706)    (0.087)        (0.284)          (0.063)   (0.046)           (0.095)
SGD                   -0.028        -0.363     0.074          0.114            0.046     0.064             -0.149
                      (0.093)       (0.305)    (0.122)        (0.199)          (0.220)   (0.094)           (0.203)
AUD                   0.267***      0.399**    0.234***       0.210***         -0.110    0.449***          0.440***
                      (0.081)       (0.190)    (0.043)        (0.055)          (0.377)   (0.053)           (0.074)
MYR                   0.178*        0.381      -0.070         -0.020           0.334     -332.083          0.063
                      (0.100)       (0.379)    (0.174)        (0.071)          (0.298)   (1,233.860)       (0.260)
THB                   0.023         -0.043     2.535***       2.557**          -0.022    -0.080            -0.084
                      (0.022)       (0.058)    (0.621)        (1.136)          (0.119)   (0.073)           (0.080)
DEM                   -0.006        -0.049     -0.113*        -0.204**         0.149
                      (0.030)       (0.160)    (0.057)        (0.084)          (0.169)
EMP defined with MB   0.004         0.135***   -0.008         -0.017*          0.084     0.013             0.012
                      (0.004)       (0.049)    (0.008)        (0.010)          (0.066)   (0.013)           (0.018)
EUR                                                                                      0.181***          0.101
                                                                                         (0.042)           (0.104)
Constant              -0.003*       -0.004     -0.000         0.002            -0.007    0.001             -0.001
                      (0.001)       (0.004)    (0.001)        (0.001)          (0.006)   (0.001)           (0.001)
Observations          46            48         48             48               36        48                34
R-squared             0.954         0.677      0.965          0.967            0.392     0.945             0.885
GBP                   0.193         0.191      0.046          0.159            0.268     0.029             0.171




                                                                                                                      47
  3. Known floaters:
                                               4.14 Australia
                        (1)                    (2)              (3)              (4)
                        aud 92-95              96-99            00-03            04-07
JPY                     0.018                  0.208            0.251**          0.165
                        (0.095)                (0.123)          (0.103)          (0.151)
USD                     0.996***               0.647***         0.270            0.176
                        (0.066)                (0.227)          (0.202)          (0.144)
DEM                     -0.148                 -0.112
                        (0.133)                (0.199)
EMP defined with MB     0.301***               0.175            0.178***         0.032
                        (0.050)                (0.128)          (0.044)          (0.028)
EUR                                                             0.543***         0.101
                                                                (0.125)          (0.243)
Constant                0.003                  -0.006           -0.001           0.001
                        (0.002)                (0.005)          (0.003)          (0.003)
Observations            48                     36               48               42
R-squared               0.854                  0.384            0.540            0.164
GBP                     0.134                  0.257            -0.064           0.559

                                               4.15 Canada
                      (1)           (2)              (3)              (4)           (5)
                      cad 90-93     94-97            98-01            02-05         06-07
JPY                   0.060         0.018            0.035            0.321***      -0.149
                      (0.060)       (0.079)          (0.078)          (0.094)       (0.274)
USD                   0.870***      0.952***         0.301            0.468***      0.538*
                      (0.058)       (0.091)          (0.321)          (0.117)       (0.269)
DEM                   0.016         0.026            0.119
                      (0.067)       (0.076)          (0.309)
EMP defined with MB   0.149***      0.084***         0.126**          0.355***      0.434**
                      (0.024)       (0.028)          (0.035)          (0.099)       (0.140)
EUR                                                                   0.349*        0.179
                                                                      (0.179)       (0.484)
Constant              -0.002*       -0.002           -0.009           0.004*        -0.005
                      (0.001)       (0.002)          (0.006)          (0.002)       (0.004)
Observations          48            48               8                48            14
R-squared             0.957         0.796            0.777            0.712         0.712
GBP                   0.053         0.004            0.544            -0.138        0.432



* Statistically significant at .10 level
** Statistically significant at .05 level
*** Statistically significant at .01 level




                                                                                              48
Table 5: Change in reserves defined as % of monetary base. IV
Δ EMP defined as:            [res(t)-res(t-1)]/mb(t-1) + [exr(t)-exr(t-1)]/exr(t-1)

Estimating the De Facto Exchange Rate Regime with commodity prices as
instrumental variables for the change in EMP in the case of commodity exporters
                   (01/1980 – 06/2007) numeraire currency = SDR




                                               5.3 Malaysia (myr)

IV: average of prices of semiconductors and tin
                            (1)                  (2)                    (3)               (4)
                            myr 92-95            96-99                  00-03             04-07
[ΔRes/MB + ΔlogEx]          0.065                -0.369                 -0.000            0.063
                            (0.047)              (1.656)                (0.000)           (0.045)
JPY                         -0.194               -0.066                 -0.000            -0.074
                            (0.249)              (0.485)                (0.000)           (0.092)
USD                         -1.018               -0.401                 1.000***          0.512**
                            (2.964)              (1.595)                (0.000)           (0.187)
KRW                         0.087                -0.136                 0.000             -0.099
                            (0.443)              (0.187)                (0.000)           (0.119)
SGD                         0.986**              1.278                  -0.000            0.576**
                            (0.484)              (0.884)                (0.000)           (0.243)
AUD                         -0.190               0.075                  0.000             -0.044
                            (0.211)              (0.634)                (0.000)           (0.105)
THB                         1.447                0.736                  0.000             0.047
                            (3.196)              (1.442)                (0.000)           (0.116)
Deutsche Mark               -0.103               -0.289
                            (0.253)              (0.687)
EUR                                                                     -0.000            0.004
                                                                        (0.000)           (0.150)
Constant                    -0.002               0.001                  0.000             -0.004
                            (0.004)              (0.026)                (0.000)           (0.005)
Observations                48                   36                     48                40
R-squared                   0.693                0.619                  1.000             0.863
GBP                         -0.015               -0.196                 0.000             0.077




                                                  5.4 Chile (clp)
Instrumental Variable : Price of copper
                (1)             (2)            (3)           (4)            (5)       (6)           (7)
                clp 80-83       84-87          88-91         92-95          96-99     00-03         04-07
[ΔRes/MB +      0.319***        7.457          -0.133        0.083          0.085**   0.093         -0.467
ΔlogEx]
                (0.112)         (133.668)      (0.405)       (0.057)        (0.031)   (0.299)       (1.403)
JPY             0.009           15.759         -0.275        0.212**        0.097**   0.098         -0.425



                                                                                                              49
               (0.190)     (277.627)   (0.974)    (0.081)    (0.042)    (0.213)    (0.853)
USD            0.448*      -24.467     1.398      0.816***   0.969***   0.636      1.622
               (0.234)     (465.661)   (1.243)    (0.118)    (0.108)    (0.524)    (1.978)
Deutsche       0.540**     6.057       -0.471     -0.117     0.091
Mark
               (0.208)     (112.040)   (0.695)    (0.129)    (0.078)
EUR                                                                     0.014      -0.118
                                                                        (0.241)    (2.104)
Constant       -0.007*     -0.113      0.002      -0.008**   -0.006**   -0.003     0.006
               (0.004)     (1.673)     (0.035)    (0.003)    (0.002)    (0.004)    (0.013)
Observations   46          48          48         48         36         48         41
R-squared      0.428                   0.500      0.824      0.827      0.358
GBP            0.003       3.651       0.348      0.088      -0.157     0.252      -0.078



                                         5.5 Kuwait (kwd)
IV: Price of oil

               (1)         (2)         (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)
               kwd 80-83   84-87       88-91      92-95      96-99      00-03      04-07
[ΔRes/MB +     -0.003      0.127       0.017      -0.019     -0.031     0.072      0.005
ΔlogEx]
               (0.011)     (0.325)     (0.019)    (0.024)    (0.106)    (0.705)    (0.007)
JPY            0.077***    0.371       0.105      0.048      0.027      0.121      0.021
               (0.014)     (0.514)     (0.074)    (0.032)    (0.078)    (0.669)    (0.021)
USD            0.800***    0.322       0.649***   0.816***   0.893***   0.542      0.993***
               (0.026)     (0.906)     (0.044)    (0.065)    (0.162)    (2.952)    (0.030)
Deutsche       0.049**     0.308       0.147**    0.068      0.032
Mark
               (0.021)     (0.450)     (0.072)    (0.066)    (0.084)
EUR                                                                     0.129      -0.064
                                                                        (0.831)    (0.049)
Constant       -0.000      -0.002      -0.001     -0.001     0.000      -0.002     -0.000
               (0.001)     (0.005)     (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.027)    (0.001)
Observations   46          48          39         48         36         48         41
R-squared      0.982       0.261       0.948      0.945      0.941      0.276      0.981
GBP            0.074       -0.001      0.099      0.069      0.048      0.208      0.050



                                        5.8 Norway (nok)
IV: oil price

               (1)         (2)         (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)
               nok 80-83   84-87       88-91      92-95      96-99      00-03      04-07
[ΔRes/MB +     -0.043      0.056       0.026      -0.060     0.095      -0.800     -0.008
ΔlogEx]
               (0.258)     (0.039)     (0.037)    (0.105)    (0.071)    (5.183)    (0.078)
JPY            0.100       0.054       -0.004     -0.082     -0.020     -0.990     0.008
               (0.149)     (0.085)     (0.055)    (0.072)    (0.087)    (6.966)    (0.369)
USD            0.227       0.130*      0.186***   0.025      0.334      -0.129     0.047
               (0.261)     (0.076)     (0.034)    (0.143)    (0.241)    (1.269)    (0.246)
Deutsche       0.420***    0.721***    0.545***   0.795***   0.842***
Mark
               (0.144)     (0.132)     (0.063)    (0.114)    (0.171)
EUR                                                                     2.929      1.472**
                                                                        (13.311)   (0.499)
Constant       -0.003      -0.006*     0.000      0.001      0.000      0.009      0.005



                                                                                              50
                (0.008)       (0.003)        (0.001)      (0.002)      (0.005)           (0.059)     (0.007)
Observations    46            48             48           48           36                48          11
R-squared       0.732         0.688          0.754        0.399        0.103                         0.658
GBP             0.252         0.095          0.274        0.263        -0.157            -0.811      -0.527




                            5.9 Papua New Guinea kina (png)
IV: average price of gold, copper, oil, gas and timber

                          (1)                  (2)                  (3)                       (4)
                          png 92-95            96-99                00-03                     04-07
[ΔRes/MB + ΔlogEx]        -0.001               0.082                -0.114                    -0.012
                          (0.037)              (0.109)              (0.720)                   (0.009)
JPY                       0.194                0.546**              1.044                     0.006
                          (0.302)              (0.226)              (1.954)                   (0.054)
USD                       2.029                1.149***             1.849                     1.203***
                          (2.427)              (0.310)              (2.211)                   (0.125)
KRW                       -1.262**             -0.063               -0.748                    -0.032
                          (0.522)              (0.119)              (1.835)                   (0.099)
SGD                       -0.458               -0.839               -0.947                    0.070
                          (0.640)              (0.602)              (3.008)                   (0.213)
AUD                       0.311**              0.125                0.512                     -0.032
                          (0.142)              (0.312)              (1.125)                   (0.057)
MYR                       -0.003               0.361                0.000                     -0.333**
                          (0.220)              (0.262)              (0.000)                   (0.152)
THB                       0.191                -0.005               -0.377                    0.018
                          (2.727)              (0.121)              (0.845)                   (0.076)
Deutsche Mark             0.135                -0.193
                          (0.289)              (0.288)
EUR                                                                 0.578                     -0.004
                                                                    (0.604)                   (0.091)
Constant                  -0.008**             -0.009               -0.005                    0.004***
                          (0.004)              (0.006)              (0.016)                   (0.001)
Observations              47                   36                   48                        41
R-squared                 0.715                0.511                0.038                     0.945
GBP                       -0.137               -0.081               -0.912                    0.104


                                               5.10 Russia (rub)
IV: Price of oil

                                        (1)                                   (2)
                                        rub 00-03                             04-07
[ΔRes/MB + ΔlogEx]                      0.001*                                -0.000
                                        (0.000)                               (0.000)
JPY                                     0.228                                 0.117
                                        (0.189)                               (0.070)
USD                                     0.640*                                0.551***
                                        (0.332)                               (0.112)
EUR                                     -0.658*                               0.126
                                        (0.348)                               (0.192)
Constant                                -0.015                                0.004
                                        (0.009)                               (0.008)
Observations                            24                                    41
R-squared                               0.540                                 0.789
GBP                                     0.790                                 0.206




                                                                                                               51
                                          5.11 Thailand (thb)
IV: rice

               (1)         (2)           (3)        (4)         (5)       (6)        (7)
               thb 80-83   84-87         88-91      92-95       96-99     00-03      04-07
[ΔRes/MB +     0.006       0.001         0.000      -0.000      0.000     0.000      0.000*
ΔlogEx]
               (0.046)     (0.003)       (0.000)    (0.005)     (0.000)   (0.000)    (0.000)
JPY            -1.543      -0.190        0.152      -0.094      -0.071    0.103      -0.045
               (13.996)    (0.788)       (0.108)    (2.512)     (0.260)   (0.177)    (0.154)
USD            4.892       2.033         0.760***   1.083       -0.834    -96.995    0.269
               (31.577)    (4.331)       (0.076)    (2.581)     (0.601)   (88.172)   (0.554)
KRW            3.726       -0.632        0.013      -0.257      0.139     0.044      0.203
               (33.609)    (2.211)       (0.035)    (2.087)     (0.118)   (0.160)    (0.226)
SGD            4.372       0.107         -0.062     0.677       0.819     0.198      0.674
               (39.736)    (0.719)       (0.300)    (8.336)     (0.865)   (0.366)    (0.479)
AUD            0.132       -0.299        0.021      -0.293      -0.331    0.193**    -0.057
               (2.295)     (0.886)       (0.022)    (3.920)     (0.290)   (0.079)    (0.171)
MYR            -13.005     -1.024        0.032      0.281       0.758**   97.395     -0.308
               (111.192)   (3.033)       (0.104)    (3.594)     (0.352)   (88.278)   (0.660)
Deutsche       -0.986      0.720         0.080      -0.336      0.384
Mark
               (8.536)     (1.914)       (0.117)    (5.096)     (0.463)
EUR                                                                       0.155      -0.138
                                                                          (0.332)    (0.228)
Constant       0.025       -0.021        -0.002     0.011       0.004     -0.003     -0.012**
               (0.244)     (0.057)       (0.006)    (0.152)     (0.007)   (0.005)    (0.005)
Observations   46          48            48         48          36        48         37
GBP            3.412       0.285         0.004      -0.060      0.136     -0.094     0.403



                                     5.12 Western Samoa tala (Wst)
IV: Price of coconuts

(1)            (2)         (3)           (4)        (5)         (6)       (7)
               wst 80-83   84-87         88-91      92-95       96-99     00-03      04-07
[ΔRes/MB +     0.072       0.034         0.080      0.176       -0.202    -0.123     0.006
ΔlogEx]
               (0.561)     (0.365)       (0.152)    (0.249)     (0.335)   (0.191)    (0.037)
JPY            0.639       0.189         0.261**    0.361       -0.060    -0.316     0.002
               (4.799)     (0.153)       (0.117)    (0.449)     (0.270)   (0.510)    (0.049)
USD            0.354       -0.264        0.740      0.979       0.931     0.000      0.488**
               (1.178)     (0.809)       (1.224)    (0.768)     (0.655)   (0.000)    (0.179)
KRW            0.053       0.592         -0.363*    -0.025      -0.068    -0.090     0.001
               (2.322)     (0.961)       (0.211)    (0.485)     (0.140)   (0.176)    (0.121)
SGD            -2.043      0.008         -0.074     -0.494      -0.354    0.598      0.030
               (16.441)    (0.883)       (0.169)    (0.622)     (0.393)   (0.812)    (0.223)
AUD            0.695       -0.049        0.108      0.015       -0.085    0.603      0.193*
               (3.173)     (0.165)       (0.079)    (0.167)     (0.238)   (0.498)    (0.099)
NZD            -0.329      0.481*        0.487***   -0.001      0.834     0.276*     0.270***
               (7.313)     (0.273)       (0.128)    (0.684)     (0.529)   (0.140)    (0.084)
MYR            2.521       0.004         -0.275     -0.021      0.193     -0.150     -0.052
               (19.180)    (0.665)       (1.009)    (0.146)     (0.206)   (0.890)    (0.292)
Deutsche       -0.728      -0.064        0.051      0.122       -0.120
Mark
               (5.316)     (0.279)       (0.555)    (0.268)     (0.446)
EUR                                                                       -0.189     0.087



                                                                                                52
                                                                                            (0.485)        (0.069)
Constant        -0.018        -0.008         -0.004         0.002          0.001            0.000          0.000
                (0.062)       (0.015)        (0.004)        (0.006)        (0.004)          (0.003)        (0.002)
Observations    40            48             48             48             36               48             41
GBP             -0.162        0.104          0.064          0.064          -0.269           0.267          -0.018



                                              5.18 Australia (aud)
IV: world commodity price index
                          (1)                  (2)                     (3)                       (4)
                          aud 92-95            96-99                   00-03                     04-07
[ΔRes/MB + ΔlogEx]        0.288**              0.457                   0.609                     0.181
                          (0.115)              (0.479)                 (0.904)                   (0.394)
JPY                       0.013                0.201*                  0.114                     0.270
                          (0.103)              (0.109)                 (0.343)                   (0.321)
USD                       1.002***             0.563*                  0.652                     0.215
                          (0.095)              (0.286)                 (0.890)                   (0.198)
Deutsche Mark             -0.153               -0.036
                          (0.146)              (0.351)
EUR                                                                    0.469                     0.335
                                                                       (0.328)                   (0.754)
Constant                  0.003                -0.006                  -0.005                    -0.003
                          (0.002)              (0.005)                 (0.010)                   (0.010)
Observations              48                   36                      48                        41
R-squared                 0.853                0.181
GBP                       0.138                0.272                   -0.235                    0.181

Notes:
1. The level of commodity prices (thought of as a determinant of the balance of payments) is used as instrumental
variables for the change in EMP
2. Commodity prices have been converted to SDR
3. The commodity prices have been deflated by the weighted world CPI:
we calculate the weighted CPI by using the weights and currencies that are used to define SDR, and have adjusted their
weights according to their evolution since 1980
4. Data source: IMF International Financial Statistics
5. Indices of Unit Values (Prices) In Terms of US Dollars: 2000=100


                             5.19 Canadian dollar (cad)
IV: world commodity price index
                          (1)              (2)             (3)                   (4)                  (5)
                          cad 90-93        94-97           98-01                 02-05                06-07
ΔRes/MB + ΔlogEx          0.378            0.383           0.186                 0.591                1.231
                          (0.322)          (1.376)         (0.101)               (0.573)              (0.721)
JPY                       0.252            0.057           0.070                 0.318***             -0.180
                          (0.288)          (0.194)         (0.153)               (0.109)              (0.709)
USD                       0.616            0.733           0.207                 0.364                0.077
                          (0.377)          (1.058)         (0.426)               (0.264)              (0.795)
Deutsche Mark             0.287            0.076           0.081
                          (0.395)          (0.318)         (0.374)
EUR                                                                              0.351*               -0.113
                                                                                 (0.192)              (0.602)
Constant                  -0.002           -0.006          -0.008                0.004                -0.015
                          (0.002)          (0.019)         (0.006)               (0.002)              (0.014)
Observations              48               48              8                     48                   13
R-squared                 0.862            0.188           0.657                 0.644
GBP                       -0.155           0.133           0.641                 -0.034               1.216



                                                                                                                     53
                                          5.20 Mexico (mxn)
IV: oil price
                (1)            (2)        (3)         (4)          (5)        (6)           (7)
                mxn 80-83      84-87      88-91       92-95        96-99      00-03         04-07
[ΔRes/MB +      1.092***       2.745      -0.046*     0.686        0.104      1.151         0.200
ΔlogEx]
                (0.127)        (5.766)    (0.027)     (0.963)      (0.170)    (3.335)       (0.501)
JPY             0.113          0.855      0.078       0.930        0.048      0.936         0.209
                (0.129)        (1.847)    (0.079)     (1.110)      (0.069)    (3.205)       (0.368)
USD             0.384**        -1.975     0.996***    -0.235       1.383***   -0.649        0.626
                (0.186)        (6.982)    (0.036)     (1.923)      (0.331)    (5.615)       (0.987)
Deutsche        0.475***       3.807      -0.089      -0.144       -0.210
Mark
                (0.156)        (10.691)   (0.076)     (1.397)      (0.167)
EUR                                                                           1.363         -0.212
                                                                              (4.263)       (0.711)
Constant        -0.000         0.029      -0.007***   -0.014       -0.011     -0.027        -0.002
                (0.004)        (0.146)    (0.001)     (0.018)      (0.008)    (0.069)       (0.006)
Observations    46             48         48          48           36         48            41
R-squared       0.954                     0.953                    0.722                    0.537
GBP             0.027          -1.686     0.015       0.449        -0.220     -0.650        0.376



                                          5.21 Indonesia (idr)
IV: average price of oil and gas
                           (1)             (2)                  (5)               (4)
                           idr 92-95       96-99                00-05             04-07
[ΔRes/MB + ΔlogEx]         0.000           -0.005               0.000             0.000
                           (0.001)         (0.052)              (0.000)           (0.001)
JPY                        -0.095          -0.045               -0.250            -0.289
                           (0.266)         (4.222)              (0.292)           (0.271)
USD                        -0.592          4.245                -1.569***         0.865
                           (5.225)         (57.251)             (0.476)           (2.556)
KRW                        0.029           2.779                0.154             -0.029
                           (0.277)         (19.712)             (0.250)           (0.427)
SGD                        0.061           0.807                2.054***          0.721
                           (0.550)         (10.127)             (0.729)           (0.800)
AUD                        -0.012          -0.605               0.144             0.528
                           (0.075)         (4.802)              (0.282)           (0.601)
MYR                        -0.054          -1.277               0.000             -0.556
                           (0.127)         (17.121)             (0.000)           (2.017)
THB                        1.471           -0.582               0.405             0.675
                           (5.468)         (7.020)              (0.454)           (0.405)
Deutsche Mark              0.055           1.065
                           (0.142)         (10.556)
EUR                                                             -0.016            -0.524
                                                                (0.560)           (0.405)
Constant                   -0.005          0.096                -0.004            -0.008
                           (0.005)         (0.758)              (0.008)           (0.006)
Observations               47              56                   48                41
R-squared                  0.950                                0.410             0.541
GBP                        -0.060          -5.591               -0.102            -0.590

* Statistically significant at .10 level
** Statistically significant at .05 level
*** Statistically significant at .01 level


                                                                                                      54
                                        Table 6: Extension 1
                      Estimating the De Facto Exchange Rate Regime
                 By allowing for trends in level and in the currency weights
                       (01/1980 – 06/2007) numeraire currency = SDR

                                            6.1 China (cny)
                                                      (1)
                                                      Cny 05-08
                  EUR                                 0.006
                                                      (0.052)
                  USD                                 1.070
                                                      (1.917)
                  JPY                                 0.029
                                                      (0.025)
                  t_usd                               0.000
                                                      (0.006)
                  KRW                                 0.060
                                                      (0.041)
                  SGD                                 -0.132*
                                                      (0.067)
                  MYR                                 0.009
                                                      (0.036)
                  RUB                                 -0.091
                                                      (0.094)
                  AUD                                 -0.010
                                                      (0.024)
                  THB                                 0.053
                                                      (0.031)
                  CAD                                 -0.032
                                                      (0.026)
                  Constant                            -0.070**
                                                      (0.025)
                  t2                                  2.284**
                                                      (0.801)
                  Δ[logEMP]                           0.004
                                                      (0.043)
                  Observations                        23
                  R-squared                           0.997
                  GBP                                 0.038
Notes:
1. t2= observation/10,000
2. t_currency = observation* currency value
3. Δ[logEMP] =Δ[logRes+logEx]

                                         6.6 Danish krone (dkk)
               (1)           (2)          (3)         (4)         (5)       (6)       (7)
               dkk 80-83     84-87        88-91       92-95       96-99     00-03     04-07
JPY            -0.215*       0.008        1.974***    -0.647      0.289     -0.320    0.448
               (0.114)       (0.315)      (0.456)     (0.434)     (0.192)   (0.559)   (0.350)
USD            -0.092        0.267        -0.673***   1.020**     0.431     -0.023    -0.493
               (0.093)       (0.272)      (0.214)     (0.467)     (0.342)   (0.350)   (0.612)
French franc   1.347***      1.295***     1.349***
               (0.136)       (0.392)      (0.408)
t_jpy          0.017***      0.001        -0.016***   0.004       -0.001    0.001     -0.001
               (0.006)       (0.004)      (0.004)     (0.003)     (0.001)   (0.002)   (0.001)



                                                                                                55
t_usd           0.009*          -0.004    0.006***    -0.006**       -0.002    0.000          0.002
                (0.005)         (0.003)   (0.002)     (0.003)        (0.002)   (0.001)        (0.002)
t_French        -0.027***       -0.006    -0.003
franc
                (0.008)         (0.005)   (0.003)
t2              -3.670**        -0.444    0.457       0.752          -0.104    -0.370         -0.223
                (1.447)         (0.730)   (0.500)     (0.792)        (0.300)   (0.528)        (0.259)
Δ[logEMP]       -0.029          0.018     0.014       0.023          0.002     0.005          -0.001
                (0.019)         (0.012)   (0.011)     (0.022)        (0.005)   (0.011)        (0.007)
German                                                1.853***       0.201
mark
                                                      (0.561)        (0.345)
EUR                                                                            1.477***       -0.663
                                                                               (0.361)        (0.954)
t_eur                                                                          -0.002         0.005*
                                                                               (0.001)        (0.003)
Constant        0.007*          0.002     -0.004      -0.012         0.002     0.010          0.007
                (0.004)         (0.005)   (0.006)     (0.014)        (0.006)   (0.014)        (0.008)
t_German                                              -0.006         0.004**
mark
                                                      (0.004)        (0.002)
Observations    46              48        48          48             36        48             41
R-squared       0.908           0.865     0.946       0.846          0.992     0.983          0.971
GBP             -0.040          -0.569    -1.650      -1.225         0.079     -0.133         1.708


                                          6.9 Latvian lat (lvl)
                          (1)               (2)                   (3)               (4)
                          lvl 92-95         96-99                 00-03             04-07
JPY                       -3.037            0.752**               0.165             1.147
                          (2.372)           (0.283)               (0.631)           (2.151)
USD                       5.144             0.770                 2.197***          1.993
                          (4.026)           (1.890)               (0.760)           (3.486)
RUB                       0.110             -0.765                -1.932**          -4.694
                          (0.983)           (1.743)               (0.788)           (5.805)
German mark               0.453             -0.900
                          (4.168)           (0.778)
t_jpy                     0.018             -0.003*               -0.000            -0.004
                          (0.013)           (0.001)               (0.002)           (0.007)
t_usd                     -0.025            -0.001                -0.007**          -0.007
                          (0.021)           (0.009)               (0.003)           (0.012)
t_rub                     -0.001            0.003                 0.008**           0.017
                          (0.005)           (0.008)               (0.003)           (0.020)
t_German mark             -0.001            0.006
                          (0.023)           (0.004)
EUR                                                               -0.446            1.545
                                                                  (0.498)           (4.280)
t_eur                                                             0.003             -0.004
                                                                  (0.002)           (0.014)
t2                        -3.840            1.020                 -0.281            0.098
                          (4.310)           (2.031)               (0.532)           (1.373)
Δ[logEMP]                 0.029             0.021                 0.011             0.033
                          (0.024)           (0.013)               (0.016)           (0.030)
Constant                  0.073             -0.023                0.007             -0.006
                          (0.080)           (0.044)               (0.014)           (0.041)
Observations              16                36                    48                42
R-squared                 0.953             0.964                 0.941             0.629
GBP                       -1.670            1.143                 1.016             1.009




                                                                                                        56
                                        6.10 Maltese lira (mtl)
               (1)         (2)           (3)         (4)          (5)        (6)         (7)
               mtl 80-83   84-87         88-91       92-95        96-99      00-03       04-07
JPY            -0.115      0.153         0.539       -0.230       2.178      -0.050      -0.756
               (0.109)     (0.230)       (0.423)     (0.632)      (3.207)    (0.391)     (0.564)
USD            0.355***    0.834***      0.501**     0.629        -8.397*    1.967***    2.174**
               (0.088)     (0.175)       (0.225)     (0.823)      (4.491)    (0.362)     (0.821)
French franc   0.432***    -0.076        0.216
               (0.089)     (0.335)       (0.332)
t_jpy          0.009**     -0.001        -0.004      0.002        -0.009     0.000       0.002
               (0.004)     (0.003)       (0.003)     (0.004)      (0.014)    (0.002)     (0.002)
t_usd          0.003       -0.008***     -0.002      -0.002       0.042*     -0.007***   -0.007**
               (0.003)     (0.002)       (0.002)     (0.005)      (0.022)    (0.001)     (0.003)
t_French       -0.009***   0.007*        0.001
franc
               (0.003)     (0.004)       (0.003)
German                                               0.706        5.671**
mark
                                                     (1.203)      (2.084)
EUR                                                                          -0.921**    -1.088
                                                                             (0.340)     (1.383)
t_eur                                                                        0.006***    0.006
                                                                             (0.001)     (0.004)
t_German                                             -0.002       -0.026**
mark
                                                     (0.007)      (0.011)
t2             -1.375      -0.510        0.351       2.181        -1.211     0.016       0.119
               (1.051)     (0.608)       (0.422)     (1.739)      (1.961)    (0.498)     (0.443)
Δ[logEMP]      0.039       0.101         0.041       0.219        0.598***   0.062**     0.022
               (0.026)     (0.090)       (0.036)     (0.170)      (0.161)    (0.029)     (0.024)
Constant       0.004       0.003         -0.004      -0.039       0.026      -0.001      -0.004
               (0.003)     (0.004)       (0.005)     (0.031)      (0.044)    (0.013)     (0.014)
Observations   46          48            48          48           36         45          41
R-squared      0.899       0.942         0.947       0.608        0.760      0.962       0.911
GBP            0.328       0.089         -0.257      -0.106       1.548      0.004       0.670




                                     6.11 Norwegian kroner (nok)
               (1)         (2)           (3)         (4)          (5)        (6)         (7)
               nok 80-83   84-87         88-91       92-95        96-99      00-03       04-07
JPY            -0.226      0.444         2.307***    -0.637       -0.037     0.140       -1.575
               (0.160)     (0.346)       (0.682)     (0.530)      (0.850)    (1.846)     (3.651)
USD            0.323***    0.031         0.262       0.391        1.064      0.631       5.032
               (0.115)     (0.470)       (0.286)     (0.529)      (2.637)    (2.511)     (3.519)
French franc   0.894***    0.704*        -0.773
               (0.126)     (0.400)       (0.834)
t_jpy          0.020***    -0.005        -0.018***   0.004        -0.000     -0.000      0.006
               (0.006)     (0.004)       (0.006)     (0.003)      (0.004)    (0.007)     (0.012)
t_usd          0.003       0.000         -0.001      -0.002       -0.004     -0.002      -0.017
               (0.005)     (0.007)       (0.002)     (0.003)      (0.013)    (0.010)     (0.011)
t_Fr. franc    -0.027***   0.000         0.011
               (0.006)     (0.005)       (0.007)
Ger. mark                                            3.005***     -0.343
                                                     (1.008)      (2.127)
t_G. mark                                            -0.014**     0.006



                                                                                                   57
                                                         (0.006)       (0.010)
EUR                                                                              -2.259            5.779
                                                                                 (2.733)           (5.261)
t_eur                                                                            0.012             -0.015
                                                                                 (0.011)           (0.017)
t2              -4.883***     0.673         0.490        1.974         -2.674    -2.348            -1.183
                (1.655)       (1.212)       (0.717)      (1.306)       (2.111)   (2.307)           (2.530)
Δ[logEMP]       0.039*        0.107*        0.050*       0.060*        0.062     0.010             0.082*
                (0.021)       (0.060)       (0.026)      (0.035)       (0.038)   (0.049)           (0.046)
Constant        0.007*        -0.010        -0.005       -0.034        0.055     0.061             0.038
                (0.004)       (0.009)       (0.009)      (0.023)       (0.043)   (0.059)           (0.079)
Observations    46            48            48           48            36        48                42
R-squared       0.814         0.774         0.864        0.823         0.804     0.658             0.587
GBP             0.009         -0.179        -0.796       -1.760        0.316     2.489             -8.235



                                             6.13 Russia (rub)
                        (1)                   (2)                   (3)                  (4)
                        rub 92-95             96-99                 00-03                04-07
JPY                     -55.359               -8.026                2.014                2.132*
                        (46.199)              (6.905)               (1.546)              (1.056)
USD                     -35.260               -42.904               -0.419               2.101
                        (65.462)              (25.901)              (1.302)              (1.374)
German mark             -55.747               28.974
                        (41.391)              (19.384)
t_jpy                   0.294                 0.037                 -0.008               -0.007*
                        (0.248)               (0.032)               (0.006)              (0.004)
t_usd                   0.189                 0.221*                0.005                -0.005
                        (0.347)               (0.129)               (0.005)              (0.004)
t_German mark           0.300                 -0.142
                        (0.227)               (0.095)
EUR                                                                 1.986*               -8.006***
                                                                    (1.171)              (2.539)
t_eur                                                               -0.008*              0.027***
                                                                    (0.004)              (0.008)
t2                      -10.071               -18.877               4.448***             -0.461
                        (35.121)              (11.763)              (1.218)              (0.761)
Δ[logEMP]               0.249                 0.287***              0.134***             0.076**
                        (0.280)               (0.083)               (0.028)              (0.034)
Constant                0.167                 0.373                 -0.123***            0.013
                        (0.665)               (0.245)               (0.033)              (0.023)
Observations            11                    36                    48                   42
R-squared               0.873                 0.721                 0.926                0.885
GBP                     147.365               22.956                -2.580               4.773



                                         6.14 Seychelles rupee (scr)
                (1)           (2)           (3)          (4)           (5)       (6)               (7)
                scr 80-83     84-87         88-91        92-95         96-99     00-03             04-07
JPY             -0.411        -0.069        0.406*       0.062         1.209     0.288             -0.795
                (0.435)       (0.108)       (0.233)      (0.200)       (1.197)   (2.232)           (2.336)
USD             0.383***      0.941***      -0.169       0.533***      -2.579    -0.561            3.901
                (0.136)       (0.090)       (0.135)      (0.159)       (2.938)   (2.731)           (2.574)
French franc    0.579***      0.295*        0.722***
                (0.190)       (0.156)       (0.162)
t_jpy           0.016         0.003**       -0.002       0.001         -0.005    0.000             0.003



                                                                                                             58
               (0.012)     (0.001)     (0.002)     (0.001)     (0.005)   (0.008)   (0.008)
t_usd          0.002       -0.007***   0.005***    -0.001      0.015     0.003     -0.010
               (0.005)     (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.015)   (0.010)   (0.009)
t_Fr. franc    -0.011*     0.000       -0.003**
               (0.006)     (0.002)     (0.001)
t2             -4.150      0.083       0.170       -0.031      -1.871    -2.320    -3.870**
               (4.002)     (0.276)     (0.192)     (0.325)     (1.793)   (2.342)   (1.627)
Δ[logEMP]      0.009       -0.000      -0.000      -0.004*     0.010     0.010     0.013
               (0.014)     (0.003)     (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.016)   (0.019)   (0.009)
Ger. mark                                          0.322       0.433
                                                   (0.292)     (2.919)
EUR                                                                      0.221     -3.943
                                                                         (1.990)   (3.949)
t_eur                                                                    -0.001    0.014
                                                                         (0.008)   (0.013)
Constant       0.016       -0.001      -0.002      0.001       0.037     0.061     0.116**
               (0.016)     (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.005)     (0.036)   (0.063)   (0.049)
t_Ger. mark                                        -0.000      -0.002
                                                   (0.002)     (0.014)
Observations   46          48          48          48          36        48        42
R-squared      0.560       0.983       0.992       0.992       0.604     0.406     0.881
GBP            0.449       -0.167      0.040       0.084       1.937     1.051     1.836



                                       6.16 Vanuatu (vuv)
               (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)       (6)       (7)
               vuv 80-83   84-87       88-91       92-95       96-99     00-03     04-07
JPY            -0.222      -0.109      3.527*      -0.387      0.635     0.374     -1.079
               (0.191)     (0.701)     (1.981)     (0.851)     (1.008)   (1.198)   (2.118)
USD            -0.094      0.893*      -2.218***   0.779       -0.344    -0.427    0.911
               (0.255)     (0.470)     (0.812)     (0.946)     (2.811)   (1.445)   (2.971)
French franc   0.923***    2.572*      -0.462
               (0.223)     (1.327)     (2.082)
t_jpy          0.011*      0.008       -0.027*     0.003       -0.002    -0.001    0.004
               (0.007)     (0.012)     (0.015)     (0.005)     (0.005)   (0.005)   (0.007)
t_usd          0.019**     -0.008      0.023***    -0.000      0.005     0.003     -0.002
               (0.008)     (0.007)     (0.007)     (0.006)     (0.014)   (0.005)   (0.010)
t_Fr. franc    -0.023***   -0.036*     0.009
               (0.007)     (0.021)     (0.017)
Ger. mark                                          2.549***    -3.045
                                                   (0.822)     (2.197)
t_Ger. mark                                        -0.016***   0.015
                                                   (0.005)     (0.011)
EUR                                                                      -1.278    2.357
                                                                         (1.434)   (4.029)
t_eur                                                                    0.006     -0.008
                                                                         (0.006)   (0.013)
t2             -1.321      -2.950      1.128       2.307**     -3.370    2.386*    -0.196
               (1.588)     (3.066)     (1.935)     (0.938)     (2.046)   (1.326)   (1.711)
Δ[logEMP]      -0.000      0.026       0.140**     0.107**     -0.008    0.097**   0.152***
               (0.003)     (0.054)     (0.062)     (0.041)     (0.039)   (0.036)   (0.050)
Constant       0.003       0.012       -0.014      -0.039**    0.066     -0.061*   0.003
               (0.005)     (0.019)     (0.024)     (0.016)     (0.042)   (0.035)   (0.053)
Observations   34          48          48          48          36        44        37
R-squared      0.905       0.515       0.736       0.889       0.743     0.731     0.716
GBP            0.392       -2.356      0.152       -1.942      3.755     2.330     -1.190




                                                                                             59
                                     6.17 Western Samoa tala (wst)
               (1)         (2)            (3)        (4)         (5)        (6)        (7)
               wst 80-83   84-87          88-91      92-95       96-99      00-03      04-07
JPY            0.198       1.097          4.081**    -0.867**    0.125      2.129      0.777
               (0.237)     (0.920)        (1.847)    (0.388)     (1.652)    (1.277)    (2.049)
USD            0.584***    -1.411         -1.532     1.762***    -0.064     -2.972**   -0.503
               (0.175)     (1.072)        (1.026)    (0.648)     (2.942)    (1.441)    (2.377)
French franc   -0.023      1.077          -4.268
               (0.260)     (1.242)        (2.828)
t_jpy          0.001       -0.011         -0.030**   0.006**     0.000      -0.008     -0.002
               (0.012)     (0.012)        (0.015)    (0.002)     (0.007)    (0.005)    (0.007)
t_usd          0.001       0.026*         0.018**    -0.006      0.004      0.014**    0.003
               (0.010)     (0.014)        (0.008)    (0.004)     (0.014)    (0.005)    (0.008)
t_Fr. franc    0.004       -0.016         0.036
               (0.018)     (0.016)        (0.023)
Ger. mark                                            1.003       -3.143
                                                     (0.668)     (2.857)
t_Ger. mark                                          -0.006      0.016
                                                     (0.004)     (0.014)
EUR                                                                         0.654      0.162
                                                                            (1.175)    (3.157)
t_eur                                                                       -0.001     -0.000
                                                                            (0.005)    (0.010)
t2             -2.156      5.195*         1.826      0.616       -5.839**   2.062*     0.516
               (4.721)     (2.722)        (2.064)    (0.742)     (2.650)    (1.173)    (1.559)
Δ[logEMP]      0.008       0.086          0.118*     0.093***    0.092      0.156***   0.094**
               (0.007)     (0.072)        (0.069)    (0.024)     (0.076)    (0.035)    (0.036)
Constant       -0.006      -0.045*        -0.026     -0.010      0.118**    -0.053*    -0.016
               (0.009)     (0.023)        (0.026)    (0.012)     (0.055)    (0.031)    (0.048)
Observations   40          48             48         48          36         48         41
R-squared      0.576       0.522          0.786      0.954       0.782      0.826      0.751
GBP            0.241       0.238          2.719      -0.898      4.083      1.189      0.564




                                          6.20 Mexico (mxn)
               (1)         (2)            (3)        (4)         (5)        (6)        (7)
               mxn 80-83   84-87          88-91      92-95       96-99      00-03      04-07
JPY            0.606       0.896          1.013*     -5.586**    1.865      1.575      -0.740
               (0.734)     (1.312)        (0.548)    (2.116)     (1.614)    (1.887)    (2.752)
USD            0.272       0.993          0.841***   5.408*      6.148      2.699      0.541
               (0.573)     (1.012)        (0.278)    (2.703)     (4.247)    (2.095)    (3.784)
French franc   0.412       0.794          -1.248**
               (0.523)     (1.313)        (0.561)
t_jpy          -0.036      -0.014         -0.008*    0.036***    -0.008     -0.006     0.003
               (0.056)     (0.019)        (0.004)    (0.013)     (0.007)    (0.007)    (0.009)
t_usd          0.048       0.002          0.001      -0.030      -0.025     -0.007     0.000
               (0.054)     (0.013)        (0.002)    (0.018)     (0.020)    (0.008)    (0.013)
t_F. franc     -0.030      -0.014         0.010**
               (0.039)     (0.018)        (0.005)
Ger. mark                                            16.001***   -4.846**
                                                     (5.061)     (2.329)
EUR                                                                         0.523      8.341*
                                                                            (1.814)    (4.520)



                                                                                                 60
t_eur                                                                  -0.001     -0.028*
                                                                       (0.007)    (0.015)
t_Ger. mark                                     -0.104***   0.023*
                                                (0.033)     (0.011)
t2             -14.909   -10.595***   0.984     -3.209      -1.391     0.036      1.007
               (9.239)   (2.976)      (0.805)   (3.802)     (2.922)    (1.681)    (1.671)
Δ[logEMP]      0.207*    0.112        -0.005    0.208***    0.346***   0.395***   0.360***
               (0.122)   (0.068)      (0.004)   (0.060)     (0.084)    (0.104)    (0.083)
Constant       -0.003    0.026        -0.019*   0.046       0.017      -0.008     -0.032
               (0.016)   (0.021)      (0.010)   (0.060)     (0.060)    (0.045)    (0.050)
Observations   46        48           48        48          36         48         42
R-squared      0.362     0.823        0.982     0.780       0.833      0.786      0.744
GBP            -0.291    -1.682       0.394     -14.823     -2.168     -3.797     -7.142



* Statistically significant at .10 level
** Statistically significant at .05 level
*** Statistically significant at .01 level




                                                                                            61
                                            Table 7:

                                         Extension 2:
    Taking into account the relative variance of reserve changes and exchange rate
              changes in the computation of Exchange Market Pressure
                When Estimating the De Facto Exchange Rate Regime
                    (01/1980 – 06/2007)            numeraire currency = SDR

                                7.1 Australian dollar (aud)
                  (1)                    (2)                    (3)              (4)
                  aud 92-95              96-99                  00-03            04-07
JPY               0.060                  0.171***               0.174***         0.145***
                  (0.082)                (0.030)                (0.050)          (0.035)
USD               0.868***               0.436***               0.437***         0.379***
                  (0.062)                (0.073)                (0.083)          (0.030)
Germany           -0.044                 0.228**
                  (0.110)                (0.107)
Δ[logEMP]         0.718***               1.038***               0.911***         0.999***
                  (0.102)                (0.061)                (0.058)          (0.036)
EUR                                                             0.374***         0.382***
                                                                (0.053)          (0.081)
Constant          0.002                  -0.002                 -0.001           -0.001
                  (0.002)                (0.002)                (0.001)          (0.001)
Observations      48                     36                     48               42
R-squared         0.891                  0.907                  0.923            0.951
GBP               0.116                  0.166                  0.014            0.093
λ                 0.541                  0.145                  0.153            0.056
Notes:
4. λ = var(Δ[logEx])/ Var(Δ[logRes])
5. Δ[logEMP] = {[varΔ[logEx]/ (varΔ[logEx]+ Var(Δ[logRes])}· Δ[logRes] + { Var(Δ[logRes]/
   (varΔ[logEx]+ Var(Δ[logRes]) }·Δ[logEx]


                                 7.2 Canadian dollar (cad)

               (1)             (2)                   (3)              (4)           (5)
               cad 90-93       94-97                 98-01            02-05         06-09
JPY            0.149***        0.140***              0.105            0.295***      -0.092
               (0.021)         (0.027)               (0.050)          (0.081)       (0.209)
USD            0.562***        0.544***              0.394*           0.404***      0.465*
               (0.025)         (0.044)               (0.139)          (0.095)       (0.206)
Germany        0.209***        0.221***              0.150
               (0.024)         (0.039)               (0.155)
Δ[logEMP]      0.770***        0.798***              0.628***         0.923***      0.989***
               (0.033)         (0.055)               (0.060)          (0.162)       (0.233)
EUR                                                                   0.338**       0.230
                                                                      (0.151)       (0.343)
Constant       -0.001          -0.001                -0.004           0.003         -0.005
               (0.001)         (0.001)               (0.003)          (0.002)       (0.004)
Observations   48              48                    8                48            14
R-squared      0.994           0.963                 0.939            0.785         0.828
GBP            0.080           0.096                 0.351            -0.037        0.397
λ              0.076           0.077                 0.121            0.710         0.555



                                                                                               62
                                          7.3 Chile (clp)

               (1)         (2)            (3)         (4)         (5)          (6)        (7)
               clp 80-83   84-87          88-91       92-95       96-99        00-03      04-07
JPY            0.025       0.662**        0.194**     0.201***    0.131***     0.130      0.094
               (0.053)     (0.317)        (0.079)     (0.057)     (0.022)      (0.150)    (0.061)
USD            0.519***    0.752**        0.518***    0.646***    0.704***     0.520**    0.480***
               (0.089)     (0.279)        (0.071)     (0.073)     (0.059)      (0.246)    (0.083)
French franc   0.376***    -0.202         0.133*
               (0.085)     (0.466)        (0.069)
Δ[logEMP]      0.838***    0.910*         0.754***    0.778***    0.709***     0.939***   0.909***
               (0.091)     (0.498)        (0.102)     (0.125)     (0.075)      (0.322)    (0.068)
German mark                                           0.027       0.184***
                                                      (0.092)     (0.042)
EUR                                                                            0.098      0.484***
                                                                               (0.132)    (0.107)
Constant       -0.001      -0.017**       -0.006***   -0.006***   -0.002***    -0.002     0.001
               (0.002)     (0.007)        (0.001)     (0.002)     (0.001)      (0.004)    (0.001)
Observations   46          48             48          48          36           48         41
R-squared      0.922       0.708          0.952       0.906       0.962        0.487      0.927
GBP            0.080       -0.212         0.156       0.126       -0.019       0.252      -0.058
λ              0.198       1.292          0.208       1.007       0.349        2.357      0.223


                                      7.4 Chinese yuan (cny)
                                (1)                                 (2)
                                cny 01-04                           05-08
EUR                             0.074                               0.079
                                (0.069)                             (0.081)
USD                             0.949***                            1.058***
                                (0.058)                             (0.110)
JPY                             0.003                               0.039
                                (0.011)                             (0.035)
Δ[logEMP]                       0.136                               0.209*
                                (0.141)                             (0.101)
KRW                                                                 0.061
                                                                    (0.052)
SGD                                                                 -0.164
                                                                    (0.105)
MYR                                                                 0.025
                                                                    (0.042)
RUB                                                                 -0.131
                                                                    (0.147)
AUD                                                                 0.027
                                                                    (0.026)
THB                                                                 0.037
                                                                    (0.048)
CAD                                                                 -0.052
                                                                    (0.031)
Constant                        -0.001                              0.000
                                (0.001)                             (0.002)
Observations                    48                                  23
R-squared                       0.987                               0.995
GBP                             -0.026                              0.023
λ                               0.623                               1.025




                                                                                                 63
                                       7.5 Danish krone (dkk)

               (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)        (5)         (6)        (7)
               dkk 80-83     84-87        88-91        92-95      96-99       00-03      04-07
JPY            0.065**       0.228***     0.120***     0.182***   0.053**     0.018      0.044**
               (0.024)       (0.056)      (0.030)      (0.026)    (0.019)     (0.027)    (0.019)
USD            0.619***      0.368***     0.222***     0.343***   0.126**     0.072      0.103*
               (0.050)       (0.064)      (0.051)      (0.025)    (0.048)     (0.052)    (0.056)
French franc   0.173***      0.317***     0.612***
               (0.055)       (0.112)      (0.080)
Δ[logEMP]      1.283***      0.902***     0.608***     0.940***   0.322***    0.164      0.313**
               (0.095)       (0.146)      (0.123)      (0.061)    (0.116)     (0.103)    (0.153)
German mark                                            0.340***   0.763***
                                                       (0.047)    (0.079)
EUR                                                                           0.889***   0.749***
                                                                              (0.080)    (0.109)
Constant       0.000         -0.000       0.000        0.000      0.000       -0.000     0.000
               (0.001)       (0.001)      (0.001)      (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.000)
Observations   46            48           48           48         36          48         41
R-squared      0.981         0.946        0.958        0.983      0.994       0.984      0.973
GBP            0.143         0.088        0.045        0.135      0.058       0.022      0.104
λ              0.033         0.032        0.071        0.021      0.035       0.141      0.079



                                     7.6 Hong Kong dollar (hkd)

                         (1)                         (2)                     (3)
                         hkd 97-00                   01-04                   05-08
JPY                      0.004                       -0.004                  -0.006
                         (0.008)                     (0.012)                 (0.021)
USD                      0.975***                    1.005***                1.008***
                         (0.032)                     (0.011)                 (0.040)
KRW                      0.002                       0.001                   0.007
                         (0.003)                     (0.014)                 (0.029)
SGD                      0.000                       -0.023                  0.020
                         (0.009)                     (0.023)                 (0.049)
AUD                      0.004                       -0.001                  0.023
                         (0.008)                     (0.006)                 (0.020)
MYR                      -0.005                                              -0.008
                         (0.005)                                             (0.034)
THB                      -0.000                      0.018                   -0.025
                         (0.005)                     (0.018)                 (0.032)
Germany                  0.005
                         (0.016)
Δ[logEMP]                0.022                       -0.032**                -0.017
                         (0.043)                     (0.016)                 (0.034)
EUR                                                  -0.005                  -0.002
                                                     (0.010)                 (0.034)
Constant                 -0.000                      -0.000                  -0.000
                         (0.000)                     (0.000)                 (0.000)
Observations             23                          48                      30
R-squared                0.998                       0.997                   0.997
GBP                      0.015                       0.009                   -0.016
λ                        0.111                       0.689                   0.941




                                                                                                   64
                                    7.7 Malaysian ringgit (myr)
                   (1)                    (2)                   (3)                (4)
                   myr 92-95              96-99                 00-03              04-07
JPY                0.156**                -0.171                -0.000             0.021
                   (0.077)                (0.166)               (0.000)            (0.047)
USD                0.085                  0.028                 1.000***           0.490***
                   (0.732)                (0.306)               (0.000)            (0.079)
KRW                0.133                  -0.077                0.000              -0.057
                   (0.145)                (0.068)               (0.000)            (0.055)
SGD                0.039                  1.243*                -0.000             0.299***
                   (0.151)                (0.609)               (0.000)            (0.105)
AUD                -0.039                 -0.072                0.000              -0.004
                   (0.048)                (0.201)               (0.000)            (0.038)
THB                0.253                  0.246                 0.000              0.016
                   (0.842)                (0.227)               (0.000)            (0.053)
German mark        0.218***               -0.140
                   (0.070)                (0.247)
Δ[logEMP]          0.958***               0.305                 -0.000             0.588***
                   (0.071)                (0.236)               (0.000)            (0.126)
EUR                                                             -0.000             0.167**
                                                                (0.000)            (0.078)
Constant           -0.000                 -0.005                -0.000             -0.001
                   (0.001)                (0.005)               (0.000)            (0.001)
Observations       48                     36                    48                 40
R-squared          0.981                  0.837                 1.000              0.969
GBP                0.155                  -0.059                0.000              0.068
λ                  0.062                  1.612                 0.292              0.254



                                          7.8 Panama (pab)
                (1)            (2)         (3)        (4)            (5)        (6)           (7)
                pab 80-83      84-87       88-91      92-95          96-99      00-03         04-07
JPY             0.001          0.000       -0.002     0.006*         0.005      0.013***      0.000
                (0.002)        (0.003)     (0.003)    (0.003)        (0.003)    (0.003)       (0.004)
USD             0.988***       1.005***    0.997***   0.987***       0.982***   0.961***      0.998***
                (0.007)        (0.007)     (0.010)    (0.007)        (0.013)    (0.010)       (0.017)
French franc    0.006          -0.006      0.002
                (0.004)        (0.004)     (0.005)
Δ[logEMP]       0.026*         -0.006      0.006      0.023**        0.034      0.062***      0.006
                (0.013)        (0.012)     (0.015)    (0.011)        (0.023)    (0.015)       (0.027)
German mark                                           0.005          0.013*
                                                      (0.004)        (0.007)
EUR                                                                             0.017***      0.006
                                                                                (0.005)       (0.011)
Constant        0.000          0.000       0.000      -0.000         0.000      0.000         0.000
                (0.000)        (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.000)        (0.000)    (0.000)       (0.000)
Observations    46             48          48         48             36         48            37
R-squared       1.000          1.000       1.000      1.000          1.000      1.000         1.000
GBP             0.005          0.001       0.003      0.003          0.001      0.009         -0.004
λ               0.002          0.004       0.016      0.038          0.008      0.015         0.004


* Statistically significant at .10 level
** Statistically significant at .05 level
*** Statistically significant at .01 level


                                                                                                        65
                                 Table 8: Extension 3
    Entering the change in the interest rate alongside the change in reserves and the
      change in the exchange rate in the definition of Exchange Market Pressure
                 when Estimating the De Facto Exchange Rate Regime

                      (01/1980 – 06/2007)       numeraire currency = SDR



                                8.1 Australian dollar (aud)
                   aud 92-95          96-99                00-03           04-07
JPY                0.062              0.170***             0.143***        0.149***
                   (0.083)            (0.029)              (0.048)         (0.032)
USD                0.866***           0.445***             0.466***        0.370***
                   (0.061)            (0.082)              (0.092)         (0.040)
Germany            -0.047             0.249**
                   (0.109)            (0.110)
Δ[logEMP]          0.472***           0.933***             0.774***        0.909***
                   (0.064)            (0.060)              (0.043)         (0.039)
EUR                                                        0.364***        0.394***
                                                           (0.048)         (0.069)
Constant           0.002              -0.001               -0.001          -0.001*
                   (0.002)            (0.002)              (0.001)         (0.001)
Observations       48                 36                   48              42
R-squared          0.894              0.904                0.922           0.939
GBP                0.119              0.137                0.027           0.088
λ                  0.541              0.145                0.153           0.056
γ                  0.011              0.009                0.026           0.039


Notes:
1. λ = var(Δ[logEx])/ Var(Δ[logRes])
2. γ = var(Δ[logEx])/ Var(Δ[i])
3. Δ[logEMP] = {var(Δ[logEx])/ Var(Δ[logRes])}·Δ[logRes]+ {var(Δ[logEx])/ Var(Δi)}·Δ
   i +Δ[logEx]
    that is,
   Δ[logEMP] = λ ·Δ[logRes]+ γ ·Δ i +Δ[logEx]




                                                                                       66
                            8.2 Canadian dollar (cad)
               (1)         (2)            (3)           (4)        (5)
               cad 90-93   94-97          98-01         02-05      06-09
JPY            0.154***    0.142***       0.112         0.291***   -0.099
               (0.022)     (0.027)        (0.053)       (0.080)    (0.209)
USD            0.552***    0.541***       0.375*        0.421***   0.466**
               (0.025)     (0.045)        (0.142)       (0.090)    (0.199)
Germany        0.206***    0.220***       0.165
               (0.026)     (0.039)        (0.155)
Δ[logEMP]      0.729***    0.753***       0.588***      0.521***   0.637***
               (0.032)     (0.051)        (0.051)       (0.086)    (0.149)
EUR                                                     0.303*     0.242
                                                        (0.151)    (0.336)
Constant       -0.000      -0.001         -0.004        0.003      -0.005
               (0.001)     (0.001)        (0.003)       (0.002)    (0.004)
Observations   47          48             8             48         14
R-squared      0.994       0.962          0.937         0.792      0.829
GBP            0.088       0.097          0.347         -0.014     0.391
λ              0.076       0.077          0.121         0.710      0.555
γ              0.001       0.002          0.004         0.029      0.014


                              8.3 Chinese yuan (cny)
                           (1)                          (2)
                           Cny 01-04                    05-08
EUR                        0.071                        0.078
                           (0.067)                      (0.079)
USD                        0.956***                     1.040***
                           (0.051)                      (0.113)
JPY                        0.000                        0.039
                           (0.009)                      (0.034)
Δ[logEMP]                  0.078                        0.105*
                           (0.080)                      (0.050)
KRW                                                     0.062
                                                        (0.053)
SGD                                                     -0.162
                                                        (0.104)
MYR                                                     0.040
                                                        (0.054)
RUB                                                     -0.123
                                                        (0.145)
AUD                                                     0.021
                                                        (0.026)
THB                                                     0.034
                                                        (0.045)
CAD                                                     -0.052
                                                        (0.031)
Constant                   -0.001                       0.000
                           (0.001)                      (0.002)
Observations               48                           22
R-squared                  0.987                        0.995
GBP                        -0.027                       0.022
λ                          0.623                        1.025
γ                          0.028                        0.011




                                                                              67
                                       8.4 Hong Kong dollar (hkd)
                           (1)                       (2)                   (3)
                           hkd 97-00                 01-04                 05-08
JPY                        0.004                     -0.005                -0.006
                           (0.008)                   (0.011)               (0.022)
USD                        0.975***                  1.007***              1.006***
                           (0.032)                   (0.010)               (0.040)
KRW                        0.002                     0.002                 0.006
                           (0.003)                   (0.014)               (0.029)
SGD                        -0.000                    -0.022                0.020
                           (0.009)                   (0.023)               (0.049)
AUD                        0.004                     -0.001                0.023
                           (0.008)                   (0.006)               (0.020)
MYR                        -0.005                                          -0.007
                           (0.005)                                         (0.034)
THB                        -0.000                    0.018                 -0.025
                           (0.005)                   (0.018)               (0.032)
Germany                    0.005
                           (0.016)
Δ[logEMP]                  0.023                     -0.034**              -0.014
                           (0.042)                   (0.016)               (0.035)
EUR                                                  -0.006                -0.001
                                                     (0.010)               (0.034)
Constant                   -0.000                    -0.000                -0.000
                           (0.000)                   (0.000)               (0.000)
Observations               23                        48                    30
R-squared                  0.999                     0.997                 0.997
GBP                        0.015                     0.008                 -0.015
λ                          0.111                     0.689                 0.941
γ                          0.000                     0.002                 0.001

                                           8.5 Norway (nok)
               (1)         (2)            (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)
               nok 80-83   84-87          88-91      92-95      96-99      00-03      04-07
JPY            0.091***    0.190***       0.124***   0.146***   0.128***   0.193***   0.169**
               (0.026)     (0.050)        (0.035)    (0.030)    (0.022)    (0.055)    (0.070)
USD            0.500***    0.282***       0.305***   0.317***   0.388***   0.298***   0.211***
               (0.045)     (0.046)        (0.025)    (0.040)    (0.034)    (0.058)    (0.067)
French         0.315***    0.444***       0.411***
               (0.056)     (0.063)        (0.042)
Δ[logEMP]      0.994***    0.679***       0.690***   0.750***   0.827***   0.782***   0.754***
               (0.046)     (0.114)        (0.077)    (0.085)    (0.062)    (0.054)    (0.058)
Germany                                              0.415***   0.400***
                                                     (0.050)    (0.036)
EUR                                                                        0.358***   0.556***
                                                                           (0.064)    (0.104)
Constant       0.000       -0.002**       0.000      -0.001     -0.000     -0.000     -0.002
               (0.001)     (0.001)        (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)
Observations   46          48             48         48         36         48         42
R-squared      0.959       0.919          0.947      0.959      0.977      0.896      0.885
GBP            0.094       0.085          0.160      0.122      0.084      0.151      0.064
λ              0.032       0.140          0.108      0.075      0.061      0.149      0.175
γ              0.000       0.002          0.001      0.000      0.001      0.006      0.024
* Statistically significant at .10 level
** Statistically significant at .05 level
*** Statistically significant at .01 level


                                                                                             68
                                      Table 9: Extension 4
      Check for robustness with respect to the numeraire used to define currency
                                           (01/1980 – 06/2007)
                                (numeraire currency = Swiss Franc)

                                     9.1 Australian dollar (aud)
In swissf           (1)                    (2)                     (3)                    (4)
                    aud 92-95              96-99                   00-03                  04-07
JPY                 -0.066                 0.201                   0.200*                 0.172
                    (0.103)                (0.133)                 (0.104)                (0.151)
USD                 0.825***               0.604**                 0.168                  0.118
                    (0.111)                (0.245)                 (0.187)                (0.142)
Germany             0.106                  -0.012
                    (0.190)                (0.234)
Δ[logRes+logEx]     0.203***               0.076                   0.180***               0.055
                    (0.046)                (0.071)                 (0.041)                (0.039)
EUR                                                                0.778***               0.173
                                                                   (0.129)                (0.258)
Constant            0.003                  -0.006                  -0.001                 0.001
                    (0.003)                (0.005)                 (0.003)                (0.003)
Observations        48                     36                      48                     42
R-squared           0.809                  0.340                   0.582                  0.186
GBP                 0.136                  0.207                   -0.146                 0.537


                                      9.2 Botswana pula (bwp)
In swissf         (1)           (2)          (3)             (4)             (5)         (6)            (7)
                  bwp 80-83     84-87        88-91           92-95           96-99       00-03          04-07
JPY               0.366**       0.486**      -0.031          -0.036          0.107       0.112          0.320*
                  (0.147)       (0.217)      (0.103)         (0.039)         (0.068)     (0.083)        (0.172)
USD               0.672***      0.004        0.286***        0.497***        -0.260      -0.008         -0.755***
                  (0.091)       (0.283)      (0.064)         (0.066)         (0.276)     (0.149)        (0.235)
French            -0.010        0.626*       0.711***
                  (0.176)       (0.355)      (0.177)
Δ[logRes+logEx]   -0.025        0.017        0.244***        0.113***        0.457***    0.488***       0.626***
                  (0.055)       (0.032)      (0.061)         (0.035)         (0.084)     (0.051)        (0.106)
Germany                                                      0.422***        1.134***
                                                             (0.108)         (0.282)
EUR                                                                                      0.896***       1.312***
                                                                                         (0.128)        (0.245)
Constant          -0.009*       -0.018**     -0.009***       -0.005***       -0.009***   0.003          -0.011***
                  (0.005)       (0.007)      (0.002)         (0.001)         (0.003)     (0.003)        (0.004)
Observations      46            48           48              48              36          48             37
R-squared         0.656         0.267        0.739           0.879           0.732       0.705          0.741
GBP               -0.027        -0.115       0.033           0.116           0.020       -0.000         0.123


                                     9.3 Canadian dollar (cad)
In swissf         (1)               (2)                  (3)                 (4)              (5)
                  cad 90-93         94-97                98-01               02-05            06-09
JPY               0.040             0.003                0.012               0.338***         -0.067
                  (0.058)           (0.081)              (0.073)             (0.092)          (0.321)
USD               0.800***          0.921***             0.253               0.192            0.130
                  (0.055)           (0.110)              (0.320)             (0.138)          (0.316)
Germany           0.119*            0.106                0.305
                  (0.061)           (0.078)              (0.315)



                                                                                                               69
Δ[logRes+logEx]   0.102***        0.053**                0.114**        0.285***         0.331**
                  (0.012)         (0.021)                (0.028)        (0.085)          (0.122)
EUR                                                                     0.644***         0.536
                                                                        (0.224)          (0.568)
Constant          -0.003**        -0.001                 -0.009         0.003            -0.006
                  (0.001)         (0.002)                (0.006)        (0.002)          (0.005)
Observations      48              48                     8              48               14
R-squared         0.960           0.778                  0.787          0.699            0.605
GBP               0.041           -0.030                 0.431          -0.174           0.401


                                             9.4 Chile (clp)
In swissf         (1)         (2)            (3)             (4)        (5)         (6)            (7)
                  clp 80-83   84-87          88-91           92-95      96-99       00-03          04-07
JPY               -0.096      0.804***       0.025           0.159**    0.081**     0.002          0.007
                  (0.082)     (0.296)        (0.122)         (0.076)    (0.032)     (0.085)        (0.130)
USD               0.530*      0.039          0.978***        0.463***   0.696***    0.035          0.496***
                  (0.282)     (0.450)        (0.137)         (0.118)    (0.085)     (0.181)        (0.169)
French            0.568       0.235          -0.239**
                  (0.343)     (0.475)        (0.114)
Δ[logRes+logEx]   0.155**     0.482**        0.014           0.257***   0.220***    0.561***       0.216***
                  (0.072)     (0.195)        (0.051)         (0.064)    (0.030)     (0.062)        (0.050)
Germany                                                      0.322**    0.466***
                                                             (0.155)    (0.074)
EUR                                                                                 0.887***       0.810***
                                                                                    (0.134)        (0.257)
Constant          -0.004      -0.017**       -0.009***       -0.004*    -0.003***   -0.000         0.002
                  (0.004)     (0.006)        (0.002)         (0.002)    (0.001)     (0.002)        (0.003)
Observations      46          48             48              48         36          48             41
R-squared         0.669       0.781          0.884           0.876      0.926       0.808          0.708
GBP               -0.003      -0.078         0.236           0.057      -0.244      0.076          -0.314


                                     9.5 Chinese yuan (cny)
In swissf                        (1)                                    (2)
                                 cny 01-04                              05-08
EUR                              0.060                                  0.186*
                                 (0.059)                                (0.087)
USD                              0.993***                               1.031***
                                 (0.018)                                (0.097)
JPY                              -0.009                                 0.039
                                 (0.011)                                (0.030)
Δ[logRes+logEx]                  0.016                                  0.082**
                                 (0.017)                                (0.030)
KRW                                                                     0.049
                                                                        (0.047)
SGD                                                                     -0.160
                                                                        (0.092)
MYR                                                                     -0.015
                                                                        (0.039)
RUB                                                                     -0.174
                                                                        (0.140)
AUD                                                                     0.027
                                                                        (0.024)
THB                                                                     0.046
                                                                        (0.040)
CAD                                                                     -0.045
                                                                        (0.028)
Constant                         -0.000                                 0.001



                                                                                                          70
                                   (0.000)                          (0.001)
Observations                       48                               23
R-squared                          0.986                            0.996
GBP                                -0.043                           0.017


                                         9.6 Danish krone (dkk)
In swissf         (1)          (2)           (3)         (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)
                  dkk 80-83    84-87         88-91       92-95      96-99      00-03      04-07
JPY               0.078        0.108         -0.024      -0.001     0.003      -0.005     0.007
                  (0.060)      (0.084)       (0.051)     (0.036)    (0.008)    (0.021)    (0.017)
USD               0.084        -0.065        0.046       0.017      0.004      -0.001     -0.017
                  (0.089)      (0.047)       (0.032)     (0.038)    (0.016)    (0.016)    (0.016)
French            0.821***     0.860***      0.997***
                  (0.122)      (0.104)       (0.048)
Δ[logRes+logEx]   -0.026       0.006         0.009       0.021      0.004      0.001      -0.004
                  (0.020)      (0.010)       (0.009)     (0.020)    (0.005)    (0.006)    (0.006)
Germany                                                  0.900***   0.971***
                                                         (0.080)    (0.019)
EUR                                                                            1.001***   0.939***
                                                                               (0.017)    (0.055)
Constant          0.000        0.000         0.000       0.001      0.000      -0.000     0.000
                  (0.002)      (0.001)       (0.001)     (0.001)    (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)
Observations      46           48            48          48         36         48         41
R-squared         0.857        0.855         0.916       0.837      0.991      0.981      0.965
GBP               0.018        0.097         -0.019      0.084      0.022      0.004      0.071


                                             9.7 Fiji dollar
In swissf         (1)          (2)           (3)         (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)
                  fiji 80-83   84-87         88-91       92-95      96-99      00-03      04-07
JPY               0.152***     0.127         -0.082      -0.201     0.065      0.080      0.008
                  (0.030)      (0.153)       (0.091)     (0.147)    (0.107)    (0.052)    (0.054)
USD               0.354***     1.075*        -1.525***   -2.540**   0.210      0.201***   0.308
                  (0.105)      (0.536)       (0.556)     (1.168)    (0.225)    (0.065)    (0.200)
KRW               -0.152*      -0.921*       0.055       0.820**    -0.031     0.040      0.140
                  (0.082)      (0.535)       (0.097)     (0.308)    (0.046)    (0.043)    (0.095)
SGD               -0.027       -0.366        0.074       0.102      -0.150     0.075      -0.153
                  (0.088)      (0.265)       (0.121)     (0.215)    (0.267)    (0.088)    (0.205)
AUD               0.264***     0.326**       0.242***    0.206***   -0.209     0.415***   0.438***
                  (0.080)      (0.153)       (0.044)     (0.057)    (0.351)    (0.052)    (0.075)
MYR               0.175*       0.345         -0.108      -0.001     0.378      0.000      0.056
                  (0.099)      (0.326)       (0.193)     (0.072)    (0.257)    (0.000)    (0.260)
THB               0.034        -0.020        2.407***    2.713**    -0.073     -0.073     -0.088
                  (0.025)      (0.044)       (0.692)     (1.238)    (0.122)    (0.064)    (0.081)
French            0.013        0.243         -0.105*
                  (0.030)      (0.189)       (0.059)
Δ[logRes+logEx]   0.009        0.208***      -0.015      -0.029     0.346      0.038*     0.012
                  (0.006)      (0.054)       (0.017)     (0.019)    (0.204)    (0.021)    (0.020)
Germany                                                  -0.263**   0.764
                                                         (0.113)    (0.456)
EUR                                                                            0.244***   0.119
                                                                               (0.055)    (0.108)
Constant          -0.002*      -0.004        -0.001      0.002      -0.006     0.001      -0.001
                  (0.001)      (0.004)       (0.001)     (0.002)    (0.005)    (0.001)    (0.001)
Observations      46           48            48          48         36         48         34
R-squared         0.955        0.749         0.963       0.967      0.555      0.948      0.885
GBP               0.188        0.191         0.040       0.163      0.046      0.017      0.171




                                                                                                    71
                                  9.8 Hong Kong dollar (hkd)
In swissf             (1)                     (2)              (3)
                      hkd 97-00               01-04            05-08
JPY                   -0.002                  -0.003           -0.018
                      (0.003)                 (0.011)          (0.017)
USD                   0.997***                -315.466         1.071***
                      (0.018)                 (335.352)        (0.046)
KRW                   0.004                   -0.001           0.011
                      (0.003)                 (0.015)          (0.026)
SGD                   0.009                   -0.019           0.014
                      (0.008)                 (0.022)          (0.046)
AUD                   0.003                   0.004            0.025
                      (0.007)                 (0.006)          (0.019)
MYR                   -0.005                  316.470          0.007
                      (0.005)                 (335.348)        (0.026)
THB                   -0.004                  0.018            -0.011
                      (0.005)                 (0.018)          (0.030)
Germany               -0.012
                      (0.012)
Δ[logRes+logEx]       -0.004                  -0.015**         -0.046**
                      (0.005)                 (0.007)          (0.020)
EUR                                           -0.016           -0.066
                                              (0.014)          (0.041)
Constant              0.000                   -0.000           0.000
                      (0.000)                 (0.000)          (0.000)
Observations          23                      48               30
R-squared             0.999                   0.998            0.997
GBP                   0.010                   0.014            -0.032




* Statistically significant at .10 level
** Statistically significant at .05 level
*** Statistically significant at .01 level




                                                                          72
                               Table 10: Extension 5
                               Monte Carlo Simulations

In this extension, we tried Monte Carlo studies on fabricated currencies -- some
constructed with the monetary authorities leaning halfway against the wind of any
fluctuations in EMP, and others constrained more narrowly to remain within a Plus and
minus 2.5% Band -- to see if the technique gives us the right answer.

We use the true path of the euro, dollar and yen (in SDR) over the last 8 years to make up
a currency (abbreviated as MCSA for Monte Carlo Simulation) with certain
configurations of weights, and then try to see if we can recover these weights with the
methodology introduced in this paper.

10.1 The case of leaning against the wind

10.1.1 Simulated currency MCSA computed as basket (with weights 1/3 euros, 1/3
dollars and 1/3 yen) valued with the SDR as numeraire:

Log[MCSA+ rw] =(log[jpy])/3+(log[eur])/3+(log[usd])/3

Note:
rw is a random walk variable which is defined as:
rw(t)= rw(t-1)+ a
a is a normally distributed random variable and a～N(0, 0.03)

We use the true variance of EMP drawn from some real countries, choosing two
representatives: a high variance case from a commodity producer (PNG) and a low-
variance case (CAD).




                                                                                        73
                                                             Var of Delta Reserve VS Var of Delta Ex
                                                                                     2001-2007, in 4 years' interval
                               .008
Variance of Delta Reserve (in USD)




                                                                                                                                                                    png00
                                            kwd04
                      .006




                                            png04
               .004




                                                                             mad00

                                                                                                      nok00
       .002




                                            kwd00                    clp04
                                                                                                     sek00
                                                                                     nok04


                                                                                         sek04

                                                            mad04     cad04 mxn00
                                                               mxn04                 jpy00
                                                                cad00 jpy04                  clp00
                                         cny00
 0




                                         hkd00 sgd04sgd00
                                         hkd04
                                          cny04



                                        0                        .0005                    .001          .0015                        .002                   .0025
                                                                                       Variance of Delta Ex (in USD)

                                                                    Country from year to year+3                                       Floating/Fix line
                                                                    Shocks line
                                       Reserve data: after subtracting off the imputed interest



                                      <1> The Case of PNG:
                                      Regression specification:         Dlg(mcsa)-dlg(gbp)= x1·[dlg(usd) – dlg(gbp)] + x2·
                                      [dlg(eur) – dlg(gbp)] + x3·[dlg(jpy) – dlg(gbp)] + x0·{0.5*dlg(PNGRes)+0.5dlg(mcsa)}

                                       10.1 Leaning against the wind, around a basket (1/3 euros, 1/3 dollars and 1/3 yen)
                                                              Calibrated by PNG reserve changes
                                                                 (1)                 (2)               (3)        (4)           (5)           (6)
                                                                 In SDR              In SDR            In SDR     Swiss franc   Swiss franc   Swiss franc
                                                                 00-07               00-03             04-07      00-07         00-03         04-07
                                      EUR                        0.290***            0.272***          0.363***   0.278***      0.264***      0.346***
                                                                 (0.039)             (0.041)           (0.119)    (0.034)       (0.032)       (0.120)
                                      JPY                        0.320***            0.334***          0.290***   0.320***      0.334***      0.288***
                                                                 (0.039)             (0.054)           (0.060)    (0.040)       (0.056)       (0.062)
                                      USD                        0.387***            0.385***          0.374***   0.396***      0.389***      0.397***
                                                                 (0.035)             (0.047)           (0.062)    (0.035)       (0.048)       (0.061)
                                      Δ[logRes+logEx]/2          -0.024              -0.014            -0.043     -0.015        -0.010        -0.031
                                                                 (0.021)             (0.030)           (0.037)    (0.020)       (0.030)       (0.036)
                                      Constant                   -0.000              -0.001            0.000      -0.000        -0.001        0.000
                                                                 (0.001)             (0.001)           (0.001)    (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.001)
                                      Observations               89                  48                41         89            48            41
                                      R-squared                  0.849               0.874             0.820      0.847         0.874         0.816
                                      GBP                        0.003               0.009             -0.026     0.006         0.013         -0.030




                                                                                                                                                            74
<2> The Case of CAD
Regression specification:
Dlg(mcsa)-dlg(gbp)= x1·[dlg(usd) – dlg(gbp)] + x2·[dlg(eur) – dlg(gbp)] + x3·
[dlg(jpy) – dlg(gbp)] + x0·{0.5*dlg(CADRes)+0.5dlg(mcsa)}

 10.2 Leaning against the wind around a basket (1/3 euros, 1/3 dollars and 1/3 yen)
                         Calibrated by CAD reserve changes
                    (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)           (5)           (6)
                    In SDR     In SDR     In SDR     Swiss franc   Swiss franc   Swiss franc
                    00-07      00-03      04-07      00-07         00-03         04-07
EUR                 0.295***   0.291***   0.347***   0.410***      0.389***      0.468***
                    (0.031)    (0.036)    (0.099)    (0.045)       (0.071)       (0.101)
JPY                 0.316***   0.330***   0.287***   0.306***      0.307***      0.308***
                    (0.034)    (0.043)    (0.050)    (0.034)       (0.045)       (0.052)
USD                 0.364***   0.383***   0.334***   0.278***      0.322***      0.202***
                    (0.033)    (0.044)    (0.055)    (0.041)       (0.052)       (0.073)
Δ[logRes+logEx]/2   0.242***   0.263**    0.249***   0.197***      0.171**       0.229***
                    (0.053)    (0.121)    (0.062)    (0.041)       (0.082)       (0.053)
Constant            -0.001     -0.001     -0.000     -0.001        -0.001        -0.001
                    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.001)
Observations        90         48         42         90            48            42
R-squared           0.877      0.889      0.867      0.879         0.887         0.876
GBP                 0.025      -0.004     0.031      0.007         -0.018        0.022



10.1.2 Simulated currency MCSA with dollar peg, valued with SDR as numeraire:
Log[MCSA+ rw] = log[usd]
note: rw is a random walk variable, defined as: rw(t)= rw(t-1)+ a
a is a normally distributed random variable and a～N(0, 0.03)
<1> The Case of PNG:
Regression specification:     Dlg(mcsa)-dlg(gbp)= x1·[dlg(usd) – dlg(gbp)] + x2·
[dlg(eur) – dlg(gbp)] + x3·[dlg(jpy) – dlg(gbp)] + x0·{0.5*dlg(PNGRes)+0.5dlg(mcsa)}

                    10.3 Leaning against the wind, around a dollar peg;
                            Calibrated by PNG reserve changes
                    (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)           (5)            (6)
                    In SDR     In SDR     In SDR     Swiss franc   Swiss franc    Swiss franc
                    00-07      00-03      04-07      00-07         00-03          04-07
EUR                 -0.011     -0.014*    0.001      -0.015**      -0.017**       -0.004
                    (0.008)    (0.008)    (0.024)    (0.007)       (0.007)        (0.025)
JPY                 -0.006     -0.002     -0.014     -0.005        -0.002         -0.015
                    (0.008)    (0.010)    (0.013)    (0.008)       (0.010)        (0.014)
USD                 1.017***   1.015***   1.016***   1.019***      1.016***       1.023***
                    (0.007)    (0.010)    (0.013)    (0.008)       (0.010)        (0.014)
Δ[logRes+logEx]/2   -0.007*    -0.005     -0.013     -0.006        -0.004         -0.011
                    (0.004)    (0.006)    (0.008)    (0.004)       (0.006)        (0.008)
Constant            -0.000     -0.000     0.000      -0.000        -0.000         0.000
                    (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)       (0.000)        (0.000)
Observations        89         48         41         89            48             41
R-squared           0.996      0.996      0.995      0.995         0.996          0.995
GBP                 -0.000     0.001      -0.003     0.001         0.002          -0.004




                                                                                                75
<2> The Case of CAD:
Regression specification:    Dlg(mcsa)-dlg(gbp)= x1·[dlg(usd) – dlg(gbp)] + x2·
[dlg(eur) – dlg(gbp)] + x3·[dlg(jpy) – dlg(gbp)] + x0·{0.5*dlg(CADRes)+0.5dlg(mcsa)}
                                                                                10.4 Leaning against the wind, around a dollar peg
                                                                                       Calibrated by CAD reserve changes
                                                                               (1)              (2)          (3)        (4)           (5)           (6)
                                                                               In SDR           In SDR       In SDR     Swiss franc   Swiss franc   Swiss franc
                                                                               00-07            00-03        04-07      00-07         00-03         04-07
EUR                                                                            -0.006           -0.013       0.008      0.012         -0.003        0.031
                                                                               (0.008)          (0.010)      (0.024)    (0.011)       (0.016)       (0.025)
JPY                                                                            -0.001           -0.001       -0.006     -0.002        -0.002        -0.002
                                                                               (0.008)          (0.012)      (0.013)    (0.008)       (0.010)       (0.013)
USD                                                                            1.003***         1.011***     0.994***   0.989***      1.004***      0.968***
                                                                               (0.009)          (0.012)      (0.016)    (0.011)       (0.014)       (0.019)
Δ[logRes+logEx]/2                                                              0.031***         0.010        0.042***   0.031***      0.014         0.043***
                                                                               (0.011)          (0.029)      (0.013)    (0.009)       (0.016)       (0.011)
Constant                                                                       -0.000           -0.000       -0.000     -0.000        -0.000        -0.000
                                                                               (0.000)          (0.000)      (0.000)    (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)
Observations                                                                   90               48           42         90            48            42
R-squared                                                                      0.996            0.996        0.995      0.996         0.996         0.995
GBP                                                                            0.004            0.003        0.004      0.001         0.001         0.003


10.2 The case of a Plus and minus 2.5% Target Zones with random walk
10.2.1 Simulated currency MCSA computed as basket (with weights 1/3 euros, 1/3
dollars and 1/3 yen), valued with the SDR as numeraire:
Log[MCSA+ rw] =(log[jpy])/3+(log[eur])/3+(log[usd])/3
Note:
rw is a random walk variable: rw(t)= rw(t-1)+ a , a ～N(0, 0.01)
with a plus or minus 2.5% credible band.
The defined currency is illustrated in the following graph, Figure 3.
                                    -1.94 -1.92 -1.9 -1.88 -1.86 -1.84
      mcsa/mcsa_non/upperb/lowerb




                                                                         240              260              280           300               320              340
                                                                                                                    T

                                                                                                           mcsa                mcsa_non
                                                                                                           upperb              lowerb



                                                                                                             Figure 3
Notes:
1. mcsa_non demonstrates a perfect peg with USD, EUR and JPY.
2. upperb is the upper 2.5% bound and lowerb is the lower bound.
3. mcsa is the makeup currency with combination of a random walk and the perfect peg.



                                                                                                                                                                  76
We use the EMP values of some real countries to recover the currency weights and also
try two types of countries: a high variance case (PNG) and a low-variance case (CAD).


<1> The Case of PNG:
We then try to recover the weights.
Regression specification:
Dlg(mcsa)-dlg(gbp)= x1·[dlg(usd) – dlg(gbp)] + x2·[dlg(eur) – dlg(gbp)] + x3·
[dlg(jpy) – dlg(gbp)] + x0·{dlg(PNGEMP)}



                          10.5 Target Zones with random walk,
               around basket (with weights 1/3 euros, 1/3 dollars and 1/3 yen)
                             Calibrated by PNG EMP changes,
                             valued with the SDR as numeraire:

                  (1)        (2)         (3)         (4)           (5)           (6)
                  In SDR     In SDR      In SDR      Swiss franc   Swiss franc   Swiss franc
                  00-07      00-03       04-07       00-07         00-03         04-07
EUR               0.323***   0.296***    0.426**     0.347***      0.323***      0.469**
                  (0.040)    (0.043)     (0.172)     (0.037)       (0.039)       (0.203)
JPY               0.287***   0.301***    0.252***    0.284***      0.293***      0.262***
                  (0.034)    (0.044)     (0.067)     (0.035)       (0.044)       (0.060)
USD               0.343***   0.350***    0.318       0.323***      0.332***      0.268
                  (0.048)    (0.056)     (0.197)     (0.048)       (0.054)       (0.188)
Δ[logPNGEMP]      0.040**    0.044**     0.027       0.045**       0.049**       0.063
                  (0.019)    (0.020)     (0.267)     (0.017)       (0.018)       (0.153)
Constant          -0.000     0.000       -0.000      -0.000        0.000         -0.000
                  (0.001)    (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.002)
Observations      89         48          41          89            48            41
R-squared         0.831      0.881       0.760       0.833         0.884         0.761
GBP               0.047      0.053       0.004       0.046         0.051         0.000




                                                                                               77
<2> The Case of CAD:
Regression specification:
Dlg(mcsa)-dlg(gbp)= x1·[dlg(usd) – dlg(gbp)] + x2·[dlg(eur) – dlg(gbp)] + x3·
[dlg(jpy) – dlg(gbp)] + x0·{dlg(CADEMP)}



                        10.6 Target Zones with random walk
               around basket (weights 1/3 euros, 1/3 dollars and 1/3 yen)
                       Calibrated by CAD EMP reserve changes

               (1)         (2)         (3)        (4)            (5)           (6)
               In SDR      In SDR      In SDR     Swiss franc    Swiss franc   Swiss franc
               00-07       00-03       04-07      00-07          00-03         04-07
EUR            0.424***    0.451***    0.248      0.619***       0.722***      0.341
               (0.120)     (0.152)     (0.207)    (0.151)        (0.224)       (0.219)
JPY            0.409***    0.456***    0.375**    0.398***       0.403***      0.390**
               (0.100)     (0.137)     (0.157)    (0.096)        (0.127)       (0.150)
USD            0.043       -0.118      0.297      -0.118         -0.267        0.177
               (0.153)     (0.238)     (0.183)    (0.165)        (0.254)       (0.198)
Δ[logCADEMP]   0.275**     0.422*      0.132      0.321***       0.427**       0.177
               (0.122)     (0.248)     (0.164)    (0.106)        (0.199)       (0.147)
Constant       -0.001      -0.001      -0.001     -0.001         -0.001        -0.001
               (0.002)     (0.004)     (0.003)    (0.002)        (0.004)       (0.003)
Observations   90          48          42         90             48            42
R-squared      0.377       0.338       0.526      0.404          0.368         0.538
GBP            0.124       0.210       0.080      0.101          0.141         0.092




10.2.2 Simulated currency MCSA around dollar peg, valued with SDR as numeraire:
Log[MCSA+ rw] = log[usd]

Note: rw is a random walk variable: rw(t)= rw(t-1)+ a ,         a ～N(0, 0.01)
with a Plus and minus 2.5% credible band



<1> Case of PNG:
Regression specification:
Dlg(mcsa)-dlg(gbp)= x1·[dlg(usd) – dlg(gbp)] + x2·[dlg(eur) – dlg(gbp)] + x3·
[dlg(jpy) – dlg(gbp)] + x0·{dlg(PNGEMP)}




                                                                                             78
               10.7 Target Zones with random walk, around a dollar peg
                            Calibrated by PNG EMP changes
               (1)         (2)          (3)        (4)           (5)           (6)
               In SDR      In SDR       In SDR     Swiss franc   Swiss franc   Swiss franc
               00-07       00-03        04-07      00-07         00-03         04-07
EUR            -0.009      -0.033       0.087      0.010         -0.012        0.127
               (0.034)     (0.035)      (0.159)    (0.032)       (0.031)       (0.188)
JPY            -0.040      -0.025       -0.076     -0.042        -0.031        -0.066
               (0.029)     (0.035)      (0.061)    (0.030)       (0.036)       (0.055)
USD            1.008***    1.014***     0.985***   0.992***      1.000***      0.939***
               (0.042)     (0.045)      (0.182)    (0.042)       (0.044)       (0.173)
Δ[logPNGEMP]   0.031**     0.034**      0.024      0.035**       0.038**       0.057
               (0.015)     (0.016)      (0.245)    (0.014)       (0.015)       (0.140)
Constant       -0.000      0.000        -0.000     -0.000        0.000         -0.000
               (0.001)     (0.001)      (0.001)    (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.001)
Observations   89          48           41         89            48            41
R-squared      0.921       0.948        0.890      0.922         0.949         0.891
GBP            0.041       0.043        0.004      0.040         0.042         0.001



<2> Case of CAD:
Regression specification:       Dlg(mcsa)-dlg(gbp)= x1·[dlg(usd) – dlg(gbp)] + x2·
[dlg(eur) – dlg(gbp)] + x3·[dlg(jpy) – dlg(gbp)] + x0·{dlg(CADEMP)}




               10.8 Target Zones with random walk, around a dollar peg
                            Calibrated by CAD EMP changes

               (1)          (2)         (3)        (4)           (5)           (6)
               In SDR       In SDR      In SDR     Swiss franc   Swiss franc   Swiss franc
               00-07        00-03       04-07      00-07         00-03         04-07
EUR            -0.001       -0.020      0.086      0.005         -0.002        0.071
               (0.033)      (0.034)     (0.107)    (0.044)       (0.049)       (0.111)
JPY            -0.035       -0.019      -0.068     -0.033        -0.016        -0.073
               (0.029)      (0.035)     (0.056)    (0.030)       (0.035)       (0.055)
USD            1.028***     1.031***    1.016***   1.013***      1.014***      1.023***
               (0.039)      (0.049)     (0.073)    (0.041)       (0.053)       (0.063)
Δ[logCADEMP]   -0.045       -0.035      -0.066     0.005         0.020         -0.029
               (0.052)      (0.067)     (0.078)    (0.039)       (0.044)       (0.066)
Constant       0.000        0.000       -0.000     -0.000        0.000         -0.000
               (0.001)      (0.001)     (0.001)    (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.001)
Observations   90           48          42         90            48            42
R-squared      0.918        0.944       0.891      0.918         0.944         0.889
GBP            0.009        0.008       -0.033     0.015         0.004         -0.022



* Statistically significant at .10 level
** Statistically significant at .05 level
*** Statistically significant at .01 level




                                                                                             79
