                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      IS THE OBESITY EPIDEMIC A PUBLIC HEALTH PROBLEM? A DECADE OF
                  RESEARCH ON THE ECONOMICS OF OBESITY

                                         Tomas Philipson
                                          Richard Posner

                                       Working Paper 14010
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w14010


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2008




We are thankful to Mary Peate for research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Tomas Philipson and Richard Posner. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Is the Obesity Epidemic a Public Health Problem? A Decade of Research on the Economics
of Obesity
Tomas Philipson and Richard Posner
NBER Working Paper No. 14010
May 2008
JEL No. I18

                                           ABSTRACT

The world-wide and ongoing rise in obesity has generated enormous popular interest and policy concern
in developing countries, where it is rapidly becoming the major public health problem facing such
nations. As a consequence, there has been a rapidly growing field of economic analysis of the causes
and consequences of this phenomenon. This paper discusses some of the central themes of this decade
long research program, aiming at synthesizing the different strands of the literature, and to point to
future research that seems particularly productive.


Tomas Philipson
Irving B. Harris Graduate School
of Public Policy Studies
The University of Chicago
1155 E 60th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
t-philipson@uchicago.edu

Richard Posner
United States Court of Appeals
Richard_Posner@ca7.uscourts.gov
Obesity Review                                                                 1


Section 1: Introduction

The recent rise in obesity has generated enormous popular interest and policy
concern in developing countries, where it is rapidly becoming a major health
problem. But obesity (which we define broadly and loosely as weight signifi-
cantly in excess of what the health-care industry deems normal) is not only a
public health issue; it is also an economic problem in several respects. First, it
is, in major part at least, a function of two choices that people make: the
number of calories to consume and the number to expend; the more the for-
mer number exceeds the latter, the more weight a person will gain. Consum-
ing calories comes with costs and benefits, and likewise expending calories
through exertion. Second, obesity has changed over time and differs across
populations; and, to the extent that it is a product of choice, explaining these
changes and differences is a task for economics. The rate of the rise in obesity
will also depend on biological factors that vary, within a range, across per-
sons and time, but such factors alone, including genes, cannot explain the rise
in obesity, because it has happened much too quickly to be explicable in evo-
lutionary terms. Third, obesity may create social as well as private costs, and,
if so, there is a question whether the government should intervene to try to
reduce obesity. Fourth, the answer to that question depends, to the econo-
mist, on the cost of alternative methods of public intervention and the bene-
fits, in reducing the social costs of obesity, that each method can be expected
to produce. A growing scholarly literature in economics and other social sci-
ences addresses the growth in obesity. We shall discuss the positive and nor-
mative analysis of obesity found in that literature, but our particular focus is
a recent anthology of articles, primarily economic, on obesity (Zoltan Acs and
Alan Lyles 2007).

From a positive perspective, the long run growth in obesity is most easily ex-
plained by changes in the price of consuming and expending calories. Agricul-
tural innovation has greatly reduced the time and resources required to go
from hungry to full. Human beings used to spend most of their time and en-
ergy on producing food. The switch from agricultural economies to ones based
on manufacturing and later services was made possible by a dramatic gain in
agricultural productivity that greatly reduced the cost of consuming calories.
At the same time, technological changes in other forms of production, notably
the movement from manual labor to automation, simultaneously raised in-
comes and increased the price of spending calories, as exercise was no longer
a byproduct of work, as it had been when work was mainly manual. The gym-
and jogging revolution resulted from the reallocation of exercise from working
time to leisure time. These economic changes explain the cross-sectional and
time-series patterns of obesity better than do biological factors, addiction, and
cultural changes, none of which alone can explain why Africans are less obese
than Americans or why obesity has increased in the near term.
Obesity Review                                                                2



From a normative perspective, obesity may be a private health problem
rather than a public one. The fact that population is overweight in a medical
sense does not imply that it is necessarily overweight in a Pareto sense.


Section 2: Positive Aspects of the Growth in Obesity

Weight is clearly the outcome of diet and exercise, and both these factors are
needed to explain long-run weight trends in the United States. During the
twentieth century, weights rose even when the total consumption of food did
not, presumably due to a fall in spending of calories; the immediate postwar
period witnessed substantial growth in weight and declining consumption of
calories. This suggests that analysis of obesity must account not only for food
consumption, but also for changes in the strenuousness of work and leisure,
both at home and in the market, caused by economic development (Darius
Lakdawalla, Tomas Philipson and Jayanta Bhattacharya 2005).

The neoclassical theory of obesity (Philipson and Richard Posner 1999; Lak-
dawalla and Philipson 2002) stresses that technological change provides the
best explanation of the time-series data. While food has gotten cheaper
through technological change in agriculture, exercise has gotten more expen-
sive, as work (at home and in the market) has become less physically de-
manding through technologies that at the same time raise productivity and
lower calorie spending. The theory also stresses the complementarities of
calorie consumption and calorie expenditure. Cheaper food results in more
eating, higher weight, and more exercise. Similarly, as the implicit price of
exercise rises, there is less exercise, higher average weight, and less food con-
sumption as people substitute toward other forms of weight control. The de-
clining price of food and the rising price of exercise thus have offsetting im-
pacts on food consumption, which is why the twentieth-century data shows
periods of both rising and falling food consumption in spite of continual in-
creases in weight and falling food prices.

The neoclassical weight model also yields predictions about the relation be-
tween income and weight. Health, or “closeness” to one’s preferred “ideal”
weight, is likely to be a normal good, which implies a non-monotonic relation-
ship between income and weight. For poor, underweight people, income
growth leads to more food consumption and a drive to increase weight, while
among well-off, overweight people, income growth might lead to weight loss
as people invest resources on striving to attain their ideal weight. Thus in
rich countries income raises weight among the poorest groups but lowers it
throughout the upper half of the income distribution. In addition, while in-
come has a non-monotonic effect on weight within countries, it has a strong
Obesity Review                                                                                        3


positive effect across countries—a greater effect than can be accounted for by
aggregation. The impact of technology on weight is essential to interpret this
pattern. Across countries, more sedentary but more productive technologies
are employed, causing both income and weight to rise.

Behavioral theories of obesity have been proposed (e.g., David Cutler, Ed-
ward L. Glaeser, and Jesse M. Shapiro 2003), following the initial work on
rational addiction by Gary Becker and Kevin Murphy (1988) and the more
recent applications of this model to obesity by John Cawley (1999) and Timo-
thy Richards et al. (2007). They can help us understand why people seek self-
control or commitment devices (for example by joining a Weight Watchers
group or undergoing bariatric surgery), but commitment issues alone, as ini-
tially discussed by Thomas Schelling 1978, do not explain well the cross-
country and time-series evidence on obesity.

Evidence related to the importance of technological change in driving weight
change has been developed in several contexts. Lakdawalla and Philipson
(2002) provide evidence that the strenuousness of work has very large effects
on weight, while Cutler, Glaeser, and Shapiro (2003) emphasize the declining
time cost of preparing food, as a result of technological change in food proc-
essing. They also note that U.S. consumption of snack foods rose after their
prices declined. But since obesity is a worldwide phenomenon, caution must
be taken in generalizing from explanations tied to particular circumstances
in the United States. Shin-Yi Chou, Michael Grossman, and Henry Saffer
(2004) analyze a wide variety of price effects and find that weight seems to
rise with: lower relative prices of food at home, lower relative prices of fast-
food and full-service restaurants, the wider availability (and hence the lower
full price) of such restaurants, lower relative prices of alcohol, and higher
relative prices of smoking.1 In addition, the percentage of income spent on
food has steadily declined since the Great Depression (Judy Putnam 2000).
Lakdawalla and Philipson (2002) report that about half the growth in weight
since the late 1970s can be explained by the declining relative price of food.
Lakdawalla et al. (2005) report similar findings for food quality, as opposed to
quantity: increases in the relative prices of certain types of foods seem to in-
crease the prevalence of deficiencies in nutrients from those foods. For exam-
ple, when orange juice is more expensive, Vitamin C deficiency rises, and so
on.

The social aspects of obesity may have a multiplier effect on the growth of
obesity. When obesity is relatively rare, it is considered abnormal and repul-
sive, and this negative response helps to keep it in check. As obesity begins to
rise, the negative image of obesity becomes less intense because obesity is

1
 Cawley et al. (2004) focus more specifically on the effect of smoking on weight: they show that adoles-
cents, particularly females, sometimes initiate smoking as a method of weight control.
Obesity Review                                                                                       4


now more common (see also Amnon Levy 2002). Hence one cost of obesity de-
clines, and this helps obesity continue to grow. At some point, however, the
health effects of obesity become so serious that the reduction in the negative
image of obesity is offset by health costs.

Childhood obesity has grown along with adult obesity, and indeed these are
positively correlated because technological change in leisure (e.g., computers
and television) has raised utility while lowering calorie expenditure. Kids are
free to play outside if they wish, but they prefer to play inside, on their com-
puters. Cawley (2006) argues that parental control and bounded rationality
are important factors in childhood obesity. (He repeats the argument in his
chapter—chapter 3—of the Acs and Lyles volume.) They may be important
factors, but that is nothing new, and so cannot explain the growth in child-
hood obesity. Since children (after infancy) generally eat the same meals as
their parents, food-related factors promoting adult obesity will work similarly
with children. In another chapter (chapter 5) of the Acs and Lyles volume,
Cawley discusses the effect of obesity on income (see also Jeff Biddle and-
Daniel Hamermesh 1994, 1998; Susan Averett and Sanders Korenman 1996;
Charles Baum and William Ford 2004; Cawley 2004; Stephen Morris 2006).
To isolate that effect, he compares the wages of siblings of different weight.
Surprisingly, he finds that the only effect is in reducing the wages of obese
relative to normal white women.2

The rise in obesity in other developed countries has lagged the rise in the
United States, and this leads Audrestsch and DiOrio, in chapter 2 of the Acs
and Lyles volume, to argue that obesity is a negative outgrowth of today’s
American culture, with its emphasis on fast food and the rise of light service
industries, and is bundled with other American practices and transferred to
other countries through globalization. A more straightforward explanation,
and one more consistent with economic analysis, is that, rather than imitat-
ing the United States, countries at a similar stage of development exhibit
similar behaviors in their population because the same causal factors, such
as rising income and automation, are at work.

Regarding the future of obesity, Acs et al., in chapter 8 of the Acs and Lyles
volume, predict that by 2016 half the U.S. population will be obese, compared
to about a third at present. There is too much uncertainty about the demand
for and supply of the factors that influence obesity to justify placing much
weight on such a prediction, but the income or education effect on health will
clearly be an important offsetting force to the further impact of technological
change. The future of obesity depends on which of two effects on obesity that


2
 However, Bhattacharya and Kate Bundorf (2005) estimate that most of this wage differential can be ex-
plained by the higher health care premiums employers must pay for obese workers.
Obesity Review                                                                                        5


stem from income growth dominate: the more sedentary way the higher in-
come is generated or the larger demand for health it induces.


Section 3: Normative Aspects of the Growth in Obesity

Naturally, when obesity is regarded as a public health issue government in-
tervention to control is recommended as soon as a substantial percentage of
the population weighs more than is optimal for maximizing health. From an
economic standpoint, the proper maximand is of course not health but utility,
in which good health is only one argument. Rational persons constantly trade
off health for competing goods, such as pleasure, income, time, and alterna-
tive consumption possibilities. Intervention that considers such tradeoffs un-
worthy of consideration is paternalistic. This is recognized in such areas as
highway safety—no one proposes to shut down highways in order to reduce
traffic deaths, or to force automobile manufacturers to equip their cars with
engines that limit top speed to 25 miles per hour—but the principle that le-
gitimizes trade-offs involving life and health is equally applicable to obesity.
The point is not that governmental efforts to control obesity should be ruled
out of bounds a priori, but that all relevant costs and benefits of such efforts
should be considered.

This is particularly important in analyzing the claim that public intervention
to control obesity is justified because of the higher average medical expenses
of the obese on public health insurance, such as Medicare and Medicaid3. We
are skeptical that such fiscal externalities are the true underlying concern of
the public health community. This is because other fiscal effects, such as
higher mortality rates of obese individuals (Lawrence Garfinkel 1986) which
reduce Social Security spending, are not considered (e.g.,Roland Sturm 2002;
Joy, Goldman and Pradham 2006). Elsie Pamuk et al. 1992, 1993 find that
weight loss for individuals with healthy BMIs and for women with high BMIs
is associated with higher mortality rates. An exception is McCormick and
Stone (2007) who argue that the medical expenses associated with obesity
have been exaggerated because the cost savings resulting from the tendency
of obese people to die earlier. However, standard analysis (Fred Kuchler and
Nicole Ballenger 2002; Eric Finkelstein et al. 2004, 2005; and Ostbye et al.
2007) focuses on health care alone.

Nor are insurance externalities a good argument for public intervention to
reduce obesity. Rather they are an argument for experience-rating health in-
surance, so that groups with above-average expected medical expenses pay
higher insurance premiums (Bhattacharya and Neeraj Sood 2005). There is

3
  In the spirit of the early work by Emmett Keeler et al. (1989), Grossman and Rashad (2004) have argued
that obesity externalities are created by public health insurance pools.
Obesity Review                                                                6


no reason to single out obesity as a basis for higher insurance costs, since
there are other, equally or more, risky “life style” choices that increase ex-
pected medical costs.

It is unclear whether obesity would create externalities if insurance were al-
lowed to adjust. A more serious problem may be a combination of consumer
ignorance with seller exploitation (discussed by Gould and Sussan in chapter
6 of Ace and Lyles) based on people’s addictive tendencies having biological
roots; in the ancestral environment to which human beings were biologically
adapted, a taste for high-caloric foods had great survival value.


Section 4: Specific Actual and Proposed Interventions

The principal public interventions, actual or proposed, thus far are education,
taxation, fast-food regulation, and a little of everything on the model of the
campaign against cigarette smoking.

4.1. Education

Education is the most frequently proposed and implemented public interven-
tion to control obesity. It comes in several forms, including requirements for
furnishing nutritional information on labels for food products, publicly fi-
nanced advertising of the health consequences of obesity (similar to publicly
financed advertising against smoking), nutrition- or exercise education, and
general education. The motivation for such interventions is the observation,
emphasized by Henderson in chapter 4 of the Acs and Lyles volume, that obe-
sity varies across socioeconomic, racial, and cultural groups (and even geo-
graphically), even though food is cheaper and work and leisure are more sed-
entary for everyone. But deficiencies in education and information cannot be
the key to explaining the growth of obesity, since people have become much
better informed about characteristics of food, including calories, as a result of
food labels, diet advertising, and publicity about obesity. Incentives created
by technological change have more than offset the increased understanding of
caloric intake and expenditure. Thus, the effectiveness of labeling in combat-
ing obesity has not been confirmed in the empirical literature (See Lorna Al-
drich 1999; Kim et al. 2001; Jayachandran Variyam and Cawley 2006; Maria
Loureiro et al. 2006).

Still, particular subgroups in the population may be more ignorant than oth-
ers about the health effects of obesity and about the foods that conduce to
obesity. Of course there may be other factors; the feedback effect that we
noted earlier may be especially important among groups, such as black and
Hispanic women, where obesity is so common as to be normal, reducing social
Obesity Review                                                                                      7


pressures to be thin. However, Henderson’s analysis of three educational
weight-loss programs targeted on vulnerable groups presents no statistical
evidence that such programs are effective.

In chapter 9 of Acs and Lyles, Parke Wilde discusses the ineffectuality of fed-
eral efforts to educate the public about a healthy diet. The government issues
dietary guidelines that if followed would reduce obesity, but at the same time,
through its commodity check-off program, it mandates promotional advertis-
ing for beef, pork, and other high-caloric foods. The result, Wilde argues, is to
increase the demand for fad diets, which promise quick results enabling con-
sumers to continue or soon resume eating their favorite foods but do not de-
liver.

Probably most of the obese population understands the mechanisms by which
weight is gained and lost, and so additional nutritional education would have
only a very limited effect. If we randomized our existing government pro-
grams for educating people about overweight and then measured weight five
years later, it is unlikely that those who received the nutrition education
would be thinner. (Kamhon Kan and Wei-Der Tsai 2004 suggest otherwise)

More promising are programs of general education focused on increasing
years of schooling for vulnerable populations (e.g., Variyam and Blaylock
1998). The problem is not that disadvantaged persons cannot read labels and
are unaware that obesity is bad for their health, but that uneducated persons
have less of an incentive to invest in their health because their longevity and
their utility from living are below average.4


4.2. Taxation

An excise tax on food would reduce consumption, though it would be regres-
sive. A better form of obesity tax would be a nonlinear tax—a tax on overcon-
sumption of food—rather than a flat tax on all sales of food. But such a tax
would be extremely difficult to enforce; it would be the equivalent of taxing
fat people. Elston et al., in chapter 10 of Acs and Lyles, analyze four linear
tax responses to obesity—a tax on all foods, a tax proportional to particular
ingredients (such as sugar or butter), a tax applied to categories of foods, and
a value-added tax on food producers. The last, which is the one they favor,
would be proportioned to the difference between the price of the raw inputs
and the selling price of the finished product, and thus would penalize heavily
processed products. This is a feasible linear-tax response to obesity, although
its effects would probably be quite limited. In principle the ingredient tax is
attractive, but Elston’s chapter (pp. 184–185) presents a number of compli-
4
    For a discussion on weight as a signaling mechanism to potential mates, see Avner Offer 2001.
Obesity Review                                                                                        8


cating factors (see also Kuchler et al. 2005). Probably any feasible tax re-
sponse to obesity would cost more to enforce than it would be worth in reduc-
ing the social costs of obesity.


4.3 Fast Food Regulations

The shift of producing and preparing food from the home to the market (due
to the increase in the market value of women’s time), in particular to fast-
food preparation and carry-out, is often believed to be an important factor in
the rise of obesity, though data are sparse. Chou, Grossman, and Inas
Rashad (2006) find a strong correlation between obesity and fast-food estab-
lishments across regions. This strong correlation is puzzling, given that the
vast majority of meals are still home-produced.5 )

Acs et al., in chapter 8 of the Acs and Lyles volume, proposed restricting ac-
cess to vending machines and the location of fast-food restaurants. These
would be costly measures of uncertain efficacy, given substitution possibili-
ties. Regulation of advertising may affect obesity growth more substantially.
The food industry is the second largest advertiser in the United States (after
the automotive industry) (Mary Story and Simone French 2004). In addition,
11 percent of food advertising geared to children is advertising for fast food
and only 2 percent for foods low in sugar, fat, and salt, and almost no ads are
directed at children for fruit or vegetables (Margot Wooten 2003).


4.4 The Tobacco Precedent

Levy and Oblack, in chapter 11 of Acs and Lyles, point out that federal, state,
and local government have attempted with considerable success to curb to-
bacco consumption through a combination of mandatory warnings in and
other restrictions on labeling and advertising, media campaigns, stiff taxes,
highly publicized lawsuits, and location restrictions that have culminated in
the prohibition of smoking in most public places. Very little, in contrast, has
been done to limit obesity, perhaps rightly so if obesity has less external costs
than smoking. In any event, the tobacco model has only limited applicability
to obesity. It is relatively easy not to begin smoking, so that over time cam-
paigns designed to arouse public awareness of the dangers of smoking, and to
increase the expense of the habit as well as creating a nonmonetary incon-
venience cost resulting from the location restrictions, reduce the number of
smokers even if no current smokers are able to break their habit. Everyone

5
 Joanne Guthrie et al. (2002), on the basis of 1996 data, estimated that only 17 percent of total calories
consumed by men aged 18 to 39, and 13 percent of the total calories consumed by women in that age group
came from fast-food establishments.
Obesity Review                                                                  9


has to begin eating, however, and having begun one is highly susceptible to
becoming obese as a result of biological predisposition, poor information, and
the asymmetry of gaining and losing weight (gaining easy, losing hard). Stiff
taxes on food, in contrast to stiff taxes on cigarettes, would be intolerable for
persons of modest means, and ingredient, nonlinear, and other superior forms
of taxing calories are unlikely to be feasible and effective. In chapter 12 of Acs
and Lyles, Anderson argues that class actions against the fast-food industry
can be effective in reining in obesity, but these actions are likely to fail for the
same reason that most suits by smokers against cigarette companies have
failed: juries see the illness resulting from voluntary consumption of danger-
ous products to be self-inflicted and hence not compensable.
Obesity Review                                                            10


References

Acs, Zoltan J., and Alan Lyles, Obesity, Business and Public Policy (Edward
      Elgar Publishing Ltd. 2007).
Aldrich, Lorna, U.S. Dept. of Agriculture, Economic Research Service, Con-
      sumer Use of Information — Implications for Food Policy (June 1999).
Averett, Susan, and Sanders Korenman. 1996. "The Economic Reality of the
      Beauty Myth." Journal of Human Resources,31(2): 304-30.
Baum, Charles L., and William F. Ford 2004. "The Wage Effects of Obesity: A
      Longitudinal Study." Health Economics, 13(9): 885-99.
Becker, Gary S., and Kevin M. Murphy. 1988. "A Theory of Rational Addic-
      tion." Journal of Political Economy, 96(4): 675-700.
Bhattacharya, Jayanta and Bundorf, M. Kate, "The Incidence of the Health-
      care Costs of Obesity." (May 2005). NBER Working Paper Series, No.
      W11303.
Bhattacharya, Jayanta and Neeraj Sood. 2005. Health Insurance and the
      Obesity Externality, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc,
      NBER Working Papers No. W11529.
Hamermesh, Daniel S., and James E. Biddle. 1994. "Beauty and the Labor
      Market." American Economic Review, 84(5): 1174-94.
Hamermesh, Daniel S., and James E. Biddle. 1998. "Beauty, Productivity,
      and Discrimination: Lawyer's Looks and Lucre." Journal of Labor Eco-
      nomics, 16(1): 172-201.
Cawley, John. 2006. “Markets and Childhood Obesity Policy.” The Future of
      Children, special issue on Childhood Overweight and Obesity, 16(1):
      69-88.
Cawley, John. 1999. "Obesity and Addiction." Ph.D. Dissertation, University
      of Chicago, Department of Economics. Chicago, IL.
Cawley, John. 2004. "Impact of Obesity on Wages." Journal of Human Re-
      sources, 39(2): 451-74.
Cawley, John, Sarah Markowitz, and John Tauras 2004. "Lighting Up and
      Slimming Down: The Effects of Body Weight and Cigarette Prices on
      Adolescent Smoking Initiation." Journal of Health Economics, 23(2):
      293-311.
Chou, Shin-Yi, Michael Grossman, and Inas Rashad. Fast-Food Restaurant
      Advertising on Television and Its Influence on Childhood Obesity, Na-
      tional Bureau of Economic Research, Inc, Working Paper 11879 (Dec.
      2006).
Chou, Shin-Yi, Michael Grossman, and Henry Saffer. 2004. "An economic
      analysis of adult obesity: results from the Behavioral Risk Factor Sur-
      veillance System." Journal of Health Economics, 23(3): 565-87.
Cutler, David M., Edward L. Glaeser, and Jesse M. Shapiro. 2003. "Why
      Have Americans Become More Obese?" Journal of Economic Perspec-
      tives, 17(3): 93-118.
Obesity Review                                                            11


Finkelstein, Eric A., Ian C. Fiebelkorn, and Guijing Wang. 2004. "State-level
      estimates of annual medical expenditures attributable to obesity."
      Obesity Research,12(1): 18-24.
Finkelstein, Eric A., Christopher Ruhm, Katherine Kosa. 2005. "Economic
      Causes and Consequences of Obesity." Annual Review of Public Health,
      26:239-257.
Flegal, K. M., et al. 1998. "Overweight and obesity in the United States:
      prevalence and trends, 1960-1994." International Journal of Obesity
      and Related Metabolic Disorders, 22(1): 39-47.
Flegal, K. M., et al. 2002. "Prevalence and Trends in Obesity Among US
      Adults, 1999-2000." Journal of the American Medical Association,
      288(14): 1723-1727.
Garfinkel, Lawrence. 1986. "Overweight and Mortality." Cancer, 58(8 Suppl):
      1826-9.
Grossman, Michael, and Inas Rashad. 2004. "The Economics of Obesity."
      Public Interest, (156): 104-112.
Guthrie, Joanne, Biing-Hwan Lin,and Elizabeth Frazao. 2002. "Role of Food
      Prepared Away from Home in the American Diet, 1977-78 versus 1994-
      96: Changes and Consequences." Journal of Nutrition Education
      Behavior, 34:140-150.
Joy, A.B., Goldman, G., and Pradhan, V. (2006) "Cost-benefit analysis con-
      ducted for nutrition education in California." California Agriculture,
      60(4):185.
Kan, Kamhon, and Wei-Der Tsai. 2004. "Obesity and Risk Knowledge." Jour-
      nal of Health Economics, 23(5): 907-34.
Keeler, Emmett, et al. 1989. "The External Costs of a Sedentary Life-style."
      American Journal of Public Health, 79(8): 975-81.
Kim, S.Y., R. Nayga und O. Capps. 2001."Food Label Use, Self-Selectivity,
      and. Diet Quality.“ Journal of Consumer Affairs, 35(2):346-363.
Kuchler Fred, and Nicole Ballenger 2002. "Societal costs of obesity: how can
      we assess when federal interventions will pay?" FoodReview, 25:33-37.
Kuchler, Fred, et al. 2005. "Obesity Policy and the Law of Unintended Conse-
      quences." Amber Waves, 3(3):26-33.
Lakdawalla, Darius, Tomas Philipson, and Jayanta Bhattacharya. 2005.
      "Welfare-Enhancing Technological Change and the Growth of Obesity."
      American Economic Review, 95(2): 253-257.
Lakdawalla, Darius N., and Tomas J. Philipson. 2002. "Technological Change
      and the Growth of Obesity." National Bureau of Economic Research
      Working Paper 8946. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic
      Research.
Levy, Amnon. 2002. "Rational Eating: Can It Lead to Overweightness or Un-
      derweightness?" Journal of Health Economics, 21(5): 887-99.
Obesity Review                                                             12


Loureiro, Maria,Azucena Gracia, and Rodolfo M. Nayga. 2006. "Do Consum-
       ers Value Nutritional Labels?" European Review of Agricultural Eco-
       nomics 33(2): 249-268.
McCormick, B., I. Stone, Corporate Analytical Team (2007). "Economic costs
       of obesity and the case for government intervention." Obesity Reviews,
       8(1): 161–164.
Morris, Stephen. 2006. “Body Mass Index and Occupational Attainment.”
       Journal of Health Economics 25(2): 347-364.
Offer, Avner. 2001. "Body weight and self control in the United States and
       Britain since the 1950s." Soc Hist Med, 14:79-106.
Ostbye T, Dement JM, Krause KM 2007. "Obesity and workers' compensa-
       tion: Results From the Duke Health and Safety Surveillance System."
       Arch Intern Med, 167:766-773.
Pamuk, Elsie R., et al. 1992. "Weight loss and mortality in a national cohort
       of adults, 1971-1987." Am J Epidemiol, 136(6): 686-97.
Pamuk, Elsie R., et al. 1993. "Weight loss and subsequent death in a cohort of
       U.S. adults." Ann Intern Med, 119(7 Pt 2): 744-8.
Philipson, Tomas J., and Richard A. Posner 1999. "The Long-Run Growth in
       Obesity as a Function of Technological Change." National Bureau of
       Economic Research Working Paper 7423. Cambridge, MA: National
       Bureau of Economic Research.
Putnam, Judy J. 2000. "Major Trends in US Food Supply: 1909-99." Food Re-
       view, 23(1): 8-15.
Richards, Timothy J., Patterson, Paul M. and Tegene, Abebayehu 2007.
       "Obesity and Nutrient Consumption: A Rational Addiction?" Contem-
       porary Economic Policy 25(3): 309-324.
Schelling, Thomas. C. 1978. "Egonomics, or the Art of Self-Management."
       American Economic Review, 68(2): 290-94.
Story, Mary, and Simone French. "Food Advertising and Marketing Directed
       at Children and Adolescents in the US." 1-3 International Journal of
        Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity, 1, 2 (2004).
Sturm, Roland. (2002). "The effects of obesity, smoking, and drinking on
       medical problems and costs. Obesity outranks both smoking and drink-
       ing in its deleterious effects on health and health costs." Health Af-
       fairs, 21(2): 245-53.
Variyam, Jayachandran N. 2005. “The Price is Right: Economics and the Rise
       in Obesity.” Amber Waves 3(1):20-27.
Variyam Jayachandran N., and Russel Blaylock. 1998. "Unlocking the mys-
       tery between nutrition knowledge and diet quality." Food Review,
       21:21-28.
Variyam, Jayachandran N., and John Cawley. 2006. “Nutrition Labels and
       Obesity.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
       11956, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc., Cambridge, MA.
Obesity Review                                                   13


Wooten, Margo G. 2003. "Pestering Parents: How Food Companies Market
     Obesity to Children." Social Policy Report, 20(2): 3-17.
