NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

AIR QUALITY AND EARLY-LIFE MORTALITY:
EVIDENCE FROM INDONESIA'S WILDFIRES
Seema Jayachandran
Working Paper 14011
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14011

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2008

I am grateful to Doug Almond, Janet Currie, Erica Field, Dan Kammen, Michael Kremer, Doug McKee,
Ben Olken, Sarah Reber, Duncan Thomas, and seminar participants at AEA, Berkeley, BREAD, Columbia,
Maryland, Stanford GSB and UCLA for helpful comments. I also thank Kok-Hoe Chan and Daniel
Chen for data and Nadeem Karmali and Rika Christanto for excellent research assistance. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Seema Jayachandran. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Air Quality and Early-Life Mortality: Evidence from Indonesia's Wildfires
Seema Jayachandran
NBER Working Paper No. 14011
May 2008
JEL No. I12,O1,Q52,Q53,Q56
ABSTRACT
Smoke from massive wildfires blanketed Indonesia in late 1997. This paper examines the impact this
air pollution (particulate matter) had on fetal, infant, and child mortality. Exploiting the sharp timing
and spatial patterns of the pollution and inferring deaths from "missing children" in the 2000 Indonesian
Census, I find that the pollution led to 15,600 missing children in Indonesia (1.2% of the affected birth
cohorts). Prenatal exposure to pollution largely drives the result. The effect size is much larger in poorer
areas, suggesting that differential effects of pollution contribute to the socioeconomic gradient in health.

Seema Jayachandran
Department of Economics
Stanford University
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and NBER
jayachan@stanford.edu

1

Introduction

Between August and November 1997, forest fires engulfed large parts of Indonesia, destroying
over 12 million acres. Most of the fires, which were concentrated on the islands of Sumatra
and Borneo (Kalimantan), were started intentionally by logging companies and palm oil
producers clearing land to plant new crop.1 Because of the dry, windy conditions caused
by El Niño, the fires burned out of control and spread rapidly. In November, rains finally
doused the fires.
While the fires were burning, much of Indonesia was blanketed in smoke. This paper
examines fetal, infant, and child mortality caused by the episode of poor air quality (specifically, high levels of particulate matter). Daily satellite measurements of airborne smoke at
locations across Indonesia provide information on the spatial and temporal patterns of the
pollution. The outcome is fetal, infant, and child mortality before age 3—hereafter called
early-life mortality—and is inferred from “missing children” in the 2000 Census, overcoming
the lack of mortality records for Indonesia and the small samples in surveys with mortality
data.
The paper finds that higher levels of pollution caused a substantial decline in the size
of the surviving cohort, and that exposure to pollution during the last trimester in utero
was the most damaging. The fire-induced increase in air pollution is associated with a 1.2%
decrease in cohort size. This estimate is the average across Indonesia for the five birth-month
cohorts with high third-trimester exposure to pollution; it implies that 15,600 child, infant
and fetal deaths are attributable to the fires. Indonesia’s under–3 mortality rate during this
period was about 6%; if the estimate is driven mainly by child and infant deaths (rather
than fetal deaths), this represents a 20% increase in under-3 mortality.
The paper also finds a striking difference in the mortality effects of pollution between
richer and poorer places. Pollution has twice the effect in districts with consumption below
the sample median compared to those above the median. There are a number of possible
1

The Indonesian Minister of Forestry estimated that “[commercial] plantations caused some 80% of the
forest fires,” and that small farmers caused the remainder (Straits Times, September 3, 1997). Rabindran
(2001), using satellite data on land use, finds that the 1997 incidence of fires on plantations was higher than
the “natural” level (based on a benchmark from conservation areas), but the incidence of fires on small farms
was at its natural level.

1

explanations for this finding. Individuals in poorer areas could be more susceptible to pollution because of lower baseline health, more limited options for avoiding the pollution, or less
access to medical care. Another possibility is that people exposed to indoor air pollution on
a daily basis suffered more acute health effects from the wildfires because they received a
double dose of pollution. Consistent with this view, the estimated effects are larger in areas
where more people cook with wood-burning stoves. Surprisingly, mother’s education does
not seem to play a role. While these correlations do not pin down causal relationships, they
provide some suggestive evidence on why the poor are especially vulnerable to the adverse
health effects of pollution and add to our understanding of the socioeconomic (SES) gradient in health (Marmot et al. 1991, Smith 1999). An open question in the literature is how
much of the health gradient is due to low-SES individuals being more likely to suffer adverse
health shocks and how much is due to a given health shock having worse consequences for
the poor (Case, Lubotsky, and Paxson 2002, Currie and Hyson 1999). This paper provides
some evidence for the second mechanism: People faced a common environmental-cum-health
shock, and the consequences were much worse for the poor.
This study examines an extreme episode of increased pollution, which has advantages
for empirical identification. In particular, the abruptness and magnitude of the pollution
are useful for identifying when in early life exposure to pollution is most harmful. In utero
exposure is found to be especially important, suggesting that targeting pregnant women
should be a priority of public health efforts concerning air pollution. The extreme level of
pollution, however, also means that one must be cautious about extrapolating the effect size
to more typical levels of pollution.
That being said, rampant wildfires are not uncommon in Indonesia and other countries,
mainly in Southeast Asia and Latin America, where fire is used to clear land. Most cost
estimates of the 1997 Indonesian fires have focused on destroyed timber, reduced worker
productivity, lost tourism, and the like and are in the range of $2 to 3 billion (Tacconi 2003).
This study shows that the health costs of the fires are likely much larger: Assuming a value
of a statistical life of $1 million, the early-life mortality costs alone were over $15 billion.2
2

This value of a statistical life (VLS) is calculated by using $5 million in 1996 dollars as the value in
the U.S. from Viscusi and Aldy (2003), Murphy and Topel (2006), and the U.S. Environmental Protection

2

This excludes health costs among survivors, which may also have been sizeable.3 The costs
of the fires very likely overwhelm the benefits to firms from setting them; the annual revenue
from Indonesia’s timber and palm oil industries at this time was less than $7 billion.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides background on
the link between pollution and health and on the Indonesian fires. Section 3 describes the
data and empirical strategy. Section 4 presents the results, and section 5 concludes.

2

Background

2.1

Link between air pollution and early-life mortality

Related literature
Recent work on air quality and infant mortality includes that by Chay and Greenstone
(2003b) who use geographic variation across the United States in the extent to which the
1980–81 recession lowered pollution. They find that better air quality reduced infant deaths.
Chay and Greenstone (2003a) also find that air pollution abatement after passage of the
Clean Air Act of 1970 led to a decline in infant deaths.4 Currie and Neidell (2005) use withinzipcode variation in California over the 1990’s and find that exposure to carbon monoxide
and other air pollutants during the month of birth is associated with infant mortality.5
In addition, there have been studies on the adult health effects of Indonesia’s 1997 fires.
Emmanuel (2000) finds no increase in mortality but an increase in respiratory-related hospitalizations in nearby Singapore. Sastry (2002) finds increased mortality for older adults on
the day after a high-pollution day in Malaysia. Frankenberg, McKee, and Thomas (2004)
compare adult health outcomes in 1993 and 1997 for areas in Indonesia with high versus low
exposure to the 1997 smoke. They find that pollution reduced people’s ability to perform
Agency (2000), and applying an income elasticity of a VSL of 0.6 from Viscusi and Aldy (2003) and the fact
that Indonesia’s per capita gross domestic product was one tenth of the U.S’s.
3
Recent work suggests that the health costs could include long-term consequences among surviving fetuses
(Barker 1990, Almond 2006).
4
Other natural experiments used to measure health effects of air pollution include the temporary closure
of a steel mill in Utah during a labor dispute; the reduction in traffic during the 1996 Olympics in Atlanta;
and involuntary relocation of military families (Pope et al. 1992, Friedman et al. 2001, Lleras-Muney 2005).
5
For research on pollution and infant mortality outside the U.S., see for example Bobak and Leon (1992)
on the Czech Republic, Loomis et al. (1999) on Mexico, and Her Majesty’s Public Health Service (1954) on
the 1952 London “killer fog” (smog) episode.

3

strenuous tasks and other measures of health. The data set used by Frankenberg, McKee,
and Thomas (2004) covers only 321 of the 4000 subdistricts in Indonesia, and only one of
Kalimantan’s four provinces is in their sample. Thus, one advantage of this paper is its
broader geographic coverage, which allows one to explore heterogeneous effects across households and nonlinearities in the health impact of pollution, for example. The most important
advance of this paper over previous work is its use of both the sharp timing and extensive
regional variation of the pollution; one can then identify causal effects while allowing for
considerable unobserved heterogeneity across time and place.
Physiological effects of pollution
Smoke from burning wood and vegetation, or biomass smoke, consists of very fine particles
(organic compounds and elemental carbon) suspended in gas. Fine particles less than 10
microns (µm) and especially less than 2.5 µm in diameter are considered the most harmful
to health because they are small enough to be inhaled and transported deep into the lungs.
For biomass smoke, the modal size of particles is between 0.2 and 0.4 µm, and 80 to 95% of
particles are smaller than 2.5 µm (Hueglin et al. 1997).
There are several pathways through which prenatal and postnatal exposure to air pollution could affect fetal or infant health. Postnatal exposure can contribute to acute respiratory
infection, a leading cause of infant death. In utero exposure is hypothesized to affect fetal
development, first, because pollution inhaled by the mother and absorbed into her bloodstream interferes with her health which in turn disrupts fetal nutrition and oxygen flow, and,
second, because toxicants cross the placenta. Several studies find a link between air pollution
and fetal growth retardation or shorter gestation period, both of which are associated with
low birthweight (Dejmek et al. 1999, Wang et al. 1997, Berkowitz et al. 2003).
There is also evidence on the biological mechanisms behind these pregnancy outcomes.
The main toxicant in biomass smoke and other sources of particulate matter is polycyclic
aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH). In utero exposure to particulate matter has been associated
with a greater prevalence of PAH-DNA adducts on the placenta, and PAH-DNA adducts, in
turn, are correlated with low birth weight, small head circumference, preterm delivery, and

4

fetal deaths (Perera et al. 1998, Topinka et al. 1997, Huel et al. 1993, Hatch et al. 1990).
Laboratory experiments on rats have confirmed most of these effects (Ridgon and Rennels
1964, MacKenzie and Angevine 1981). PAHs disrupt central nervous system activity of the
fetus, and during critical growth periods such as the third trimester, the disruption has a
pronounced effect on fetal growth. PAHs are also hypothesized to reduce nutrient flow to the
fetus by suppressing estrogenic and endocrine activity and by binding to placental growth
factor receptors (Perera et al. 1999). In utero exposure to PAHs has been linked to increased
risk of infant leukemia as well (Alexander et al. 2001).

2.2

Description of the Indonesian fires

The 1997 dry season in Indonesia was particularly dry. Figure 1 compares the monthly
rainfall recorded at a meteorological station in South Sumatra for 1997 and previous years.
The 1997 dry season was both severe and prolonged: rainfall amounts in June, July, August,
and September were lower than usual, and the rainy season was delayed until November.
The rest of Indonesia experienced similar rainfall patterns as Sumatra.
Fires are commonly used in Indonesia to clear land for cultivation, and the dry season is
considered an opportune time to set fires because the vegetation burns quickly. Industrial
farmers burn forest land in order to replant it with palm or timber trees, and small farmers
use swiddening or “slash–and–burn” techniques in which land is cleared with fire to ready
it for cultivation. In addition, logging companies are thought to have set some virgin forests
on fire in order to degrade the land so that the government would designate the land as
available for logging.
With expansion of the timber and palm oil industries in Indonesia, many tracts of forestland have become commercially developed, and logged-over land is more prone to fires than
pristine forest.6 Roads running through forests act as conduits for fire to spread, and with
the canopy gone, the ground cover becomes drier and more combustible and wind speeds
are higher. In addition, because logging firms were taxed on the volume of wood products
6

In 1996 forest products accounted for 10% of Indonesia’s gross domestic product, and Indonesia supplied
about 30% of the world palm oil market (Ross 2001).

5

that left the forest, they often left behind waste wood, even though it had economic value
as fertilizer or wood chips. The left-behind debris wood made the forest more susceptible to
fast-spreading fires (Barber and Schweithhelm 2000).
In September 1997, because of the dry conditions, the fires spread out of control. The
Indonesian government made some attempt to fight the fires, but the efforts were ineffective.
The fires continued until the rains arrived in November. In southeastern Kalimantan but
not the rest of Indonesia, fires started anew in March 1998 after the rainy season ended.
The fires were concentrated on the island of Sumatra and in Kalimantan. Estimates are
that up to 12 million acres burned, 8 million acres in Kalimantan (12% of its land area) and 4
million in Sumatra (4% of its area). The practice of clearing land with fire is used throughout
Indonesia, and El Niño affected all of Indonesia. What set Sumatra and Kalimantan apart
is that Indonesia’s forests are mainly in these areas. The majority of crop plantations are
located in Sumatra, and plantations are a fast-growing use of land in Kalimantan. Timber
operations are also primarily in these regions.
The location of the smoke generally tracked the location of the fires, though because of
wind patterns, not entirely. Figure 2 shows satellite images of the pollution over Indonesia
between September and November. Fires were concentrated on the southern parts of Sumatra
and Kalimantan, and these two areas experienced the most pollution. On the other hand, the
northern half of Sumatra was strongly affected by smoke while Java was relatively unaffected,
yet neither of these areas experienced many fires.
A common measure of particulate matter is PM10 , the concentration of particles less than
10 µm in diameter. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency has set a PM10 standard of
150 micrograms per cubic meter (µg/m3 ) as the 24-hour average that should not be exceeded
in a location more than once a year. During the 1997 fires, the pollution in the hardest
hit areas surpassed 1000 µg/m3 on several days and exceeded 150 µg/m3 for long periods
(Ostermann and Brauer 2001, Heil and Goldmammer 2001). The levels of pollution caused
by the wildfires are comparable to levels caused by indoor use of wood-burning stoves. The
daily average PM10 level from wood-burning stoves, which varies depending on the dwelling
and duration of use, ranges from 200 to 5000 µg/m3 (Ezzati and Kammen 2002).

6

3

Empirical Strategy and Data

3.1

Empirical model and outcome variable

The goal of the empirical analysis is to measure the effect that air pollution from the wildfires
had an on early-life mortality. Ideally, there would be data on all pregnancies indicating
which ended in fetal, infant, or child death, and the following equation would be estimated:
Survivejt =β1 Smokejt + δt + αj + εjt .

(3.1)

The variable Survivejt is the probability that fetuses whose due date is month t and whose
mothers reside at the time of the fires in subdistrict j survive to a certain point, such as live
birth, one year, etc. The prediction is that β1 is negative, or that exposure to smoke around
the time of birth reduces the probability of survival.
In practice, mortality records are unavailable for Indonesia, and survey data are not
feasible for the analysis because the samples are too small to examine month-to-month
fluctuations or geographic variation in pollution. For example, the 2002 Demographic and
Health Survey has on average 1 birth and 0.05 recorded child deaths per district-month for
the affected cohorts.7
Thus, the approach I take is to infer early-life mortality by measuring “missing children.”8
The outcome measure is the cohort size for a subdistrict-month calculated from the complete
2000 Census of Population for Indonesia. The estimating equation is
ln(CohortSize)jt =β1 Smokejt + β2 P renatalSmokejt +

(3.2)

β3 P ostnatalSmokejt + δt + αj + εjt .

The dependent variable, ln(CohortSize)jt , is the natural logarithm of the number of people
born in month t who are alive and residing in subdistrict j at the time of the 2000 Census.
Smokejt is the pollution level in the month of birth, and the variables P renatalSmokejt
7

The appendix verifies that for more aggregated area-time cells, population counts from the Census move
one-for-one with births and deaths in survey data.
8
The literature on “missing women” in developing countries, most often associated with Sen (1992), uses
population sex ratios to infer excess female mortality caused by gender discrimination.

7

and P ostnatalSmokejt are included to explore the different timing of exposure, as discussed
below. Each observation is weighted by the subdistrict’s population (the number of people
enumerated in the Census who were born in the year prior to the sample period).
The main advantage of inferring deaths by counting survivors is that the data are for the
entire population instead of a sample. Also, the outcome variable measures fetal deaths in
addition to infant and child deaths, albeit without distinguishing between the two outcomes;
most surveys do not collect data on fetal deaths. Finally, population counts may be better
measured than infant and child mortality because of underreporting of deaths and recall
error on dates of deaths.
There are several potential concerns about inferring mortality from survivors, however.
Since the data come from a cross-section of survivors in June 2000, the outcome represents
a different length of survival for individuals born at different times, and the mean level of
survival will differ by cohort, independent of the fires. For a cohort born in December 1997
around the time of the fires, the outcome is survival until age two and a half, while for an
older cohort born in December 1996, the outcome is survival until age three and a half,
for example.9 The inclusion of birthyear-birthmonth (hereafter, month) fixed effects in the
regression will control for any average differences in survival by cohort.
Also, in using ln(CohortSize) as a proxy for the early-life mortality rate, in order to
obtain unbiased estimates of the effect of pollution on early-life mortality, it must be the
case that conditional on subdistrict and month fixed effects, pollution is not correlated
with ln(Births). This seems like a reasonable assumption. First, by using a short panel,
subdistrict fixed effects absorb most variation in the number of women of childbearing age
and other determinants of fertility. Month effects control for fertility trends and seasonality.
Second, although not observing fertility will add noise to the estimates, it seems unlikely
that there were large fluctuations in fertility that coincided with the air pollution both
spatially and temporally. Even area-specific trends could not explain the patterns since the
sample includes control periods both before and after the fires; any omitted fertility shift
causing bias would have to be a short-term downward or upward spike in particular regions.
9

One advantage of observing survival more than two years after the due date is that for deaths that occur
around birth, the estimates are less likely to reflect simply short-term “harvesting.”

8

Furthermore, section 4.2 directly tests whether demographic shifts could explain the results,
and fluctuations in predicted fertility do not seem to be a confounding factor.
Another concern is that if pollution affects the duration of pregnancies, then missing
children might result from the shifting of births from certain months to other months. For
example, if exposure to smoke induces preterm labor, then one would expect to see an excess
of births followed by a deficit of births. In section 4.2, I examine and am able to reject the
conjecture that the results are an artifact of changes in gestation period.
There are also potential empirical concerns not unique to using ln(CohortSize) as the
dependent variable. First, pollution might affect not only mortality but also fertility. This
would influence the population counts for the later “control” cohorts and could lead to sample
selection problems even if mortality were directly measured. In order that the control cohorts
are uncontaminated by fertility effects, I restrict the sample to births occurring no more than
eight months after the outbreak of the fires. The last individuals in the sample are those born
in May 1998. Second, an implicit assumption in the empirical model is that it is exposure
to pollution just before or after birth that affects mortality. The motivation for this model
are findings from previous research that exposure to air pollution near the time of birth has
significant health effects. However, exposure to pollution earlier in a pregnancy or later after
birth also could affect health. If the control cohorts are in fact also treated, though less
intensely, then the results would underestimate the true effects.
A third important concern arises from the fact that individuals are identified by their
subdistrict of residence in 2000 rather than the subdistrict where their mother resided during
the end of her pregnancy or just after giving birth. If families living in high-smoke areas with
children born around the time of the fires were more likely to leave the area (either during
or after the fires), then cohort size would be smaller in areas more affected by pollution.
Fortunately, one can directly examine this concern by analyzing data at the district level since
the Census collects the district of birth and the district of residence in 1995. As discussed in
section 4.2, the results are identical using birthplace, current location, or mother’s location
in 1995.
Table 1 presents the descriptive statistics for the sample. The sample comprises monthly

9

observation between December 1996 and May 1998 (18 months) for 3751 subdistricts (kecamatan). Of this starting sample size of 67,518 observations, 64 observations are dropped
because the cohort size for the subdistrict-month is 0.10 There are on average 96 surviving
children per observation. The larger administrative units in Indonesia are districts (kabupaten), of which there are 324 in the sample, and provinces, of which there are 29.

3.2

Pollution variable

The measure of air pollution is the aerosol index from the Earth Probe Total Ozone Mapping
Spectrometer (TOMS), a satellite-based monitoring instrument. The aerosol index tracks
the amount of airborne smoke and dust and is calculated from the optical depth, or the
amount of light that microscopic airborne particles absorb or reflect. The TOMS index
has been found to quite closely track particulate levels measured by ground-based pollution
monitors (Hsu et al. 1999). Ground monitor data are not available for Indonesia for this
period. The aerosol index runs from -2 to 7, with positive values representing absorbing
aerosols (dust and smoke); for positive values, a higher index indicates more smoke.11
The TOMS data contain daily aerosol measures (which are constructed from observations
taken over three days) for points on a 1◦ latitude by 1.25◦ longitude grid. Adjacent grid points
are approximately 175 kilometers (km) apart. The probe began collecting data in mid-1996,
and the data I use begin in September 1996. For each subdistrict, I calculate an interpolated
daily pollution measure that combines data from all TOMS grid points within a 100-km
radius of the geographic center of the subdistrict, weighted by the inverse distance between
the subdistrict and the grid point. The number of TOMS grid points that fall within the
catchment area of a subdistrict ranges from 1 and 6 and is on average 4. The mean distance
between a subdistrict’s center and the nearest grid point is 50 km. The monthly measure is
10

The Census covers 3962 subdistricts which make up 336 districts. For subdistricts dropped from the
sample, either the latitude and longitude could not be determined or there were no enumerated children for
more than 15% of the monthly observations due to missing data or very small subdistrict size. In addition,
I drop four districts that make up Madura since the East Javanese island received a large influx of return
migrants in 1999 (in response to ethnic violence against them in Kalimantan), and also Aceh province where
separatist violence is thought to have affected the quality of the Census enumeration. The results are robust
to dropping Irian Jaya, another area where unrest could have affected data quality.
11
Negative values represent non-absorbing particulates such as sulfates.

10

calculated as the median of the daily values, and I also consider the mean of the daily values
and the number of days that exceed a threshold value of 0.75.
Whereas there are over 3700 subdistricts in the data, there are only 226 unique pollution
grid points used. Interpolation adds spatial variation at a finer grain, but uncorrected
standard errors would nevertheless overestimate how much independent variation there is
in the pollution measure. Moreover, in addition to the non-independence of the pollution
variable that arises from interpolation, the actual pollution level is spatially correlated.
Therefore I allow for clustering of errors among observations within an island group by
month. There are ten island groups in the sample (Sumatra, Java, Sulawesi, Kalimantan,
Bali, West Nusa Tenggara, East Nusa Tenggara, Irian Jaya, Maluku, North Maluku).12
The estimating equation (3.2) includes pollution in the month of birth (Smokejt ) as well
as lags of Smokejt which measure exposure to pollution in utero, and leads which measure
exposure after birth. Note that Smokejt measures both prenatal and postnatal exposure,
with the balance depending on when in the calendar month an individual is born (the Census
did not collect the specific date of birth, only the month). It becomes difficult to separately
identify each lag and lead with precision, so the main specification uses an average of the
pollution level for the three months before the birth month (P renatalSmokejt ) and after
the birth month (P ostnatalSmokejt ). The population-weighted mean values of Smoke,
P renatalSmoke, and P ostnatalSmoke are 0.09, 0.10, and 0.07, as shown in Table 1. On
average, the pollution index exceeds 0.75 on 5% of days.
During the months of the fires, August to October 1997, the mean aerosol index for
Indonesia was 0.58. For the same months in 1996, the mean was 0.05. Similarly, the mean of
P renatalSmoke was 0.34 for the most affected cohorts (births in September 1997 to January
1998) while during the same months a year earlier, the mean was 0.04. These gaps are helpful
when interpreting the magnitudes of the regression coefficients and quantifying the impact
of the fires.
The intensity of smoke also varied across Indonesia. Figure 3a shows the coefficients on
12
The standard errors are almost identical if the standard errors are clustered on island, suggesting that
serial correlation is not a major concern. Using only 10 clusters is not advisable since “the cluster approach
may be quite unreliable except in the case where there are many groups,” (Donald and Lang 2007, p. 229).

11

island-specific month fixed effects for Kalimantan and Sumatra, which were the hardest hit
regions. The pollution was most severe during August to October 1997, both for Indonesia as a whole and in relative terms for Kalimantan and Sumatra, as shown. Kalimantan
experienced another episode of smoke in early 1998 after the rainy season ended.
Figure 3b plots the corresponding island-specific month effects with log cohort size as the
outcome variable. Intuitively, the identification strategy is to test whether in the areas most
affected by the pollution, the size of cohorts that were born around the time of the pollution
is abnormally low. The regression analysis uses not only this between-island variation but
also within-island variation. Even using just this coarse variation, one can see in the point
estimates the decline in cohort size for the affected island-months.

3.3

Other variables

Several other variables are used in the analysis either as controls or to examine differential
effects of pollution, i.e., as interaction terms. First, I construct a measure of the financial
crisis that hit Indonesia in late 1997. Cross-sectional variation in the crisis is measured as the
1996 to 1999 ratio of the median log food consumption per capita in a district. The variable
is constructed so that it is larger in areas hit harder by the crisis. The consumption data are
from the National Socioeconomic Survey (SUSENAS), a large household survey conducted
annually by the national statistics bureau. The survey is representative at the district rather
than subdistrict level, so data are aggregated to the district. The data appendix describes
in more detail how the consumption measure is constructed. The national consumer price
index for food is from the central bank and is used as a measure of temporal variation in the
crisis. The interaction of these two variables is the crisis measure.
The cross-sectional measure of consumption in 1996 is interacted with the pollution
variables to examine how the effects of pollution differ for richer and poorer areas. Measures
of the health care system, such as the number of doctors and maternity clinics per capita,
as well as the type of fuel people cook with are also used. These variables are from the 1996
Village Potential Statistics (PODES), a census of community characteristics. The PODES
has an observation for each of over 66,000 localities which I aggregate to the subdistrict level.
12

In the analyses that use data from the PODES or SUSENAS, the sample size is 63,158 since
some Census subdistricts could not be matched to the surveys.
To measure the extent of fires (as opposed to pollution) in an area, daily data on the
location of “hot spots” are used. The data are from the European Space Agency which
analyzed satellite measurements of thermal infrared radiation to locate fires. In addition, to
control for rainfall I use monthly rainfall totals from the Terrestrial Air Temperature and
Precipitation data set and match each subdistrict to the nearest node on the rainfall data
set’s 0.5◦ latitude by 0.5◦ longitude grid. Finally, I use additional variables from the Census
including mother’s education and whether a locality is rural or urban.

4

Results

4.1

Relationship between exposure to smoke and mortality

Table 2, column 1, presents the relationship between cohort size and exposure to smoke. The
independent variables are Smoke, which is pollution in the month of birth, P renatalSmoke
which is pollution in the three months before birth, and P ostnatalSmoke which is pollution
in the three months after birth. The results suggest that prenatal exposure to pollution
decreases the survival rate of children. P renatalSmoke has a coefficient of -0.035 that is
statistically significant at the 1% level. The coefficient for Smoke is very close to 0, while the
coefficient for P ostnatalSmoke is -0.014 though statistically insignificant. Standard errors
are clustered within an island-month.13 In column 2, when P renatalSmoke is the only
variable in the regression (besides fixed effects), the coefficient is similar to that in column
1.14
The regressions are weighted by population, but as a specification check, the unweighted
regression is shown in column 3. The results are similar, with coefficients and standard errors
that are larger in magnitude. The larger standard errors suggest that, given heteroskedas13

The standard error is 0.014 if one clusters on island instead of island-month.
See Table A1 in the appendix for an instrumental variable estimate of the effect of P renatalSmoke on
cohort size. The instrument for P renatalSmoke is a dummy for Kalimantan or Sumatra interacted with a
dummy for September 1997 to January 1998. This difference-in-differences estimate, which uses only coarse
variation in pollution attributable to the fires, is -0.037.
14

13

ticity, weighting by population improves efficiency. The other rationale for weighting is that
the dependent variable measures proportional rather than absolute changes in cohort size.
Columns 4 and 5 consider alternative monthly pollution measures, first, the mean rather
than median of the daily pollution values and, second, the proportion of days with high
pollution (aerosol index above 0.75). Mean pollution gives nearly identical results as the
median value, with postnatal exposure now having a negative impact on cohort size that is
marginally significant. For the proportion of days with high pollution, the point estimate
implies that when there are 3 additional high-smoke days in a month (an increase of 10
percentage points), cohort size decreases by 0.85%.
Exposure to pollution in utero is associated with a decrease in fetal, infant, and child
survival. To assess the aggregate magnitude of the effect, note that P renatalSmoke was
higher by 0.30 during September 1997 to January 1998 compared to the same calendar
months a year earlier; this five-month period are the cohorts for whom P renatalSmoke
includes a month during the fires. Multiplying that gap by the coefficient of -0.035 implies
that the fires led to a 1.1% decrease in cohort size. A more precise way to estimate the total
effect is to use the coefficient for P renatalSmoke and calculate what the population would
have been for each subdistrict if during the period during and immediately after the fires,
P renatalSmoke had taken on its value from 12 months earlier. Aggregated over the five
months for the 3751 subdistricts, this calculation similarly implies a population decline of
1.2%, or 15,600 missing children.15 Indonesia’s baseline under-3 mortality rate was roughly
60 per 1000 live births at this time.16 If the effect of pollution was due exclusively to infant
and child deaths, the estimates would represent a 20% effect; if half of the effect was due to
fetal deaths, the coefficient would imply an 10% effect on infant and child mortality.
The welfare implications of pollution-induced mortality depend on the counterfactual of
how long individuals otherwise would have lived. About 1% of children in Indonesia who
survive until age 3 die by age 5. Thus, if one wanted to attribute the 1.2% effect of the fires
15

The estimates using high-smoke days imply a 1.0% aggregate effect. (The mean of the prenatal highsmoke variable is 0.131 during the 1997-8 episode and 0.006 for the same calendar months a year earlier, and
the coefficient in Table 2, column 4, is -0.085.)
16
The government estimates of under-1 and under-5 mortality rates at this time are 5% and 7%, respectively. I assume that half of deaths between age 1 and 5 occur before age 3.

14

to “harvesting,” all deaths between age 3 and 5 would have to have been pushed forward to
the time of the fires. Moreover, by most standards, the shortening of children’s lives by even
a few years is a significant welfare loss.
Figure 4 shows the nonparametric relationship between third-trimester exposure and
cohort size. The effect of pollution is linear for the most part. There appears to be a
somewhat steeper relationship at high levels of pollution, but the data are sparse in this
region. The nonlinearities are statistically insignificant when estimated parametrically with
a spline or quadratic term.
The next regressions use the pollution level in each of the three months preceding and
following birth, rather than aggregated for a quarter. Table 2, column 6, reports the results using the median pollution level. For prenatal exposure (lags of Smoke), the effect is
strongest two months before the month of birth. For postnatal exposure (leads of Smoke),
the effect is strongest immediately after birth, though the estimates are imprecise. The next
two columns repeat the exercise using the month’s mean pollution and the proportion of
days that have high pollution. The general pattern of the point estimates for postnatal
pollution remains the same, but the pattern for prenatal exposure is a bit different. For
the mean pollution level or number of high-smoke days (columns 7 and 8), exposure in the
month immediately before the month of birth now has the strongest negative relationship
with cohort size. One interpretation is that at different points during gestation, fetuses are
more vulnerable to sustained exposure to pollution versus extreme levels of pollution. A
more likely interpretation is that there is not enough precision to determine at this level of
detail how the timing of exposure affects survival.17 Thus, for the rest of the analysis, I focus
on the three-month measures of prenatal and postnatal exposure. The results are similar
using two-month measures.
17

The month-by-month patterns, unlike the results with the three-month measures, are somewhat sensitive
to using a different sample period or a different threshold for high-smoke days, for example.

15

4.2

Effect of smoke on mortality versus alternative hypotheses

The results in Table 2 suggest that exposure to smoke in utero causes early-life mortality.
This section considers other possible explanations for the results.
Migration
The Census identifies respondents by their subdistrict of current residence, but exposure to
pollution depends on where the family resided during the fires. Migration could be a reason
that cohorts with the highest prenatal exposure to pollution are smaller. Women who were in
the third trimester of pregnancy during the fires could have been especially likely to migrate
away from affected areas, either while pregnant or after giving birth. Fortunately, the Census
collects information on the district (though not subdistrict) where an individual was born
and where he or she lived five years earlier that enables one to probe this concern.18
To examine the extent of pollution-induced migration that occurs after birth, I repeat
the main analysis by district of birth. Cohort size is aggregated to the district level, and the
pollution measure for the district is a population-weighted average of the subdistrict measure.
The regression is weighted by the district population in the year preceding the sample period.
For comparison, column 1 of Table 3 presents results by district of residence, and column 2
presents results by district of birth. The results are nearly identical to each other, as well as
to the subdistrict-level analysis, in terms of both point estimates and precision. Betweendistrict migration after the birth of the infant is not the likely explanation for the relationship
between pollution and cohort size.
This finding does not rule out pollution-induced migration that takes place before the
infant is born. If some women spent most of their third trimester of pregnancy in the hardesthit areas but migrated away before giving birth, then neither place of residence in 2000 nor
place of birth would accurately reflect the fetus’s location during the fires. While the Census
did not ask respondents where they resided in August to October 1997, it did ask where
they lived in 1995. As long as people do not migrate across districts repeatedly, this measure
should be a good proxy for where pollution-induced migrants lived at the time of the fires.
18

For 9% of the sample, district of residence differs from district of birth, for 7% it differs from mother’s
residence five years earlier, and for 12% it differs from one or the other.

16

To test for migration that occurs before birth, I match infants to their mothers as described
in the data appendix and repeat the estimate by the district where the mother resided in
1995. The results, shown in column 3, are unchanged from the earlier estimates. In sum,
migration, either before or after birth, cannot easily account for the negative relationship
between exposure to pollution and cohort size.19
Fertility
The empirical approach interprets decreases in ln(CohortSize) as increases in early-life
deaths, but there would also be fewer survivors if the number of births decreased. It seems
unlikely that conceptions declined nine months before the fires with a spatial pattern matching the pollution, but this omitted variable concern also can be tested more directly by
constructing a measure of predicted births. First, I measure the percentage of women of
each age who give birth, using a time period not in the sample (namely, the youngest cohorts in the Census, those born in 1999 and 2000). I then apply these birth rates to the
demographic composition of each district-month in the sample. This gives a predicted number of births based on demographic shifts. (See the data appendix for further details.) Table
4, column 1, shows the results when ln(P redictedBirths) is included as a control variable.
The coefficient of survivors on births is predicted to be slightly less than 1. Because the measure is noisy especially after conditioning on subdistrict and month indicators, the estimate
is likely to suffer from attenuation bias. The estimated coefficient on predicted births is less
than but statistically indistinguishable from 1. More importantly, the coefficients on the pollution variables are essentially unchanged with this control variable included. Fluctuations
in fertility, at least those caused by demographic shifts, do not appear to be a confounding
factor in the analysis.20
19

Within-district migration is unlikely to be driving the results since there is very little within-district
variation in pollution, and most of it derives from interpolation so is noisy. In a model with district-month
fixed effects, the coefficient for P renatalSmoke is -0.013, smaller than in the main specification (Table 2,
column 1), and imprecise, suggesting that between-district variation is dominant in the main estimates.
20
Table A2 addresses another potential concern about fertility, namely that the seasonality of births or
deaths could differ for areas more affected by the pollution, generating a spurious result. As shown in
columns 4 and 5, the results are robust to restricting the sample to the months with high P renatalSmoke
plus the same calendar months one year earlier.

17

Preterm births
Another concern is that the missing children are not deaths but instead reflect changes in the
duration of pregnancies. In particular, exposure to pollution may have induced preterm delivery which is often associated with traumatic pregnancies. The reason this mechanism could
conceivably generate the results is that it is prenatal exposure that has a strong negative
relationship with cohort size. Consider August 1997, the month the fires started. Pollution
levels were high in August but the value of P renatalSmoke in August is low since there
was no significant smoke in May, June, or July. In September, in contrast, P renatalSmoke
is high since it incorporates the pollution in August. If infants due in September were instead born in August, then births would have shifted from a high-P renatalSmoke month to
a low-P renatalSmoke month, generating a negative relationship between P renatalSmoke
and cohort size that is unrelated to mortality. To test the preterm-birth hypothesis, I repeat
the analysis excluding August 1997 from the sample. If the above hypothesis were correct,
the coefficient on P renatalSmoke would become less negative (and the coefficient on Smoke
would become more negative) compared to the baseline results. As shown in Table 4, column
2, this does not occur. The coefficients are nearly identical between the full sample and the
subsample, contrary to what one would expect if the pollution had induced preterm births
but had not affected infant survival.21
According to the results of this test, the effect of pollution on cohort size is not due to
preterm births instead of being due to fetal and infant deaths. However, pollution may have
caused infant deaths precisely by inducing premature births (which put infants at greater
risk of death); that is, preterm delivery is potentially an important channel through which
exposure to pollution led to mortality.
Financial crisis
The Indonesian financial crisis began shortly after the 1997 fires, as shown in Figure 5, so
a concern is that the analysis is attributing to air pollution deaths that were caused by the
21

Table A2 restricts or expands the sample to other time periods, and the results are robust to this change.
One noteworthy finding is that the estimated effect of P renatalSmoke is smaller when the window extends
more than 8 months after the fires, suggesting that the fires may have reduced fertility.

18

crisis. To test this alternative hypothesis, a measure of the financial crisis is added to the
model. No monthly subdistrict-specific data on the crisis were collected, to my knowledge, so
I construct a measure of the crisis by interacting a cross-sectional measure, the inverse ratio of
median income (consumption) at the height of the crisis in 1999 to median income before the
crisis in 1996, and a time-series measure, the consumer price index for food. The regression
results can be anticipated by noting that the cross-sectional correlation between the crisis
measure and pollution in September 1997 (peak of the fires) is 0.03; the spatial patterns
of the crisis are not similar to the spatial patterns of pollution. For regressions that use
variables from the SUSENAS or PODES surveys, a slightly smaller sample of subdistricts is
used due to data availability. Table 4, column 3, shows the regression results for the baseline
model without additional regressors and confirms that the subsample is similar to the full
sample, with a coefficient on P renatalSmoke of -0.032. Column 4 shows the results when the
crisis variable contemporaneous to the month of birth is included as a control variable. The
estimated effect of P renatalSmoke remains -0.032. The crisis measure has been normalized
to have a mean of zero and standard deviation of one for the sample, so the coefficient implies
that a one standard deviation increase in the crisis is associated with a 4.9% smaller cohort,
though the coefficient is statistically insignificant (and moreover could be due to migration
rather than mortality).22,23
Effect of pollution versus effect of fires or drought
Another interpretation of the results is that they represent reduced-form mortality effects of
the fires rather than effects of specifically air pollution from the fires. The regressor is the
pollution level, but the smoke affected places nearby the sites of fires, and the fires could
have caused mortality through income effects, degraded food supply, and other channels. To
separate the effect of pollution from other effects of the fires, I use data on where precisely
the fires occurred. I calculate the number of fire-days occurring in or near a subdistrict based
22

Since the crisis accelerated a few months after the fires, I also estimated models that control for the
crisis measure for the three months following the month of birth. This generates more variation in the crisis
measure during the period of interest. The estimated effect of P renatalSmoke remains unchanged.
23
Rukumnuaykit (2003) finds a 3% increase in infant mortality in 1997-8 in the Indonesia Family Life
Survey, which is interpreted as due to the financial crisis, drought and smoke.

19

on satellite data on “hot spot” locations and durations. Fire-days is the duration of each
fire summed over all fires within 50 km of the subdistrict center. First, I examine the effects
of pollution in areas that did not experience extensive fires. In essence, the identification
comes from fires in neighboring areas and which way the winds blew the pollution. In Table
4, column 5, the sample is restricted to subdistricts where fewer than 20 fire-days occurred
over the sample period, which eliminates 22% of subdistricts, predominantly in Kalimantan
and Sumatra.24 The coefficient on P renatalSmoke on log cohort size remains -0.035 for
these areas which experienced only the pollution from the fires. Next, I include measures of
fire prevalence as regressors. The number of fire-days is a highly skewed variable, so I use
two indicator variables, one for whether there were any fire-days in the subdistrict-month
(sample mean of 0.16) and a second for whether there were intense fires, defined as at least
10 fire-days during the month (sample mean of 0.03). In column 6, the fires variable and
intense fires variable in the month of birth, averaged over the three months before birth
(prenatal exposure), and averaged over the three months after birth (postnatal exposure)
are included as regressors. The effect of P renatalSmoke is -0.032, nearly identical to earlier
estimates, which supports the interpretation that air pollution is the cause of the increase in
early-life mortality. There is also some evidence that intense fires in the month of birth are
associated with a decrease in cohort size, suggesting that fires may have an additional effect
on survival (or migration) through channels besides pollution. The effect size is relatively
small. The intense fires variable is larger by 0.09 during the 1997 episode compared to a
year earlier, so the coefficient of -0.028 implies that intense fires are associated with a 0.25%
decrease in cohort size.
Another hypothesis is that the effects are due not to pollution but to drought. There was
below-normal rainfall throughout Indonesia in 1997, not just in areas affected by pollution,
so given that month fixed effects are included, drought seems unlikely to be driving the
results. One can test directly for the effects of drought conditions, and I do so in a way
that stacks the cards in favor of finding that drought is driving the results. Monthly rainfall
24
Because of measurement error in the hotspot data, eliminating any subdistrict with at least 1 fire-day
would eliminate over two thirds of subdistricts, which is inconsistent with the actual geographic extent of
the fires. Fewer than 22% of subdistricts were probably affected, so the results shown are conservative. They
are similar if other thresholds are chosen.

20

for the subdistrict is measured relative to the 1990–5 average for that calendar month, and
I construct the subdistrict-level mean for the months of June to November 1997, when the
drought occurred. The mean of this variable is 0.48. I then control for this measure of
rainfall interacted with an indicator for being in a birth cohort between September 1997
and January 1998. In other words, the drought is assumed to affect specifically the cohorts
that I find are harmed by the pollution. As shown in Table 4, column 7, the coefficients
for the pollution variables are largely unaffected when the rainfall variable is included as a
control. The coefficient for rainfall is statistically insignificant and quantitatively small. The
results are similar controlling for contemporaneous rainfall in the month or rainfall with a
one to nine-month lag. One particular concern is that drought might reduce fertility, but
the drought began only in June, and the affected cohorts were conceived by April. That
said, when rainfall nine months prior to birth is added as a control variable, again, rainfall
has a small and insignificant effect on cohort size, and the effect of prenatal pollution is
unchanged. The changes in cohort size do not seem to be due to rainfall shortages.25

4.3

Effects by gender and income

Gender
This section examines how the mortality effects of pollution vary across groups. I first test
whether there are differential effects for boys and girls. Table 5, column 1, reports results
for a model in which the number of surviving boys and girls are totaled separately, each
observation is a subdistrict-month-gender, and the three pollution variables are interacted
with a dummy for male. The coefficients are imprecise but follow an interesting pattern.
The male interaction terms are positive for contemporaneous and postnatal smoke, but
negative for prenatal smoke. The more negative effect for boys in utero (30% larger effect) is
consistent with findings in the literature that male fetuses are less physiologically robust than
female fetuses and have more delayed lung development (Hassold, Quillen, and Yamane 1983,
25

Most of the variation in rainfall is absorbed by the month fixed effects. The results show that the residual
variation in rainfall cannot explain the “missing children,” but the findings should not be interpreted as
showing that rainfall has no effect on fertility or mortality. The 1997 drought may have had an Indonesiawide effect.

21

Jakobovits 1991). The more negative effect for girls in the month of birth and after birth
could reflect physiological differences, but it is also consistent with gender discrimination. If
parents are more likely to take steps to minimize a newborn son’s exposure to pollution or to
seek medical treatment for his respiratory infection, for example, then one would expect the
effects of postnatal pollution to be stronger for girls. However, these interpretations should
be treated with caution since the gender differences are not statistically significant.
Income
The next estimates test whether the effects of pollution are more pronounced in poorer
places. This type of heterogeneity could arise if the poor effectively are exposed to more
pollution, for example because they spend more time outdoors doing strenuous work or are
less likely to have temporarily evacuated the area. It could also arise if the same amount of
effective pollution leads to bigger health effects for the poor, for example because they have
lower baseline health, making them more sensitive to pollution or have less access to health
care to treat the health problems caused by the pollution.
Column 2 of Table 5 uses food consumption as a proxy for income to examine this hypothesis, interacting the pollution measures with a dummy variable for whether the district’s
median log consumption in 1996 is above the 50th percentile among all subdistricts. All three
of Smoke, P renatalSmoke, and P ostnatalSmoke are associated with smaller cohorts for
the bottom half of the consumption distribution, and the interaction terms for the top half
of the distribution are large and positive. The model estimated in column 2 appears to
be misspecified, however. The weighted average of the coefficients for the bottom and top
halves of the distribution would be more negative than the average effect found earlier. The
reason is that month effects vary significantly with income. As has been documented in the
demography literature, seasonality in fertility tends to be stronger and qualitatively different
in poorer areas (Lam and Miron 1991).
Thus, column 3 includes separate month fixed effects for the top and bottom halves of the
consumption distribution. The results are qualitatively similar to those in column 2. The
effect of prenatal exposure is large and negative when consumption is below the median.

22

In these areas, postnatal exposure is also statistically significant, with an effect size about
60% that of prenatal exposure. Each of the interaction coefficients for districts with above
median consumption is positive, and in the case of P renatalSmoke, significant at the 1%
level. The effect of a one unit change in P renatalSmoke is -0.06 for the top half of the
distribution and -0.13, or over twice as large, for the bottom half. Average log consumption
is 0.4 log points larger in the top half of the distribution compared to the bottom half, so
another way to view the results is that when consumption increases by 50% (e0.4 ), the effect
size decreases by 50%.
The fact that seasonal patterns in cohort size differ by income suggests that including
separate month effects for the two halves of the consumption distribution might be the
preferred specification even for estimating the average effect. In addition, for the reasons
explained by Deaton (1995), given the heterogeneous effects the average effect should be
calculated by separately estimating the effect by consumption level and then averaging.
This amounts to averaging the coefficients in column 3, weighted by the population in each
half of the consumption distribution. As shown in column 4, the average effect for prenatal
smoke is then -0.090 and the coefficient for postnatal smoke is -0.035, both considerably
larger than seen earlier in Table 2.
Finally, I further break down the income distribution into quartiles (and include monthquartile fixed effects). Column 5 shows the separate coefficients by quartile, estimated as
one regression. The point estimate on P renatalSmoke becomes more negative moving from
higher to lower quartiles. The results are not very precise, though, and the P renatalSmoke
coefficients for different quartiles are not statistically distinguishable from one another. The
coefficients for the other smoke variables are also imprecise, especially for the bottom two
quartiles, and the point estimates do not monotonically decline with consumption. Aboveversus below-median consumption, as opposed to a linear interaction term, is therefore used
below to parsimoniously characterize the heterogeneous effects by income.

23

Effects by urbanization, wood-stove use, health care, and mother’s education
There are several possible reasons for the income gradient in the effects of pollution, and this
subsection tests some hypotheses. The evidence presented here is merely suggestive since
the measures used could be correlated with omitted variables and since data are available to
test only a limited number of hypotheses.
One possibility is that urban areas experience smaller effects from the fires than rural
areas, and it is this fact that generates the heterogeneity by income. Urbanization would only
be a proximate cause, but one might think that in urban areas, housing stock is less permeable
to pollution, health care is better, there is less outdoor work, or there are more effective
public advisories urging people to stay indoors, for example. On the other hand, pollution
from the fires may have been particularly noxious in cities where it mixed with industrial
pollution from cars and factories. Column 1 of Table 6 interacts the pollution measures with
the proportion of the subdistrict population that lives in urban localities (based on those
born in the year before the sample period). Only the coefficients for P renatalSmoke and
its interaction terms are reported, but Smoke, P ostnatalSmoke and their interactions are
also included in the regressions. The effects of pollution do not vary by urbanization level,
suggesting that the offsetting effects described above may have canceled each other out. In
unreported results, when the sample is divided into infants born to mothers who work in
agriculture, work in other industries, or do not work, it does not appear that children whose
mothers work in agriculture experience larger effects.
Next I test whether the effects depend on the prevalence of wood-burning stoves. If the
health impact of pollution is convex in exposure, those who have daily exposure to indoor
air pollution could suffer more acutely from the wildfires. For each village or town, data are
available on whether the majority of people used wood or other biomass as their primary
cooking fuel in 1996. I construct for each subdistrict the population-weighted average of this
measure, which serves as a crude measure of the proportion of people in the subdistrict who
use wood as their cooking fuel. The mean of the variable is 0.64. As shown in column 2
of Table 6, wood fuel use is strongly associated with more negative effects from any given
level of exposure to the wildfire smoke. A 20 percentage point decrease in wood fuel use

24

reduces the net effect of prenatal pollution by 0.03. By comparison, moving from the bottom
half to the top half of the consumption distribution (50% increase in consumption) reduces
the effect of prenatal pollution by 0.07. The obvious caveat to these results is that use of
wood-burning stoves could be proxying for an omitted variable.
I also examine whether the effects vary with the availability of health care in the area. A
good health care system could lead to improved baseline health of mother and child through
prenatal care and to better medical treatment of morbidities caused by the pollution, for
example. Table 6, columns 3 to 4, present the results when interactions of the pollution
measures with maternity clinics and doctors per capita are successively included. The per
capita measures, which are for 1996, have been normalized to be mean 0, standard deviation
1. In areas with more maternity clinics or doctors, pollution has a significantly smaller effect
on cohort size. The net coefficient for P renatalSmoke is smaller by 0.03 in an area with one
standard deviation above the average number of maternity clinics compared to the average
area, and smaller by 0.05 in an area with one standard deviation above average doctors per
capita. These results are similar to the those of Frankenberg (1995). She examines withinvillage changes in the health sector between 1983 and 1986 and finds that infant mortality
decreases when a village acquires more maternity clinics or doctors.
In column 5, the interactions with wood fuel use, doctors, and maternity clinics are estimated in a single regression. The effects of in utero pollution continue to be considerably
larger when wood fuel use is higher. In addition, the interaction terms for maternity clinics and doctors remain positive and, for maternity clinics, statistically significant, though
smaller in magnitude than when estimated separately. What is as noteworthy is that these
interaction terms do not fully explain the differential effects by income.
Table 7 examines how the effects vary by mother’s education. Mother’s education is
important per se as a factor that might affect children’s health, and it is also the best
available individual-level (i.e., Census) measure of SES. I match each infant to his or her
mother and create a dummy variable for whether the mother has completed junior high.
The sample mean is 0.38. In column 1, there are two observations for each subdistrictmonth, the number of surviving children for high-education and for low-education mothers.

25

The three pollution variables are interacted with an educated-mother dummy, as are the
month and subdistrict dummies. The main effects for prenatal pollution remains negative
and statistically significant. The interaction terms are small and insignificant. Surprisingly,
the mortality effects of pollution do not seem to vary by mother’s education. Next I examine
whether differences in maternal education across areas explain why the effects of pollution
are smaller in richer areas. In column 2, the pollution variables are interacted with the
percentage of children in the subdistrict born to educated mothers. The regression is fully
interacted; that is, month fixed effects are interacted with the subdistrict-level measure of
maternal education. The interaction of the pollution variables with mother’s education are
positive but not large and generally not statistically significant, though there is some evidence
that postnatal pollution has detrimental effects in areas with fewer educated mothers. In
column 3, I also include the pollution variables interacted with a dummy for above-median
consumption, and interact the month effects with this consumption measure. Maternal
education does not seem to be what generates the heterogeneity in effect size between more
and less developed areas.
The factors examined in this section are unable to fully explain why prenatal exposure to
pollution has a smaller effect on mortality in higher income areas. Even after controlling for
wood-stove pollution, access to health care, and maternal education, there remains a positive
coefficient for the interaction of pollution and high consumption. With better measures of
indoor pollution, health care, and parental education, one might be able to explain more
of the heterogeneity by income. There are also several channels not tested here. Mothers
and newborns in poor areas might be less healthy to begin with because of poor nutrition.
Dwellings in poor areas might be more permeable to smoke, allowing pollution from the
wildfires to contaminate indoor air quality. Behavioral responses might differ by income,
with those in richer areas being more likely to stay indoors, avoid strenuous activity or
temporarily evacuate to less affected areas, for example.
26

26

But regardless of the underlying

In unreported results, the effect of prenatal smoke is smaller in areas where more houses are constructed
with bricks and concrete (compared to wood, palm leaves, etc.). Worse road quality, which could be a proxy
for higher costs of evacuating, is also associated with larger mortality effects of pollution. Another approach
to measuring evacuation would be to use distance to the nearest low-smoke area, but in practice this variable
is too highly correlated with the pollution level to be useful as an interaction term. Use of surgical masks
might also vary with income. Kunii et al. (2002) surveyed 532 people during the fires and found that use

26

reason, the differential effects by income suggest that the mortality costs of pollution are
disproportionately borne by the poor.27

5

Conclusion

Air pollution from land fires that engulfed Indonesia in late 1997 led to over 15,600 child,
infant and fetal deaths, or a 1.2 percentage point decrease in survival for the affected cohorts.
This paper exploits the abrupt timing of the pollution and the spatial variation across Indonesia to identify these effects. The paper presents evidence on the timing of exposure that
is most harmful: in utero exposure to pollution has the largest effect on survival. At levels
that are common both indoors and outdoors in many poor countries, particulate matter has
a sizeable effect on early-life mortality.
Questions in developing countries sometimes go unstudied because data are not available.
Research on infant mortality effects of air pollution in the United States makes use of linked
natality-mortality records and ground-based pollution monitors. No such data exist for
Indonesia. To overcome this obstacle, this paper uses an unconventional methodology. First,
child, infant and fetal death are inferred from “missing children” in the 2000 Indonesian
Census. While the indirect method could introduce potential problems, the paper is able to
show that migration, changes in gestation length, and other potential concerns do not seem
to be driving the results. Second, smoke data from a satellite-based spectrometer are used
in lieu of ground-monitor pollution data. Because of the satellite’s global coverage, proxy
measures of particulate matter are available for even remote, underdeveloped areas.
There are at least two broader lessons about environmental issues in developing countries
worth highlighting. First, environmental damage—and the accompanying health effects—
are yet an additional consequence of weak governance. Corruption, which is prevalent in
Indonesia as in many low–income countries, was an important factor behind the catastrophic
of surgical masks was associated with fewer respiratory problems, but most medical experts believe that
surgical masks are ineffective at blocking out fine particles.
27
The income gradient in health for survivors could go in the same direction or, if the weakest individuals
were “harvested,” in the opposite direction. Also, note that if richer people have less severe health effects
because they are spending more money on health care or smokeless cooking stoves, then the income gradient
in the welfare effects of pollution might be smaller than the income gradient in the health effects.

27

fires. The Suharto government turned a blind eye when large firms started fires in violation
of the law. The Minister of Forestry tried to hold firms accountable. In September 1997
he named 176 firms suspected of illegally setting fires. However, he quickly lost his job.
Suharto, in a move that was brazen even by his formidable standards of crony capitalism,
installed his golfing partner Bob Hasan—a timber magnate—as the new Minister of Forestry
in early 1998. Hasan was outspoken in blaming small farmers for the fires and exonerating
large firms, including his own. In virtually no cases were firms punished for starting illegal
blazes.
The findings of the paper highlight a second link between the environment and economic
development: the health burden from pollution seems to fall disproportionately on the poor.
The estimated effect size is much larger in poorer areas than in richer areas. There is
suggestive evidence that the heterogeneity could be because people in underdeveloped areas
use wood-burning stoves and face a compounded effect of indoor plus outdoor air pollution.
Part of the explanation also may be less access to health care. An interesting direction for
further research would be to compare the early-life mortality effects in richer neighboring
countries that were affected by Indonesia’s pollution such as Malaysia and Singapore. Why
the health effects of pollution vary with income remains an open question—and an area to
pursue to better understand how environmental degradation creates unique challenges in
developing countries.

28

Appendix 1: Verification that Census counts track infant mortality
This section verifies that the population counts from the Census closely track data on births
and infant deaths from the 2002 Demographic and Health Survey (DHS). The log of the
number of surviving children should increase one-for-one with the log of total births and
should decrease one-for-one with the infant mortality rate (as can be derived with a few
steps of algebra). Thus, I estimate
ln(CohortSize)JT = α + γ1 ln(Births)JT + γ2 IM RJT + εJT

where J is a province and T is a quarter, Births is the number of children born in the
province-quarter, and IM R (infant mortality rate) is the fraction of those children who
died by June 2000 when the Census was taken. Very few births per subdistrict-month are
sampled in the DHS, so the validation exercise aggregates to provinces and quarters and
uses a longer panel from 1988 to 1999 to gain power.28 Note that ln(Births) varies not only
with the number of births in the province-quarter but also with the DHS sampling rate for
the province. The IM R variable should not be affected by this problem.
Table A3 presents the results of this validation exercise. In column 1, the coefficient
on IM R is -1.3 and the coefficient on ln(Births) is 1.6, which are surprisingly close to the
predictions of -1 and 1, given the crudeness of the exercise. In column 2, each observation is
a province-quarter-gender, and in column 3, a province-month. The coefficients remain on
the order of -1 and 1 but become smaller in magnitude, which is consistent with attenuation
bias from measurement error when smaller and hence noisier cell sizes are used. One cannot
reject that the estimated coefficients are 1 and -1 at standard significance levels. In short,
variation in population counts in the Census indeed tracks variation in the number of births
and, importantly for this study, variation in the infant mortality rate.

28

Ideally, the DHS would have recorded pregnancies that ended in fetal deaths. Some of the missing
children in the Census are not among the live births measured by the DHS. Also, ideally, the validation
exercise would use the same unit of observation and sample period as the main analysis, but the survey data
are then too noisy to obtain meaningful results.

29

Appendix 2: Data Sources and Description
Census data
Indonesia conducted a Census of its population in June 2000. The dependent variable, the
cohort size for a subdistrict-month, is the count of all enumerated people born in a given
month who reside in the subdistrict. The specific date of birth is not available. The population weight for each subdistrict is the total number of people born in 1994 to 1996 enumerated
in the Census.
I link mothers to children for the analyses by mother’s 1995 residence and education and for
constructing the measure of predicted births. Using a household identifier, I link each child
to women who are 14 to 42 years older than the child. When there are multiple matches,
I give preference to household heads or spouses of heads and to women closer to the peak
of the fertility age distribution. To construct predicted fertility, I perform this matching
for children born in 1999 and 2000 (through May) and calculate the mother-child age gap.
Then for each age in months of women between 14 and 42, I calculate the number of children
these women give birth to divided by the total number of women of that age. This gives the
fertility rate (net of infant mortality) for each age. I make two adjustments to the fertility
rate. First, I smooth the distribution using values for the 4 ages in months before and after
each data point. Second, after the age of 38, I replace the estimate with a linear extrapolation
from the estimated value at age 38 to 0 at age 42 to correct for the fact that the matching
process mistakenly assigns grandmothers as mothers in some cases (giving an implausibly
high fertility rate for older ages). The next step is to calculate the number of women by
age for each district in the sample period, and multiply it by the age-specific fertility rate.
Summing across all the ages of women of childbearing age gives the predicted number of
births for each district-month in the sample.
TOMS pollution data
In addition to the information provided in the text, further details on the Total Ozone
Mapping Spectrometer can be found at http://toms.gsfc.nasa.gov.

30

Fire location data and rainfall data
The European Space Agency compiles the ATSR World Fire Atlas, a list of “hot spots”
(date, time, latitude and longitude) identified by nighttime infrared measurements by the
ATSR-2 instrument onboard the ERS-2 satellite. A hot spot corresponds to a reading of >
312 Kelvins at 3.7 micron wavelength. For each subdistrict-month, hot spot-days within 50
km of the subdistrict’s center are used to calculate the number of fire-days, or the sum over
discrete fires of the duration of the fire in days.
The rainfall data set, Terrestrial Air Temperature and Precipitation: Monthly and Annual
Time Series, is from the Center for Climatic Research, University of Delaware. The rainfall
measure for each node on a 0.5◦ latitude by 0.5◦ longitude grid is interpolated from 20
nearby weather stations using a spherical version of Shepard’s distance-weighting method.
The rainfall measure for a subdistrict uses the closest node.
SUSENAS data
I use household level data from the 1996 and 1999 SUSENAS core modules which aggregate
item-by-item consumption data to two categories, food and non-food. For each household,
per capita consumption is calculated weighting children by 0.75 and infants by 0.6 compared
to adults who are weighted by 1. The district log consumption measure is the median across
all households of log food consumption per capita. The survey is representative at the district
level, so I use district-level measures.
PODES data
The PODES is a census of all villages and towns in Indonesia. I use the population, fuel use,
and health facilities questions for 1996. One question asks what cooking fuel the majority
of the village uses, where I group the answers as wood fuel (wood plus other biomass)
or other (kerosene and gas). The population-weighted average of this indicator variable
across villages in a subdistrict is the fuel use variable. Health care measures are unweighted
per capita measures for the subdistrict, based on the reasoning that people have access to
facilities throughout the subdistrict.

31

References
Alexander, F., S. Patheal, A. Biondi, and Others (2001): “Transplacental Chemical
Exposure and Risk of Infant Leukemia with MLL Gene Fusion,” Cancer Research, 61(6),
2542–6.
Almond, D. (2006): “Is the 1918 Influenza Pandemic Over? Long-term Effects of In Utero
Influenza Exposure in the Post–1940 U.S. Population,” Journal of Political Economy,
114(3), 672–712.
Barber, C., and J. Schweithhelm (2000): Trial by Fire: Forest Fires and Forestry
Policy in Indonesia’s Era of Crisis and Reform. World Resources Institute, Washington,
DC.
Barker, D. (1990): “The Fetal and Infant Origins of Adult Disease,” British Medical
Journal, 301, 1111.
Berkowitz, G., M. Wolff, T. Janevic, I. Holzman, R. Yehuda, and P. Landrigan (2003): “The World Trade Center Disaster and Intrauterine Growth Restriction,”
Journal of the American Medical Association, 290(5), 595–6.
Bobak, M., and D. Leon (1992): “Air Pollution and Infant Mortality in the Czech
Republic, 1986–1988,” Lancet, 340, 1010–1014.
Case, A., D. Lubotsky, and C. Paxson (2002): “Economic Status and Health in Childhood: The Origins of the Gradient,” American Economic Review, 92(5), 1308–1334.
Chay, K., and M. Greenstone (2003a): “Air Quality, Infant Mortality, and the Clean
Air Act of 1970,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 10053.
(2003b): “The Impact of Air Pollution on Infant Mortality: Evidence from Geographic Variation in Pollution Shocks Induced by a Recession,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 118(3), 1121–1167.
Currie, J., and R. Hyson (1999): “Is the Impact of Health Shocks Cushioned by Socioeconomic Status? The Case of Low Birthweight,” American Economic Review, 89(2),
245–250.
Currie, J., and M. Neidell (2005): “Air Pollution and Infant Health: What Can We
Learn from California’s Recent Experience?,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(3),
1003–1030.
Deaton, A. (1995): “Data and Econometric Tools for Development Analysis,” in Handbook
of Development Economics, Volume III, ed. by J. Berhman, and T. Srinivasan, chap. 33,
pp. 1785–1882. Elsevier, Amsterdam.
Dejmek, J., S. Selevan, B. Benes, I. Solansky, and R. Sram (1999): “Fetal Growth
and Maternal Exposure to Particulate Matter During Pregnancy,” Environmental Health
Perspectives, 107, 475–480.

32

Donald, S. G., and K. Lang (2007): “Inference with Difference–in–Differences and Other
Panel Data,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 89(2), 221–233.
Emmanuel, S. (2000): “Impact to Lung Health of Haze from Forest Fires: The Singapore
Experience,” Respirology, 5(2), 175–182.
Ezzati, M., and D. Kammen (2002): “The Health Impacts of Exposure to Indoor Air
Pollution from Solid Fuels in Developing Countries: Knowledge, Gaps, and Data Needs,”
Environmental Health Perspectives, 110(11), 1–12.
Frankenberg, E. (1995): “The Effects of Access to Health Care on Infant Mortality in
Indonesia,” Health Transition Review, 5, 143–163.
Frankenberg, E., D. McKee, and D. Thomas (2004): “Health Consequences of Forest
Fires in Indonesia,” Demography, 42(1), 109–129.
Friedman, M., K. Powell, L. Hutwagner, L. Graham, and W. G. Teague (2001):
“Impact of Changes in Transportation and Commuting Behaviors During the 1996 Summer Olympic Games in Atlanta on Air Quality and Childhood Asthma,” Journal of the
American Medical Association, 285, 897–905.
Hassold, T., S. Quillen, and J. Yamane (1983): “Sex Ratio in Spontaneous Abortions,” Annals of Human Genetics, 47, 39–47.
Hatch, M., D. Warburton, and R. Santella (1990): “Polycyclic Aromatic
Hydrocarbon-DNA Adducts in Spontaneously Aborted Fetal Tissue,” Carcinogenesis, 11,
1673–5.
Heil, A., and J. Goldmammer (2001): “Smoke-Haze Pollution: A Review of the 1997
Episode in Southeast Asia,” Regional Environmental Change, 2(1), 24–37.
Her Majesty’s Public Health Service (1954): “Mortality and Morbidity During the
London Fog of December 1952,” Reports on Public Health and Medical Subjects.
Hsu, N., J. Herman, O. Torres, B. Holben, D. Tanre, T. Eck, A. Smirnov,
B. Chatenet, and F. Lavenu (1999): “Comparisons of the TOMS Aerosol Index
with Sunphotometer Aerosol Optical Thickness: Results and Applications,” Journal of
Geophysical Research, 104, 6269–6280.
Hueglin, C., C. Gaegauf, S. Kunzel, and H. Burscher (1997): “Characterization
of Wood Combustion Particles: Morphology, Mobility and Photoelectric Activity,” Environmental Science and Technology, 31, 3439–3447.
Huel, G., J. Godin, N. Frery, F. Girard, T. Moreau, C. Nessmann, and P. Blot
(1993): “Aryl Hydrocarbon Hydroxylase Activity in Human Placenta and Threatened
Preterm Delivery,” Journal of Exposure Analysis and Environmental Epidemiology, 3
(suppl. 1), 187–9.
Jakobovits, A. (1991): “Sex Ratio of Spontaneously Aborted Fetuses and Delivered
Neonates in Second Trimester,” European Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology and Reproductive Biology, 40, 211–213.
33

Kunii, O., S. Kanagawa, I. Yajima, Y. Hisamatsu, S. Yamamura, T. Amagai,
and I. Ismail (2002): “The 1997 Haze Disaster in Indonesia: Its Air Quality and Health
Effects,” Archives of Environmental Health, 57, 16–22.
Lam, D., and J. Miron (1991): “Seasonality of Births in Human Populations,” Social
Biology, 38(1–2), 51–77.
Lleras-Muney, A. (2006): “The Needs of the Army: Using Compulsory Relocation in the
Military to Estimate the Effect of Air Pollutants on Childrens Health,” Mimeo, Princeton
University.
Loomis, D., M. Castillejos, D. Gold, W. McDonnell, and V. Borja-Aburto
(1999): “Air Pollution and Infant Mortality in Mexico City,” Epidemiology, 10, 118–123.
MacKenzie, K., and D. Angevine (1981): “Infertility in Mice Exposed In Utero to
Benzo[a]pyrene,” Biology of Reproduction, 24, 83–191.
Marmot, M. G., G. D. Smith, S. Stansfeld, C. Patel, F. North, J. Head,
I. White, E. Brunner, , and A. Feeney (1991): “Health Inequalities among British
Civil Servants: The Whitehall II Study,” Lancet, pp. 1387–93.
Murphy, K. M., and R. H. Topel (2006): “The Value of Health and Longevity,” Journal
of Political Economy, 114(5), 871–904.
Ostermann, K., and M. Brauer (2001): “Air Quality During Haze Episodes and Its
Impact on Health,” in Forest Fires and Regional Haze in Southeast Asia, ed. by P. Eaton,
and M. Radojevic, chap. 10. Nova Science, Huntington, NY.
Perera, F., R. Whyatt, W. Jedrychowski, V. Raugh, D. Manchester, R. Santella, and R. Ottman (1998): “Recent Developments in Molecular Epidemiology: A
Study of the Effects of Environmental Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons on Birth Outcomes in Poland,” American Journal of Epidemiology, 147, 309–314.
Perera, F. P., W. Jedrychowski, V. Rauh, and R. M. Whyatt (1999): “Molecular Epidemiologic Research on the Effects of Environmental Pollutants on the Fetus,”
Environmental Health Perspectives Supplements, 107(suppl. 3), 451–60.
Pope, C. A., J. Schwartz, and M. Ransom (1992): “Daily Mortality and PM10 Pollution in Utah Valley,” Archives of Environmental Health, 15, 3–23.
Rabindran, S. (2001): “Essays in Empirical Environmental Economics: GIS–Econometric
Analysis of Indonesia’s Fires, Bolivia’s Deforestation and Mexico’s Trade with the United
States,” Ph.D. thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Ridgon, R., and E. Rennels (1964): “Effect of Feeding Benzpyrene on Reproduction in
the Rat,” Experientia, 4, 224–6.
Robinson, P. (1988): “Root-n Consistent Semiparametric Regressions,” Econometrica, 56,
931–954.

34

Ross, M. L. (2001): Timber Booms and Institutional Breakdown in Southeast Asia. Cambridge University, Cambridge, UK.
Rukumnuaykit, P. (2003): “Crises and Child Health Outcomes: The Impacts of Economic
and Drought and Smoke Crises on Infant Mortality and Birthweight in Indonesia,” Mimeo,
Michigan State.
Sastry, N. (2002): “Forest Fires, Air Pollution, and Mortality in Southeast Asia,” Demography, 39(1), 1–23.
Sen, A. (1992): “Missing Women,” British Medical Journal, 304, 586–87.
Smith, J. P. (1999): “Healthy Bodies and Thick Wallets: The Dual Relationship Between
Health and Economic Status,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 13(2), 145–166.
Tacconi, L. (2003): “Fires in Indonesia: Causes, Costs and Policy Implications,” Discussion Paper No. 38, Center for International Forestry Research (CIFOR).
Topinka, J., B. Binkova, G. Mrackova, and Others (1997): “Influence of GSTM1
and NAT2 Genotypes on Placental DNA Adducts in an Environmentally Exposed Population.,” Environmental and Molecular Mutagenics, 30(2), 184–95.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (2000): “Guidelines for Preparing Economic
Analyses,” EPA Report 240-R-00-003, Office of the Administrator.
Viscusi, W. K., and J. E. Aldy (2003): “The Value of a Statistical Life: A Critical
Review of Market Estimates Throughout the World,” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty,
27(1), 5–76.
Wang, X., H. Ding, L. Ryan, and X. Xu (1997): “Association between Air Pollution
and Low Birth Weight: A Community-Based Study,” Environmental Health Perspectives,
105, 514–520.

35

Figure 1: Rainfall at Palembang Airport meteorological station, South Sumatra, 1990-97

36

37

September 25, 1997

November 4, 1997

September 5, 1997

October 15, 1997

Figure 2: Satellite images of smoke over Indonesia

Figure 3a: Pollution by month and location

Figure 3b: Log cohort size by month and location

This figure plots coefficients and standard errors for a regression of (a) pollution and (b) log
cohort size on subdistrict and month fixed effects and island-specific month fixed effects for
Kalimantan and Sumatra. The month fixed effects for Kalimantan and Sumatra are plotted.
The vertical lines delineate the (a) three months of highest pollution and (b) six birth cohorts
that experienced high pollution in the month of birth or third trimester in utero.

38

Figure 4: Kernel regression of log cohort size on prenatal exposure to pollution

The solid line is the relationship between log cohort size and pollution (P renatalSmoke).
The dashed lines mark the bootstrapped 95% confidence interval, with errors clustered within
an island-month. The model estimated is a locally weighted non-parametric regression of
log cohort size on pollution conditional on linear year and district fixed effects, following
Robinson (1988). Log cohort size has been offset by a constant so that its value is 1 at an
aerosol index of 0.

39

ar

97

40
ar

98

ar

99

N

p99

9

ov
-9
9

Se

Ju
l-9

9

-9
9

n-

ay
-9

M
M

p98

8

ov
-9
8

Ja

N

Se

Ju
l-9

8

-9
8

n-

ay
-9

M
M

7

p97

ov
-9
7

Ja

N

Se

Ju
l-9

7

-9
7

n-

ay
-9

M
M

6

p96

ov
-9
6

Ja

N

Se

Ju
l-9

Consumer Price Index (Food)

Figure 5: Timing of the fires and the financial crisis

2.5

2

Wildfires

1.5

1

0.5

Table 1
Descriptive Statistics
Mean

Std. Dev.

Cohort size (for subdistrict-month)

95.6

89.7

Ln(cohort size)

4.8

.8

Smoke (median daily value for month)
Prenatal Smoke (Smoket-1,2,3)

.087
.095

.424
.330

Postnatal Smoke (Smoket+1,2,3)

.074

.342

Proportion of days with high smoke (aerosol index > .75)

.047

.154

Average smoke (daily values averaged for the month)

.120

.445

Mean of Smoke for Aug-Oct 1996

.048

.069

Mean of Smoke for Aug-Oct 1997

.578

.791

Mean of Prenatal Smoke for Sept 1996 - Jan 1997

.038

.052

Mean of Prenatal Smoke for Sept 1997 - Jan 1998

.341

.522

Fires (any fires)

.157

.364

Intense fires (number x duration of fires >= 10 fire-days)

.026

.157

Rainfall for June to November 1997 relative to 1990-95

.480

.241

Ln(median 1996 household food consumption)

10.52

.26

Cohort size variables

Pollution variables

Other variables

75th percentile

10.71

50th percentile

10.49

25th percentile

10.33

Median HH food consumption in 1996 / Median HH food
consumption in 1998

.742

.070

National consumer price index (for food)

1.131

.202

Urbanization

.57

.39

Wood as primary cooking fuel

.636

.413

Doctors per 1000 people

.161

.241

Maternity clinics per 1000 people

.031

.050

Educated mothers (completed junior high)

.386

.215

Notes: The sample consists of 67454 subdistrict-birthmonths from December 1996 to May 1998. Sample averages are weighted
by population (the number of people enumerated in the Census born in the year before the sample period), except for cohort
size for which the unweighted mean is shown. Cohort size is the number of people enumerated in the 2000 Census who were
born in a subdistrict in a given month. Smoke is the monthly median of the daily TOMS aerosol index which is interpolated
from TOMS grid points within 100 km of the subdistrict's geographic center and weighted by the inverse distance between the
grid point and subdistrict center. Prenatal and Postnatal Smoke are averages of Smoke for the three months before and after
the month of birth. Fire-days is calculated from European Space Agency hot spots within 50 km of the subdistrict's center.
Rainfall is measured at the nearest grid point on a 0.5 degree latitude/longitude grid and is the mean of 1997 rain relative to
1990-1995 for June to November. Urbanization is the subdistrict's percent of births in urban areas based on those born in 1994
to 1996 and uses an indicator in the Census of whether the respondent's locality is rural or urban. Educated mothers is the
percent of infants whose mother has completed junior high and is based on matching infants to mothers in the Census. Median
food consumption is a per capita measure for each district that uses data from the 1996 and 1999 SUSENAS household survey.
Consumer price index is from the Indonesian central bank. Health care variables are calculated for each subdistrict using the
1996 PODES (survey of village facilities). PODES and SUSENAS data are available for 63158 observations.

41

Table 2
Relationship Between Air Pollution and Cohort Size
Dependent variable: Log cohort size

Median

Median

(1)

(2)

Statistic used for smoke measures
% highMedian
Mean
smoke
Median
days

Mean

% highsmoke
days

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

-.010
(.020)

.001
(.009)

.018
(.014)

.035
(.036)

Smoket-1

-.010
(.009)

-.028 *
(.016)

-.069 *
(.040)

Smoket-2

-.023 ***
(.008)

-.006
(.013)

-.035
(.038)

Smoket-3

-.003
(.013)

-.005
(.015)

.005
(.030)

Smoket+1

-.010
(.009)

-.019
(.014)

-.030
(.031)

Smoket+2

-.005
(.008)

-.003
(.014)

-.034
(.034)

Smoket+3

.001
(.009)

-.001
(.012)

.010
(.031)

(3)

Smoke

-.0005
(.006)

Prenatal Smoke (Smoket-1,2,3)

-.035 *** -.032 *** -.048 *** -.032 **
(.012)
(.011)
(.015)
(.013)

-.085 **
(.033)

Postnatal Smoke (Smoket+1,2,3)

-.014
(.009)

-.042 *
(.025)

Observations
Weighted?
Subdistrict and month FEs?

-.005
(.008)

(4)

-.017
(.013)

-.001
(.007)

-.016 *
(.010)

67454
Y

67454
Y

67454
N

67454
Y

67454
Y

67454
Y

67454
Y

67454
Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Notes: Each observation is a subdistrict-month. Standard errors, in parentheses below the coefficients, allow for clustering at the islandmonth level. *** indicates p<.01; ** indicates p<.05, * indicates p<.10. Observations are weighted by the number of individuals
enumerated in the Census who reside in the subdistrict and were born in the year before the sample period, except in column 3 which is
unweighted.

42

Table 3
Distinguishing between Mortality and Migration
Dependent variable: Log cohort size
District of residence versus
birthplace versus mother's 1995 residence
Residence

Birthplace

Mother's 1995
residence

(1)

(2)

(3)

Smoke

-.002
(.006)

.002
(.006)

.002
(.006)

Prenatal Smoke

-.035 ***
(.012)

-.037 ***
(.012)

-.038 ***
(.012)

Postnatal Smoke

-.013
(.010)

-.015
(.010)

-.016
(.010)

Observations

5829

5829

5829

Fixed effects

month, district

month, district

month, district

Notes: Each observation is a district-month. Standard errors, in parentheses
below the coefficients, allow for clustering at the island-month level. ***
indicates p<.01; ** indicates p<.05, * indicates p<.10. Observations are weighted
by the number of individuals enumerated in the Census who reside in the district
and were born in the year before the sample period.

43

Table 4
Alternative Hypotheses
Dependent variable: Log cohort size
Control for
predicted
fertility

Excluding
August
1997

(1)

(2)

Smoke

.001
(.006)

.001
(.006)

.002
(.006)

Prenatal Smoke

-.035 ***
(.012)

-.036 ***
(.012)

Postnatal Smoke

-.014
(.009)

-.009
(.010)

Ln(Predicted Births)

.875
(.696)

SUSENAS Control for
and PODES financial
subsample
crisis
(3)

Excluding
Control for
areas with
fires
fires

(4)

(5)

(6)

.002
(.006)

.003
(.011)

.004
(.006)

.0010
(.006)

-.032 *** -.032 ***
(.011)
(.011)

-.035 **
(.018)

-.032 **
(.014)

-.032 **
(.013)

-.012
(.009)

.016
(.014)

-.005
(.011)

-.014
(.009)

Financial Crisis

-.012
(.009)

-.004
(.010)

Prenatal Any Fires

.007
(.017)

Postnatal Any Fires

-.004
(.014)

Intense Fires

-.028 *
(.016)
-.017
(.025)
-.021
(.029)

Prenatal Intense Fires
Postnatal Intense Fires
Rainfall

Subdistrict and month FEs?

(7)

-.049
(.038)

Any Fires

Observations

Control for
rainfall

-.023
(.033)
67454

63703

63158

63158

52646

67454

67454

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Notes: Each observation is a subdistrict-month. Standard errors, in parentheses below the coefficients, allow for clustering at the islandmonth level. *** indicates p<.01; ** indicates p<.05, * indicates p<.10. Observations are weighted by the number of individuals enumerated
in the Census who reside in the subdistrict and were born in the year before the sample period. Predicted Births is constructed using the
fertility rate by age and the number of women of different child-bearing ages within a district, as described in the data appendix.The financial
crisis variable is standardized to have a mean of 0 and standard deviation of 1 for the sample. Areas without fires are those with fewer than 20
fire-days over the entire period. Any Fires is an indicator of any fires and intense fires is an indicator of at least 10 fire-days in the month. The
rainfall variable is subdistrict-level rainfall for the 1997 drought months of June to November divided by the 1990-95 average for those
calendar months, interacted with a dummy for being in a birth cohort between September 1997 and January 1998.

44

Table 5
Effects by Gender and Income
Dependent variable: Log cohort size
By income (log consumption) of the district

By gender

<--------------------- one regression ----------------------->
Top quartile 3rd quartile 2nd quartile

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Bottom quart.

(5)

-.008
(.007)

-.060 ***
(.021)

-.024
(.016)

-.013
(.017)

-.004
(.009)

-.011
(.010)

-.028
(.024)

.002
(.045)

Prenatal Smoke

-.030 **
(.012)

-.158 ***
(.037)

-.129 ***
(.028)

-.090 ***
(.015)

-.058 ***
(.018)

-.076 ***
(.017)

-.094 **
(.047)

-.121 **
(.061)

Postnatal Smoke

-.019 *
(.010)

-.158 ***
(.027)

-.047 *
(.024)

-.035 **
(.019)

-.025
(.016)

-.040 ***
(.014)

-.046
(.032)

.009
(.052)

Male

.014 ***
(.003)

Smoke * Male

.016 ***
(.005)

Prenatal Smoke * Male

-.009
(.007)

Postnatal Smoke * Male

.010
(.006)

Smoke * High Consum.

.066 ***
(.021)

.017
(.014)

Prenatal Smoke * High Consum.

.127 ***
(.038)

.072 ***
(.027)

Postnatal Smoke * High Consum.

.161 ***
(.026)

.017
(.014)
63158

45

Smoke

Observations

134734

63158

Fixed effects included

subdistrict,
month

subdistrict,
month

63158

subdistrict,
subdistrict,
month * high month * high
cons.
cons.

<------------------- 63158 ----------------->
subdistrict, month*quartile of log consumption

Notes: Each observation is a subdistrict-month. Standard errors, in parentheses below the coefficients, allow for clustering at the island-month level. *** indicates
p<.01; ** indicates p<.05, * indicates p<.10. High consum. is an indicator that equals 1 if the district's median log food consumption is above the sample median.
Observations are weighted by the number of individuals enumerated in the Census who reside in the subdistrict and were born in the year before the sample
period. Column 4 reports the average of the coefficients in Column 3, weighted by the population in each half of the consumption distribution; the standard error
and the joint significance of the linear combination of coefficients is shown.

Table 6
Effects By Urbanization, Wood Fuel Use, and Health Care Sector
Dependent variable: Log cohort size
(2)

(1)
Prenatal Smoke
Prenatal Smoke * Urbanization

-.121 ***
(.028)
-.013
(.013)

Prenatal Smoke * Wood Fuel Use

.015
(.032)

(3)

(4)

-.115 ***
(.027)

-.113 ***
(.028)

(5)

-.155 ***
(.036)

Prenatal Smoke * Maternity Clinic

-.007
(.025)

-.120 ***
(.026)
.030 ***
(.009)

Prenatal Smoke * Doctors

.011 **
(.005)
.048 ***
(.015)

.016
(.013)

Prenatal Smoke * High Consum.

.071 ***
(.027)

.048 *
(.025)

.058 **
(.025)

.052 **
(.025)

.044 *
(.025)

Observations

63158

63158

63158

63158

63158

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Subdistrict and month FEs?

Notes: Each observation is a subdistrict-month. Standard errors, in parentheses below the coefficients, allow for
clustering at the island-month level. *** indicates p<.01; ** indicates p<.05, * indicates p<.10. All regressions also
include Smoke and Postnatal Smoke and their interactions with the relevant variables for each column. Urbanization
is the proportion of the population in urban localities and is based on 1994 to 1996 birth cohorts. Wood fuel use is
an approximate measure of the proportion of people in the subdistrict who cook with wood fuel rather than
kerosene and gas. Health variables are normalized to be mean 0, standard deviation 1 for the sample. High consum.
is an indicator that equals 1 if the district's median log food consumption is above the sample median. Observations
are weighted by the number of individuals enumerated in the Census who reside in the subdistrict and were born in
the year before the sample period.

46

Table 7
Effects by Mother's Education
Dependent variable: Log cohort size
Measure of mother's education
Individual-specific
(1)

Subdistrict average
(2)
(3)

Smoke

.002
(.007)

-.004
(.012)

-.013
(.017)

Prenatal Smoke

-.041 ***
(.013)

-.054 ***
(.018)

-.113 ***
(.029)

Postnatal Smoke

-.010
(.012)

-.036 **
(.018)

-.044
(.028)

Smoke * Educated Mother

-.007
(.005)

Prenatal Smoke * Educated Mother

.007
(.008)

Postnatal Smoke * Educated Mother

-.010
(.009)

Smoke * % Educated Mothers

.003
(.020)

-.009
(.020)

Prenatal Smoke * % Educated Mothers

.021
(.029)

-.034
(.028)

Postnatal Smoke * % Educated Mothers

.057 *
(.034)

.053 *
(.034)

Smoke * High Consumption

.018
(.014)

Prenatal Smoke * High Consumption

.099 ***
(.026)

Postnatal Smoke * High Consumption

.011
(.034)

Observations
Fixed effects included

134908
subdistrict * educated
mother, month *
educated mother

63158
subdistrict,
month * %
educated
mothers

63158
subdistrict, month *
high consum.,
month * %
educated mothers

Notes: Standard errors, in parentheses below the coefficients, allow for clustering at the island-month level. ***
indicates p<.01; ** indicates p<.05, * indicates p<.10. In column 1, each observation is a subdistrict-montheducation category. Educated mothers are defined as those who have completed junior high. In columns 2 and 3,
each cell is a subdistrict-month, and % educated mothers is the subdistrict average over the sample period. When
interacted with month fixed effects, % educated is standardized to mean 0. High consumption is an indicator that
equals 1 if the district's median log food consumption is above the sample median.

47

Table A1
Instrumental Variables Estimation

Dependent variable

(Sumatra or Kalimantan) *
Sept 97 to Jan 98)

First stage

IV

Prenatal Smoke

Log cohort size

(1)

(2)

.624 ***
(.092)

Prenatal Smoke

-.037 **
(.017)

Observations

67454

67454

Fixed effects

month,
subdistrict

month,
subdistrict

45.6

n/a

F-statistic for instrument

Notes: Each observation is a subdistrict-month. Standard errors, in
parentheses below the coefficients, allow for clustering at the island-month
level. *** indicates p<.01; ** indicates p<.05. Observations are weighted by
the number of individuals enumerated in the Census who reside in the
subdistrict and were born in the year before the sample period.

48

Table A2
Different Sample Periods
Dependent variable: Log cohort size
Shorter periods

Smoke

Prenatal Smoke

Postnatal Smoke

Observations
Subdistrict & month FEs?

3/97 5/98

12/96 2/98

3/97 2/98

(1)

(2)

(3)

-.003

-.004

(.005)

Balanced calendar months

Longer period

11/96 - 2/97 & 11/96 - 2/97 &
10/97 - 2/98
11/97 - 2/98

12/96 - 5/98

(4)

(5)

(6)

-.009 *

-.005

-.021

-.001

(.005)

(.005)

(.009)

(.042)

(.006)

-.043 ***

-.036 ***

-.049 ***

-.026 *

-.030 **

-.026 **

(.012)

(.012)

(.012)

(.014)

(.014)

(.012)

-.023 ***

-.012

-.026 ***

.025

.038

-.006

(.009)

(.010)

(.008)

(.030)

(.032)

(.009)

56220

56201

44967

33684

29933

78703

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Notes: Each observation is a subdistrict-month. Standard errors, in parentheses below the coefficients, allow for clustering at the
island-month level. *** indicates p<.01; ** indicates p<.05, * indicates p<.10. Observations are weighted by the number of
individuals enumerated in the Census who reside in the subdistrict and were born in the year before the baseline sample period.

49

Table A3
Comparison of Log Cohort Size Variable to Survey Data on Infant Mortality
Dependent variable: Log cohort size
Level of an observation
Quarter *
province

Quarter *
province *
gender

Month * province

(1)

(2)

(3)

Infant Mortality Rate

-1.34
(1.12)

-.83
(.65)

-.54
(.41)

Log Births

1.60
(.29)

1.11
(.23)

.83
(.18)

Male

-.01
(.02)

p-value of test that IMR
coefficient = -1

.78

.79

.27

p-value of test that Log
Births coefficient = 1

.05

.62

.36

1248

2496

3742

Observations

Notes: The dependent variable is the log of the cohort size enumerated in the 2000
Census. The independent variables are from the 2002 Demographic and Health Survey.
Infant Mortality Rate is the number of children who have died by June 2000 divided by all
children born. Log births is all children born. There are 26 provinces in the sample, and
the period covers 48 quarters from 1988 to 1999. In column 3, for 2 of the potential 3744
observations, there are no births. Standard errors allow for clustering within a province.

50

