NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EXPLAINING INTERNATIONAL DIFFERENCES IN ENTREPRENEURSHIP:
THE ROLE OF INDIVIDUAL CHARACTERISTICS AND REGULATORY CONSTRAINTS
Silvia Ardagna
Annamaria Lusardi
Working Paper 14012
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14012

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2008

We would like to thank David Blanchflower, Boyan Jovanovic, Leora Klapper, Josh Lerner, Norman
Loyaza, Maria Luengo-Prado, Ramana Nanda, Ana Maria Oviedo, Paul Reynolds, Antoinette Schoar,
and Luis Serven for their comments and help with the data, and seminar participants at the NBER's
International Differences in Entrepreneurship Conference, the European University Institute, the European
Bank for Reconstruction and Development, and Northeastern University for their many suggestions.
We also thank David Raines for his excellent research assistance; any errors are our responsibility.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Silvia Ardagna and Annamaria Lusardi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Explaining International Differences in Entrepreneurship: The Role of Individual Characteristics
and Regulatory Constraints
Silvia Ardagna and Annamaria Lusardi
NBER Working Paper No. 14012
May 2008
JEL No. M13,M38
ABSTRACT
We use a micro dataset that collects information across individuals, countries, and time to investigate
the determinants of entrepreneurial activity in thirty-seven developed and developing nations. We
focus both on individual characteristics and on countries' regulatory differences. We show that individual
characteristics, such as gender, age, and status in the workforce are important determinants of entrepreneurship,
and we also highlight the relevance of social networks, self-assessed skills, and attitudes toward risk.
Moreover, we find that regulation plays a critical role, particularly for those individuals who become
entrepreneurs to pursue a business opportunity. The individual characteristics that are impacted most
by regulation are those measuring working status, social network, business skills, and attitudes toward
risk.

Silvia Ardagna
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center
Cambridge, MA 02138
sardagna@fas.harvard.edu
Annamaria Lusardi
Harvard Business School
Morgan, T93
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
a.lusardi@dartmouth.edu

Explaining International Differences in
Entrepreneurship: The Role of Individual
Characteristics and Regulatory Constraints
Silvia Ardagna and Annamaria Lusardi∗
Harvard University; Dartmouth College, Harvard Business School and NBER
April 2008

Abstract
We use a micro dataset that collects information across individuals, countries, and time to investigate the determinants of entrepreneurial activity in
thirty-seven developed and developing nations. We focus both on individual characteristics and on countries’ regulatory differences. We show that
individual characteristics, such as gender, age, and status in the workforce
are important determinants of entrepreneurship, and we also highlight the
relevance of social networks, self-assessed skills, and attitudes toward risk.
Moreover, we find that regulation plays a critical role, particularly for those
individuals who become entrepreneurs to pursue a business opportunity. The
individual characteristics that are impacted most by regulation are those measuring working status, social network, business skills, and attitudes toward
risk.

1 Introduction
The regulatory and legal environment is commonly held to be an important factor
in determining a country’s economic performance. Tight regulation of product and
labor markets is one of the most frequently cited reasons for slower growth and
∗ We would like to thank David Blanchflower, Boyan Jovanovic, Leora Klapper, Josh Lerner,
Norman Loyaza, Maria Luengo-Prado, Ramana Nanda, Ana Maria Oviedo, Paul Reynolds, Fabio
Schiantarelli, Antoinette Schoar, and Luis Serven for their comments and help with the data, and
seminar participants at the NBER’s International Differences in Entrepreneurship Conference, the
European University Institute, the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, and Northeastern University for their many suggestions. We also thank David Raines for his excellent research
assistance; any errors are our responsibility.

1

higher unemployment in Continental Europe than in the United States. Deregulation has been highly recommended to countries like Italy, France, and Germany, as
well as to developing nations, to improve their economies.
One way in which the regulatory and legal environment can impact growth
and employment is its effect on the rate at which new businesses are created. In
fact, as suggested by the Schumpeterian approach to economic growth (Aghion
and Howitt 1997), new entrepreneurial activities play a vital part in the process
of creative destruction that fosters innovation, employment, and growth. While a
burgeoning empirical literature has studied the influence of regulation of product
and labor markets on GDP growth, TFP, investment, and employment using macro
data,1 little is known about how a country’s regulatory and legal environment affect
individuals’ decisions to engage in new entrepreneurial activity.
In our paper, we tackle this question using micro data. We study the effect of
regulation on entrepreneurship in a broad sample of countries using a novel data
set: the Global Entrepreneurship Monitor (GEM). There are several advantages
in using data from GEM. First, we can rely on cross-national harmonized data
on entrepreneurship for about 150,000 individuals in thirty-seven developed and
developing nations. This is the only dataset that allows researchers to compare
the level of business creation and its determinants at the micro level across many
countries. Second, we can identify two different types of entrepreneurs: those who
enter entrepreneurship to pursue a business opportunity and those whose entrepreneurial activity is simply remedial, i.e., they could not find a better alternative.
This distinction is important in that it allows us to perform an economic analysis
of entrepreneurship that has not been possible in previous work. Third, we have
information on a wide-ranging set of individual characteristics, including business
skills, fear of failure, and social networks. Thus, we can account for a good set
of determinants of entrepreneurship across countries. To be able to examine the
impact of regulation on entrepreneurial activity, we merge data from GEM with
data on measures of regulation in the product markets, the labor markets, and the
legal system.
There are relatively few studies that investigate the factors affecting individual
decisions to engage in new entrepreneurial activity in a broad sample of countries;
most of the literature uses micro data from one particular country, the United States
in the majority of the cases. Also, with the exception of Djankov et al. (2005),
(2006a), (2006b), and (2008), who investigate the role of a broad set of macro
and micro variables on entrepreneurship in Russia, China, and Brazil, empirical
1 A non-exhaustive list of papers includes: Alesina et al. (2005), Bassanini and Ernst (2002),
Bayoumi et al. (2004), Blanchard and Wolfers (2000), Fiori et al. (2007), Loayza et al. (2004),
Nicoletti and Scarpetta (2003).

2

research has focused on a limited number of individual characteristics.2 Moreover,
while the literature has focused on tax policy and liquidity constraints (see, for example, the work by Djankov et al. (2007), Gentry and Hubbard (2000), Evans and
Jovanovic (1989), Guiso et al. (2004), Hurst and Lusardi (2004) and (2008)),3 our
paper looks at other types of regulation, such as the regulation of product and labor
market and contract enforcement. In this respect, our paper relates to the work
of Ciccone and Papaioannou (2006), Desai et al. (2003), Klapper et al. (2006),
and Guiso and Schivardi (2006), who investigate the role of regulation in product
markets on industries’ entry rates and on several other firms’ characteristics using
firms’ level data from developed and transitional countries.
Views about regulation vary widely in economic theory. According to public
choice theory, regulation is socially inefficient and exists either because industry
incumbents are able to lobby government officials to pass laws that grant them rents
or because politicians use regulation to extract rents for their own benefit. Hence,
regulation is a burden for new and existing firms. The public interest theory of regulation proposes an opposing view: regulation exists to cure market failures; hence,
heavier regulation should lead to socially superior outcomes.4 More generally, regulation can foster or hinder entrepreneurial activity depending on the dimension of
regulation one considers. In our empirical work, we consider three broad areas of
regulation: regulation of entry, regulation of contract enforcement, and regulation
of labor. For each area, we can envision channels through which regulation affects entrepreneurship in potentially opposite directions. For example, as Ciccone
and Papaioannou (2006) show, entry regulation can delay the introduction of new
product varieties in industries that experience expansionary global demand or technology shocks. Hence, the rate at which firms enter these particular industries is
lower in countries that regulate entry more extensively. Second, credit constraints
can bind a larger fraction of would-be entrepreneurs in countries where it is more
expensive to comply with entry regulation. As a result, individuals who would like
to start a new business are prevented from doing so by credit constraints. This is
more likely to occur in less financially developed countries.5 Finally, as Klapper et
al. (2006) discuss, entry regulation that protects investors enhances access to credit
2 See, for example, the papers by Blanchflower ((2000) and (2004)), Blanchflower, Oswald, and
Stutzer (2001), and Blanchflower and Oswald (1998), and the review in Hurst and Lusardi (2004)
and (2008).
3 See also Alfaro and Charlton (2007) for the effects of international financial integration on entrepreneurship.
4 See Djankov et al. (2002) for an extensive review of the theory of regulation.
5 See Banerjee and Newman (1994), and Desai et al. (2003) for the relation between entry costs,
financial constraints, and entrepreneurship. See also the work by Blanchflower and Oswald (1998),
Evans and Jovanovic (1989), Guiso, Sapienza and Zingales (2004) and Hurst and Lusardi (2004) and
(2008) for an overview of the importance and empirical relevance of liquidity constraints.

3

for would-be entrepreneurs. In this case, entry regulation increases entry rates
and facilitates entrepreneurship. Similarly, both contract enforcement regulation,
which affects the efficiency and the functioning of the legal system, and the regulation of labor markets can have opposite effects on the individual decision to start a
new business (see, for example, Djankov et al. (2003), Desai et al. (2003), La Porta
et al. (1998) and (2000)). Thus, whether regulation has a beneficial or detrimental
effect on entrepreneurship is ultimately an empirical question; the specific goal of
our empirical work is to understand whether entrepreneurship flourishes in more
or in less regulated environments.
Consistent with the public choice model, we find that regulation acts as a detriment to entrepreneurship, particularly for those individuals who become entrepreneurs to pursue a business opportunity. In our empirical analysis, we estimate
the effect of regulation via its impact on individual characteristics. Regulation
has the greatest impact on the effects of social network, business skills, attitudes
toward risk, and working status. Specifically, regulation attenuates the effect of
social networks, business skills, and working status on entrepreneurship while it
strengthens the impact of attitudes toward risk. We find also that several individual characteristics—gender, age, and education—are important determinants of
entrepreneurship, though their effects differ across types of entrepreneurship. For
example, the estimates of education are positive and statistically significant for individuals who become entrepreneurs to pursue a business opportunity, while they
are negative and statistically significant for those whose entrepreneurial activity is
simply remedial. This finding further highlights the importance of being able to
distinguish between types of entrepreneurs. Finally, we provide ample evidence
that our findings are robust to a variety of extensions and robustness checks. In
particular, our results are virtually unchanged when we instrument countries’ regulatory indicators with countries’ legal origins to account for the potential endogeneity of regulation.
The GEM data can provide very useful information to policy-makers. In particular, the data can speak to the determinants of entrepreneurship across countries.
Most importantly, the data show there are different types of entrepreneurs and these
differences should be taken into account when evaluating the effects of policies toward entrepreneurship.
This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes our data and presents
some descriptive statistics. Section 3 discusses the empirical methodology and our
results. The last section concludes.

4

2 Data
This section describes the data we employ in the empirical analysis. We begin by
discussing the micro survey data. In section 2.2 we illustrate the institutional and
regulatory data, and in section 2.3 we show descriptive statistics on the relationship
among entrepreneurship, personal characteristics (such as age, sex, and education),
and countries’ regulatory environments. We then perform an econometric analysis
of the effect of regulation on different measures of entrepreneurship and several
robustness checks.

2.1 GEM micro survey data
We use micro survey data collected by the Global Entrepreneurship Monitor (GEM),
a research program started in 1998 that annually collects cross-national harmonized
data on entrepreneurship. Each year the project surveys (i) either by phone or faceto-face interviews a sample of at least 2,000 randomly selected individuals in each
country (the Adult Population Survey), and (ii) an average of 35 national experts
in each country, using face-to-face interviews and self-administered questionnaires
(Expert Questionnaire Data). A coordination team at London Business School supervises the contracts to survey vendors, receives the data, checks all data files for
inconsistencies, harmonizes the entire dataset, and generates new variables.6
In this paper, we use data from the Adult Population Surveys of 2001 and
2002. These are the most recent surveys available to researchers who are not directly involved in the GEM project and include information both on individuals’
decisions to engage in entrepreneurial activity and on individuals’ motivations to
start a new business. One advantage of using these data is also that the definitions of variables and the methodology used in collecting the data are consistent
between the two years. Countries included in our sample are: Argentina, Australia, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, Chile, China, Croatia, Denmark, Finland, France,
Germany, Hong Kong, Hungary, India, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Korea, Mexico, The Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Russia, Singapore,
Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Taiwan, Thailand, United
Kingdom, and United States.7 We restrict our analysis to individuals of 18-64
years of age and the total number of observations in our sample is 152,612.8
6 See Reynolds et al. (2005) for more information on the GEM project and the data collection

process.
7 Adult Population Surveys have been conducted also in Iceland in 2001 and 2002. We exclude
Iceland from our sample because regulatory variables for most of the indices we use are not available
for this country. Including Iceland in the regressions in which we exclude the regulatory variables
does not change the main results.
8 In our empirical work, we always use weights. However, the difference between weighted and

5

2.1.1 Measures of entrepreneurial activity and individual characteristics data
Our variable of interest is total entrepreneurial activity (T E A), which can be further split into total opportunity entrepreneurial activity (T E AO P P) and total remedial entrepreneurial activity (T E AN EC). T E A is an indicator variable equal
to one if individuals are starting a new business or are owners and managers of a
young firm; it is equal to zero otherwise. T E AO P P is an indicator variable equal
to one if individuals are starting a new business or are owners and managers of
a young firm to take advantage of a business opportunity; it is equal to zero otherwise (opportunity entrepreneurs hereafter). T E AN EC is an indicator variable
equal to one if individuals are starting a new business or are owners and managers
of a young firm because they could find no better economic work; it is equal to
zero otherwise (remedial or necessity entrepreneurs hereafter).9
Individuals starting a new business are individuals who (i) alone or with others
are currently trying to start a new business, including any type of self-employment,
or (ii) alone or with others are trying to start a new business or a new venture together with their employer as an effort that is part of their normal work, and who
(a) have been active in the past 12 months in trying to start the new business, (b)
expect to own part of it, and (c) have not paid salaries and wages to anybody, including the owner/managers, for more than 3 months. Individuals who are owners
and managers of a young firm are individuals who, alone or with others, are the
owners of a company they help manage, provided that the company has been paying salaries and wages for no more than 42 months.10 Thus, our focus is on firms
at the initial planning or inception stage. Our data represents the potential supply
of entrepreneurs rather than the actual rate of entrepreneurship.11 This is a specific
definition of entrepreneur that differs from what other papers have used so far (see,
for example, Blanchflower (2004), Evans and Jovanovic (1989), Hurst and Lusardi
(2004), Gentry and Hubbard (2000)), but, as explained below, it is appropriate
given the focus of this paper.
These data present several advantages. First, we can concentrate on the start-up
phase and on the first few years of a new business, rather than on well-established
firms that have been active for many years and for which, for example, the regulaunweighted statistics and weighted and unweighted empirical estimates is rather small. Results using
the unweighted data are available upon request.
9 We will use the terms remedial entrepreneurs and necessity entrepreneurs interchangeably.
10 Appendix II reports the survey questions that the GEM coordination team uses to generate the
variables T E A, T E AO P P, T E AN EC. The exact methodology is based on procedures previously
used in the US Panel Study of Entrepreneurial Dynamics and it is described in detail in the 2001 and
2002 Adult Population Surveys’ data documentation and in Reynolds et al. (2005).
11 One reason to consider the nascent and the early-stage entrepreneurs together is that the size of
these two groups can be quite small, particularly among European countries.

6

tory environment can have different effects. Second, we can distinguish between
different types of entrepreneurs, i.e., those individuals involved in entrepreneurship to take advantage of a business opportunity as opposed to those individuals
for whom entrepreneurship is a remedial activity. This distinction is not available
in many previous studies on entrepreneurship, but it can be particularly useful in
studying the impact of individual characteristics and countries’ institutional and
regulatory differences on the creation of new businesses. Moreover, it is useful in
studying the effects of policies toward entrepreneurship.
Table 1 reports the number of observations for each country in the sample
(column 1); the mean and standard deviation of the variables T E A, T E AO P P,
T E AN EC (columns 2-7); and the ratio of the variables T E AN EC/T E AO P P
(column 8) for all countries in our sample and for different groups of countries.
We group countries by income groups and by geographic regions using the World
Bank classification, and by legal origins following the classification in Djankov et
al. (2003). We also compute statistics for countries belonging to the European
Union.12 On average, in the entire sample, the percentage of individuals participating in entrepreneurial activity is 7.6%. Among them about 36% start a new
business or are managers/owners of a young firm because other employment options are not available or not appealing, while the rest participate in entrepreneurial
activities to exploit a perceived business opportunity. The average entrepreneurship
rate is much higher in low- and middle-low income countries than in high-income
countries; with rates of about 14% and 6.7% respectively. However, the type of
entrepreneurial activities undertaken in these countries is rather different: in poor
countries more than two thirds of individuals engage in remedial entrepreneurial
activities, while this type of entrepreneurship drops to 21.9% in high-income countries (see also figure 1). Total entrepreneurial activity is highest in Latin America
(14.10%), followed by countries in the East Asia and Pacific region (9.4%), while
countries belonging to the European Union (EU) have the lowest rate of entrepreneurial activity (5.68%). However, as shown in Figure 1, the ratio of remedial
to opportunity entrepreneurial activity is much higher in Latin American than in
the Organisation for Economics Co-operation and Development (OECD) and EU
countries.
Entrepreneurial activity also varies with a nation’s legal origin. While in coun12 The World Bank classifies economies in income groups using the gross national income per

capita, calculated with the World Bank Atlas method. The most recent classification uses data for
2005, (see www.worldbank.org /data/countryclass /classgroups.htm). The groups are: low income,
$875 or less; lower middle-income, $876-3,465; upper middle-income $3,466-10,725; and high income, $10,726 or more. Low and middle income economies are also classified by geographical
regions. We augmented this classification by including in the various groups the high income countries. See Appendix I for the exact classification of countries in each group.

7

tries with English (common law) legal origin and in countries with French (civil
law) legal origin, the percentage of individuals engaging in any type of entrepreneurial activity is almost identical (8.24% and 8.36%, respectively), individual motivation to start a new business or to be the manager/owner of a young firm varies.
On average, 6.04% of people become entrepreneurs to take advantage of a business
opportunity in countries with English legal origin, while 5.27% do so in countries
with French legal origin, and the respective ratio T E AN EC/T E AO P P goes
from 28.8% to 50.3%.
Table 2 reports the mean and standard deviation of the regressors we use in the
empirical analysis in all countries in the sample (column 1), in low-income (column 2), middle-low-income (column 3), upper-middle-income (column 4), and
high-income countries (column 5). We use a variety of demographic variables that
are also used in many other studies: age, gender, education, working status, and
income. Moreover, we use other less used, but potentially important variables to
explain entrepreneurship: self-assessed business skills, attitudes toward risk, and
social networks.13 We measure self-assessed business skills (Skills) with a dummy
variable equal to 1 if an individual answers that he or she has the knowledge, skill,
and experience to start a new business; the variable is equal to 0 otherwise. Fear
of failure, a proxy for individual attitudes toward risk, is measured by the dummy
variable Fear f ail, which is equal to 1 for individuals who answer that fear of failing prevents them from starting a new business; the variable is equal to 0 otherwise.
Finally, we measure social networks with the dummy variable K nowent, which is
equal to 1 if an individual knows someone who has started a business in the past
two years; the variable is equal to 0 otherwise. Although we are aware that these
variables may not be truly exogenous with respect to the choice of starting a new
business, they can be critical indicators of the impediments or the stimulators of
business creation and they can help explain the wide heterogeneity we see among
business owners. In this paper, given our focus on regulation, we will not account
for the potential endogeneity of these variables. Appendix I includes the precise
definition of all the variables. There are substantial differences in these variables
among the countries. For example, the proportion of individuals that are not working is substantially higher in low income countries than in higher income countries.
Similarly, the fraction of individuals with a college degree is much smaller in low
income countries than in other countries. Moreover, both social networks and fear
of failure are much lower in low income countries than in other countries. These
statistics already point to potentially different types of entrepreneurship among
countries depending on the income level of each country.
13 Other papers that have used these types of variables include de Melo, McKenzie and Woodruff

(2008), and Djankov et al (2008).

8

2.1.2 Reliability of GEM data
GEM data have not been used extensively by academics yet and not much is known
about these data. Therefore, before describing our empirical work, we provide an
overview of the quality of the data. First, we compare the GEM data with data from
other surveys and we review the comparisons of GEM data performed by other
researchers (Reynolds et al. (2005) and Acs et al. (2007)). Second, throughout
the paper we show that the descriptive statistics on entrepreneurship in many of the
countries covered by GEM are consistent with the results reported in other studies
on entrepreneurship. Third, for both the descriptive statistics and the econometric
analysis, we check the robustness of our results across countries and/or groups of
countries and across survey years.
One data set that reports information similar to GEM is the Flash Eurobarometer Survey on Entrepreneurship collected by the European Commission.14 While
not all countries covered in GEM are available in the Flash Eurobarometer, we can
compare data among the countries common to both data sets, given that questions
are rather similar between the two surveys. Table 3 shows results for individuals
living in countries that are surveyed both in GEM in 2001 and/or 2002 (column
1) and in the Flash Eurobarometer Surveys in 2002, 2003, and/or 2004 (column
2).15 For each variable, we report the mean, its standard error, and the number of
observations. The percentage of individuals involved in entrepreneurial activity is
very similar in the two datasets (6.37% when we use GEM data and 6.53% when
we use data from the Flash Eurobarometer Surveys on Entrepreneurship), regardless of the significantly smaller sample surveyed by the European Commission,
which is about one third the size of the GEM sample. The percentage of individuals pursuing a business opportunity is equal to 4.93% in column 1 and 4.12% in
column 2, while the percentage of individuals for whom entrepreneurship is a remedial activity is lower in the GEM dataset (1.06% in column 1) than in the Flash
Eurobarometer Survey data (1.35% in column 2). Note, however, that the sample
size shrinks further in column 2 because information on individual motivation to
participate in entrepreneurship is available only in the 2004 data collected by the
European Commission.
We can also compare demographic characteristics, such as age, the percentage
of males, the percentage of individuals who work, and the percentage of individuals who think that fear of failing could prevent them from starting a new business.
14 See Appendix III for a description of the variables computed using data from the Flash Eurobarometer Surveys.
15 Countries surveyed in both databases are: Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, the Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, the United
Kingdom, and the United States.

9

Results in Table 3 are very similar regardless of the dataset used for these variables
both when we look at the entire sample and when we average the characteristics
among individuals who participate in entrepreneurial activities and among those
who do not. The only exception is the variable measuring the percentage of individuals who think that fear of failing could prevent them from starting a new business. The average value is higher when we use data from the Flash Eurobarometer
Surveys (44.99%) than when we use GEM data (34.85%). However, the difference
between the percentage of individuals who think that fear of failing could prevent
them from starting a new business and are not entrepreneurs and those with the
same beliefs but who are involved in an entrepreneurial activity is much closer in
the two datasets: using GEM data, this difference is equal to 16.05% (35.89-19.84);
using data from the Flash Eurobarometer Surveys it is equal to 11.2%.
Reynolds et al. (2005) compare GEM national annual new firms’ estimates
and new firms’ birth rates with data from the Official New Firm Census and data
from the European Commission Report. They show that the T E A index and other
entrepreneurship indices computed using GEM data are reliable and capture the
creation of new firms on a scale comparable to that resulting from the use of other
national administrative datasets.
Finally, Acs et al. (2007) compare the GEM data with the World Bank Group
Entrepreneurship Survey (WBGES) dataset, which collected data on formal business registrations of limited liability corporations (LLCs) in 84 countries from 2003
to 2005. Specifically, Acs et al. (2007) consider separately the two components of
the T E A index defined above (i.e., they distinguish individuals who are starting a
new business —nascent entrepreneurs—from individuals who are owners and managers of a young firm—baby entrepreneurs) and calculate the spread between the
nascent and baby entrepreneurship rates in GEM (defined as the proportion of the
adult population in each country who engages in nascent or baby entrepreneurship)
and the percentage of individuals who have started a formal corporation. The authors report a number of differences in the two datasets: (i) GEM data show higher
levels of early-stage entrepreneurship in developing economies than WBGES data;
(ii) WBGES business entry data tend to be higher than GEM data for developed
countries; (iii) a significantly negative relationship is found between administrative
barriers to starting a business and entrepreneurship when WBGES data are used but
not when GEM data are used. Several explanations are given for such differences,
which, in our view, are very important in clarifying the differences among the two
datasets, but in no way suggest that one dataset is of better quality than the other.
First, Acs et al. (2007) point out that, while WBGES only considers businesses
that legally registered as limited liability corporations, GEM data consider a larger
set of entrepreneurial activities: from businesses that operate in the formal sector
but opt for a different legal status than an LLC, to businesses that can be part of
10

the informal economy, to entrepreneurial initiatives that are at the very early stage
and, hence, can potentially become businesses operating in the formal sector but
do not yet actually do so. Such a range of possibilities is likely to be more relevant
for developing than developed countries given the extent of the informal sector.
Second, GEM measures the number of individual entrepreneurs, while WBGES
considers the number of businesses. Hence, GEM can overlook the number of
individuals who are involved in multiple new businesses. Third, the definition of
baby entrepreneurs in GEM considers data for 42 months of activity, not for 12
months, but when one estimates the annual rate for the United States they are of
comparable magnitude of those recorded by the U.S. Census. Fourth, especially
in developed countries, firms may register several limited liability corporations to
limit liability for different lines of businesses, helping to explain why for some
countries entrepreneurship rates computed using the World Bank data are higher
than rates computed with GEM data.
We would like to offer an additional explanation. GEM data allow a distinction between remedial and opportunity entrepreneurship. As we have discussed in
section 2.1.1, remedial entrepreneurship is more widespread in developing than in
developed countries, and remedial entrepreneurs are less likely to register a business as an LLC. This can offer another reason for higher entrepreneurship rates
in developing countries when rates are computed using GEM rather than WBGES
data. Finally, relative to the existence of a negative relationship between entry barriers and entrepreneurship rates, results below show that a negative and statistically
significant relationship can be found when one uses data from GEM. However, it
is important to consider opportunity and remedial entrepreneurship separately (see
section 2.3), and/or to estimate the effect of regulation on entrepreneurship using
micro rather than macro data. This allows researchers to control for other possible institutional and policy differences that exist among various developed and
developing countries (see section 3).
To further examine the quality of the data, we have estimated the probability
of starting a business as a function of a set of demographic characteristics that are
available in the data (age, gender, employment status, education, income, etc.),
country by country. For the subset of countries for which we have data in both
2001 and 2002, we also performed regressions by country and by year. For brevity,
in Table 4 we report results for only six countries: the United States, two upperincome countries —Canada and Italy; two middle-low-income countries—Brazil
and China; and India, the only country in our sample classified in the low-income
group. Results for the other countries in our sample are not reported but are available upon request. We have first compared the estimates using GEM data for the
United States with estimates from other studies on entrepreneurship (see Lusardi
and Hurst (2008)). Estimates are very similar for the United States, particularly re11

garding demographic variables such as gender and education. Estimates for other
countries are similar to results reported by Djankov et al. (2008) for Brazil and
Djankov et al. (2006a) for China, particularly for variables such as social networks
and attitudes toward risk. The importance of social networks in Italy is also highlighted in the work by Guiso and Schivardi (2006). Among the countries whose
results are not reported, three countries: Russia, Poland, and Slovenia, display results that are different than other countries but, as reported in the robustness check
at the end of this paper, the inclusion or exclusion of these countries does not affect our main estimates. France also displays different estimates between 2001 and
2002, although we cannot exclude the possibility that they are genuine changes due
to differences in macroeconomic conditions between the two years.

2.2 Regulatory data
To perform our empirical work, we merge the micro survey data described above
with data on countries’ institutional and regulatory environments. We follow the
work of Loayza et al. (2004), and construct indices on several aspects of market
regulation.16 In particular, we focus on entry regulatory indicators for the product
markets, regulation of contract enforcement (indicators measuring the efficiency of
the justice system in resolving legal disputes), and labor market regulation. While
these aspects of regulation do not cover all regulatory and economic policies (e.g.,
taxes, tariff and non-tariff barriers, safety and environmental standards) that can
influence individual entrepreneurial behavior, they include some of the most important regulatory constraints across countries.
The data we use are from the following sources: Doing Business Database
(the World Bank Group), Index of Economic Freedom (the Heritage Foundation),
International Country Risk Guide (the PRS Group), and Djankov et al. (2004).
Data from Doing Business refer to the year 2003; data from Djankov et al. (2004)
refer to the year 1997; all other data are averages of all the available data points
until the year 2000. Appendix I lists the exact source, time period, and definition
of each regulatory variable used in the empirical analysis.
Because our indices of regulation combine several different variables, we stani −X min
when
dardize each variable available in the databases using the formula XXmax
−X min
X max i −X i
higher values of the variable X indicate heavier regulation and the formula X max −X min
when lower values of the variable X indicate heavier regulation. Hence, each standardized regulatory variable is simply an index ranging from 0 to 1, increasing with
16 We construct our own indices, rather than using the ones provided to us by Loayza et al. (2004),

because regulatory variables for eleven countries included in our sample are not available in Loayza
et al. (2004).

12

the amount of regulation. For each area of regulation, we construct a synthetic indicator of the tightness of regulation. Each synthetic indicator is the average of
the standardized indices measuring regulation of the relevant area. The indices are
described below.
Entr y: The entry index measures the barriers and costs entrepreneurs face
when they decide to create a new business. It is the average of the number of
procedures that are officially required to start and operate a new business, the time
and cost needed to complete such procedures, and a composite index measuring
not only how easy/difficult it is to operate a business but also the degree of corruption in the government and whether or not regulation is applied uniformly to all
businesses.
Contract: The contract enforcement index is an indicator that measures the
efficiency of the justice system in resolving commercial disputes. It is the average
of the number of procedures required to solve a dispute and of an index measuring
the ability of the government to operate without dramatic changes in policy or
interruptions of its services.
Labor: The labor index measures the difficulty for entrepreneurs of adjusting
the labor force. It is the average of indices measuring the difficulty in hiring and
firing workers, the rigidity of labor contracts, and the percentage of the workforce
affiliated with labor unions.
These indices are those used by Loyaza et al. (2004) although for a larger set
of countries. Use of these indices allows us to compare our results to previous
studies and to capture many different aspects of regulation in the three areas we
consider. However, we also perform a set of regressions to examine the effect of
each individual component. We report the results in section 3.6.
Table 5 reports the value of the synthetic indices of regulation for all countries
in the total sample and for groups of countries. Several features are worth noting.
First, the level of regulation is negatively related to the countries’ income: countries in the low- and middle-low-income groups exhibit levels of regulation that
are up to three times higher than the level of regulation in high-income countries.
The ranking among groups of countries is quite similar for the entry and contract
enforcement indices. The index measuring the regulation of labor shows that countries in the East Asia and Pacific region have the lowest level of regulation, while
the level of regulation in OECD countries, and, in particular, in countries belonging
to the European Union, is very close to that of Latin America, Eastern Europe, and
Central Asia. Second, consistent with the results of several other papers,17 when
17 A non-exhaustive list of papers relating countries’ legal origins and their regulatory environment
includes Djankov et al. (2002), Djankov et al. (2003), Djankov et al. (2004), and Klapper et al.
(2006).

13

we group countries by their legal origin, countries with English legal origin are
among those with the lowest levels of regulation, while countries with French and
Socialist legal origin are among those with the highest levels of regulation.
Table 6 shows the correlation among the regulatory indices. There is a strong
positive correlation between the Entr y and Contract indices, while the correlation of these two indices and the Labor index is lower. When we further look at
the correlation among the components of each synthetic index, in all areas but the
labor market, we find a positive correlation that ranges from a minimum of 38% to
a maximum of 70%. However, for the labor market index, we observe a very low
correlation between indicators of hiring and firing costs and union density, and, in
one case, the correlation is negative. Thus, regulation in the labor markets can have
different effects than regulation in other markets.
Finally, given that we have a different sample, we computed the correlation of
the indices we constructed with the ones of Loyaza et al. (2004). The correlation
is equal to 0.97 for the entry regulatory index, 0.80 for the contract enforcement
regulation index, and 0.74 for the labor market regulation index. Hence, even
though our sample of countries differs from that of Loyaza et al. (2004), our indices
are very similar.

2.3 Descriptive statistics
We start the empirical analysis with some descriptive statistics. We first discuss the
relationship between entrepreneurship and personal characteristics (Table 7); we
then turn to the relationship between entrepreneurship and countries’ regulatory
environments.
In Table 7, columns 1-3, we compute average values of the individual characteristics described in Table 2 separately for individuals who engage in entrepreneurial activity (T E A = 1) and for those who do not (T E A = 0). We also test for
the equality of means between entrepreneur types. Even though we only consider
individuals in pre-retirement years (ages 18-64), the average age of entrepreneurs
is lower by approximately 2 years than the average age of non-entrepreneurs (i.e.,
individuals who are not operating a new or young firm) and the difference is statistically significant at the 5% level. The percentage of males among entrepreneurs
is higher than among non-entrepreneurs as is the percentage of working individuals (85% of nascent entrepreneurs are working at the time of the interview, while
only 64.8% of non-entrepreneurs are working). As far as individual education is
concerned, the largest difference relates to the percentage of people holding a postsecondary degree—about 8% greater in the sample of entrepreneurs. Similarly, the
percentage of high-income people starting a new business is 9% greater than that
of people in the same income category who are not engaging in entrepreneurial
14

activity. Finally, the percentage of individuals who know someone who has started
a business in the recent past and the percentage of individuals who think that they
have the knowledge, skills, and experience to start a new business is significantly
higher among entrepreneurs than among non-entrepreneurs. The opposite occurs
for the percentage of individuals who think that fear of failing could prevent them
from starting a new business. Note that in all cases, we can reject the null hypothesis of the test on the equality of the means of the two groups of individuals at the
5% level of significance.
We have conducted the same type of analysis comparing characteristics of different types of entrepreneurs. Results are reported in Table 7, columns 4-6. On
average, opportunity entrepreneurs are slightly younger than remedial entrepreneurs. Moreover, opportunity entrepreneurs are more likely to be male, to have a
higher level of education and income, and to have more confidence in their skills
and abilities and less fear of failure than remedial entrepreneurs. Consistent with
the test results in Table 7, columns 1-3, we can reject the null hypothesis of the
equality of means in the two groups of individuals for almost all variables. For example, means are statistically different between the two groups for variables such
as the percentage of people who work, the percentage of people with more than a
college degree, and with low and high (but not middle) income.
Finally, we have repeated the analysis in Table 7, dividing countries by income
groups and geographical areas. Results, not shown but available upon request, are
qualitatively identical to those just discussed.
We now turn to a cross-country analysis of entrepreneurship and regulation. We
compute the proportion of opportunity entrepreneurs (T E AO P P) and remedial
entrepreneurs (T E AN EC) for each country in our sample and study the univariate relationship between the proportion of entrepreneurs in each country and the
level of regulation, using the three indices we discussed in section 2.2. Figures 2
and 3 show the results for the group of high-income countries and middle- and lowincome countries respectively. We find a negative relationship between T E AO P P
and all measures of regulation. Thus, higher levels of regulation are associated with
lower rates of activity to pursue a business opportunity. This is true both in the
high-income country group and in the low and middle-income group, even though
the magnitude of the effects differs in the two groups of countries. Findings are
different for the other measure of entrepreneurial activity: T E AN EC. We find
a positive correlation between the indices of entry regulation and of contract enforcement regulation and T E AN EC, but a negative correlation between the level
of regulation of labor markets and T E AN EC. Thus, countries with more stringent
regulation of entry, less efficient judicial systems, and less regulated labor markets
exhibit higher remedial entrepreneurship rates. However, due to the small number
of observations at the macro level (25 for the high-income group, and 12 for low,
15

middle-low and upper-middle-income countries), the coefficients of the univariate
regressions are often not statistically significant. This analysis shows that it is critically important to be able to differentiate between types of entrepreneurial activity.
It also highlights that regulation may act as a detriment for the type of entrepreneurial activity —opportunity entrepreneurs—that is more likely to be a drive for
economic activity and growth.

3 Econometric analysis
3.1 Methodology
We now turn to a more formal analysis of the effect of individual characteristics
and regulation on entrepreneurship. For individual i, in country j, at time t, let
us define the outcome of interest yi jt , where y is one of the three measures of entrepreneurial activity: T E A, T E AO P P, T E AN EC. We estimate the following
equation for yi j t :
yi j t = α j + β 1 X i jt + β 2 X i j t R j + γ t + εi jt

(1)

where α j is a vector of country dummies, X is a vector of variables measuring individual characteristics such as age, gender, employment status, education,
income, the role of social networks, business skills, and fear of failure, R captures
countries’ regulatory and legal environment, and γ t is a time dummy variable.
Since the dependent variable is binary, we use probit estimation and correct the
standard errors by clustering them at the country level.
Our sample includes many different countries whose macroeconomic and institutional characteristics (level of economic development, growth rates, level of
taxation, and degree of openness, just to mention a few) can be correlated both with
the entrepreneurship indices and with the regulatory variables. While we cannot
separately account for each country’s macroeconomic and institutional variable,
we can control for countries’ specific characteristics, including the level of the regulatory environment, by adding country fixed effects to our regressions. Because
regulatory variables are country and time invariant, once we include α j among our
regressors, we can only measure the differential effect that personal characteristics
have on the decision to engage in entrepreneurial activity because of cross-country
differences in the regulatory and legal environment. In other words, we can only
measure the effect of regulation via the interaction between countries’ regulation
and individual characteristics.

16

3.2 Entrepreneurship and personal characteristics
In Table 8 we estimate the effect of individual characteristics on the indices of
entrepreneurial activity T E A, T E AO P P, T E AN EC. In columns 1-3, we exclude the variables measuring the income group to which the individual belongs.
We include income dummies in columns 4-6. When we do so, the sample shrinks
significantly because the income data is not available for many countries.
The variable that has the largest effect on the likelihood of an individual becoming an entrepreneur is Skills, a proxy for individual degree of self-confidence
(or self-assessed skills and abilities). Ceteris paribus, when Skills = 1, the probability of engaging in entrepreneurship increases by more than 8.5% in column 1
when considering T E A. The effects of Skills is large both for opportunity and
remedial entrepreneurs, estimates are 5.9% in column 2 and 1.5% in column 3,
respectively.
Fear of failure, a proxy for individual attitudes toward risk, is another important variable and negatively affects entrepreneurship. Note that fear of failure affects opportunity entrepreneurs and our total index of entrepreneurship, but it is
significant only at the 10% level for individuals for whom entrepreneurship is a
remedial activity. Similarly, the effect of education on entrepreneurship depends
on entrepreneurial type. The coefficients of the dummy variables Highschool and
College18 are both positive and statistically significant when we estimate equation (1) for T E AO P P, while both are negative and statistically significant for
T E AN EC. This may explain why evidence of the effect of education on entrepreneurship in the literature is rather mixed when using a measure of entrepreneurship
that does not account for individual motivation to become an entrepreneur (see, for
example, Blanchflower (2004)). These findings again highlight the importance of
distinguishing between types of entrepreneurial activity.19
Entrepreneurship is also affected by social networks. In all specifications, the
coefficient of this variable is positive and statistically significant at the 1% level.
The probability of becoming involved in an entrepreneurial activity when knowing
someone who has started a business increases by 3% for opportunity entrepreneurs
and by 0.5% for remedial entrepreneurs. Other authors have found evidence of
the importance of social networks and social capital on entrepreneurship (see, for
18 The dummy variable Highschool is equal to 1 if the individual has at least a high school degree
(high school degree or more than high school but no college degree) and to 0 otherwise. The dummy
variable College is equal to 1 if the individual has at least a college degree (college degree and higher
degrees) and to 0 otherwise.
19 As highlighted in Mondragon-Velez and Pena-Parga (2008) some forms of entrepreneurship are
simply a subsistence activity. Since there is little transition out of this type of business activity
into business-ownership, policy-makers should consider carefully policies that promote remedial
entrepreneurship.

17

example, Djankov et al. (2005) and (2006), Guiso et al. (2004) and Nanda and
Sorensen (2007)). Our work adds to this literature by highlighting that networks
are an important factor, particularly for specific entrepreneurial types.20
Turning to the effect of variables measuring individual status in the workforce,
people who do not work, students, retired and disabled individuals are less likely
to become entrepreneurs than individuals who work. This is true both for remedial
entrepreneurs and opportunity entrepreneurs. We also find evidence of a nonlinear
effect for age: while the coefficient of the linear term is positive and statistically
significant, the coefficient of the square term is negative and statistically significant. The magnitude of the coefficients implies that the probability of starting a
new entrepreneurial activity increases with age for individuals younger than 32 in
column 1, younger than 29 in column 2, and younger than 40 in column 3, and
decreases with age afterwards. Finally, men are more likely than women to pursue
entrepreneurial activity; this is true both for necessity and opportunity entrepreneurs.
In columns 4-6, we control for the dummy variables Lowestinc, Middleinc,
U pperinc. These indicators are equal to 1 if individuals’ income is in the lowest,
middle, or upper third income percentile of their country’s income distribution,
and equal to 0 otherwise. We find a non-linear relationship between the composite index T E A and individual income. The probability of starting a new business
is higher for individuals in both the lowest and the upper income groups. This
non-linearity captures the different effect income has on entrepreneurial type. For
T E AO P P, the coefficient of the variable Lowestinc is not statistically significant, while that of U pperinc is positive and statistically significant. For T E AN EC,
the coefficient of the variable Lowestinc is positive and statistically significant,
that of U pperinc is negative and not statistically significant. Thus, again it is
crucial to be able to distinguish between individual motivations to become entrepreneurs. Also, while income is an important control, the estimates of the other
variables do not change significantly when adding income dummies to the regression.21 This provides further evidence of the robustness of our estimates since the
sample reduces considerably when adding income dummies.
There are other potential determinants of entrepreneurship that previous studies
have considered such as wealth, family background, optimism, and other sociological and psychological characteristics (see, for example, Blanchflower (2004), de
20 Estimating the impact of peer effect on entrepreneurship is complex and other studies were able
to take account of the endogeneity of peers (see Nanda and Sorensen (2007) and their discussion
on the difficulty of estimating peer effects)). Since we only have a cross section of data, we cannot
address this problem in our empirical analysis.
21 The coefficient of the variables Age, Male, and Highschool in column 6 become insignificant.
The coefficient of the variable Fear f ail becomes significant at the 5% level in column 6.

18

Melo, McKenzie, and Woodruff (2008), Djankov et al. (2008), Fairlie and Robb
(2007), and Puri and Robinson (2006)). Unfortunately, we do not have information
about these variables in this survey and cannot account for them in our empirical
work.

3.3 Entrepreneurship and regulation
We now consider the effects of regulation by interacting the synthetic indices:
Entr y, Contract, and Labor with the vector of individual characteristics. Because indices are highly correlated, we consider each regulatory index separately.
Results are reported in Table 9; they refer to the specifications in which we exclude
income dummies. We discuss specifications which include income dummies in
section 3.7.
Columns 1-3 report the results for the regulation of entry. The parameter of
interest is β 2 . Negative values of β 2 in equation (1) indicate that heavier regulation
of entry reduces the effect of personal characteristics on the likelihood to engage
in entrepreneurship when β 1 in equation (1) is positive and reinforces the effect of
personal characteristics when β 1 is negative. For example, while the probability of
engaging in entrepreneurship is higher for individuals who know someone who has
started a business recently (i.e., those for whom K nowent = 1), in countries where
entry is more heavily regulated, the effect of social network is much reduced. To
evaluate its magnitude, we calculate the marginal effect due to a change in the variable K nowent from 0 to 1 in two hypothetical countries: one in which the entry
regulatory index is equal to 0 (the index minimum value) and one in which the
index is equal to 1 (the index maximum value). Using the estimates reported in
column 1, we find that the probability of becoming an entrepreneur in these two
different countries changes from 6% to 1.8%. Thus, regulation substantially curbs
the positive effect of social networks on entrepreneurship. A similar effect also occurs when we distinguish opportunity entrepreneurs from necessity entrepreneurs.
Consider first the former (see column 2). The probability to engage in entrepreneurship for individuals who know someone who has recently started a new business is
higher by 4 percentage points than for individuals who do not know entrepreneurs
if they live in a low-regulation country (a country in which Entr y = 0). However, individuals who know people who are entrepreneurs have only a 1.7% higher
probability to become entrepreneurs than individuals for whom K nowent = 0 if
they live in a high-regulation country (a country in which Entr y = 1). Hence,
the positive effect of social capital on entrepreneurship is reduced by more than
half if Entr y changes from 0 to 1. For necessity entrepreneurs (see column 3), the
marginal effect due to a change in the variable K nowent from 0 to 1 is equal to
0.8% when Entr y = 0 and it is reduced to 0.2% when Entr y = 1. Hence, the
19

positive effect of social networks on entrepreneurship is almost eliminated when
going from low- to high-regulation countries (Entr y changes from 0 to 1).
Regulation also diminishes the effect of Skills. Individuals who report having
business skills (i.e., those for whom Skills = 1) are less likely to engage in new
entrepreneurial activity when entry regulation is more stringent. This effect is entirely driven by individuals who engage in entrepreneurship to pursue a business
opportunity. In fact, the coefficient of the interaction term Entr y ∗ Skills is not
statistically significant in column 3, but it is statistically significant at the 5% level
in column 2.
Tougher entry regulation also decreases the probability of starting new entrepreneurial activity for individuals who do not work and for students, a finding that
has important policy implications. Consider, for example, Italy and the United
States, whose values of the entry regulation index are 0.38 and 0.14, respectively.
An American who does not work faces a lower probability of engaging in entrepreneurship than an American who is employed; the estimate is -1.47% (-0.0058
-(0.064*0.14)). The same figure is much higher for Italians who do not work; it is
-3.01% (-0.0058 -(0.064*0.38)). Thus, individuals who do not work are two times
less likely to start a new business than individuals who do work if they live in Italy
rather than in the United States. More generally, the average value in the sample of
the index of entry regulation is equal to 0.32 and the standard deviation is equal to
0.17. Thus, individuals who do not work are 2.6% less likely to become entrepreneurs than individuals who work. A one standard deviation increase in the index
reduces this number to 3.7%. Finally, individuals who want to pursue a business
opportunity and do not have a job are less likely to engage in entrepreneurship than
individuals who work by 1.7% in countries in which Entr y = 0.32. This number
becomes 2% if Entr y increases by one standard deviation. For necessity entrepreneurs who do not have a job, the probability of starting a new business is not
statistically different than for those who work if there are no regulatory constraints
on entry. However, if entry is constrained in their country these entrepreneurs find
it more difficult to start a new business.
Our estimates are in line with the results in Klapper et al. (2006). They find that
relative to the high entry industries in the United States, in highly regulated countries a lower number of new firms enter these industries. Ciccone and Papaioannou
(2006) also find slower entry in expanding industries in countries where it takes
longer to comply with procedures required to open a new firm.
Our other indices of regulation show similar results. When we interact personal characteristics with the Contract index, which measures the efficiency of
the judicial system in resolving commercial disputes, we find estimates similar to
those reported in column 1 (see columns 4-6). Thus, contract regulation can also
curb the effects of skills, social network, and labor force status. A country’s legal
20

environment also plays an important role in individual decisions to engage in entrepreneurship, and this is especially true for those individuals who wish to pursue
a business opportunity. The economic magnitude is also relevant. For example,
while the probability of engaging in entrepreneurship is higher for individuals who
know someone who has started a business recently (i.e., those for whom K nowent
= 1), in countries where the legal system is more regulated, the effect of social
networks is much reduced. We calculate again the marginal effect due to a change
in the variable K nowent from 0 to 1 in two hypothetical countries: one in which
the contract regulatory index is equal to 0 (the index minimum value) and one in
which the index is equal to 1 (the index maximum value). Using the estimates
reported in column 4, we find that the probability of becoming an entrepreneur
changes by 3.1%. Thus, this different type of regulation also curbs the positive effect of social networks on entrepreneurship. Using data from Eastern and Western
European firms, Desai et al. (2003) also find that industries’ entry rates are higher
in countries in which courts are fair and impartial, even though this result seems
to be driven by Eastern and Central European countries, not by Western European
ones.
When we investigate the effect of labor market regulation on the determinants
of entrepreneurship (see columns 7-9), we find that, as for the other two indices,
labor market regulation curbs the effects of social network. The effect is statistically significant for opportunity entrepreneurs, a finding that can have important
implications for public policy. Moreover, the interaction term Fear f ail ∗ Labor
is statistically significant for every measure of entrepreneurship we use, while it
was not in the other two indices of regulation. Thus, ceteris paribus, in countries
that heavily regulate the labor market individuals’ risktaking attitudes seem to play
a more important role than in countries with less labor market regulation.22

3.4 Additional robustness checks
Our results are robust to a variety of additional specification changes. In what
follows, we discuss several extensions of our models. For brevity, results are not
reported but are available upon request.
First, we interact the components of each synthetic index of regulation with
the vector of individual characteristics. Our goal is to investigate whether a particular aspect of regulation, in each of the areas we consider, is driving the results
reported in Table 9. For all of the synthetic indicators, we find that the components of the indices generally have similar effects on entrepreneurship even though
22 Our findings about the negative effects of regulation are consistent with the results by Mul-

lainathan and Schnabl (2008). They examine regulation within one country and show that tighter
regulation hinders entrepreneurship.

21

some components have a larger and more significant effect through some personal
characteristics’ variables than through others.
Second, we include an income variable (aggregated in broad groups) among the
regressors in Table 9. Our results are, overall, the same. In the regressions in which
we interact the indices of entry and contract enforcement regulation with personal
characteristics we find evidence that regulation also has an effect through the age
variable, but the coefficients of the interaction terms between all the regulatory
indices and Skills are not statistically significant.
Third, we estimate the specifications in Table 9 separately for 2001 and 2002
data for the sample of countries for which we have data for both years.23 We find
no evidence of relevant changes between regressions for 2001 and 2002 and results
in Table 9.
Fourth, we check that our results do not hinge on data for a particular country.
We exclude one country at a time and reestimate the specification used in Table
9. Results are qualitatively the same, even when excluding Russia, Poland, and
Slovenia, whose data may be of poorer quality, as discussed above.
Finally, we estimate equation (1) for subgroups of countries. Specifically, we
consider the specifications in Table 9 for high-income countries and the other countries (i.e., countries with low, middle-low and upper- middle income countries). We
find a stronger effect of labor regulation in the wealthier countries than in the others, but in general, results do not change substantially.

3.5 Instrumental variables estimation
A potential problem of the estimates reported above is that the underlying variables
that may be driving entrepreneurship in a country (e.g., an educational system that
encourages individual responsibility or an extensive welfare system that insulates
against unemployment and health risks) may also be driving the regulatory system
in that country. Thus, the relationship between entrepreneurship and regulation
may simply be the result of these omitted variables. Alternatively, it could be that
the desire to achieve a certain level of entrepreneurship in a country shapes regulation in that country. In other words, the causality may go from entrepreneurship
to regulation rather than the other way around. This problem may be less relevant in our empirical work since we only look at the interaction of regulation with
individual characteristics rather than simply looking at the effect of regulation on
entrepreneurship. In this section, we tackle these problems by using instrumental
variables (IV) estimation.
23 Data for Portugal are not available in 2002. Data for Switzerland, Chile, Thailand, China, Tai-

wan, Hong Kong, Croatia, and Slovenia are not available in 2001.

22

Our instruments need to be correlated with regulation but uncorrelated with
the error term. We use countries’ legal origins as instruments. Several papers
have shown that the current regulatory environments correlate with each country’s
legal tradition; for example, countries with English legal origin are among those
with the lowest level of regulation, while countries with French and Socialist legal origin are more heavily regulated. Because countries’ legal origins have been
transplanted through conquest and colonization that occurred centuries ago, legal
origin is unlikely to be correlated with omitted variables that influence individuals’
decisions to begin a new entrepreneurial activity in 2001 or 2002.
We follow the existing literature and group countries with English (common
law), French (civil law), Socialist, German and Scandinavian legal origins. We
estimate equation (1) instrumenting the variable R with the indicator variables that
measure countries’ legal origins. Results are reported in Table 10. Note that coefficient estimates are included in Table 10, while marginal effects are reported in
all the other tables of the paper; hence, the numbers in the tables are not directly
comparable. The estimates continue to confirm the results reported in Table 9.
Both entry and labor market regulation curbs the effects of social networks. Contract regulation also curbs the effects of social network, primarily for opportunity
entrepreneurs. Moreover, entry and contract regulation strengthens the effects of
risk aversion, thus discouraging entrepreneurship and, in particular, remedial entrepreneurship. Finally, note that for the specifications for T E A and T E AO P P,
the p-value of a Wald test on the exogeneity of the regressors does not reject exogeneity. Thus, our estimates in Table 9 do not seem to be biased due a potential
endogeneity problem.

4 Conclusions
In this paper, we use GEM data from thirty-seven countries to estimate the differential effect that individual characteristics, such as work status, education, and
attitudes toward risk, have on entrepreneurship because of cross-country differences in regulatory constraints. Using our data set, we can distinguish between
different types of entrepreneurs, i.e., those who enter entrepreneurship to pursue a
business opportunity versus those who enter entrepreneurship because they could
not find better work. We also use different measures of regulation, from measures
of regulation in the product markets to regulation in the labor markets and the legal
system.
We find evidence that regulation plays a critical role in the individual decision
to start a new business, particularly for individuals who engage in an entrepreneurial activity to pursue a business opportunity. The variables through which regu-

23

lation affects entrepreneurship are social network, working status, business skills,
and attitudes toward risk. Specifically, regulation curbs the effects of social networks and business skills while strengthens the effects of risk aversion. Moreover,
those who do not work are less likely to become entrepreneurs in countries with
high levels of regulation. Our results are robust to a variety of robustness checks.
This is one of the few studies that perform a micro analysis of the determinants
of entrepreneurship and the effect of regulation in a large cross section of countries.
While our approach does not allow us to measure the total effect of regulation,
we can measure the effect of regulation on individual characteristics, which has
important implications for public policy.

24

References
[1] Acs Z., S. Desai, Klapper L., (2007), “What Does "Entrepreneurship" Data
Really Show? A Comparison of the Global Entrepreneurship Monitor and
World Bank Group Datasets,” mimeo.
[2] Aghion P., P. Howitt, (1997), “Endogenous Growth Theory,” Cambridge,
MA, MIT Press, 1997.
[3] Alesina A., S. Ardagna, G. Nicoletti, and F. Schiantarelli, (2005), “Regulation
and Investment,” Journal of the European Economic Association,
3(4),
pp. 791-825.
[4] Alfaro L., A. Charlton, (2007), “International Financial Integration and Entrepreneurial Firm Dynamics,” Harvard Business School Working Paper, n.
07-012
[5] Banerjee A., A. Newman, (1994), “Poverty, Incentives, and Development,”
American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, vol. 84, pp. 211-215.
[6] Bassanini, A. and E. Ernst (2002). “Labor Market Institutions, Product Market Regulations and Innovation: Cross Country Evidence,” OECD Economics
Department Working Papers, No. 316.
[7] Bayoumi T., D. Laxton, P. Pesenti, (2004), “Benefits and Spillovers of Greater
Competition in Europe: a Macroeconomic Assessment,” Federal Reserve
Bank of New York Staff Report 182.
[8] Bertrand, M. and F. Kramarz (2002). “Does Entry Regulation Hinder Job
Creation? Evidence From The French Retail Industry,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, pp. 1369-1413.
[9] Blanchflower D., (2004), “Self-Employment: More May Not Be Better,”
Swedish Economic Policy Review, vol 11(2), pp. 15-74.
[10] Blanchflower D., (2000), “Self-Employment in OECD Countries,” Labour
Economics, 7, pp. 471-505.
[11] Blanchflower D., A. Oswald, and A.Stutzer, (2001), “Latent Entrepreneurship
Across Nations,” European Economic Review, 45(4-6), pp. 680-691.
[12] Blanchflower D., A. Oswald, (1998), “What Makes an Entrepreneur?,” Journal of Labor Economics, 16(1), pp. 26-60, 1998.

25

[13] Blanchard, O. J. and J. Wolfers (2000). “The Role of Shocks and Institutions in the Rise of European Unemployment: The Aggregate Evidence,”
Economic Journal, 110, pp. 1-33.
[14] Ciccone A. and E. Papaioannou, (2006), “Red tape and Delayed Entry,”
CEPR Discussion Paper n 5996.
[15] de Melo S, D. McKenzie, and C. Woodruff (2008), "Who Are the Microenterprise Owners? Evidence from Sri Lanka on Tokman v. de Soto, forthcoming
in J. Lerner and A. Schoar (eds.), "International Differences in Entrepreneurship."
[16] Desai, M., P. Gompers and J. Lerner, (2003), “Institutions, Capital Constraints and Entrepreneurial Firm Dynamics: Evidence from Europe,” NBER
Working Paper No. 10165.
[17] Djankov S., Y. Qian, G. Roland, and E. Zhuravskaya, (2008), “What Makes
an Entrepreneur?,” mimeo.
[18] Djankov S., T. Ganser, C. McLiesh, R. Ramalho, A. Shleifer, (2007), The
Effect of Corporate Taxes on Investment adn Entrepreneurship,” mimeo.
[19] Djankov S., Y. Qian, G. Roland, and E. Zhuravskaya, (2006a), “Who are
China’s Entrepreneurs?”, American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, vol. 96, pp. 348-352.
[20] Djankov S., Y. Qian, G. Roland, and E. Zhuravskaya, (2006b), “Entrepreneurship in China and Russia Compared,”Journal of the European Economic
Association, vol. 4, n. 2-3, pp. 352-365.
[21] Djankov S., Y. Qian, G. Roland, and E. Zhuravskaya, (2005), “Who are Russia’s Entrepreneurs?,” Journal of the European Economic Association, vol. 3,
n. 2-3, pp. 1-11.
[22] Djankov S., R. La Porta, Lopez-De-Silanes F., Shleifer A., (2004), “The Regulation of Labor,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, pp. 1339-1381.
[23] Djankov S., R. La Porta, Lopez-De-Silanes F., Shleifer A., (2003), “Courts,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, pp. 453-517.
[24] Djankov S., R. La Porta, Lopez-De-Silanes F., Shleifer A., (2002), “The Regulation of Entry,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, pp. 1-37.

26

[25] Evans D., B. Jovanovic, (1989), “An Estimated Model of Entrepreneurial
Choice Under Liquidity Constraints,” Journal of Political Economy, vol. 97,
no. 4, pp. 808-827.
[26] Fairlie R., A. Robb, (2007), “Why Are Black-Owned Businesses Less Successful than White-Owned Businesses? The Role of Families, Inheritances,
and Business Human Capital,” Journal of Labor Economics, 25(2), pp. 289323.
[27] Fiori G.,G. Nicoletti, S. Scarpetta, and F. Schiantarelli, (2007), “Employment
Outcomes and the Interaction Between Product and Labor Market Deregulation: Are They Substitutes or Complements?,” Boston College Working
Papers in Economics 663.
[28] Gentry W., R. G. Hubbard, (2000), “Tax Policy and Entrepreneurial Entry,”
American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, vol. 90, no. 2, pp. 283287.
[29] Guiso L., F. Schivardi, (2006),“What Determines Entrepreneurial Clusters?,”
mimeo.
[30] Guiso L., P. Sapienza, L. Zingales, (2004), “Does Local Financial Development Matter?,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, pp. 929-969.
[31] Hurst E., A. Lusardi, (2004), “Liquidity Constraints, Household Wealth, and
Entrepreneurship,” Journal of Political Economy, vol. 112(2), pp. 319-347.
[32] Hurst E., A. Lusardi, (2008), “Liquidity Constraints and Entrepreneurship.
Household Wealth, Parental Wealth, and the Transition In and Out of Entrepreneurship”, in "Overcoming Barriers to Entrepreneurship," Lexington
Books, MD: Lanham, pp. 47-68.
[33] Klapper L., L. Laeven, and R. Rajan, (2006) ,“Entry Regulation as a Barrier
to Entrepreneurship,” Journal of Financial Economics (forthcoming).
[34] La Porta R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer, R. W. Vishny, (2000), “Investor
Protection and Corporate Governance,” Journal of Financial Economics, vol.
58, pp. 1-25.
[35] La Porta R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer, R. W. Vishny, (1998), “Law
and Finance,” Journal of Political Economy, vol. 106, pp. 1113-1155.
[36] Loayza N., A. Oviedo, Serven L., (2004), “Regulation and Macroeconomic
Performance,” World Bank Policy Research Working Papers n. 3469.
27

[37] Mondragon-Velez, C. and X. Pena-Parga, (2008), "Business Ownership and
Self-Employment in Developing Economies: The Colombian Case," forthcoming in J. Lerner and A. Schoar (eds), "International Differences in Entrepreneurship."
[38] Mullainathan, S. and P. Schnabl (2008), "Business Simplification in Peru,"
forthcoming in J. Lerner and A. Schoar (eds), "International Differences in
Entrepreneurship."
[39] Nanda R., and J. B. Sorensen, (2007), “Peer Effects and Entrepreneurship,”
Harvard Business School Working Paper n. 08-051.
[40] Nicoletti, G., and S. Scarpetta (2003), “Regulation, Productivity, and Growth:
OECD Evidence,” Economic Policy, vol. 18, no. 36, pp.11-72.
[41] Puri M., D. T. Robinson, (2006), “Who Are Entrepreneurs and Why Do They
Behave That Way,” Working Paper Duke University.
[42] Reynonds P., N. Bosma, E. Autio, S. Hunt, N. De Bono, I. Servais, P. LopezGarcia, N. Chin, (2005), “Gobal Entrepreneurship Monitor: Data Collection
Design and Implementation 1998-2003,” Small Business Economics, vol. 24,
pp. 205-231.

28

Appendix I: Variables used in the empirical analysis
Entrepreneurship indices - source: Global Entrepreneurship Monitor (GEM)
• T E A = 1 if individuals are starting a new business or are owners and managers of a young firm, 0 otherwise.
• T E AO P P = 1 if individuals are starting a new business or are owners and
managers of a young firm to take advantage of a business opportunity, 0
otherwise.
• T E AN EC = 1 if individuals are starting a new business or are owners and
managers of a young firm because they could find no better economic work,
0 otherwise.
Individuals’ characteristics - source: Global Entrepreneurship Monitor (GEM)
• AG E = age of the individual at the time of the interview.
• M AL E = 1 if male, 0 otherwise.
• W O R K I N G = 1 if individual works at the time of the interview, 0 otherwise.
• ST U D E N T S = 1 if individual is a student at the time of the interview, 0
otherwise.
• R E T I R E D D I S AB L E S = 1 if individual is retired or disabled at the time
of the interview, 0 otherwise.
• N OT W O R K I N G = 1 if individual does not work (and he/she is not a
student, nor a retired or disabled individual) at the time of the interview, 0
otherwise.
• H I G H SC H O O L = 1 if individual has a high school degree, 0 otherwise.
• C O L L E G E = 1 if individual has at least a college degree, 0 otherwise.
• K N OW E N T = 1 if the person knows someone who has started a business
in the recent past, 0 otherwise.
• S K I L L S = 1 if the person thinks she has the knowledge, skills, and experience to start a new business, 0 otherwise.

29

• F E AR F AI L = 1 if the person’s fear of failing can prevent him or her from
starting a new business, 0 otherwise.
• L OW E ST I N C = 1 if individuals’ income is in the lowest 33rd income
percentile of their country’s income distribution, 0 otherwise.
• U P P E R I N C = 1 if individuals’ income is in the upper 33rd income percentile of their country’s income distribution, 0 otherwise.
Regulatory Indices - various sources
• E N T RY measures the barriers and costs entrepreneurs face when they decide to create a new business; E N T RY = (procedures + time + cost + regulation (IEF))/4.
• P R OC E DU R E S = number of procedures that are officially required to
start and operate a new business. Source: Doing Business Database (The
World Bank Group), 2003.
• T I M E = time in calendar days needed to complete procedures that are officially required to start and operate a new business. Source: Doing Business
Database (The World Bank Group), 2003.
• C O ST = cost (measured as a percentage of the country’s income per capita)
needed to complete procedures that are officially required to start and operate
a new business. Source: Doing Business Database (The World Bank Group),
2003.
• R E GU L AT I O N (I E F) = composite index measuring not only how easy/difficult
it is to operate a business but also examining the degree of corruption in the
government and whether or not regulation is applied uniformly to all businesses. Source: Index of Economic Freedom (The Heritage Foundation),
variable name in IEF database: regulation, average 1995-2000.
• C O N T R AC T measures the efficiency of the justice system in resolving
commercial disputes; C O N T R AC T = (procedures + quality of bureaucracy)/2.
• P R OC E DU R E S = number of procedures required to solve a dispute. Source:
Doing Business Database (The World Bank Group), 2003.
• QU AL I T Y O F BU R E AU C R ACY = index measuring the ability of the
government to operate without dramatic changes in policy or interruptions
of its services. Source: International Country Risk Guide (The PRS Group);
variable name in ICRG database: bureaucracy, average 1984-2000.
30

• L AB O R measures the difficulty for entrepreneurs of adjusting the labor
force. L AB O R = (hiring index + firing index + firing costs + rigidity of
labor contracts + union density)/5.
• H I R I N G I N D E X = index measuring the availability of term contracts for
temporary/permanent task, the maximum cumulative duration of term contracts, and the ratio of the minimum wage for a trainee or first time employee
to the average value added per worker. Source: Doing Business Database
(The World Bank Group), 2003.
• F I R I N G I N D E X = index measuring whether redundancy is disallowed
as a basis to fire a worker, the need for the employer to notify a third party
and/or to get approval from a third party when firing one redundant worker
and/or a group of more than 20 redundant workers, whether the law requires
the employer to consider retraining or reassignment before firing a redundant
worker, whether priority rules apply for redundancies and reemployment.
Source: Doing Business Database (The World Bank Group), 2003.
• F I R I N G C O ST = index measuring the cost in weekly wages of advance
notice requirements, severance payments adn penalties due when terminating a redundant worker. Source: Doing Business Database (The World Bank
Group), 2003.
• R I G I D I T Y L AB O R C O N T R AC T S = index measuring whether night
and/or weekend work is unrestricted, whether the workweek can consist of
5.5 days and/or can be extended to 50 hours or more (including overtime) for
2 months a year, whether paid annual vacation is 21 working days or fewer.
Source: Doing Business Database (The World Bank Group), 2003.
• U N I O N D E N S I T Y percentage of total workforce affiliated to labor unions
in 1997. Source: Djankov et al. (2004).
Countries’ groups
• L OW I N C O M E includes India. Source: World Bank’s classification, see
www.worldbank.org /data/countryclass /classgroups.htm.
• M I D DL E L OW I N C includes Brazil, China, Thailand. Source: World
Bank’s classification, see www.worldbank.org /data/countryclass /classgroups.htm.
• U P P E R M I D DL E I N C includes Argentina, Chile, Croatia, Hungary,
Mexico, Poland, Russia, South Africa. Source: World Bank’s classification,
see www.worldbank.org /data/countryclass /classgroups.htm.
31

• H I G H I N C O M E includes Australia, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Hong Kong, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, The Netherlands, Norway, New Zealand, Portugal, Singapore, Slovenia, Spain, South
Korea, Sweden, Switzerland, Taiwan, United Kingdom, United States. Source:
World Bank’s classification, see www.worldbank.org /data/countryclass /classgroups.htm.
• O EC D includes Australia, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Finland, France,
Germany, Ireland, Italy, Japan, The Netherlands, Norway, New Zealand,
Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom, United States.
• EU includes Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy,
The Netherlands, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, United Kingdom;
• EC A includes Croatia, Hungary, Poland, Russia, Slovenia.
• E A P includes China, Hong Kong, Singapore, South Korea, Taiwan, Thailand.
• L AT I N AM E R I C A includes Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Mexico.
• Legal Origin :
• E N G L I S H includes Australia, Canada, Hong Kong, India, Ireland, Israel,
New Zealand, South Africa, Singapore, Thailand, United Kingdom, United
States. Source: Djankov et al. (2003).
• S OC I AL I ST includes China, Croatia, Hungary, Poland, Russia, Slovenia.
Source: Djankov et al. (2003).
• F R E N C H includes Argentina, Belgium, Brazil, Chile, France, Italy, Mexico, The Netherlands, Portugal, Spain. Source: Djankov et al. (2003)
• G E R M AN includes Germany, Japan, Switzerland, South Korea, Taiwan.
Source: Djankov et al. (2003).
• SC AN D I N AV I AN includes Denmark, Finland, Norway, Sweden. Source:
Djankov et al. (2003).

32

Appendix II: GEM questionnaires’ questions
The following are the questionnaires’ questions that the GEM coordination
team uses to generate the variables T E A, T E AO P P, T E AN EC. Questions are
from the 2002 data documentation manual. Questions asked in 2001 were exactly
the same, even though the numbering of the questions changes. The methodology
followed to construct the indices is based on procedures previously used in the US
Panel Study of Entrepreneurial Dynamics and it is described in detail in the 2001
and 2002 Adult Population Surveys’ data documentation and in Reynolds et al.
(2005).
• 1. Which of the following would apply to you? (Possible answers: Yes, No,
Don’t Know, Refused)
• 1a. You are, alone or with others, currently trying to start a new business,
including any self-employment or selling any goods or services to others.
• 1b. You are, alone or with others, currently trying to start a new business or
a new venture for your employer– an effort that is part of your normal work.
• 1c. You are, alone or with others, currently the owner of a company you help
manage, self-employed, or selling any goods or services to others.
• If "Yes", Or “Don’t Know” To Qu. 1a or Qu. 1b, Ask Qu 2a. If “Yes”, Or
“Don’t Know” To Qu. 1c, Ask Qu. 3a.
• 2a. Over the past twelve months have you done anything to help start a new
business, such as looking for equipment or a location, organizing a start-up
team, working on a business plan, beginning to save money, or any other
activity that would help launch a business?
• 2b. Will you personally own all, part, or none of this business?
• 2d. Has the new business paid any salaries, wages, or payments in kind,
including your own, for more than three months?
• 2d1. What was the first year the owners received wages, profits, or payments
in kind?
• 2g. Are you involved in this start-up to take advantage of a business opportunity or because you have no better choices for work?
• 3a. Do you personally own all, part, or none of this business?
33

• 3c. What was the first year the owners received wages, profits, or payments
in kind? Payments in kind refers to goods or services provided as payments
for work rather than cash.24
• 3g. Are you involved in this firm to take advantage of a business opportunity
or because you have no better choices for work.
The following are the questionnaires’ questions used to define the variables
K nowent, Skills, and Fear f ail, respectively. Questions are from the 2002 data
documentation manual. Questions asked in 2001 were exactly the same even
though the numbering of the questions changes.
• 1. Which of the following would apply to you? (Possible answers: Yes, No,
Don’t Know, Refused)
• 1g. You know someone personally who started a business in the past 2 years
• 1i. You have the knowledge, skill and experience required to start a new
business
• 1j. Fear of failure would prevent you from starting a business
24 From this question, researchers can identify owners who have received wages, profits, or pay-

ments in kind for no more than 42 months.

34

Appendix III: Flash Eurobarometer Surveys
The questions from the Flash Eurobarometer Surveys used to generate the variables T E A_Euro, T E AO P P_Euro, T E AN EC_Euro in Table 3, column 2 are
as follows:
• 1) Have you started a business recently or are you taking steps to start a new
one? (Possible answers: a) It never came to my mind. b) No, but you are
thinking about it. c) No, you thought of it and you had already taken steps
to start a business but gave up. d) Yes, you are currently taking steps to
start a new business. e) Yes, you have started or taken over a business in the
last three years which is still active today. f) Yes, you started or took over
a business more than three years ago and it is still active. g) No, you once
started a business, but currently you are no longer an entrepreneur (business
has failed, business was sold or the interviewee has retired). h) Don’t Know).
• 2) All in all, would you say you started, or are starting, your business because
you saw an opportunity or you started it out of necessity? (Possible answers:
a) You started it because you came across an opportunity. b) You started it
because it was a necessity. c) Both. d) Don’t Know).
To create variables consitent with the ones in GEM, the indices T E A_Euro,
T E AO P P_Eur o, T E AN EC_Euro in Table 3, column 2 are defined as follows:
• T E A_Euro = 1 if individuals replied “Yes, you are currently taking steps to
start a new business” or “Yes, you have started or taken over a business in the
last three years which is still active today” to question 1 above, 0 otherwise.
• T E AO P P_Euro = 1 if individuals replied “Yes, you are currently taking
steps to start a new business” or “Yes, you have started or taken over a business in the last three years which is still active today” to question 1 above and
individuals replied “You started it because you came across an opportunity”
to question 2 above, 0 otherwise.
• T E AN EC_Euro = 1 if individuals replied “Yes, you are currently taking
steps to start a new business” or “Yes, you have started or taken over a business in the last three years which is still active today” to question 1 above
and individuals replied “You started it because it was a necessity” to question
2 above, 0 otherwise.
The questions from the Flash Eurobarometer Surveys used to generate the variable F E AR O F F AI LU R E_Euro in Table 3, column 2 is the following: do
35

you strongly agree, agree, disagree, or strongly disagree with the following opinion? One should not start a business if there is a risk it might fails. F E AR O F
F AI LU R E_Euro measures the percentage of people who strongly agree or agree
with this opinion.

36

Table 1: Entrepreneurship rates
N. OF
OBS

ARGENTINA
AUSTRALIA
BELGIUM
BRAZIL
CANADA
CHILE
CHINA
CROATIA
DENMARK
FINLAND
FRANCE
GERMANY
HONG KONG
HUNGARY
INDIA
IRELAND
ISRAEL
ITALY
JAPAN
KOREA
MEXICO
NETHERLANDS
NEW ZEALAND
NORWAY
POLAND
PORTUGAL
RUSSIA
SINGAPORE
SLOVENIA
SOUTH AFRICA
SPAIN
SWEDEN
SWITZERLAND
TAIWAN
THAILAND
UK
US

TEA

TEAOPP

TEANEC/
TEAOPP

TEANEC

(1)

mean
(2)

s.dev
(3)

mean
(4)

s.dev
(5)

mean
(6)

s.dev
(7)

(8)

3438
2785
4706
3930
4123
1975
2054
1603
3521
2896
3122
16570
1638
4000
4961
3194
3399
3486
3659
3669
2789
4317
2967
4009
3395
2000
1795
3872
1692
10442
3476
3552
1739
1977
985
16923
7953

11.86
9.17
3.41
13.68
9.39
16.01
12.44
3.47
6.82
6.59
4.47
5.37
3.41
8.74
13.11
10.18
6.14
7.40
2.43
14.31
16.07
5.06
14.69
7.85
6.19
6.61
2.54
6.02
4.43
6.40
5.23
4.84
7.11
4.22
18.18
5.57
10.73

32.38
28.87
18.16
34.37
29.18
36.68
33.02
18.30
25.22
24.81
20.66
22.53
18.17
28.25
33.76
30.14
24.01
26.18
15.41
35.02
36.73
21.92
35.42
26.90
24.10
24.86
15.71
23.78
20.58
24.48
22.23
21.46
25.71
20.11
38.59
22.94
30.95

6.03
7.23
2.68
7.10
7.24
9.03
5.17
2.07
5.94
5.56
2.91
3.90
2.26
5.74
7.11
8.11
3.47
5.11
1.31
8.09
9.93
4.36
12.13
6.66
3.28
5.15
1.90
4.85
3.14
3.62
3.75
4.00
6.07
3.27
14.53
4.28
9.34

23.81
25.90
16.16
25.68
25.91
28.67
22.14
14.24
23.63
22.92
16.81
19.37
14.86
23.27
25.70
27.30
18.29
22.01
11.38
27.27
29.99
20.42
32.66
24.94
17.86
22.11
13.67
21.50
17.44
18.68
19.01
19.60
23.89
17.80
35.26
20.25
29.10

5.62
1.43
0.45
6.52
1.79
6.54
7.50
0.8
0.4
0.4
0.57
1.30
1.16
2.64
5.67
1.65
0.94
1.20
0.85
4.74
5.29
0.43
2.39
0.26
2.62
1.31
0.5
1.01
1.29
2.18
1.27
0.67
0.82
0.72
3.44
0.80
1.18

23.03
11.88
6.69
24.69
13.27
24.74
26.34
8.79
6.37
7.0
7.55
11.32
10.71
16.03
23.12
12.76
9.55
10.91
9.17
21.26
22.39
6.56
15.28
5.07
15.99
11.36
7.44
9.99
11.27
14.59
11.18
8.13
9.02
8.44
18.23
8.89
10.81

93.20
19.78
16.79
91.83
24.72
72.43
145.07
38.65
6.73
7.19
19.59
33.33
51.33
45.99
79.75
20.35
27.09
23.48
64.89
58.59
53.27
9.86
19.70
3.90
79.88
25.44
26.32
20.82
41.08
60.22
33.87
16.75
13.51
22.02
23.68
18.69
12.63

ALL
LOW INCOME
MIDDLE LOW INC
UPPER MIDDLE INC

152612
7.61
26.52
5.3
22.40
1.89
13.61
35.66
4961
13.11
33.76
7.11
25.70
5.67
23.12
79.75
6969
13.94
34.64
7.56
26.44
6.38
24.44
84.39
29437
8.48
27.86
4.92
21.64
3.10
17.32
63.01
HIGH INCOME
111245
6.74
25.08
5.17
22.16
1.13
10.56
21.86
OECD
94998
6.65
24.92
5.26
22.33
1.00
9.98
19.01
EU
67763
5.68
23.15
4.37
20.45
0.9
9.52
20.59
ECA
12485
5.92
23.61
3.72
18.92
1.92
13.74
51.61
EAP
14195
9.39
29.17
5.89
23.54
3.07
17.24
52.12
LATIN AMERICA
12132
14.10
34.80
7.77
26.78
5.99
23.74
77.09
ENGLISH
63242
8.24
27.51
6.04
23.83
1.74
13.07
28.81
SOCIALIST
14539
6.86
25.28
3.93
19.42
2.72
16.28
69.21
FRENCH
33239
8.36
27.67
5.27
22.34
2.65
16.07
50.28
GERMAN
27614
6.20
24.11
4.21
20.08
1.63
12.67
38.72
SCANDINAVIAN
13978
6.56
24.76
5.57
22.93
0.45
6.69
8.08
Notes: TEA = 1 if individuals are starting a new business or are owners and managers of a young firm, 0 otherwise; TEAOPP = 1 if individuals are
starting a new business or are owners and managers of a young firm to take advantage of a business opportunity, 0 otherwise; TEANEC = 1 if individuals
are starting a new business or are owners and managers of a young firm because they could find no better economic work, 0 otherwise. See Appendix I for
the exact classification of countries in each group.

37

Table 2: Individual characteristics

AGE
% MALE
% WORKING
% STUDENTS
% RETIRED AND DISABLES
% NOT WORKING
%HIGH SCHOOL
%COLLEGE
% LOW INCOME
% MIDDLE INCOME
% UPPER INCOME
% KNOWS ENTREPR
% HAS SKILLS
% FEAR OF FAILURE
N. OF OBSERVATIONS

ALL

LOW INCOME

MIDDLE LOW
INC

UPPER MIDDLE
INC

HIGH INCOME

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

39.35
(12.87)
49.35
(50.00)
66.31
(47.27)
4.77
(21.32)
6.60
(24.82)
22.33
(41.64)
38.30
(48.61)
30.32
(45.97)
27.90
(44.85)
40.15
(49.02)
31.94
(46.63)
34.70
(47.60)
40.57
(49.10)
33.74
(47.28)

38.56
(10.93)
53.20
(49.90)
58.72
(49.25)
3.35
(17.99)
0.67
(8.15)
37.26
(48.36)
15.47
(36.16)
11.75
(32.21)
58.69
(49.25)
33.37
(47.16)
7.94
(27.04)
18.53
(38.85)
40.39
(49.07)
26.63
(44.20)

36.32
(12.29)
52.12
(49.96)
68.76
(46.35)
3.64
(18.73)
9.66
(29.54)
17.94
(38.37)
11.41
(31.80)
11.36
(31.74)
55.61
(49.69)
30.52
(46.06)
13.86
(34.56)
44.40
(49.69)
46.88
(49.91)
37.11
(48.31)

37.36
(13.14)
48.22
(49.97)
51.82
(49.97)
7.48
(26.30)
9.50
(29.32)
31.20
(46.33)
39.77
(48.94)
19.00
(39.23)
30.14
(45.89)
38.83
(48.74)
31.03
(46.26)
32.13
(46.70)
40.49
(49.09)
29.92
(45.79)

40.09
(12.84)
49.30
(50.00)
69.79
(45.92)
4.21
(20.08)
5.87
(23.50)
20.14
(40.10)
40.30
(49.05)
34.52
(47.54)
25.33
(43.49)
41.12
(49.20)
33.56
(47.22)
35.46
(47.84)
40.20
(49.03)
34.78
(47.63)

152612

4961

6969

29437

111245

Notes: Standard deviation in parenthesis. AGE = age of the individual at the time of the interview; WORKING = individuals who work at the time of the
interview; STUDENTS individuals who are students at the time of the interview; RETIRED AND DISABLES = individuals who are retired or disable at the time
of the interview; NOT WORKING = individuals who do not work and are not students, retired, or disable at the time of the interview; HIGH SCHOOL =
individuals with a high school degree; COLLEGE = individuals with at least a college degree; LOW INCOME = individuals with income in the lowest 33rd
income percentile of their country's income distribution; MIDDLE INCOME = individuals with income in the middle 33rd income percentile of their
country's income distribution; UPPER INCOME = individuals with income in the upper 33rd income percentile of their country's income distribution;
KNOWS ENTREPR = individuals who know someone who has started a business in the recent past; HAS SKILLS individuals who think they have the
knowledge, skills and experience to start a new business; FEAR OF FAILURE = individuals who answer that fear of failing can prevent them to start a new
business. See also Appendix I.

38

Table 3: Comparisons between GEM data and Flash Eurobarometer data
SAMPLE OF COUNTRIES SURVEYED IN GEM
ALSO SURVEYD IN FLASH EUROBAROMETER
(1)

SAMPLE OF COUNTRIES SURVEYED IN FLASH
EUROBAROMETER ALSO SURVEYED IN GEM
(2)

6.37
(0.08)
[88812]
4.93
(0.07)
[88812]
1.06
(0.03)
[88812]

6.53
(0.16)
[24526]
4.12
(0.19)
[11161]
1.35
(0.11)
[11161]

TEA (total entrepreneurial
activity)
TEAOPP (total opportunity
entrepreneurial activity)

TEANEC (total remedial
entrepreneurial activity)

ALL
AGE

% MALE

% WORKING

% FEAR OF FAILURE

40.30
(0.04)
[88812]
49.32
(0.17)
[88812]
69.60
(0.16)
[82465]
34.85
(0.16)
[85721]

ENTREPR

NON ENTREPR.

37.91
(0.15)
[5586]
65.59
(0.64)
[5586]
85.94
(0.48)
[5140]
19.84
(0.54)
[5477]

40.46
(0.04)
[83226]
48.20
(0.17)
[83226]
68.49
(0.17)
[77325]
35.89
(0.17)
[80244]

ALL
40.99
(0.08)
[24526]
47.50
(0.32)
[24526]
69.07
(0.29)
[24385]
44.99
(0.32)
[24020]

ENTREPR

NON
ENTREPR.

37.86
(0.27)
[1603]
62.38
(1.21)
[1603]
84.98
(0.89)
[1598]
34.51
(1.19)
[1579]

41.21
(0.08)
[22923]
46.46
(0.33)
[22923]
67.96
(0.30)
[22787]
45.73
(0.33)
[22441]

Notes: Standard errors of the mean in (). Number of observations in []. See aAppendix I and Appendix III for variables’ definitions.

39

Table 4: Entrepreneurship and individual characteristics in selected countries
US

AGE
AGE SQUARE
MALE
NOT WORKING
STUDENTS

CANADA

TEA
(1)
0.0019
(0.99)
-0.00003
(-1.48)
0.0112
(1.64)*
0.0076
(0.73)
-0.0209
(-1.49)

TEAOPP
(2)
0.0016
(0.89)
-0.00003
(-1.39)
0.0071
(1.14)
-0.0044
(-0.46)
-0.0164
(-1.31)

TEANEC
(3)
0.0004
(0.61)
-0.000006
(-0.77)
0.0019
(0.84)
0.0102
(3.01)***
-0.0012
(-0.23)

0.0283
(1.98)**
0.0266
(2.09)**
0.0811
(10.65)***
0.1196
(14.91)***
-0.0064
(-0.74)
7673

0.0423
(2.86)***
0.0376
(3.03)***
0.0703
(10.06)***
0.1045
(13.63)***
-0.0100
(-1.24)
7673

-0.0039
(-1.36)
-0.0072
(-2.31)**
0.0075
(2.99)***
0.0115
(4.91)***
0.0040
(1.55)
7673

RETIRED DISABLES
HIGHSCHOOL
COLLEGE
KNOWENT
SKILLS
FEARFAIL
OBSERVATIONS

TEA
(4)
-0.0013
(-0.55)
0.000007
(0.22)
0.0219
(2.51)**
0.0072
(0.42)
-0.0292
(-1.32)
-0.0286
(-1.93)*
-0.0097
(-0.66)
0.0039
(0.29)
0.0892
(8.88)***
0.0957
(9.26)***
-0.0247
(-2.58)**
3840

BRAZIL

TEAOPP
(5)
-0.0013
(-0.71)
0.000007
(0.31)
0.0169
(2.54)**
-0.0220
(-1.75)*
-0.0291
(-2.06)**
-0.0145
(-1.21)
-0.0124
(-1.09)
0.0075
(0.72)
0.0683
(8.35)***
0.0746
(8.59)***
-0.0208
(-2.84)***
3840

CHINA

ITALY
TEANEC
(6)
0.0004
(0.47)
-0.000005
(-0.50)
0.0012
(0.36)
0.0278
(3.24)***
0.0121
(1.09)
-0.0076
(-1.56)
0.0037
(0.67)
-0.0055
(-1.05)
0.0128
(3.47)***
0.0141
(3.47)***
0.0023
(0.61)
3840

TEA
(7)
-0.0043
(-1.64)*
0.000038
(1.18)
-0.0086
(-1.00)
-0.0319
(-3.38)***
-0.0536
(-4.55)***
-0.0512
(-2.97)***
-0.0092
(-0.78)
-0.0221
(-1.63)
0.0175
(2.03)**
0.0846
(8.57)***
-0.0253
(-2.89)***
2815

TEAOPP
(8)
-0.0027
(-1.36)
0.000024
(0.98)
0.0007
(0.11)
-0.029
(-4.13)***
-0.0328
(-3.70)***
-0.0299
(-2.38)**
-0.0016
(-0.17)
-0.0118
(-1.09)
0.0105
(1.63)
0.0575
(7.38)***
-0.0185
(-2.69)***
2815

TEANEC
(9)
0.0022
(2.06)**
-0.000028
(-2.07)**
-0.0036
(-0.92)
0.0024
(0.56)
-0.0004
(-0.05)

-0.0114
(-2.57)**
-0.0113
(-2.56)**
0.0042
(1.10)
0.0091
(2.30)**
-0.0036
(-1.04)
2582

INDIA

TEA
TEAOPP
TEANEC
TEA
TEAOPP
TEANEC
TEA
TEAOPP
TEANEC
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
AGE
0.0094
0.0060
0.0031
-0.0094
-0.0058
-0.0015
-0.0045
0.0019
-0.0061
(2.44)**
(2.19)**
(1.19)
(-1.31)
(-1.32)
(-0.27)
(-0.96)
(1.37)
(-1.49)
AGE SQUARE
-0.00011
-0.00007
-0.00004
0.00012
0.00007
0.00003
0.00002
-0.00002
0.00005
(-2.45)**
(-2.16)**
(-1.19)
(1.35)
(1.37)
(0.37)
(0.39)
(-1.32)
(0.84)
MALE
-0.0129
-0.0020
-0.0091
-0.0268
0.0134
-0.0477
0.0106
0.0161
-0.0118
(-0.70)
(-0.15)
(-0.77)
(-0.90)
(1.15)
(-1.76)*
(0.43)
(1.71)*
(-0.64)
NOT WORKING
-0.0888
-0.0470
-0.0358
-0.1001
-0.0296
-0.0763
-0.0557
0.0106
-0.0623
(-3.87)***
(-2.82)***
(-2.30)**
(-3.90)***
(-1.93)*
(-3.77)***
(-2.08)**
(0.96)
(-3.00)***
STUDENTS
-0.0890
-0.0559
-0.0246
-0.0712
-0.0157
-0.0642
0.0080
-0.0501
(-2.59)***
(-2.40)**
(-0.98)
(-1.39)
(-0.58)
(-2.00)**
(0.37)
(-2.61)***
RETIRED DISABLES
-0.0784
-0.0475
-0.0259
-0.1138
-0.0347
(-4.27)***
(-3.51)***
(-2.06)**
(-4.67)***
(-2.47)**
HIGHSCHOOL
-0.0790
-0.0416
-0.0346
-0.0217
0.0016
-0.0210
0.0982
0.0419
0.0375
(-1.77)*
(-1.24)
(-1.32)
(-0.71)
(0.13)
(-0.80)
(3.65)***
(3.41)***
(1.87)*
COLLEGE
0.0122
0.0097
0.0005
-0.0624
0.0035
-0.0730
0.0881
0.0213
0.0610
(0.36)
(0.40)
(0.02)
(-2.56)**
(0.25)
(-3.94)***
(2.91)***
(2.10)**
(2.36)**
KNOWENT
0.0734
0.0512
0.0192
0.0808
0.0270
0.0502
0.0108
0.0289
-0.0265
(4.40)***
(4.26)***
(1.74)*
(2.87)***
(1.97)**
(2.06)**
(0.48)
(3.23)***
(-1.69)*
SKILLS
0.0911
0.0411
0.0474
0.1105
0.0697
0.0464
0.0973
0.0238
0.0583
(5.50)***
(3.36)***
(4.31)***
(3.36)***
(4.62)***
(1.60)
(4.53)***
(2.90)***
(3.21)***
FEARFAIL
-0.0414
-0.0414
0.0025
-0.0085
0.0004
-0.0045
-0.0470
-0.0129
-0.0282
(-2.57)**
(-3.51)***
(0.24)
(-0.29)
(0.03)
(-0.19)
(-2.58)***
(-2.42)**
(-1.91)*
OBSERVATIONS
1854
1854
1854
1782
1782
1475
1771
1771
1771
Notes: Probit regressions including country fixed effects and a time dummy for 2001. Standard errors are clustered at the country level. Marginal effects
(not coefficients) and t-stat. are shown in the tables. ***, **, * coefficients statistically significant at 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively. TEA = 1 if
individuals are starting a new business or are owners and managers of a young firm, 0 otherwise; TEAOPP = 1 if individuals are starting a new business or
are owners and managers of a young firm to take advantage of a business opportunity, 0 otherwise; TEANEC = 1 if individuals are starting a new business
or are owners and managers of a young firm because they could find no better economic work, 0 otherwise. See Notes to Table 2 and Appendix I for the
exact definition of the variables.

40

Table 5: Regulatory indices

ARGENTINA
AUSTRALIA
BELGIUM
BRAZIL
CANADA
CHILE
CHINA
CROATIA
DENMARK
FINLAND
FRANCE
GERMANY
HONG KONG
HUNGARY
INDIA
IRELAND
ISRAEL
ITALY
JAPAN
KOREA
MEXICO
NETHERLANDS
NEW ZEALAND
NORWAY
POLAND
PORTUGAL
RUSSIA
SINGAPORE
SLOVENIA
SOUTH AFRICA
SPAIN
SWEDEN
SWITZERLAND
TAIWAN
THAILAND
UK
US

ENTRY

CONTRACT

LABOR

(1)

(2)

(3)

0.468
0.176
0.392
0.756
0.088
0.298
0.593
0.574
0.123
0.253
0.287
0.383
0.076
0.492
0.795
0.202
0.212
0.383
0.332
0.450
0.542
0.294
0.101
0.251
0.448
0.500
0.481
0.098
0.449
0.304
0.565
0.210
0.304
0.289
0.349
0.167
0.141

0.581
0.060
0.155
0.621
0.036
0.562
0.592
0.402
0.012
0.165
0.094
0.190
0.249
0.204
0.710
0.060
0.265
0.459
0.079
0.333
0.629
0.095
0.167
0.044
0.528
0.345
0.702
0.251
0.341
0.300
0.291
0.060
0.095
0.322
0.354
0.060
0.036

0.583
0.186
0.356
0.412
0.121
0.271
0.318
0.631
0.317
0.565
0.484
0.507
0.112
0.440
0.397
0.411
0.369
0.510
0.249
0.389
0.467
0.418
0.105
0.570
0.330
0.633
0.507
0.053

ALL
LOW INCOME
MIDDLE LOW INC
UPPER MIDDLE INC

0.446
0.578
0.563
0.243
0.609
0.211
0.193
0.025

0.320
0.231
0.363
0.795
0.710
0.397
0.649
0.573
0.356
0.416
0.443
0.457
HIGH INCOME
0.262
0.142
0.338
OECD
0.262
0.120
0.344
EU
0.295
0.143
0.409
ECA
0.483
0.455
0.456
EAP
0.298
0.335
0.276
LATIN AMERICA
0.547
0.601
0.455
ENGLISH
0.219
0.170
0.226
SOCIALIST
0.495
0.470
0.438
FRENCH
0.442
0.346
0.465
GERMAN
0.374
0.197
0.454
SCANDINAVIAN
0.212
0.069
0.507
NOTES: ENTRY measures the barriers and costs entrepreneurs face when they decide to create a new business; ENTRY = (procedures + time + cost +
regulation (IEF))/4. CONTRACT measures the efficiency of the justice system in resolving commercial disputes; CONTRACT = (procedures + quality of
bureaucracy)/2. LABOR measures the difficulty for entrepreneurs of adjusting the labor force. LABOR = (hiring index + firing index + firing costs +
rigidity of labor contracts + union density)/5. See also Appendix I.

41

Table 6: Correlation among regulatory indices the components of the indices
REGULATION
ENTRY
CONTRACT
LABOR

ENTRY
1
0.75
0.50

CONTRACT

LABOR

1
0.27

1

PROCEDURES
1
0.70
0.46
0.38

TIME

COST

REGUL. (IEF)

1
0.49
0.47

1
0.52

1

ENTRY REGULATION
PROCEDURES
TIME
COST
REGULATION (IEF)

CONTRACT ENFORCEMENT REG.
PROCEDURES
PROCEDURES
QUALITY OF BUREAUCRACY

QUALITY OF
BUREAUCRACY

1
0.50

1

HIRING INDEX

FIRING INDEX

FIRING COST

1
0.47
0.28
0.39
0.01

1
0.23
0.33
0.11

1
0.18
-0.16

LABOR MARKET REG.

HIRING INDEX
FIRING INDEX
FIRING COST
RIGIDITY LABOR CONTRACTS
UNION DENSITY

RIGIDITY LABOR
CONTRACTS

1
0.38

UNION DENSITY

1

Notes: ENTRY measures the barriers and costs entrepreneurs face when they decide to create a new business; ENTRY = (procedures + time + cost +
regulation (IEF))/4. CONTRACT measures the efficiency of the justice system in resolving commercial disputes; CONTRACT = (procedures + quality of
bureaucracy)/2. LABOR measures the difficulty for entrepreneurs of adjusting the labor force. LABOR = (hiring index + firing index + firing costs +
rigidity of labor contracts + union density)/5. See also Appendix I.

42

Table 7: Entrepreneurship and personal characteristics
TEA=1

AGE
% MALE
% WORKING
% STUDENTS
% RETIRED AND DISABLED
% NOT WORKING
%HIGH SCHOOL
% COLLEGE
% LOW INCOME
% MIDDLE INCOME
% UPPER INCOME
% KNOWS ENTREPR
% HAS SKILLS
% FEAR OF FAILURE

TEA=0

ST. ERR. OF
DIFF

TEAOPP=1

TEANEC=1

ST. ERR. OF
DIFF

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

37.50
64.84
84.75
2.12
2.01
11.13
35.59
37.39
24.20
35.56
40.24
62.67
81.52
21.87

39.50
48.08
64.83
4.99
6.96
23.22
38.51
29.76
28.20
40.52
31.28
32.38
37.14
34.74

0.12**
0.48**
0.49**
0.22**
0.26**
0.43**
0.50**
0.48**
0.54**
0.59**
0.55**
0.45**
0.46**
0.46**

37.07
66.37
86.46
2.23
1.92
9.39
35.43
42.30
19.76
34.79
45.46
66.54
84.59
19.12

38.24
60.98
80.24
1.69
2.18
15.89
34.75
22.79
37.33
37.78
24.89
53.13
74.22
29.60

0.24**
1.04**
0.86**
0.34
0.32
0.75**
1.12
1.13**
1.14**
1.31**
1.31**
1.04**
0.84**
0.90**

Notes: Difference in mean statistically different from zero at 5% (**) / 10% (*). TEA = 1 if individuals are starting a new business or are owners and
managers of a young firm, 0 otherwise; TEAOPP = 1 if individuals are starting a new business or are owners and managers of a young firm to take
advantage of a business opportunity, 0 otherwise; TEANEC = 1 if individuals are starting a new business or are owners and managers of a young firm
because they could find no better economic work, 0 otherwise. See Notes to Table 2 and Appendix I for the exact definition of the variables.

43

Table 8: Entrepreneurship and individual characteristics
TEA
(1)
0.0020
(3.20)***
-0.00003
(-4.10)***
0.0112
(5.67)***
-0.0235
(-6.20)***
-0.0295
(-7.68)***
-0.0287
(-5.70)***
0.0029
(1.13)
0.0028
(0.88)
0.0429
(14.63)***
0.0848
(29.02)***
-0.0200
(-9.19)***

TEAOPP
(2)
0.0012
(3.03)***
-0.00002
(-3.91)***
0.0082
(6.28)***
-0.0150
(-7.22)***
-0.0169
(-7.63)***
-0.0167
(-4.08)***
0.0062
(3.42)***
0.0102
(5.83)***
0.0304
(15.95)***
0.0591
(25.58)***
-0.0152
(-9.07)***

TEANEC
(3)
0.0006
(2.32)**
-0.000008
(-2.66)***
0.0017
(1.97)**
-0.0045
(-2.96)***
-0.0071
(-3.88)***
-0.0067
(-4.44)***
-0.0020
(-1.69)*
-0.0058
(-4.34)***
0.0056
(5.43)***
0.0148
(16.14)***
-0.0012
(-1.64)*

TEA
TEAOPP
TEANEC
(4)
(5)
(6)
AGE
0.0019
0.0012
0.0005
(2.38)**
(2.42)**
(1.39)
AGE SQUARE
-0.00003
-0.00002
-0.000006
(-3.19)***
(-3.26)***
(-1.65)*
MALE
0.0116
0.0082
0.0017
(5.36)***
(5.51)***
(1.50)
NOT WORKING
-0.0231
-0.0134
-0.0055
(-5.00)***
(-5.49)***
(-3.00)***
STUDENTS
-0.0280
-0.0146
-0.0080
(-5.08)***
(-4.21)***
(-3.86)***
RETIRED DISABLES
-0.0270
-0.0147
-0.0070
(-3.91)***
(-2.86)***
(-2.86)***
HIGHSCHOOL
0.0034
0.0058
-0.0013
(1.05)
(2.70)***
(-0.83)
COLLEGE
0.0010
0.0071
-0.0051
(0.27)
(3.38)***
(-2.62)***
KNOWENT
0.0435
0.0293
0.0068
(14.33)***
(15.70)***
(5.03)***
SKILLS
0.0867
0.0604
0.0160
(25.54)***
(24.09)***
(15.54)***
FEARFAIL
-0.0201
-0.0147
-0.0016
(-7.30)***
(-7.32)***
(-2.14)**
LOWESTINC
0.0066
0.0004
0.0038
(1.71)*
(0.16)
(2.12)**
UPPERINC
0.0069
0.0065
-0.0022
(2.01)**
(2.38)**
(-1.62)
OBSERVATIONS
118525
118525
118525
83397
83397
83397
Notes: Probit regressions including country fixed effects and a time dummy for 2001. Standard errors are clustered at the country level. Marginal effects
(not coefficients) and t-stat. are shown in the tables. ***, **, * coefficients statistically significant at 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively. TEA = 1 if
individuals are starting a new business or are owners and managers of a young firm, 0 otherwise; TEAOPP = 1 if individuals are starting a new business or
are owners and managers of a young firm to take advantage of a business opportunity, 0 otherwise; TEANEC = 1 if individuals are starting a new business
or are owners and managers of a young firm because they could find no better economic work, 0 otherwise. See Notes to Table 2 and Appendix I for the
exact definition of the variables.

44

Table 9: Entrepreneurship and regulation
R=
R=
R=
R=
R=
R=
R=
R=
R=
ENTRY
ENTRY
ENTRY
CONTRACT
CONTRACT
CONTRACT
LABOR
LABOR
LABOR
TEA
TEAOPP
TEANEC
TEA
TEAOPP
TEANEC
TEA
TEAOPP
TEANEC
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
AGE
0.0022
0.0013
0.0007
0.0021
0.0012
0.0007
0.0025
0.0015
0.0007
(3.78)***
(3.37)***
(3.64)***
(3.39)***
(2.96)***
(3.48)***
(3.64)***
(3.54)***
(2.77)***
AGE SQUARE
-0.00003
-0.00002
-0.000008
-0.00003
-0.00002
-0.000009
-0.00003
-0.00002
-0.000008
(-4.11)***
(-3.95)***
(-3.05)***
(-4.11)***
(-3.82)***
(-3.25)***
(-4.24)***
(-4.15)***
(-2.6)***
MALE
0.0164
0.0076
0.0056
0.0141
0.0076
0.0046
0.0125
0.0066
0.0038
(4.31)***
(2.77)***
(3.92)***
(5.44)***
(3.94)***
(4.30)***
(3.01)***
(2.46)**
(2.35)**
NOT WORKING
-0.0058
-0.0091
0.0043
-0.0125
-0.0107
0.0007
-0.0100
-0.0068
-0.0015
(-0.78)
(-1.72)*
(1.41)
(-2.44)**
(-3.41)***
(0.29)
(-1.17)
(-1.73)*
(-0.31)
STUDENTS
-0.0148
-0.0112
0.0009
-0.0218
-0.0145
-0.0034
-0.0201
-0.0155
0.0055
(-1.60)
(-1.86)*
(0.15)
(-3.79)***
(-3.98)***
(-1.07)
(-1.51)
(-2.14)**
(0.96)
RET. DIS.
-0.0259
-0.0153
-0.0059
-0.0240
-0.0144
-0.0051
-0.0285
-0.0162
-0.0067
(-2.74)***
(-1.95)*
(-2.48)**
(-3.53)***
(-2.77)***
(-2.31)**
(-2.48)**
(-1.91)*
(-2.7)***
HIGHSCHOOL
-0.0036
0.0024
-0.0056
0.0016
0.0037
-0.0033
-0.0002
0.0053
-0.0038
(-0.48)
(0.49)
(-2.52)**
(0.38)
(1.17)
(-2.07)**
(-0.03)
(1.16)
(-2.6)***
COLLEGE
0.0011
0.0072
-0.0084
0.0038
0.0082
-0.0067
0.0034
0.0103
-0.0074
(0.14)
(1.61)
(-3.43)***
(0.84)
(2.68)***
(-4.19)***
(0.61)
(2.54)**
(-5.7)***
KNOWENT
0.0601
0.0399
0.0082
0.0537
0.0356
0.0088
0.0616
0.0426
0.0082
(12.73)*** (11.09)***
(4.32)***
(15.99)***
(14.43)***
(6.59)***
(12.34)*** (12.01)*** (5.11)***
SKILLS
0.0972
0.0701
0.0144
0.0938
0.0672
0.0145
0.0864
0.0609
0.0130
(24.95)*** (21.95)*** (11.52)***
(27.58)***
(24.19)***
(12.45)***
(15.83)*** (19.49)*** (7.24)***
FEARFAIL
-0.0151
-0.0117
0.0021
-0.0170
-0.0137
0.0017
-0.0104
-0.0090
0.0030
(-3.83)***
(-3.94)***
(1.55)
(-5.13)***
(-5.36)***
(1.85)*
(-3.04)***
(-3.53)***
(2.64)***
R*AGE
-0.0009
-0.0005
-0.0003
-0.0005
-0.0001
-0.0002
-0.0013
-0.0009
-0.0002
(-1.22)
(-0.88)
(-0.85)
(-1.00)
(-0.56)
(-1.01)
(-1.46)
(-1.46)
(-1.22)
R*MALE
-0.0184
0.0016
-0.0114
-0.0153
0.0018
-0.0104
-0.0043
0.0044
-0.0058
(-1.75)*
(0.21)
(-2.85)***
(-1.78)*
(0.29)
(-3.04)***
(-0.44)
(0.62)
(-1.74)*
R*NOT WORK.
-0.0639
-0.0237
-0.0245
-0.0519
-0.0227
-0.0186
-0.0466
-0.0299
-0.0095
(-3.07)***
(-1.45)
(-3.47)***
(-3.35)***
(-1.94)*
(-2.98)***
(-2.26)**
(-2.68)***
(-0.87)
R*STUDENTS
-0.0801
-0.0342
-0.0332
-0.0553
-0.0194
-0.0217
-0.0519
-0.0100
-0.0434
(-2.73)***
(-1.57)
(-2.49)**
(-2.90)***
(-1.34)
(-2.48)**
(-1.14)
(-0.37)
(-3.4)***
R* RET. DIS
-0.0166
-0.0095
-0.0039
-0.0386
-0.0213
-0.0100
0.0006
-0.0010
0.0012
(-0.61)
(-0.44)
(-0.51)
(-2.08)**
(-1.81)*
(-1.13)
(0.02)
(-0.04)
(0.11)
R*HIGHSCHOOL
0.0205
0.0114
0.0104
0.0070
0.0104
0.0045
0.0076
0.0019
0.0047
(0.82)
(0.71)
(1.64)*
(0.34)
(0.84)
(0.82)
(0.59)
(0.17)
(1.22)
R*COLLEGE
0.0034
0.0080
0.0095
-0.0048
0.0071
0.0039
-0.0036
-0.0012
0.0054
(0.13)
(0.65)
(1.01)
(-0.24)
(0.75)
(0.53)
(-0.27)
(-0.13)
(1.35)
R*KNOWENT
-0.0421
-0.0228
-0.0061
-0.0373
-0.0184
-0.0092
-0.0406
-0.0258
-0.0059
(-3.85)***
(-2.78)***
(-1.27)
(-4.09)***
(-2.78)***
(-2.42)**
(-3.41)***
(-3.60)***
(-1.24)
R*SKILLS
-0.0273
-0.0227
0.0004
-0.0270
-0.0235
0.0003
-0.0027
-0.0032
0.0032
(-2.68)***
(-2.35)**
(0.15)
(-2.54)**
(-2.58)***
(0.12)
(-0.21)
(-0.37)
(0.87)
R*FEARFAIL
-0.0170
-0.0130
-0.0089
-0.0125
-0.0066
-0.0095
-0.0306
-0.0205
-0.0110
(-1.45)
(-1.42)
(-2.55)**
(-1.26)
(-0.86)
(-3.90)***
(-3.08)***
(-2.57)**
(-4.1)***
OBSERVATIONS
118525
118525
118525
118525
118525
118525
116978
116978
116978
Notes: Probit regressions including country fixed effects and a time dummy for 2001. Standard errors are clustered at the country level. Marginal effects
(not coefficients) and t-stat. are shown in the tables. ***, **, * coefficients statistically significant at 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively. TEA = 1 if
individuals are starting a new business or are owners and managers of a young firm, 0 otherwise; TEAOPP = 1 if individuals are starting a new business or
are owners and managers of a young firm to take advantage of a business opportunity, 0 otherwise; TEANEC = 1 if individuals are starting a new business
or are owners and managers of a young firm because they could find no better economic work, 0 otherwise; ENTRY measures the barriers and costs
entrepreneurs face when they decide to create a new business; ENTRY = (procedures + time + cost + regulation (IEF))/4. CONTRACT measures the
efficiency of the justice system in resolving commercial disputes; CONTRACT = (procedures + quality of bureaucracy)/2. LABOR measures the
difficulty for entrepreneurs of adjusting the labor force. LABOR = (hiring index + firing index + firing costs + rigidity of labor contracts + union
density)/5. See Notes to Table 2 and Appendix I for the exact definition of the variables.

45

Table 10: Entrepreneurship and regulation – Instrumental variables estimation (weighted data)

AGE
AGE SQUARE
MALE
NOT WORKING
STUDENTS
RET. DIS
HIGHSCHOOL
COLLEGE
KNOWENT
SKILLS
FEARFAIL
R*AGE
R*MALE
R*NOT WORK.
R*STUDENTS
R* RET. DIS
R*HIGHSCHOOL
R*COLLEGE
R*KNOWENT
R*SKILLS
R*FEARFAIL
OBSERVATIONS

R=
ENTRY
TEA
(1)
0.0020
(2.20)**
-0.0000
(2.64)**
0.0254
(4.03)***
-0.0071
(0.51)
-0.0212
(1.64)
-0.0318
(1.81)*
0.0153
(1.21)
0.0134
(0.96)
0.0915
(7.84)***
0.1029
(5.90)***
-0.0191
(2.78)***
-0.0009
(0.66)
-0.0373
(1.80)*
-0.0760
(1.60)
-0.0970
(1.96)*
-0.0121
(0.25)
-0.0427
(1.29)
-0.0390
(0.94)
-0.1004
(3.01)***
-0.0112
(0.24)
-0.0325
(1.49)
118525

R=
ENTRY
TEAOPP
(2)
0.0014
(2.39)**
-0.0000
(2.88)***
0.0158
(3.19)***
-0.0098
(1.15)
-0.0187
(1.81)*
-0.0288
(1.85)*
0.0177
(2.26)**
0.0148
(1.90)*
0.0838
(7.82)***
0.0865
(5.94)***
-0.0236
(3.95)***
-0.0010
(0.89)
-0.0132
(0.87)
-0.0326
(1.25)
-0.0525
(1.60)
0.0250
(0.63)
-0.0405
(1.93)*
-0.0076
(0.31)
-0.1116
(3.69)***
-0.0401
(1.07)
-0.0052
(0.30)
118525

R=
ENTRY
TEANEC
(3)
0.0004
(0.80)
-0.0000
(1.62)
0.0079
(2.04)**
0.0038
(0.45)
-0.0006
(0.07)
0.0037
(0.71)
-0.0022
(0.26)
-0.0027
(0.27)
0.0009
(0.18)
0.0099
(1.44)
0.0061
(2.98)***
0.0007
(1.08)
-0.0187
(1.27)
-0.0409
(1.37)
-0.0409
(1.41)
-0.0492
(2.41)**
-0.0036
(0.15)
-0.0264
(0.84)
0.0251
(1.75)*
0.0344
(1.64)
-0.0269
(3.32)***
118525

R=
CONTRACT
TEA
(4)
0.0019
(1.91)*
-0.0000
(2.69)**
0.0207
(3.94)***
-0.0149
(1.22)
-0.0291
(2.40)**
-0.0322
(2.17)**
0.0110
(1.35)
0.0098
(1.10)
0.0764
(7.48)***
0.1042
(7.70)***
-0.0205
(3.82)***
-0.0004
(0.34)
-0.0321
(1.35)
-0.0727
(1.59)
-0.0930
(1.81)*
-0.0158
(0.33)
-0.0420
(1.42)
-0.0373
(0.97)
-0.0735
(1.86)*
-0.0215
(0.43)
-0.0381
(1.52)
118525

R=
CONTRACT
TEAOPP
(5)
0.0012
(1.94)*
-0.0000
(2.82)***
0.0127
(2.93)***
-0.0106
(1.53)
-0.0233
(2.48)**
-0.0265
(1.91)*
0.0114
(1.93)*
0.0115
(2.04)**
0.0680
(7.37)***
0.0871
(7.46)***
-0.0241
(5.15)***
-0.0003
(0.38)
-0.0056
(0.33)
-0.0417
(1.74)*
-0.0510
(1.46)
0.0224
(0.54)
-0.0304
(1.50)
0.0042
(0.17)
-0.0865
(2.54)**
-0.0600
(1.44)
-0.0027
(0.13)
118525

R=
CONTRACT
TEANEC
(6)
0.0006
(1.08)
-0.0000
(1.70)*
0.0074
(2.32)**
-0.0029
(0.38)
-0.0034
(0.51)
0.0003
(0.09)
0.0001
(0.01)
-0.0023
(0.33)
0.0034
(0.89)
0.0109
(2.57)**
0.0049
(2.89)***
0.0006
(0.95)
-0.0242
(1.36)
-0.0285
(0.86)
-0.0390
(1.31)
-0.0515
(2.70)**
-0.0150
(0.73)
-0.0385
(1.32)
0.0247
(1.72)*
0.0454
(2.40)**
-0.0340
(4.26)***
118525

R=
LABOR
TEA
(7)
0.0022
(2.47)**
-0.0000
(3.10)***
0.0241
(3.53)***
-0.0165
(1.03)
-0.0286
(1.44)
-0.0373
(1.76)*
0.0063
(0.52)
0.0054
(0.39)
0.1074
(10.81)***
0.1039
(5.19)***
-0.0220
(3.07)***
-0.0008
(0.58)
-0.0272
(1.50)
-0.0402
(0.83)
-0.0647
(1.02)
0.0078
(0.14)
-0.0124
(0.46)
-0.0120
(0.37)
-0.1292
(5.13)***
-0.0121
(0.26)
-0.0215
(1.14)
116978

R=
LABOR
TEAOPP
(8)
0.0016
(2.79)***
-0.0000
(3.37)***
0.0145
(2.60)**
-0.0134
(1.40)
-0.0231
(1.73)*
-0.0316
(1.67)
0.0153
(1.96)*
0.0169
(2.22)**
0.0948
(11.42)***
0.0779
(4.93)***
-0.0220
(3.72)***
-0.0009
(0.87)
-0.0070
(0.46)
-0.0178
(0.66)
-0.0332
(0.85)
0.0342
(0.76)
-0.0282
(1.53)
-0.0137
(0.68)
-0.1255
(6.04)***
-0.0096
(0.26)
-0.0102
(0.68)
116978

R=
LABOR
TEANEC
(9)
0.0004
(0.88)
-0.0000
(1.91)*
0.0064
(2.16)**
-0.0014
(0.15)
-0.0027
(0.19)
0.0001
(0.02)
-0.0089
(0.91)
-0.0144
(1.43)
0.0052
(1.06)
0.0207
(2.10)**
0.0022
(0.74)
0.0007
(0.98)
-0.0115
(1.32)
-0.0221
(0.86)
-0.0304
(0.73)
-0.0341
(1.56)
0.0152
(0.73)
0.0110
(0.48)
0.0098
(0.78)
-0.0011
(0.05)
-0.0124
(1.51)
116978

Notes: IV regressions including country fixed effects and a time dummy for 2001. Standard errors are clustered at the country level. Instruments for the
regulatory variable R are dummy variables measuring English (common law), French (civil law), Socialist, German and Scandinavian legal origin.
Coefficients and t-stat. are shown in the tables. ***, **, * coefficients statistically significant at 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively. TEA = 1 if
individuals are starting a new business or are owners and managers of a young firm, 0 otherwise; TEAOPP = 1 if individuals are starting a new business or
are owners and managers of a young firm to take advantage of a business opportunity, 0 otherwise; TEANEC = 1 if individuals are starting a new business
or are owners and managers of a young firm because they could find no better economic work, 0 otherwise. See Notes to Table 2 and Appendix I for the
exact definition of the variables.

46

47

Figure 1: Entrepreneurship across the world
Entrepreunership rates by income groups
90

7

80

TEAOPP
TEANEC
(%)
TEANEC/TEAOPP
(%)

8

70

6

60

5

50

4

40

3

30

2

20

1

10

0

0
High Income

Upper Middle
Income

TEAOPP

Middle Low
Income

TEANEC

Low Income

TEANEC/TEAOPP

Entrepreunership rates by geografic regions
90

8

80

TEAOPP
TEANEC
(%)
TEANEC/TEAOPP
(%)

9

7

70

6

60

5

50

4

40

3

30

2

20

1

10

0

0
OECD

EU

EAP

TEAOPP

TEANEC

ECA

LATIN
AMERICA

TEANEC/TEAOPP

Entrepreunership rates by legal origin
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

TEANEC/TEAOPP
(%)

TEAOPP
TEANEC
(%)

7
6
5
4
3
2
1

CI
AL
IS
TS

EN
CH

SO
TEAOPP

Notes: see Appendix I.

FR

AN
M
GE
R

EN
G

SC
AN

DI
N

AV

IA
N

LI
SH

0

TEANEC

TEANEC/TEAOPP

Figure 2: Entrepreneurship and regulation – high income countries

.12

Entrepreneurship and the regulation of entry

Entrepreneurship and the regulation of entry

.1

y=

- 0.062 x
(-1.74)

irl

kor

aus
nor
che

dnk
fin

prt

ita

sing

can
aus

deu
taiw
fra

esp
slov

.02

dnk

.2

.5

.6

.1

.12
.1

nor
che
fin
prt

ita

sing

taiw
fra

esp
slov

.02

dnk

.5

.6

.1

.04

- 0.043 x
(-1.66)

bel

.5

.6

kor irl
aus
nor
che

dnk
fin
prt

ita

sing

deu
isr
bel

- 0.009 x
(-0.89)

kor

nzl
can

irl
aus

nld

uk

0.015
(3.66)

R2 = 0.03
N. obs = 24

TEANEC
.02
.03

R2 = 0.11
N. obs = 24

swe
esp
taiw

fra

usa

.01

0.069
(6.54)

.1

esp

.05

.12

y=

TEAOPP
.06
.08

prt

Entrepreneurship and the regulation of labor

nzl

.04

slov

.2
.3
.4
Contract enforcement regulatory index

Entrepreneurship and the regulation of labor

sing

deu
ita

hkon
uk

jpn
che

nld

fra

swe
fin
nor

0

jpn

.2
.4
Labor market regulatory index

esp

.6

0

prt

isr
dnk bel

hkon

.02

fin
nor

che jpn
taiw
fra
nld

0

.2
.3
.4
Contract enforcement regulatory index

can

kor

deu
ita
isr
swe

uk

bel
jpn

y=

.6

irl
usa

hkon
sing

hkon

.1

+ 0.023 x
(1.65)

aus

deu

.5

nzl

nld

swe
isr

bel

.3
.4
Entry regulatory index

0.008
(2.59)

can

.01

.04

uk

esp

R2 = 0.11
N. obs = 25

TEANEC
.02
.03

kor

aus
dnk

y=

.04

irl
can

.2

.05

- 0.046 x
(-1.14)

R2 = 0.05
N. obs = 25

usa

TEAOPP
.06
.08

0.060
(7.16)

prt

slov

Entrepreneurship and contract enforcement regulation

nzl

y=

fin
nor

che jpn
taiw
fra
nld

0

.3
.4
Entry regulatory index

Entrepreneurship and contract enforcement regulation

0

isr
swe

uk

bel
jpn

usa

deu
ita

usa

hkon
sing

hkon

.1

kor

irl

nld

swe
isr

+ 0.01 x
(0.77)

nzl

.01

.04

uk

0.009
(2.59)

R2 = 0.02
N. obs = 25

TEANEC
.02
.03

can

y=

.04

R2 = 0.12
N. obs = 25

usa

TEAOPP
.06
.08

0.069
(6.46)

.05

nzl

.2
.4
Labor market regulatory index

.6

taiw

Figure 3: Entrepreneurship and regulation – middle and low income countries

.08

Entrepreneurship and the regulation of entry

tha

y=

0.078
(2.05)

.1

y=
chl

mex

TEAOPP

chl
ind

braz

.05

arg hung

0.017
(0.71)

ind
mex

tha
hung

pol
safr

.02

pol

braz

arg

chin
safr

chin

+ 0.05x
(1.05)

R2 = 0.10
N. obs = 12

.06

R2 = 0.02
N. obs = 12

- 0.031x
(-0.42)

TEANEC
.04

.15

Entrepreneurship and the regulation of entry

croa

rus

croa

0

0

rus

.3

.4

.5
.6
Entry regulatory index

.7

.8

.3

.7

.8

.08

chin

0.068
(1.79)

R2 = 0.01
N. obs = 12

- 0.01x
(-0.14)

y=
chl

.06

y=

mex

chl
braz

ind

.05

arg hung

0.009
(0.39)

ind
mex

tha
pol

hung

safr

.02

pol

braz

arg

chin
safr

+ 0.063x
(1.51)

R2 = 0.19
N. obs = 12

TEANEC
.04

.15

tha

.1

.5
.6
Entry regulatory index

Entrepreneurship and contract enforcement regulation

Entrepreneurship and contract enforcement regulation

TEAOPP

.4

croa

rus

croa

0

0

rus

.3

.4

.5
.6
Contract enforcement regulatory index

.7

.8

.3

.4

.15

.08

- 0.179x
(-2.43)

chl
ind

.8

- 0.077x
(-1.37)
arg

mex

TEANEC
.04

arg

hung

tha

chin

pol
safr

hung
safr

.02

pol

0.074
(3.02)

R2 = 0.16
N. obs = 12

mex

ind braz

.05

braz

.06

0.138
(4.30)

R2 = 0.37
chl = 12
N. obs

.1

y=

chin

y=

.7

Entrepreneurship and the regulation of labor

Entrepreneurship and the regulation of labor
tha

TEAOPP

.5
.6
Contract enforcement regulatory index

croa

rus

croa

0

0

rus

.2

.3

.4
.5
Labor market regulatory index

.6

.2

.3

.4
.5
Labor market regulatory index

.6

