NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SEARCHING FOR OPTIMAL INEQUALITY/INCENTIVES
Anders Björklund
Richard Freeman
Working Paper 14014
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14014

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2008

Anders Björklund acknowledges financial support from the Swedish Council for Working Life and
Social Research. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Anders Björklund and Richard Freeman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Searching for Optimal Inequality/Incentives
Anders Björklund and Richard Freeman
NBER Working Paper No. 14014
May 2008
JEL No. J0,J01,J08,J24,J3
ABSTRACT
This paper examines the evolution of economic inequality in Sweden before, during and after the major
macro-economic recession in the early 1990s. Earnings and income inequality increased after the downturn,
but government safety net programs buttressed disposable income for those with low income, and
despite the rise in inequality, Sweden remained one of the most egalitarian economies in the world.
The rise in inequality raised the return to observable skills, but the returns are still too low to explain
that Sweden moved to the top of the league tables in knowledge intensive activities. Our analysis of
attitudes to inequality shows that more Swedes expressed more concern over the inequity in inequality
after the rise in inequality in the 1990s than in the past. Further, more Swedes expressed greater dissatisfaction
with wages and working conditions. On the other hand, the rise in unemployment did not reduce overall
subjective well being, probably because individuals adapted to higher levels of unemployment.

Anders Björklund
Swedish Institute for Social Research
Stockholm University
SE-10691 Stockholm
Sweden
anders@sofi.su.se
Richard Freeman
NBER
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
freeman@nber.org

Economic inequality is Janus-faced. Inequality creates incentives for people to move from
lower rewarding activities to higher rewarding activities, which raises output and should reduce the
difference in rewards. Inequality also produces differences in living standards that can lead some
into poverty and social exclusion. In public debate, persons on the right stress the effect of
inequality on incentives and work effort while persons on the left stress the effect of inequality on
living standards for those with low incomes. Both are important.
Since the 1960s Sweden has been a world leader in reducing inequality and poverty. In the
labor market, institutional wage determination compressed hourly earnings for persons with similar
measured skills and limited differentials across skill groups (Björklund and Freeman, 1997); while
dispersion of literacy and numeracy skills in Sweden was also low compared to the US (Devroye and
Freeman, 2003). Family background played a smaller role in labor market success than the US
(Solon, 2002; Björklund and Jäntti, 1997; Björklund et al., 2002). Inequality was lower in Sweden
than in the US in long run/permanent earnings and income as well as in the transitory component
(Aaberge et al. 2002).1 Generous welfare benefits and high tax rates extended egalitarianism beyond
the working population, so that the disposable income in the bottom decile of the income distribution
was closer to the median than in most other countries.2 As a result a poor child in Sweden had a
higher income than a poor child in the US despite the US having higher per capita GDP. These facts
led Social Democrats in Sweden and elsewhere to see the country as establishing an attractive
welfare state alternative to more market-driven capitalist economies.
The huge recession that hit Sweden in 1991-94 challenged the viability of the Swedish
3

model. Rates of unemployment rose from below 2 % to over 9% , and the proportion of the work
force on labor market programs reached 5.5% in 1994. The employment to population rate fell from
83.1 in 1990 to 70.7 in 1997,4 in large part because Sweden reduced public sector employment to

1

Sweden was not the only country with a highly egalitarian distribution of income. Other
Scandinavian countries and Belgium also had low inequality in labor market earnings and in total
income, while Japan has low inequality in total income.
2
In 1991 the disposable income of adults aged 20-64 in the bottom decile of the income distribution
was 60% that of the median. Among children 0-17 the ratio the disposable income of those in the
bottom decile was 67% of median income. Among adults, the ratio of disposable income in the top
decile to income in the bottom decile was 2.67, while among children the ratio of income in the top
decile to income in the bottom decile was 2.23 (Björklund and Freeman, 1997).
3
Unemployment rates vary depending on whether they have been adjusted for international
comparability or not. The National Institute of Economic Research Sweden gives quarterly open
unemployment rates that reach 9.4% in 1993Q4 and in 1997Q1. OECD gives standardized
unemployment rates of 1.7% in 1990 that rise to 9.6% in 1996 and 9.9% in 1997.
4
http://ocde.p4.siteinternet.com/publications/doifiles/302005041P1T050.xls

deal with a crisis in public finances. The rise in unemployment, job loss, and fiscal problems were a
wake-up call that the economy was not as healthy as touted. Many analysts believed that Sweden
had strayed too far from market solutions for the long-term success of the welfare state and called
for market reforms that invariably increased inequalities.
From the mid-1990s through the mid-2000s the Swedish economy recovered smartly from
recession. Real GDP per capita in purchasing power parity terms increased rapidly from 1993-94 to
2006, though Sweden still ranked lower in GDP per capita among those countries than it had in the
1980s. Productivity increased more in Sweden than in most other advanced OECD countries,
including the US, and was accompanied by growth in real wages (Fredriksson and Topel, 2008). The
current account in the balance of trade became positive. The country moved to the top rung in what
the OECD has termed “investment in knowledge” – research and development spending, investment
in higher education and investment in information technology. The World Economic Forum’s
Global Competitiveness Report placed Sweden 4th out of 131 countries in competitiveness in 20072008 (http://www.weforum.org/pdf/Gcr/profiles08/Sweden.pdf).
But job growth lagged the recovery overall.5 Between 1994 and 2000 private sector
employment expanded by 300,000 while public sector employment stagnated. After exceeding the
rate of unemployment in the EU at the peak of the recession, Sweden’s unemployment rate fell to
4% in 2001 and 2002. The proportion of the work force on labor market programs (which is not
counted as part of unemployment) also fell, bottoming out at 2.1% in 2003, but even so the jobless
rate including labor market programs remained high. As of 2005, the employment-population rate in
the country was several points below the pre-recession 1991 level.6
What happened to Sweden’s egalitarian outcomes during the crisis and recovery? Did the
crisis lead Swedes to view inequality and life and job satisfaction differently than in the past? Did
the incentives from increased inequality contribute to the recovery and competitiveness? Why has
Sweden done so well in investing in knowledge and competitiveness despite lower inequality and
pecuniary incentives than most other advanced economies?
This study examines these questions. Section 1 shows that inequality in earnings and income
increased moderately through the early 2000s while inequality in hours worked increased
substantially, making it the most important form of inequality in the society. But the rise in
inequality notwithstanding, Sweden remained a leading egalitarian economy in the world. Section 2
5

OECD, Report (2005). This occurred as well in the US, Korea and other countries.
U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics Office of Productivity and Technology
http://www.bls.gov/fls/ June 16, 2006, Comparative Real Gross Domestic Product Per Capita and
Per Employed Person Fifteen Countries 1960-2005Table 5
6

shows that Swedes are aware of the inequity and incentive sides of inequality and that their tolerance
for inequality, while less than that of Americans, is similar to that of persons in most other advanced
economies. It also shows satisfaction with living conditions has been relatively stable while
satisfaction with wages has become modestly lower. Section 3 argues that the increased earnings
inequality was productivity enhancing, but that factors other than pecuniary rewards in the labor
market underlie Sweden’s large investment in university training and success in knowledgeintensive activity.
1. Earnings, Hours Worked, and Income Inequality
To determine how the distribution of earnings changed in the 1990s-early 2000s period of
recession and recovery, we examined employer reports on earnings from Statistics Sweden and
individual reports on earnings from the LNU survey. Figure 1 displays the ratios of the earnings of
employees in the 90th percentile of the before tax monthly earnings distribution to the earnings of
employees in the 10th percentile (90/10 ratio) and the comparable ratios of earnings for persons at the
90th percentile relative to median earnings (90/10) and of earnings at the median to earnings at the
10th percentile (50/10). All of the earnings are adjusted to a full-time equivalent basis from
employer records for 1990-2006. The data show that the 90/10 ratio went from 1.8 in 1995 to 2.0 in
2003, with the rise roughly equally divided between an increase in the 90/50 ratio and an increase in
the 50/10 ratio. These increases in inequality are substantive in low inequality Sweden. The figure
also gives percentile income ratios from the 1991 and 2000 LNU. The LNU data shows a smaller
rise in inequality. The LNU had a higher level of inequality than the employer-based data in 1991
and a similar rate in 2000.
Björklund and Freeman (1997) found that Sweden’s relatively egalitarian distribution of
annual earnings was due as much to a narrow distribution of hours worked as to the more publicized
narrow distribution of hourly earnings. To see how hours worked changed over the 1990s, we
tabulated the distribution of working hours from the 1991 and 2000 LNU surveys, which give annual
hours for 1990 and 1999, respectively. The hours measure includes hours paid for but spent on
vacation time and hours employed when the worker is on short-term absences due to sickness or
caring for a sick child.
Table 1 gives the mean hours worked, the coefficient of variation in hours worked, and the
distribution of hours worked for individuals aged 19-64. It shows a substantial increase in inequality
of hours worked, with the coefficient of variation in hours worked rising from 0.52 to 0.63. The
increase is due almost entirely to an increase in the proportion of persons working zero hours and
thus long-term unemployed. Disaggregating hours for the age group19-24, 25-54 and 55-64 shows

that the largest increase is among 19-24 year olds, which reflects both unemployment of those out of
school and the increased proportion of young persons in school without any accompanying time
worked. The growth of inequality in hours is smallest for older people, possibly due to the
incentives the reformed pension system gives to persons to keep working through age 67.7
Rising inequality in monthly earnings and hours worked increased the dispersion of annual
disposable income among families during the recession and into the ensuing recovery. Panel A of
figure 2 displays the Gini coefficient measure of inequality measured by Statistic’s Sweden pre-1991
tax reform income definition (labelled old) and by its post-1991 tax reform definition (labelled new).
The Gini from both definitions in the overlap period shows that the more inclusive definition
increased inequality, so that an accurate reading of trends requires that we compute them separately.
The Gini under the new definition increased from 0.23 to a peak of 0.31 in 2000 and then falls to
0.28-0.29 through 2005. Panel B of the figure, which measures inequality by income ratios for
different deciles, tells a similar story. The income at the 90th percentile relative to that at the 10th
percentile went from 2.55 in 1991 to 3.20 in 2005. The lines for the ratio of income for the 90th
percentile to the median and for the median to the 10th percentile show that, as with ratios of
earnings in figure 1, the rise in the 90/10 ratio is roughly equally divided between rises in the 90/50
ratio and the 50/10 ratio.
The rise in inequality was not, however, associated with losses of income for lower income
families. Panel C of figure 2 shows the real disposable income of persons in different percentiles in
the 1980s and in the period of rising inequality. The real disposable household incomes at the 10th
percentile fell from 1989 to 1997 but then recovered to be about 10% higher than it was in 1991. The
increased inequality took the form of greater growth of incomes for higher income families, shown
by the sharp upward trend in the earning of persons in 90th percentile from 1995 through 2005 – a
gain of about 37% -- rather than in declines of incomes for lower income families.
To what extent did Sweden’s welfare state maintain incomes of households at the bottom of
the distribution during the recession? Table 2 uses data specially tabulated for our study by Statistics
Sweden on the percentage of household disposable income accruing to persons in different deciles
from earnings, capital returns, pensions, and various government programs. If welfare state
programs provided a stable safety net, we would expect that the share of incomes from programs like
sickness, parental leave, UI and labor market programs; universal tax free benefits and means-tested
tax free benefits would rise sharply between 1991 to 1995 and fall thereafter for persons in the low
income deciles but not for those in higher income deciles. The table shows such a pattern. In 1991
7

We obtained similar results with hours worked per adult household member.

the sum of the share of income in the three program areas in the bottom part of the table is 29.1% for
the bottom decile, 26.7% for the next lowest decile, and 24.2% for the third lowest decile. In 1995
the sum of the shares of income for these groups are 49.8%, 42.5% and 31.2%, respectively –
increases of 23.1 points, 25.8 points, and 6.9 points. By contrast, the share of income from these
programs barely changes for persons from the 4th decile to the top decile. In the recovery although
the shares of income from these programs falls for the lower income deciles, they remain higher than
in the past for persons in the bottom and second bottom deciles.
The data in table 2 also show jumpiness in capital incomes at the bottom of the distribution
and in the share of pension incomes. The fall in the share of capital incomes indicates that many
persons were in the lowest decile because of capital losses while the changing share of pension
incomes implies that pensions kept older persons from falling in the distribution in the recession.
Long-run inequality vs transitory inequality
So far we have looked at cross-sectional inequality in incomes. Such measures can be
misleading indicators of changes in permanent incomes since they are affected by transitory factors.8
To see whether the picture of Swedish inequality before, during and after the crisis shown in figures
1 and 2 changes markedly if we take account of income mobility, we use Swedish register data that
follow individuals’ earnings over time. We look at inequality based on annual earnings and five-year
averages for four cohorts of Swedish men from 1981 to 2005, based on a 35-percent sample of the
whole Sweden-born population of men, including the zero observations for those who did not have
any earnings from work.9
Figure 3 reports results from this analysis for cohorts of men born in 1950, 1955, 1960 and
1965. For each cohort we report measures of earnings inequality from age 31 onwards. We start at
31 to avoid the large increase and volatility in earnings that usually takes place during the process of
labor market entrance. The figure shows first that the older cohorts had lower inequality at each age
level than the younger cohorts. For example, the 1950-cohort aged 31-35 years in 1981-85 had a
coefficient of variation around 0.40-0.45 compared to a coefficient of variation of around 0.6 for
1965-cohort at the same age. The same pattern of greater inequality at the same age is found for
successively younger cohorts. Second, the figure shows rising earnings inequality by age for a
8

A common hypothesis is that compared to European social welfare states the United States
has greater income mobility over the career so that comparisons of income inequality based on
cross-sectional incomes exaggerates US-European differences. Research through the early 1990s has
shown that the US is not much different than Germany (Burkhauser and Poupore1997) or than the
Nordic countries (Aaberge et al. 2002) in this respect.
9
The income concept is called “arbetsinkomst” and includes income from short-term sickness and
parental leave, but not UI-benefits or labour market training stipends.

specific cohort. This pattern – which presumably reflects differential investments in on-the-job
training – is so strong that it is hard to discern a clear rise in inequality during the crisis period 199195. Third, the measures of inequality that cover five year earnings show sufficiently large increases
in inequality to rule out increased short-run earnings volatility as an important factor behind rising
inequality in the Swedish labor market.
Finally, Figure 4 gives a measure of earnings mobility based on annual and long-run
inequality—the so-called Shorrocks measure.10 It shows some differences between the cohorts, but
the magnitude of mobility is too low to challenge the conclusion of rising longer run measures of
inequality given in the cross-sections of annual inequality in figures 1 and 2. Thus, our analysis
supports Gustavsson’s (2007) finding that the increased inequality largely is due to changes in the
long run component of earnings rather than in transitory earnings.
International perspective
Income inequality rose in many countries during the 1990s through the mid 2000s. How did
Sweden’s rise of inequality compare to the changes in other advanced countries?
Table 3 gives our best estimate of the change in inequality among countries and of Sweden’s
rank in terms of the magnitude of the change. Panel A records the ratios of earnings at the 90th
percentile to earnings at the 10th percentile in 1990 or in two cases an earlier period and in 2003 or
the latest period for which data was available from the OECD’s earning database of fulltime
dependent employees and gives the percentage point changes in earnings ratios. It ranks the
countries by increasing inequality. Sweden fits in the middle of the distribution. It had the 6th
largest increase in earnings ratios among the 13 countries. Panel B records comparable earnings
ratios and Gini coefficients from the Luxembourg Income study, with the countries listed in order of
increasing inequality in the earnings ratio in that data set. There are some striking inconsistencies
between the OECD and LIS rankings: the OECD, for example, shows Finland with declining
inequality while the LIS shows it with rising inequality, while the OECD has Danish inequality
falling while the LIS shows it rising. Some of this difference may be due to differences in years
covered, in treatment of part-time workers, and so on. For the purposes of this study, however, the
LIS data place Sweden in a similar position as the OECD data. In terms of increases in the 90/10
earnings ratio, Sweden is tied for 8th out of 19 countries. In terms of increases in the Gini

10 The measure is defined as one minus the ratio of long-run inequality and weighted annual
inequality and takes on values between zero and one for a standard class of inequality measures. See
Shorrocks (1978)

coefficients, Sweden is tied for 3rd with the US and Spain. Thus, Sweden’s increase in inequality put
it reasonably high in the ranking of countries by the magnitude of increased inequality.11
Even so, however, inequality was sufficiently low in Sweden that the country remained one
of the lowest inequality countries in the world. In table 3 Sweden has the lowest 90/10 ratio of
earnings in the OECD data in 2003 and has the third lowest 90/10 ratio of earnings in the LIS data
set. It is tied for fifth with Finland in its Gini coefficient in 2000 the LIS data. Table 4 records
additional measures of inequality circa 2000 from other sources: OECD earnings data published in
the Employment Outlook; ratios of 90/10 levels disposable income from LIS, earnings ratios from a
study by Martins and Pereira (2004), Gini coefficients from the UN’s Human Development Report,
and other LIS measures. In all of these statistics, Sweden remains among the lowest inequality
countries in the advanced world. Sweden ranges from 2nd to 4th in having lower income inequality.
It has the 2nd or 3rd lowest 90/10 earnings ratio, behind Norway and Denmark in column 1, behind
Norway in column 2 and behind Germany in column 3. It has the 3rd lowest Gini in column 4 and the
4th lowest Gini in column 5. It is third in the fraction of persons whose disposable incomes place
them below 50 percent of the median income in columns 6 and 7.
To see the extent to which the narrow wage dispersion affect incentives to invest in skill in
Sweden relative to other advanced countries, we examined OECD data on the relative earnings for
workers with tertiary education for 22 countries. In 2004 earnings for those with tertiary education
relative to average earnings was 1.28 in Sweden compared to 1.72 in the US. This placed Sweden
third lowest in relative earnings for university graduates among the countries. For “tertiary-type A
and advanced research programmes”, the relative income ratio was 1.39 in Sweden compared to 1.81
in the US.12 Other OECD data confirm this picture. Estimating log earnings equations for 21 OECD
countries for 2001 Boarini and Strauss (2007, table 1) report a coefficient for tertiary education
relative to secondary education for men of 0.26 in Sweden (2nd lowest in the countries covered) and
of 0.21 for women (the lowest) compared to 0.65 for men and 0.64 for women in the US, which was
the highest among the countries covered.
In short, despite the rise in inequality during the period of crisis and recovery, Sweden
remained one of the lowest inequality countries in the world, with an exceptionally low wage gap
between university and high school graduates. Inequality rose greatly in hours of work and
employment, but the high social safety net partially offset the effects of this on family incomes.
11

Our data tell a different story than that of Smeeding (2002), who puts Sweden in the lower third
or so of countries by increased inequality in the 1990s.
12
OECD Science, Technology, and Industry Scoreboard 2007, table b.12.1 Relative earnings of the
population with income from employment

2. Attitudes toward inequality/incentives
How do Swedes view the incentive and inequity components of inequality described in our
introduction? Are Swedes more or less sensitive to those components compared to Americans and
citizens in other countries, and if so, why? .
Table 5 records the responses of persons to questions relating to inequality13 from the 1999
International Social Science Programme (ISSP) Social Inequality III survey.14 By way of summary,
the lines agree-disagree gives the differences between the percentages that strongly agree or that
agree with a statement and the percentages that strongly disagree or that disagree with it. The upper
four panels give the responses to statements about the incentive component of inequality: whether
people get rewarded for effort; whether differences in income are necessary for national prosperity;
whether people get rewarded for skill, and whether study requires additional pay as an incentive.
The data show that proportionately fewer Swedes believe in the incentive effects of inequality than
Americans. For instance, fewer Swedes than Americans agree or agree strongly that “people get
rewarded for effort” and that people get “rewarded for skill”; and more Swedes than Americans
disagree strongly with the statement that differences in income are necessary for prosperity. But
Swedish responses are similar to those for other advanced countries. The odd country is the US, not
Sweden.
The next three panels summarize responses to questions about the inequity component of
inequality: whether inequality benefits the rich, whether differences in income are too large, and
whether to get to the top one must be corrupt. In all of these cases, Swedes show more concern
about the inequitable aspects of income inequality than do Americans, but the attitude of Swedes is
again not peculiar. Indeed, proportionately fewer Swedes than persons in the composite of other
countries agree that inequality exists because it benefits the rich; that the income differences in their
country are too large; and that to get on top you have to be corrupt. But Swedes are closer in their
views to others than they are to those of Americans.
Where Swedes and the citizens of the other countries differ most from Americans is in their
belief that government should intervene to reduce income differences. The two panels at the bottom
of table 5 show a huge difference between Swedes and Americans in the belief that government must
13

These economies are Australia, Austria, Canada, Denmark, France, Germany (West), Great
Britain, Japan, New Zealand, Northern Ireland, Norway, Spain.
14
The ISSP is a cross-national collaboration on surveys covering topics important for social science
research, which has the virtue that it asks the same questions of persons in different countries,
facilitating cross-country analyses. In addition to the US and Sweden, our analysis covers Australia,
Austria, Canada, Denmark, France, Germany (West), Great Britain, Japan, New Zealand, Northern
Ireland, Norway, Spain, as a group.

reduce income differences and that rich people should pay more taxes. Again, the attitudes of
Swedes more closely resemble those of citizens in the other advanced countries than those of
Americans.15
What might cause the wide differences in attitudes between Swedes and persons in most
other advanced economies from those in the US? There is growing evidence that attitudes toward
fairness in economic transactions are hard-wired into human beings with people favoring egalitarian
splits of incomes in some circumstances, such as the ultimatum game, but it is hard to imagine some
genetic basis for differences in attitudes toward inequality. One appealing hypothesis is that the
attitudes reflect to some extent economic reality: in the US the wide dispersion in earnings and high
return to skills should lead more people to believe that people are rewarded for effort and skill
(because they are) than in Sweden and other countries where the narrower distribution of earnings
and lower returns to skill means in fact that people are rewarded less for skill and effort. The
differences in attitudes might also be greatly influenced by social rhetoric – the US story of the land
of opportunity versus the Swedish story of egalitarianism.
Changes in attitudes
Did Swedish views about inequality change in the 1990s as inequality rose? To the extent
that attitudes toward inequality respond to existing inequality, we would expect persons to become
more tolerant toward inequality as it increases in society (“it is the way the world is”) On the other
side, increases in inequality in a society where people are committed to more egalitarian outcomes
might generate more negative attitudes toward increased inequality and desire for government
policies to reduce income differences more than in the past.
As a first step to seeing how attitudes in fact changes we contrast the responses of Swedes to
the 1999 ISSP survey to their responses to the same questions on Stefan Svallfors’s (1992) survey of
Swedish attitudes toward inequality that later became part of the 1992 ISSP. Table 6 gives the
results of this comparison.16 Focusing on the difference between the proportion that agrees or agrees
strongly and the proportion that disagrees or disagrees strongly with the statements, the data tell a
clear story. Over the 1990s, proportionately more Swedes became concerned with the adverse effects
of inequality than with the incentive effects of inequality. The difference in the proportion who view

15

As US income inequality has risen, however, the Syracuse University Maxwell Poll has reported
increased belief that income inequality is a serious problem, and that government should do more to
try to reduce it. http://www.maxwell.syr.edu/campbell/Poll/PollHome.htm
16 This table reports statistics for those who gave explicit answers, eliminating “don’t know”
responses. This causes a modest difference in the 1999 percentages from those in table 5. The way
we treat don’t know answers does not affect the findings in either case.

income differences as too large rises from 40 points to 60 points; the difference in the proportions
who believe inequality benefits the rich rises from 31 points to 44 points; while the difference
between those who think income differentials are needed for prosperity and those who do not falls
from –9 points to –26 points. The proportions that agree and disagree that the rich should pay more
taxes and the proportions that believe/do not believe that people study to earn money remain
essentially constant, but the proportion that believes government should reduce income differences
increases. In short, the rise in inequality reduced the proportion of Swedes attuned to the efficiency
aspects of inequality and increased the proportion who favored policies to reduce inequality on these
questions.
The 1991 and 2000 LNU surveys asked a different question on attitudes toward inequality:
what people thought about “The idea of going in for a society where income differentials are small”.
On the basis of the ISSP results, we would expect that the proportion favoring a lower income
differential society would rise, but the LNU data show a slight movement in the opposite direction.
The fraction that thought that going for a small income differential society was very good fell
modestly from 1991 to 2000 while the fraction who thought this was quite good and the fraction who
thought it quite bad rose modestly.17 The different pattern in LNU than in the ISSP suggests that the
precise wording of questions may cause different patterns of response across the surveys and thus
makes us cautious about drawing any firm conclusions.
The ISSP surveys contain another set of questions that cast light on how attitudes toward
inequality in Sweden have changed over time relative to attitudes in other countries during the 1990s
rise of inequality. The ISSP ask respondents the pay they believe workers make in different
occupations: “What do you think people in these jobs actually earn?” and what they believe people
should make: “How much do you think people in these jobs ought to earn?” These questions were
asked for nine occupations in 1987 and for eleven occupations in 1992 and 1999.18 Responses

17

18

Here are the tabulations
The idea of going in for a society where
income differentials is small is

Very Quite
good good

Neither good
nor bad

Quite Very
Bad
Bad

2000

.20

.32

.17

.20

.07

1991

.26

.29

.17

.18

.07

Change

-.06

.03

.00

.02

.00

The occupations are from the following list: Bricklayer; Doctor in general practice; Bank clerk;
Shop owner; Chairman of a large company; Skilled worker in a factory; Farm laborer; Secretary;
City bus driver; Unskilled worker in a factory; Cabinet minister.

about the earnings people actually earn provide one way of assessing whether perceptions of income
differences reflect actual differences among countries and over time.19
To analyze these data, we calculated for each individual the standard deviation of the ln
earnings that they said people earned across occupations and the standard deviation of the ln
earnings they said people should earn across occupations. The standard deviation of ln earnings
summarizes their responses into a single statistic that measures dispersion. Figure 5 displays the
country averages of the standard deviations of the ln of “actual” and “should” earnings. Almost all
of the data points fall below the 45 degree line. This indicates that regardless of the perceived level
of dispersion of wages, respondents favor lower dispersion. A linear regression of the average
standard deviation of the ln earnings that respondents believe should be paid on the average standard
deviation of the ln earnings they believe people are actually paid fits the data reasonably well, with a
slope of 0.61. This positive slope implies that as the perceived actual dispersion is larger, the
dispersion people believe is appropriate rises but at a lower than for one for one rate.20
The data points for Sweden (denoted with the large diamond) fit the regression line. Persons
in Sweden perceive (correctly) that the country has lower difference in earnings among occupations
than persons in most other countries perceive in their countries. But low dispersion of perceived
earnings notwithstanding, Swedes seem to want to narrow occupational pay differences even more.
The 1999 observation for Sweden lies above the 1991 observation (Sweden was not part of the 1987
ISSP survey). The higher dispersion for perceived actual pay fits with the reality of rising inequality
in earnings shown in figure 1. The higher dispersion in the earnings that respondents think should be
paid in the various occupations is, however, inconsistent with the responses about income inequality
given in table 6, as it implies that as inequality rose so too did tolerance of inequality. The way in
which we measure the desire to reduce inequality evidently produces different patterns of response
across the surveys.21
19

Asking respondents to report on earnings in specific occupations before asking them what they
think people should make arguably grounds responses in reality more than questions about
inequality in general.
20
Further analyses that treat individuals rather than country averages as observations yield similar
results for the 1999 ISSP and show no noticeable difference in the regression coefficients of the
standard deviation of the ln pay that respondents say people should receive in an occupation on the
standard deviation of the ln earnings they believe they actually receive between Sweden, the US, and
other countries as a group.
21
In calculations for the 1999 ISSP we have found that persons who are more concerned about the
adverse effects of inequality and less concerned about the incentive effects in the questions report
smaller dispersion of earnings that they think “should be paid” across occupations. Thus, there is no
inconsistency in attitudes among persons within the survey. The problem is in the trend across

Satisfaction with personal outcomes
An alternative way to assess how increased inequality has impacted Swedish citizens is to
relate their self-reported satisfaction with their living conditions, jobs, and wages or income before
and after the economic recovery. People’s feelings toward their personal situation may differ from
attitudes toward what is happening in the economy as a whole. Ms A might be doing personally well
but be troubled by inequality or unemployment in the country while Mr. B might be having personal
economic difficulties while satisfied with economic conditions broadly.
Table 7 tabulates the responses to five questions on the 1991 and 2000 LNU surveys relating
to the satisfaction of individuals with their own circumstances. The responses to questions about the
individuals’ personal situation or changes in situation or life satisfaction do not vary much over time.
Responses relating to job satisfaction and satisfaction with wages show declines in well being and
increased dispersion in these forms of personal well-being. There is a 10 percentage point drop in the
proportion very satisfied with their job and a large shift in the distribution of responses on wage
satisfaction from very/rather satisfied to very/rather dissatisfied. To see whether the reduction in job
and wage satisfaction are related to objective factors, we regressed them on the log of hourly wages
and reported working conditions in 1991 and 2000, conditional on family conditions, age, gender,
and education. The results, summarized in Table 8, show that wages are strongly related to wage
satisfaction while measures of working conditions are closely linked to job satisfaction. The large
coefficients on the log hourly wages combined with the rising standard deviation in the hourly wages
could help explain the increased dispersion in the responses to the question about satisfaction with
wages. The changes in the fraction of persons reporting different objective working conditions are,
however, too small to explain much of the change in that variable on the basis of the estimated
coefficients. Exploiting the longitudinal component of the LNU, we also examined changes in wage
satisfaction and job satisfaction between 1991 and 2000 and obtained comparable results: a large
coefficient on ln wages in the wage satisfaction equation that implies that increases in the standard
deviation of ln wages contributed to the increased dispersion in wage satisfaction.22
Since unemployment is a major depressing factor on happiness, the surprise in table 7 is the
stability in life satisfaction despite higher and longer unemployment between the two surveys.23 We
probe this finding further through multivariate regressions that link the level and duration of
surveys over time.
22
The coefficient in the wage satisfaction equation on change in log wages was 1.681 (0.125).
Changes in job conditions had modest coefficients on the work conditions variables.
23
The proportion of persons who were unemployed went from 7.0% in the 2000 LNU to 3.7% in the
1991 LNU and the duration of unemployment went from 0.46 of a year to 1.61 years

unemployment to how people assess their life situation/living conditions and their life satisfaction in
1991 and 2000, conditional on a variety of covariates. Table 9 summarizes the regression findings in
terms of the coefficients on unemployment measured as a 0/1 variable and the coefficients on
dummy variables for the duration of unemployment. Being unemployed has a sizeable adverse
impact on both the persons’ assessment of their life situation/living conditions and on their life
satisfaction. There is no clear generalization to reach. Comparing the coefficients on unemployment
in regressions 1 and 2 we see that unemployment has a larger impact in reducing the person’s
assessment of their living conditions in 2000 than in 1991. By contrast, in the life satisfaction
regressions in columns 3 and 4 the impact of unemployment is lower in the 2000 survey than in the
1991 survey, which implies that the impact of unemployment on life satisfaction lessened.
The increase in the duration of unemployment suggests that comparisons of the unemployed
in the two periods may be confounded by changes in the group that is unemployed. Regressions 5-8
give regression coefficients for the effect of being in the specified level of duration on the life
situation/living conditions and life satisfaction measures. The impact of the duration of
unemployment variables on life situation varies across the groups. There is a large drop in effect of
unemployment on the person’s own conditions for every group but those with less than 0.3 years of
unemployment and a particularly large drop for those with two years or more of unemployment.
The impact of the duration of unemployment variables on life satisfaction are smaller in 2000 than in
1991, implying a substantial drop in unhappiness with unemployment at all durations. The data seem
to suggest that people adjusted to unemployment between 1991 and 2000, so that with the higher
rates they were less impacted in their living conditions and in their life satisfaction, despite the
longer durations of joblessness.
3. Inequality and Sweden’s Position in Competitiveness
Sweden’s recovery from the early 1990s recession was sufficiently strong that by 2007-8 it
ranked number 4 on the World Economic Forum’s ranking of countries in global competitiveness. It
was number 2 in the OECD’s ranking of countries by investment in knowledge.
Did the increased inequality help the recovery and improve the country’s high position in
competitiveness?
Inequality and recovery
There are three criteria for assessing whether an increase in inequality is likely to be
incentive increasing and thus a potential contributor to economic recovery.
First, the increase should affect observable incentives, such as returns to skill or wage
differentials among firms or industries that signal workers to shift to the sectors with increased pay.

If the increase shows up solely in higher returns to unmeasured factors (residuals) it is difficult for
anyone to know what to do. Examining changes in mean earnings across groups by education,
occupation, or industry shows that at least some of the increased inequality in Sweden in the 1990s
was associated with changes among persons with observable characteristics. Studies of earnings
patterns, (Gustavsson, 2006, Fredriksson and Topel 2008) find that the payoff to schooling increased
over the 1990s, which creates an incentive for additional school going that appears to underlie the
observed increased enrollment in higher education in the period (Fredriksson and Topel, 2008).24
Examining data by plant, Nordström Skans, Edin, and Holmlund (forthcoming) found that a trend
rise in between plant wage inequality accounts for the entire increase in wage dispersion, which
would presumably motivate workers to move from the lower wage to the higher wage plants.
Second, the increase should induce economic behavior that reduces the inequality. For
instance, a rise in inequality to education should produce an increased investment in skills, and an
increase in inequality among sectors or firms should induce workers to move where pay has
increased. Nordström Skans, Edin, and Holmlund (forthcoming) report modest positive correlations
between entry rates and wage changes and the standard deviation of wages within plants that suggest
that the increases in wages across and within plants may have induced workers to shift toward work
places with rising earnings relative to others.
Third, the increase should be associated with improved national economic outcomes.
Lindquist (2005) and Nahum (2005) suggest that the moderate increases in skill differentials and
inequality have helped raise economic growth and efficiency in Sweden. Lindquist related the
increased income inequality between high and low skilled workers in Sweden to changes in relative
demand due to the presence of capital-skill complementarity in production. Nahum finds that
inequality within Swedish counties has a positive relation with the ensuing growth of the county’s
economy. While these studies have to make bold assumptions for their estimates, their different data
and methodologies suggest that at least some of the rise in inequality helped economic recovery.
On the other hand, it is difficult to see how increased inequality in hours worked can be
incentive creating. Some of this increase is associated with sickness absenteeism. While workers
who are not employed or who work relatively few hours may be doing productive work in the
household, it is difficult to imagine that this compensates for the absence of market work. It also
makes little sense for persons on sickness absence doing household work to be paid the benefits of
24

Our estimated earnings equations from the1991 and 2000 LNU surveys also found that the
earnings of university graduates increased relative to that of less educated workers We also found
that the relative earnings of experienced workers fell, which increased equality but it is unclear if
this is a reduction in skill prices or in institutionally determined seniority.

someone truly incapacitated. Reductions of the inequality in hours worked would more likely be
output enhancing.
Sweden in the knowledge economy
The “doubling” of the global labor force, due to China, India, and the ex-Soviet bloc joining the
world economy pressured advanced countries to invest heavily in higher education and research and
development and in high tech industries. A priori, some analysts might expect that Sweden’s low
inequality and modest gross wage premium to tertiary education would provide insufficient incentive for
investments in schooling so that the country would lag behind in the supply of highly educated persons
compared to economies with higher premium, and that this would keep the country from the front ranks of
the R and D and technology frontier. To be sure, the relatively low cost of highly skilled Swedish workers
would increase firms’ demand for these workers but the firms would face a supply constraint and fall
behind countries like the US where the premium to university training is much higher. Nothing could be
further from the truth.
Panel A of Table 10 shows that Sweden is in the top rank of countries in investment in
knowledge. It is number one in the world in R and D spending over GDP, number one in software
investment/GDP, and number 7 in higher education spending over GDP. Summing the three
measures, the OECD’s “investment in knowledge” indicator places Sweden in 2nd spot behind the
US.
The data on educational attainment in panel B suggest that the OECD measure of higher
education spending understates Sweden’s success in university education, particularly in science and
engineering (S & E). Sweden is 4th in the world (after Japan, Korea, and Canada) in degrees
granted per 25-34 year olds. Sweden is 2nd among OECD countries (behind Korea) in the share of
degrees awarded in science and engineering. Its S&E share of degrees is more than twice the US
share. At the doctorate level, Sweden is number one in PhDs and in science and engineering PhDs
granted per young person. If the US had the Swedish rate of S&E PhDs per young person, it would
be producing over 100,000 doctorates graduates in those disciplines.
What motivates so many young Swedes to invest in higher education? Even after the 1990smid 2000s increase in earnings inequality, pay differences between highly educated workers and less
educated workers were lower in Sweden than in the US and most other countries at both the tertiary
and advanced research programmes level. The increased earnings differential between university
graduates and high school graduates in the 1990s and the high unemployment during and after the
recession contributed to the growth of university enrollments in Sweden (Fredriksson and Topel
2008) but cannot account for the concentration on science and engineering or the extraordinary

proportion of persons obtaining PhDs in science and engineering.
One factor that helps compensate for the lower labor market differentials is a low cost of
attending university. Students are eligible for grants and loans, whose repayment is income
contingent, to help them through the student years. Indeed, for graduate studies the norm is that the
students are eligible to a wage at the level of living wage. But OECD estimates of internal rates of
return to tertiary education (Boarini and Strauss, 2007, figure 11) show that while this improves
Sweden’s ranking in returns and lowers the return to the US, it still leaves Sweden in the bottom
third of countries by rate of return. There are no readily available estimates of the return to graduate
training across countries to see how Sweden fits on that margin.
Panel C in table 10 records measures of the output of Sweden’s investment in scientific and
engineering activity and research and development. In terms of research output, Sweden ranks second
(after Switzerland) in terms of scientific articles published per capita. Citation indices per article place
Sweden 4th in the world in the prominence of its published research. Finally, Sweden has a high number
of patents measured per million inhabitants. When the share of Swedish companies with innovative
activity is compared internationally, Swedish companies are above the average of EU countries.
Much of Sweden’s investment in R and D is due to activities of the Swedish multinational firms,
such as Ericsson, who conduct much of their research and development in the country while locating the
bulk of production outside the country. This would appear to be an economic response to the country’s
large supply of undergraduate and graduate degree recipients particularly in science and engineering, and
their relatively low cost but still leaves open the question of how the country has overcome the low
pecuniary returns to induce so many young persons to obtain advanced research and other degrees.
Finally, it is Sweden’s exemplary position in these and other measures of technological prowess,
innovation, higher education and training, and business sophistication that underlie its position as the 4th
top country in the World Economic Forum’s Global Competitiveness Report (2008). By contrast, the
Competitiveness Report gives Sweden lower marks for its high taxes and such labor market factors as
flexibility of wage determination and hiring and firing practices. To some extent, however, these
desirable and less desirable aspects of the welfare state are intertwined: high taxes fund investments in
higher education and research and development that buttress innovativeness.
4. Conclusion
This study has examined the pattern of change and correlates of Sweden’s national effort to
produce egalitarian labor market outcomes and the interplay between the level and change in
inequality and attitudes toward inequality. It has found:

1) That earnings and income inequality increased after the early 1990s recession, with
smaller increases in income for persons at the bottom of the income distribution than for those higher
in the distribution. Government safety net programs buttressed disposable income for those with
low incomes during the 1990s recession.
2) Despite the increase in inequality, Sweden remained one of the most egalitarian economies
in the world. The rise in inequality raised earnings for identifiable groups and seems to have
contributed to economic recovery.
3) The low level of inequality and labor market returns to skill notwithstanding, Sweden
moved to the top of the league tables in knowledge intensive activities. Five times as many Swedes
obtained PhDs in science and engineering as Americans relative to the population and Sweden was
world leader in R&D/GDP. These achievements highlight the ability of Sweden to overcome some
of the incentive problems of a welfare state.
With respect to attitudes
4) Swedes are more attuned to the inequity face of inequality than to the incentive face of
inequality than are Americans. But Swedish attitudes are closer to those of persons in most other
countries. It is the American attitudes that are divergent.
5) Proportionately more Swedes expressed concern over the inequity of inequality after the
rise in inequality in the 1990s than in the past, but there are sufficient differences in changes among
measures of attitudes to rule out any firm conclusions about how the recession and recovery affected
how people feel toward inequality.
6) Swedes expressed greater dissatisfaction with wages and conditions at work during the
1990s but the rise in unemployment did not reduce overall subjective well being, seemingly because
individuals adapted to higher levels unemployment.
Perhaps the most intriguing question that emerges from our analysis is how Sweden managed
to reach the top of world tables in the proportion of young persons gaining PhDs and bachelor’s
degrees and in competitiveness with only a moderate increase in earnings inequality and low return
to tertiary education. Could it be that limited pecuniary incentives motivate Swedes to distinguish
themselves in other productive ways? Or could it be that in a highly egalitarian society seemingly
small changes in inequality can motivate people more than they might in an economy with a wider
dispersion of overall earnings? Whichever, Sweden did well in the inequality front in its recovery
from the early 1990s economic disaster.

References
Aaberge Rolf, Anders Björklund, Markus Jäntti, Mårten Palme, Peder J. Pedersen, Nina Smith and
Tom Wennemo (2002), “Income Inequality and Income Mobility in the Scandinavian Countries
Compared to the United States”, The Review of Income and Wealth, vol. 48(4): 443-469.
Björklund Anders and Richard Freeman (1997), ”Generating Equality and Eliminating Poverty - The Swedish
Way”, in R B Freeman, R Topel and B Swedenborg eds. The Welfare State in Transition - reforming the
Swedish model, The University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Björklund Anders and Markus Jäntti (1997) “Intergenerational Income Mobility in Sweden
Compared to the United States”, American Economic Review, Vol. 87, No. 5, pp: 1009-1018.
Björklund Anders, Tor Eriksson, Markus Jäntti, Oddbjörn Raaum and Eva Österbacka, (2002)
“Brother Correlations in Earnings in Denmark, Finland, Norway, and Sweden compared to the
United States”. Journal of Population Economics, vol. 15: 757-772.
Boarini, Romina and Hubert Strauss (2007) “The Private Internal Rates of Return to Tertiary
education OECD, ECONOMICS DEPARTMENT WORKING PAPERS NO. 591
Burkhauser Richard and John G. Poupore (1997), “A Cross-National Comparison of Permanent
Inequality in the United States and Germany”, The Review of Economics and Statistics 79: 10-17.
Devroye Dan and Richard Freeman “Does Inequality in Skills Explain Inequality of Earnings Across
Advanced Countries? November 2002 Paper No CEPDP0552:
Fredriksson Peter and Robert Topel (2008, forthcoming) ”Wage Determination and Employment in
Sweden since the early 1990s” in Freeman, R, B. Swedenborg, R Topel (eds) Reforming the
Welfare State: Recovery and Beyond in Sweden
Gustavsson, Magnus (2006). “The Evolution of the Swedish Wage Structure: New Evidence for
1992-2001”, Applied Economics Letters, vol. 13: 279-286.
Gustavsson, Magnus (2007), "The 1990s Rise in Swedish Earnings Inequality - Persistent or
Transitory?" Applied Economics, Vol. 39(1), 25-30.
International Social Science Programme, surveys http://www.issp.org/ 1987 Social Inequality 1992
Social Inequality II 1999 Social Inequality III
Lindquist, Matthew J. 2005. "Capital-Skill Complementarity and Inequality in Sweden,"
Scandinavian Journal of Economics, Blackwell Publishing, vol. 107(4), pages 711-735, December.
Luxembourg Income study, http://www.lisproject.org/keyfigures.htm accessed on February 18, 2007
Luxembourg Income Study obtained from http://www.lisproject.keyfigures.htm (November 9, 2005).
Martins, Pedro and Pedro T Pereira (2004). “Does Education Reduce Wage Inequality? Quantile
Regression Evidence from 16 Countries”, Labour Economics, 11(3), 355-371.

Nahum Ruth Aida “Income Inequality and Growth: A Panel Study of Swedish Counties 19602000”http://ideas.repec.org/p/hhs/uunewp/2005_008.html
Nordström Skans, Oskar, Per-Anders Edin, and Bertil Holmlund (forthcoming) “Wage dispersion
between and within plants: Sweden 1985–2000”, forthcoming in Lazear Edward & Kathryn Shaw
(red) An International Comparisons of the Structure of Wages, University of Chicago Press.
OECD, (2007a) Science, Technology, and Industry Scoreboard 2007, Paris
OECD (2006) Society at a Glance, Paris
OECD (2004) Employment Outlook, Paris
OECD (2007b) Factbook, Paris
Shorrocks Anthony (1978), “Income Inequality and Income Mobility”, Journal of Economic Theory,
19: 376-393.
Smeeding Timothy (2002) Globalization, Inequality and the Rich Countries of the G-20: Evidence
from the Luxembourg Income Study (LIS) Luxembourg Income Study Working Paper Series
Luxembourg Income Study (LIS), Working Paper No. 320 July 2002
Solon, Gary (2002) “Cross-Country Differences in Intergenerational Earnings Mobility,” Journal of
Economic Perspectives 16 (Summer 2002), pp. 59-66.
Svallfors Stefan (1992) ATTITUDES TO INEQUALITY - A SWEDISH SURVEY 1991
Åsikter om ojämlikhet i Sverige 1991 SSD_0297
Syracuse University 2007 Maxwell Poll of views of income inequality
http://www.maxwell.syr.edu/campbell/Poll/PollHome.htm
United Nations Development Programme, Human Development Report 2005
http://hdr.undp.org/en/statistics/
World Economic Forum (2008) , Global Competitiveness Report 2007-2008
http://www.weforum.org/en/initiatives/gcp/Global%20Competitiveness%20Report/index.htm

Figure 1 Hourly earnings inequality 1992-2006 according to Statistics Sweden and 1991 and
2000 according to the Level of Living Survey

19
91
19
92
19
93
19
94
19
95
19
96
19
97
19
98
19
99
20
00
20
01
20
02
20
03
20
04
20
05
20
06

2,2
2,1
2
1,9
1,8
1,7
1,6
1,5
1,4
1,3
1,2
1,1
1

P90/P10-SCB
P90/P10-LNU

P50/P10-SCB
P50/P10-LNU

P90/P50-SCB
P90/P50-LNU

Source: Statistics Sweden (SCB) and own computations from the Level of Living Survey (LNU).
The former is based on monthly fulltime equivalent monthly earnings report from employers. The
latter is based on home interviews with individuals. Each of the data sources has advantages and
disadvantages.

Figure 2 Diverse Measures of Inequality of annual disposable income 1980-2005.

a) Gini coefficients
0,32
0,3
0,28
0,26
0,24

Gini-old

0,22

Gini-new

0,2

20
04

20
02

20
00

19
98

19
96

19
94

19
92

19
90

19
88

19
86

19
84

19
82

19
80

0,18

b) Ratios of disposable income by deciles: P90/P10, P90/P50, P50/P10 ratios.
3,25
3,05
2,85
P90/P10-old

2,65

P90/P10-new
2,45

P90/P50-old
P90/P50-new

2,25

P50/P10-old
2,05

P50/P10-new

1,85
1,65
1,45

20
04

20
02

20
00

19
98

19
96

19
94

19
92

19
90

19
88

19
86

19
84

19
82

19
80

1,25

Note: “Old” is based on the more narrow income concept used before the major 1991 tax reform.
The individual is the unit of analysis, and the household the unit of income. Income includes capital
gains, which were particularly high in 1994 and 2000 due to changes in tax rules. Statistics Sweden’s
equivalence scales are applied. Source: special tabulations by Kjell Jansson for the authors.

c) Real disposable income at the median (P50), 10th (P10) and 90th (P90) percentile of the
distribution 1980-2005 in 2006 year’s prices.

300
P90-old

275

P90-new
250

P50-old

225

P50-new
P10-old

200

P10-new

175
150
125
100
75

20
04

20
02

20
00

19
98

19
96

19
94

19
92

19
90

19
88

19
86

19
84

19
82

19
80

50

Note: “Old” is based on the more narrow income concept used before the 1991 tax reform. The
individual is the unit of analysis, and the household the unit of income. Income includes capital
gains, which were particularly high in 1994 and 2000 due to changes in tax rules. Statistics
Sweden’s equivalence scales are applied. Source: special tabulations by Kjell Jansson for the
authors.

Source: Statistics Sweden

Figure 3 Coefficient of variation of annual earnings and of 5-year average earnings 1981-2005, four
cohorts of men.

a) Men born 1950
1,1
1
0,9
0,8
0,7
0,6
0,5
0,4
0,3
1981

annual
5-years

1983

1985

1987

1989

1991

1993

1995

1997

1999

2001

2003

2005

b) Men born 1955
1,1
1
0,9
0,8
0,7
0,6
0,5
0,4
0,3

annual
5-years

1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005

1981 1983 1985 1987 1989 1991

c) Men born 1960
1,3
1,2
1,1

annual

1
0,9
0,8
0,7

5-years

0,6
0,5
0,4
1981

1983

1985

1987

1989

1991

1993

1995

1997

1999

2001

2003

2005

2001

2003

d) Men born 1965
1
0,9

annual
5-years

0,8
0,7
0,6
0,5
1981

1983

1985

1987

1989

Source: Swedish Register data

1991

1993

1995

1997

1999

2005

Figure 4. Earnings mobility for cohorts of men born 1950, 1955, 1960 and 1965. in 1981-85,
1986-1990, 1991-95, 1996-2000, 2001-2005

0,11

0,1

0,09

0,08

0,07
b-1950
0,06

b-1955
b-1960
b-1965

0,05
1981-1985

1986-1990

Source: Swedish Register Data

1991-1995

1996-2000

2001-2005

Figure 5: Dispersion of ln earnings that “should be paid “in different occupations and the
dispersion of ln perceived actual earnings, by country, 1987, 1992, 1999 ISSP

1.6
1.4
Should Pay

1.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

1.2

1.4

1.6

Actual Pay
1987-11 occ

1992-11 occ

45 degree

Sweden

1999- 9 occ

The regression line:

SD(Ln Shld) = .11 +.61 SD(Ln Actual) + YDs + .15 ComD N=52
(.06)
(.07)
where LnShld is the natural log of the earnings that respondents believe should be paid in an
occupation, lnActual is the natural log of the earnings that respondents believe is paid in an
occuption, YD are two year dummies; and ComD is a dummy for countries which were communist
in 1987: East Germany, Hungary, Poland. The standard deviations are averages of standard
deviations reported by all respondents from the country.

Source: Tabulated from International Social Science Programme surveys for 1987, 1992, 1999.
Sweden data are from the Svallfors (1992) and the 1999 ISSP.

Table 1: The distribution of working hours, 1990 and 1999
Individuals
All, 19-65 years

19-24 years

25-54 years

55-65 years

1990

1999

1990

1999

1990

1999

1990

1999

Mean

1650

1510

1170

770

1825

1690

1340

1350

Coeff. of var.

.51

.63

.72

1.07

.41

.51

.69

.74

.099

.179

.114

.309

.059

.122

.249

.287

1-1000 hours

.100

.102

.329

.336

.070

.074

.058

.049

1001-1500 hrs

.113

.080

.151

.121

.092

.069

.164

.089

1501-2000 hrs

.155

.158

.110

.087

.172

.179

.119

.130

2001-2500 hrs

.449

.407

.273

.129

.508

.468

.355

.377

2501+ hrs

.080

.075

.021

.016

.098

.088

.055

.066

N

4423

4458

622

559

3054

3005

747

894

Proportions
0 hours

Source: own computations from the Level of living surveys.

Table 2 Percentage of household disposable income net of taxes by different source, by decile
groups 1991, 1995, 2001 and 2005.
Decile
Group

Earnings for employees and
self-employed

Capital

Pensions

1991

1995 2001 2005 1991 1995 2001

2005

1991

1995

2001

2005

1

21.3

33.8

33.7

27.1

5.0

-9.0

-19.2

-1.7

43.6

25.4

40.4

29.6

2

18.0

24.1

21.8

24.2

4.6

2.4

1.1

1.5

50.6

32.2

43.2

43.3

3

32.4

30.5

26.8

26.7

4.4

2.0

0.9

1.5

39.0

35.3

44.2

47.1

4

43.8

38.0

39.8

38.8

4.6

2.7

2.1

1.5

31.1

32.5

37.0

40.4

5

53.6

50.0

56.1

53.6

5.5

3.3

2.4

1.9

23.7

27.8

25.5

29.8

6

62.4

57.7

63.1

64.0

5.3

4.0

2.6

2.4

18.9

23.8

21.8

22.8

7

65.6

61.3

70.0

69.5

5.9

4.1

2.6

2.5

16.8

23.3

16.9

19.8

8

70.7

67.1

73.4

75.1

5.8

4.5

3.5

3.0

14.4

20.0

14.7

15.8

9

72.2

69.3

78.7

77.3

7.1

5.4

3.7

4.0

13.3

18.7

12.0

14.2

10

65.5

67.2

63.8

57.6

19.7

14.8

22.8

29.2

10.1

15.1

10.4

11.4

All

57.7

56.1

60.2

58.1

8.5

5.5

6.7

8.8

20.7

22.9

20.5

22.1

Decile
group

Sickness, parental leave, UI and
LMP benefits

Universal taxfree benefits

Means-tested taxfree benefits

1991

1995

2001

2005

1991

1995

2001

2005

1991

1995

2001

2005

1

9.1

16.7

11.8

11.7

9.8

16.0

18.2

19.8

11.2

17.1

15.2

13.5

2

7.5

16.2

10.0

9.4

6.4

10.3

10.8

10.2

12.8

15.0

13.1

11.4

3

9.2

13.4

9.9

8.2

7.1

6.9

7.7

5.9

7.9

11.9

10.4

10.6

4

10.5

12.6

10.6

11.2

6.3

6.1

6.4

5.5

3.6

8.2

4.1

2.7

5

10.6

10.7

10.0

8.8

4.9

4.7

4.8

4.7

1.6

3.5

1.1

1.1

6

8.5

8.8

8.2

6.7

3.9

4.0

3.6

3.7

1.0

1.8

0.7

0.4

7

7.9

7.4

7.3

5.2

3.1

2.7

3.0

2.5

0.6

1.3

0.2

0.5

8

7.0

5.8

6.1

4.2

1.8

1.9

1.9

1.8

0.3

0.7

0.3

0.2

9

5.8

5.1

4.1

3.4

1.3

1.4

1.3

1.1

0.2

0.1

0.2

0

10

3.8

2.2

2.4

1.3

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.5

0.1

0.1

0.2

0

All

7.2

7.8

6.4

5.3

3.4

3.9

3.7

3.5

2.5

3.8

2.5

2.3

Source: Statistics Sweden, special tabulations done by Kjell Jansson for the authors. Note: relevant taxes are
subtracted for taxable income sources.

Table 3: Level and Changes in 90/10 Ratios of Earnings from 1990s to early 2000s in OECD,
and Level Changes in 90/10 Ratios of Earnings and Gini Coefficients in Luxembourg Income
Study, from late 1980s/early 1990s through 2000

Panel A: OECD Earnings Database of Full-time Employees
90/10 ratio

New Zealand, 1990-2003

2.34*

2.90

0.56*

Switzerland, 1990-2003

2.71

3.22

0.51

US, 1990-2003

4.34

4.67

0.33

Denmark, 1990-2003

2.16

2.63

0.47

Netherlands, 1985/89 to 1955/99

2.55

2.85

0.30

Sweden, 1990-2003

2.01

2.30

0.29

Germany, 1990-2002

2.76

3.04

0.28

Australia, 1990-2003

2.81

3.07

0.26

Italy, 1985/89 to 1955/99

2.29

2.40

0.11

UK, 1990-2003

3.41

3.50

0.09

Finland, 1990-2002

2.49

2.45

-0.04

France, 1990-2002

3.26

3.13

-0.13

Japan, 1990-2003

3.16

2.94

-0.22

Early year

90/10 ratio
Last year

Change

Countries in order of increasing
inequality in OECD

Panel B: Luxembourg Income Study Data, 1987-2000
90/10 Earnings Ratios
Change
Countries and years covered in First Last
order of increasing inequality in year year
LIS earnings ratio

Gini Coefficients
First
Last
Change
year
year

Spain, 1990-2000

3.96

4.69

0.73

.303

.336

Belgium, 1988-2000

2.77

3.30

0.53

.232

Finland, 1987-2004

2.59

3.04

0.45

.209

.252

.043

Germany, 1989-2000

2.99

3.37

0.38

.257

.275

.018

.279

.033
.047

Canada, 1987-2000

3.89

4.19

0.30

.283

.311

.028

Austria, 1987-2000

2.85

3.15

0.30

.227

.257

.030

Luxembourg, 1991-2000

2.97

3.25

0.28

.239

.260

.021

Sweden, 1987-2000

2.71

2.96

0.25

.218

.252

.034

Ireland, 1987-2000

4.23

4.48

0.25

.328

.313

-.015

Australia, 1989-2003

4.19

4.24

0.05

.304

Norway, 1991-2000

2.76

2.80

0.04

.223

.251

.028

US, 1991-2004

5.65

5.68

0.03

.338

.372

.034

France, 1989-2000

3.46

3.45

-0.01

.287

.278

-.009

Italy, 1987-2000

4.49

4.47

-0.02

.332

.333

.001

UK, 1991-1999

4.67

4.57

-0.10

.336

.343

.007

Netherlands, 1987-1999

2.94

2.78

-0.16

.256

.231

-.025

Switzerland, 1991-2002

3.62

3.37

-0. 25

.307

.274

-.023

Denmark, 1987-2004

3.23

2.78

-0.45

.254

.228

-.026

.312

.008

Source: Panel A tabulated from OECD, Society at a Glance, 2006 edition, Trends in Earnings
dispersion of full-time workers in 20 OECD members, Changes from 1985-89 to 1995-99 for
Netherlands and Italy from OECD, Employment Outlook, 2004, table 3.2;
* New Zealand data estimated as follows. OECD figures for all workers cover 1997 to 2003 and
show an increase in the ratio from 2.56 to 2.90, for a rise of 0.34 points. Separate data for men and
women show an increase in the 90/10 ratio for men from 1990 to 1997 of 0.38 points and an increase
in the 90/10 ratio for women of 0.06 points for women; and show increases for men from 1990 to
2000 for men of 0.97 points of of women of 0.22 points. As a crude approximation, we take the
average change in the ratios from 1990 to 1997 for the two genders and add 0.22 points to get the
0.56 points. This is of the same magnitude as the average change for the two genders from 1990 to
2003 of 0.60 points.
Panel B: Luxembourg Income study, http://www.lisproject.org/keyfigures.htm accessed on February 18,
2007

Table 4: Measures of Earnings and Income Inequality in Sweden and other advanced
economies and Percent of Persons in Relative Poverty, around 2000 (Sweden rank in
parenthesis)
90/10 Ratios

Earnings

Disposable
Income

(OECD)

(LIS)

Gini Coefficients

Fraction in
relative poverty

Earnings

Disposable
Income

Disposable
Income

(M & P)

(UN HDR)

(LIS)

All

Kids

(LIS)

(LIS)

Norway

1.96

2.80

2.21

25.8

25.1

0.064

0.034

Denmark

2.16*

3.15

2.39

24.7

--

--

--

Sweden

2.23 (#3)

2.96 (#2)

2.08 (#2)

25.0 (#3)

25.2 (#4)

0.065(#3)

0.042(#3)

Belgium

2.28*

3.31

--

25.0

27.7

0.080

0.067

Finland

2.36

2.90

2.53

26.9

24.7

0.054

0.028

Italy

2.40

4.48

2.67

36.0

33.3

0.127

0.166

Switzerland

2.69

3.34

2.53

33.1

28.0

0.077

0.089

Holland

2.85

2.98

2.83

30.9

24.8

0.073

0.098

Germany

2.87

3.29

1.45

28.3

26.4

0.083

0.090

--

4.78

--

--

34.0

--

--

Australia

2.94

--

--

35.2

--

--

--

Japan

2.99

--

--

24.9

--

--

--

France

3.07

--

--

32.7

--

--

--

UK

3.45

4.59

3.33

36.0

34.5

--

--

Austria

3.56*

3.37

2.28

30.0

26.6

0.077

0.078

Canada

3.65

3.95

--

33.1

30.2

0.114

0.149

Portugal

3.76*

--

4.58

38.5

--

--

--

Ireland

3.97

4.56

4.74

35.9

32.3

0.165

0.172

USA

4.59

5.45

3.45

40.8

36.8

0.170

0.219

Spain

Source: OECD, 2004, table 3.2, where the data with * are from 1995-99 for Austria, Belgium, Denmark,
Portugal are for 1990-94; Data for Spain and Greece from Martins, Pereira (2004), table 1 Luxembourg
Income Study (LIS) from http://www.lisproject.keyfigures.htm (November 9, 2005). M&P, from Pedro
Martins and Pedro T Pereira.” 'Does Education Reduce Wage Inequality? Quantile Regression Evidence
from 16 Countries', with Labour Economics, 11(3), 355_371, 2004, table 1 Gini and relative poverty,
Luxembourg Income Study obtained from http://www.lisproject.keyfigures.htm (November 9, 2005).
UNDP Human Development Report 2005,

Table 5: Attitudes of Swedes, Americans, and Persons in other Advanced Countries toward
the Incentive and Inequity Components of Inequality, 1999
People get rewarded for effort
Sweden US
Others
Strongly agree
3
11
5
Agree
31
50
35
Neither
36
22
25
Disagree
20
9
25
Strongly disagree 5
2
7
Don’t know
6
6
3
Agree-Disagree 9
50
8

Differences in income necessary for prosperity
Sweden US
Others
3
4
4
17
20
16
29
27
22
31
31
35
15
8
17
5
9
6
-26
-15
-32

People get rewarded for skill
Sweden US
Others
Strongly agree
3
15
6
Agree
35
55
43
Neither
37
16
23
Disagree
15
7
20
Strongly disagree 4
1
5
Don’t know
6
6
3
Agree-Disagree 19
62
24

Study requires additional pay
Sweden US
Others
19
21
27
50
37
44
16
13
11
11
18
12
2
4
4
3
7
3
56
36
55

Inequality benefits rich Differences in income too large To get on top must be corrupt
Sweden US
Others
Sweden US
Others
Sweden US
Others
Strongly agree
16
12
24
29
23
36
4
4
8
Agree
42
32
44
41
38
41
14
12
20
Neither
21
24
14
18
20
12
29
22
20
Disagree
13
16
11
8
9
7
24
35
30
Strongly disagree 3
4
3
2
3
1
16
21
18
Don’t know
8
11
4
1
7
3
13
6
5
Agree-Disagree 42
24
54
60
49
69
-22
-40
-20
Govt must reduce differences
Sweden US Others
Strongly agree
23
10 25
Agree
35
22 35
Neither
22
24 16
Disagree
12
23 14
Strongly disagree 6
14 6
Don’t know
3
7
5
Agree-Disagree 40
-5 40

Rich should pay more taxes
Sweden US Others
16
20 25
59
39 50
22
30 19
1
1
1
0
1
1
2
8
4
74
57 73

Source: Tabulated from ISSP, 1999 Social Inequality III

Table 6: Changes in Attitudes To Inequality in Sweden, 1991-1999

Income diffs

Income diffs

Too large

needed for prosperity

Inequality benefits
rich

1991

1999

1991

1999

1991

1999

Strongly agree

24

28

5

3

21

17

Agree

35

42

25

17

32

44

Neither

22

18

31

29

25

22

Disagree

14

8

30

31

17

14

Strongly disagree 5

2

9

15

5

3

Agree -Disagree

60

-9

-26

31

44

40

Rich should pay
More taxes

Government should

People study to

reduce income diffs

earn money

1991

1999

1991

1999

1991

1999

Strongly agree

14

16

17

24

25

20

Agree

62

60

36

36

47

52

Neither

23

22

18

22

14

16

Disagree

1

1

19

13

12

11

Strongly disagree 0

0

10

6

2

2

Agree -Disagree

75

24

31

48

49

75

Source: Tabulated from ISSP 1992, 1999 where the 1992 ISSP is based on Svallfors 1991

Table 7 Satisfaction with Living Conditions, Job, and Wages, 19-65 year olds
Satisfaction with
Overall life
1991 1999

Job
1991

Wages

1999

1991

1999

Very good/satisfied

41

43

43

33

10

9

Rather good/satisfied

53

51

45

50

45

38

Neither good/satisfied nor

4

4

9

11

22

22

Rather bad/ dissatisfied

2

2

2

5

17

21

Bad/very dissatisfied

1

1

1.

2

7

10

Good/satisfied-

91

91

76

31

16

bad/dissatisfied

85

Bad/dissatisfied

Change in your

Daily life source of

Situation

personal satisfaction

1991

1999

1991

1999

Improved

52

56

Yes, most often

58

57

More/less same

35

31

Yes, sometimes

35

36

Deteriorated

13

13

No

07

07

Improved –

39

43

Yes-No

86

86

Deteriorated

Source: Tabulated from Level of Living (LNU) surveys based on questions: a) “We have now been
through a lot of questions about your living conditions in different areas. How do you yourself view
your own conditions? By and large, do you think that your situation is very good, rather good, rather
bad, or very bad? b) “If you look back over the last ten years, do you think that your living
conditions during this time have deteriorated, improved, or remained more or less the same? c) “Do
you usually feel that your daily life is a source of personal satisfaction?” d) “On the whole, how
satisfied are you with your present job?” e) “How satisfied are you with your present wages (income
from work)? The questions were asked to those employed “last week”, i.e., either employee or selfemployed during the week preceding the interview. The sample sizes ranged from 3473 to 4527
depending on the year and question.

Table 8 Regression Coefficients (std errors) for the effect of working conditions, log wage, and
demographic variables on job and wage satisfaction. 19-65 years of age.
Sample mean (standard deviation)
Variable
1991
2000
Job satisfaction

4.248
(0.804)
3.317
(1.074)
4.344
(.290)
11.6
(3.14)
.466

4.040
(.873)
3.092
(1.160)
4.700
(.310)
12.7
(3.14)
.490

.485

.472

.169

.154

Sweaty at job

.227

.229

Mentally
demanding
Monotonous
job

.493

.518

.182

.190

Repetitive
movements
Age

.411

.461

39.8

41.2

Male

.500

.509

Married/
cohabiting
Divorced

.719

.723

.058

.058

Widowed

.010

.015

Any kids

.686

.690

N
Adj. R sq.

3265

2963

Wage
satisfaction
Log hourly
wage
Years of
education
Influence over
job tasks
Learn new
things at the
job
Heavy lifting

Job satisfaction
1991
2000
-

-

-

Wage satisfaction
1991
2000
-

-

-

-

.110
(.056)
-.011
(.005)
.141
(.028)
.281
(.028)

.132
(.059)
-.021
(.006)
.240
(.031)
.237
(.032)

1.243
(.076)
-.037
(.007)
.075
(.038)
.016
(.038)

1.460
(.076)
-.039
(.007)
.026
(.041)
.056
(.041)

-.024
(.038)
-.069
(.034)
-.163
(.027)
-.509
(.038)

-.105
(.045)
-.040
(.040)
-.247
(.031)
-.471
(.042)

-.171
(.052)
.028
(.047)
-.171
(.038)
-.068
(.052)

-.166
(.059)
-.160
(.052)
-.366
(.040)
-.122
(.055)

-.040
(.030)
.0031
(.0014)
-.120
(.029)
.061
(.041)
.020
(.068)
.174
(.141)
-.025
(.038)
3264
.1520

-.026
(.033)
.0008
(.0016)
-.041
(.033)
.021
(.044)
-.000
(.077)
.132
(.134)
-.023
(.041)
2961
.1302

-.040
(.041)
-.0012
(.0019)
-.148
(.040)
-.065
(.056)
-.236
(.093)
-.059
(.195)
-.167
(.052)
3264
.0941

.050
(.042)
-.0121
(.0020)
.086
(.043)
-.046
(.057)
-.086
(.100)
.054
(.174)
-.102
(.053)
2961
.1778

Source: Tabulated from Level of Living (LNU) surveys

Table 9: Regression coefficients (std errors) for estimates of the effect of unemployment and
duration of unemployment on life situation/living conditions and life satisfaction, 19-65 years
of age.

Proportion in Group
Measure of
Unemployment

Regressions with
unemployment status
Dummy for
Unemployment

1991

.037

2000

.070

Adj R sq
Regressions with
dummy variables for
duration of
unemployment
< 0.3 year

.02298

.0264

0.3 – 0.6 years

.0067

.0117

0.6 – 1.0 years

.0022

.0064

1.0 – 2.0 years

.0038

.0079

> 2 years

.0013

.0174

Adj R sq

Coefficients (std errors) on unemployment measure
1991
Life
situation/
living
conditions
(1)

2000
Life
situation/
living
conditions
(2)

1991
Life
satisfaction

2000
Life satisfaction

(3)

(4)

-.249
(.053)

-.293
(.039)

-.212
(.049)

-.126
(.038)

.0579
(5)

.0604
(6)

.0408
(7)

.0321
(8)

-.099
(.066)
-.439
(.122)
-.620
(.206)
-.297
(164)
-1.086
(.267)
.0615

-.232
(.065)
-.266
(.091)
-.416
(.124)
-.159
(.109)
-.409
(.075)
.0608

-.150
(.062)
-.224
(.114)
-.243
(.193)
-.385
(.153)
-.664
(.250)
.0411

-.099
(.062)
-.076
(.087)
-.004
(.119)
-.141
(.104)
-.234
(.072)
.0321

Source: Each regression included dummy variables for whether the worker was full time or part
time, self-employed, self-employed, helper in family, retired, housework, other and age, male
The life situation/living conditions outcome is based on question: a)“We have now been through a
lot of questions about your living conditions in different areas. How do you yourself view your own
conditions? By and large, do you think that your situation is very good, rather good, rather bad, or
very bad? The life satisfaction question is “Do you usually feel that your daily life is a source of
personal satisfaction?”

Table 10: Sweden compared to US, OECD, and EU in “knowledge economy” 2004
A) OECD Investment in Knowledge

Sweden
US
OECD
EU

RD/GDP
(rank of 18)

Software
(rank of 18)

Higher Ed
(rank of 18)

3.98 (1)
2.74 (4)
2.41
2.02

1.54 (1)
1.46 (2)
1.08
0.80

0.93 (7)
2.36 (1)
1.42
0.79

Investment
In Knowledge
(rank of 18)
6.44 (2)
6.56 (1)
5.10
3.62

B) Young Persons in Higher Education

Sweden
US
OECD
EU19

Bachelors/
25-34
(rank of
42.3 (4)
39.1(7)
31.0
--

SE Share of
Bachelor’s
(rank of 30)
31.7(2)
14.7
21.2
23.4

PhDs/age
(rank of 34)

SE PhDs/age
(rank of 31)

3.1 (1)
1.3 (11)
1.3
1.4

1.6 (1)
0.3 (22)
0.5
0.6

C) Scientific Output

Sweden
US
OECD
EU19

Scientific Articles Per
Capita (rank of 38)
1143 (2 )
726 (31)
441
573

Relative Prominence
of cited articles (rank of 39)
0.86 (5)
1.03 (2)
-0.74

Patents/ million
(rank of 32)
72.3 (5)
55.1 (8)
43.9
32.4*

Source:
A) OECD Science, Technology, and Industry: Scoreboard 2007 Figure A1.1 Investment in
Knowledge as percent of GDP 2004
B) OECD, Factbook 2007, tertiary attainment for age group 25-34, p 180; Figure B1.2 S&E degrees
as a percentage of total new degrees, Figure B1.1 Graduate rates at the doctorate level
C) OECD Science, Technology, and Industry: Scoreboard 2007 Figure D.5.1 Scientific articles per
million population 2003; Figure D1.4 Triadic Patent families per million population; Figure D5.2
Relative Importance of scientific literature

Note: *= EU25; Figure A2.1 R&D intensity compares R and D over GDP in 33 countries, Sweden
ranks 1 while the US ranks 7th. In this compilation, the Swedish RD/GDP ratio is nearly twice that
for the EU and 70% higher than the OECD average.

