                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      SYSTEMIC SUDDEN STOPS:
 THE RELEVANCE OF BALANCE-SHEET EFFECTS AND FINANCIAL INTEGRATION

                                         Guillermo A. Calvo
                                         Alejandro Izquierdo
                                         Luis-Fernando Mejía

                                        Working Paper 14026
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14026


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2008




We would like to thank Marty Eichenbaum, Ernesto Talvi and seminar participants at Columbia University,
George Washington University, the Latin American Economic Association, and the VI Workshop
in International Economics and Finance organized by the Department of Economics of the Universidad
T. Di Tella for their valuable comments, Walter Sosa for substantive technical advice, and Rudy Loo-Kung,
Gonzalo Llosa and Freddy Rojas for superb research assistance. The usual caveats apply. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Guillermo A. Calvo, Alejandro Izquierdo, and Luis-Fernando Mejía. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Systemic Sudden Stops: The Relevance Of Balance-Sheet Effects And Financial Integration
Guillermo A. Calvo, Alejandro Izquierdo, and Luis-Fernando Mejía
NBER Working Paper No. 14026
May 2008
JEL No. F31,F32,F34,F41

                                              ABSTRACT

Using a sample of 110 developed and developing countries for the period 1990-2004 we analyze the
empirical characteristics of systemic sudden stops (3S) in capital flows --understood as large and largely
unexpected capital account contractions that occur in periods of systemic turmoil -- and the relevance
of balance sheet effects in the likelihood of their materialization. We conjecture that large real exchange
rate (RER) fluctuations come hand in hand with 3S. A small supply of tradable goods relative to their
domestic absorption -- a proxy for potential changes in the real exchange rate -- and large foreign-exchange
denominated debts towards the domestic banking system, denoted Domestic Liability Dollarization,
DLD, are claimed to be key determinants of the probability of 3S, conforming a balance-sheet effect
that impacts on the probability of 3S in non-linear fashion. Regarding financial integration, the larger
is the latter, the larger is likely to be the probability of Sudden Stop; however, beyond a critical point
the relationship gets a sign reversion.


Guillermo A. Calvo                                   Luis-Fernando Mejía
Columbia University                                  University of Chicago
School of International and Public Affairs           Department of Economics
420 West 118th ST,Room 1303B, MC3332                 1126 East 59th Street
New York, NY 10027                                   Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER                                             lfmejia@uchicago.edu
gc2286@columbia.edu

Alejandro Izquierdo
Inter-American Development Bank
1300 New York Ave, N. W.
Washington, D. C., 20577
alejandroi@iadb.org
I. Introduction

       This paper is motivated by the spectacular financial crises in developing countries that

took place in the last fifteen years. Our central objective is to try to isolate the role of domestic

financial factors, in particular the role of foreign-exchange denominated debts and financial

integration into world capital markets. The approach is eminently empirical, and it focuses on

Sudden Stops episodes. These are episodes in which the economy exhibits a “large and largely

unexpected” cut in capital inflows. In addition, we zero in on “systemic” Sudden Stops (3S), i.e.,

sudden stops that take place in conjunction with a sharp rise in aggregate interest-rate spreads.

       Consequently, these are episodes for which it could be claimed that the initial trigger is

financial and external. Thus, the procedure we use to select Sudden Stop episodes is designed to

exclude crises that are idiosyncratic and can be due to factors quite disparate (like natural

disasters or political turmoil) from the purely financial ones that we intend to isolate. Moreover,

since our crisis definition tries to isolate episodes that are “largely unexpected,” it could be

argued that in these episodes market incompleteness is likely to prevail, making shocks such as

large changes in relative prices difficult to handle in a context of non-contingent contracts.

       The simple model discussed in Section II captures these characteristics by assuming that

3S are initially triggered by factors that are exogenous to individual economies. However,

whether or not this initial shock develops into a full-fledged Sudden Stop depends also on

country-specific variables. We conjecture that foreign-currency denominated debts play a

central role in this respect, especially when the Sudden Stop brings about a sharp increase in the

real exchange rate (RER). This is so because central banks have serious limitations as lenders of

last resort in terms of foreign exchange. In the empirical implementation we focus on an even

narrower concept of foreign-exchange denominated debt, namely, Domestic Liability




                                                   2
Dollarization, DLD, i.e., foreign-exchange denominated domestic debts towards the domestic

banking system, as a share of GDP. The rationale behind this choice is that typically banks are at

the heart of the economy’s payment system and, thus, their bankruptcy or even temporary

suspension of activities could trigger a serious supply shock. In addition, those crises are in

many cases associated with major real currency depreciation. Thus, it is necessary to bring into

focus factors that could provoke large increases in the real exchange rate. The framework

introduced below shows that a key factor is the current account deficit as a share of absorption

of tradable goods, which is shown to be negatively related to the ratio of tradables’ output (net of

transfers) to tradables’ absorption (a variable that we denote by ω (see Sections II and IV for

details)).1 The smaller is ω, the larger will be the impact on tradables’ absorption of a Sudden

Stop (keeping international reserves constant) and, thus, the larger its impact on the real

exchange rate. Thus, the model leads us to expect that the probability of a Sudden Stop will be

negatively associated with ω and positively associated with DLD (given the exogenous financial

trigger), bringing to the forefront the relevance of potential balance-sheet effects on the

likelihood of a Sudden Stop.

         The paper is organized as follows: Section II discusses a basic framework that helps to

identify the variables that determine the change in the RER, which is at the heart of our empirical

analysis. Section III develops an empirical definition and characterization of Sudden Stops and

links this definition to the empirical literature on crises. Section IV focuses on an empirical

analysis of the determinants of Sudden Stops, following a panel Probit approach, and highlights




1
  Variable ω is a measure of the economy’s ability to finance domestic absorption of tradable goods. Although it
could be claimed that ω is a measure of trade openness, it should be noted that it is significantly different from the
standard one, i.e., the ratio of exports plus imports to GDP (see Section IV for more details).


                                                           3
the impact of balance-sheet effects. Section V concludes with a description of our main findings

and future lines of research.



II.     Basic Framework

        The objective of this section is to motivate a set of key macro variables used in the

empirical exploration. As noted in the Introduction, we will focus on cases in which it can be

argued that the initial shock is systemic, and is associated with a sharp increase in the cost of

credit, initially inducing substantial contraction in international credit and aggregate demand.

Whether or not this initial credit contraction results in a full-fledged Sudden Stop depends on the

effects of the initial contraction, which, in turn, depend on domestic vulnerabilities.

        Consider the case in which there are two sectors, tradables and nontradables, and the

following demand function for nontradables holds:

                                                  h = α + β rer + δ z,                                           (1)

where h = log H, z = log Z, rer = log RER, H and Z are the demand for nontradables (or home

goods) and tradables, RER is the real exchange rate (i.e., the relative price of tradables with

respect to nontradables), and α, β, and δ are parameters, β > 0, δ > 0.2 Suppose for simplicity

that the supply of tradables and non-tradables is inelastically given. Thus, by equation (1), if z

contracts by Δz, in equilibrium we have

                                                          δ
                                                  Δrer = − Δz ,                                                  (2)
                                                          β

where Δ is the first-difference operator. Clearly, the larger is the proportional contraction of the

demand for tradables, the larger will be the proportional increase in the real exchange rate.


2
  This equation could be derived from first principles if H and Z are identified with consumption of nontradables and
tradables, the intertemporal utility function is separable, and the utility function is iso-elastic in H and Z.


                                                         4
Changes in rer, in turn, change the ratio of foreign-exchange denominated debt to GDP

(assuming that those debts are not state-contingent, which is justified by looking at episodes

where capital flow cuts are large and can be presumed to be largely unexpected). Thus, given a

positive stock of foreign-exchange denominated debt, the larger Δrer, the larger will be the

probability of financial distress. This illustrates how a systemic financial shock could create

financial domestic distress, especially if the foreign-denominated debt is owed to domestic

banks, as noted in the Introduction.3

         The next step is to trace the effect of credit contraction on z. It should be clear from the

start that such an effect will depend on preexisting debt maturity structure and central bank

policy with respect to international reserves, subjects that we do not address here. Instead, the

ensuing discussion suggests that a plausible proxy for the initial impact of a credit drought is the

ratio of the prior-to-shock current account deficit to the absorption of tradable goods. Let the

current account deficit, capital inflows, and international reserves be denoted by CAD, KI, and R,

respectively. By definition, and abstracting from errors and omissions,

                                           KI = CAD + ΔR = Z – Y + S + ΔR,                                            (3)

where Y is output of tradables and S are international factor payments, remittances abroad, etc.

Let us focus on the case in which the initial or incipient Sudden Stop results in zero capital

inflows, i.e., KI = 0. If CAD remains constant (and positive), then, by equation (3), ΔR < 0,

driving the economy into a balance-of-payments crisis beyond which the whole adjustment will

have to fall upon CAD. Hence, there will come a time at which CAD will have to be set equal to

zero. Thus, in the plausible case in which the economy initially attempts to honor its external




3
  It should be pointed out, however, that a large increase in rer is likely to generate financial difficulties even when
there are no foreign-exchange denominated debts, e.g., the case of firms that depend on imported raw materials.


                                                            5
financial obligations (i.e., S remains largely constant), then, in the most favorable case in which

Y does not contract as a result of the credit drought, we must eventually have

                                                   ΔZ = – CAD;                                                    (4)

thus,

                                                   – ΔZ / Z = CAD / Z .                                           (5)



Approximating the relative change in Z by its first difference in logs, it follows from equations

(2) and (5), that

                                                              δ CAD
                                                   Δrer =           .                                             (6)
                                                              β Z

Thus, by equation (6), the potential proportional change in the real exchange rate increases with

CAD prior to the Sudden Stop, as a ratio to the absorption of tradables (Z). Given that Y is

unchanged⎯and in some Sudden Stop episodes Y falls (it never rises)⎯ equation (6) gives a

lower bound for the required proportional increase in the real exchange rate.4 It should be

emphasized that equation (6) does not model the actual change in the equilibrium real exchange

rate but, rather, that part of the total change that is likely to be very difficult to prevent. We are

now ready to complete the framework that will help to rationalize Sudden Stops as defined in the

empirical section.

         Consider a scenario in which a shock is spread from one country to other regions, for

example, because of prevailing regulations in capital market transactions (such as margin calls)

that are unrelated to country fundamentals. Such a possibility is discussed in Calvo (1999),

4
 In a world of heterogeneous agents, full-fledged Sudden Stops could take place even under current account
surplus, because there could be key sectors that exhibit a current account deficit while the rest of the economy
exhibits an even larger surplus. In our sample, about 5% of Sudden Stops occur under a current account surplus the
period prior to crisis. This is another reason why equation (6) is likely to underestimate the required change in rer
of an incipient Sudden Stop.


                                                          6
where it is argued that a liquidity shock to informed investors due to adverse developments in

one country5 may trigger sales of assets from other countries in their portfolio in order to restore

liquidity. Now add to this framework a set of uninformed investors who face a signal-extraction

problem because they cannot observe whether sales of the informed are motivated by lower

returns on projects or by the informed facing margin calls. In this context, uninformed investors

may easily interpret the fact that informed investors stay out of the market for EM securities, or

massive asset sales, as an indication of lower returns and decide to get rid of their holdings as

well, even though the cause for informed investors’ sales was indeed due to margin calls.6 When

this occurs, a set of countries with no ties to the country at the epicenter of the crisis could be

exposed to a large and unexpected liquidity shock making their equilibrium real exchange rate

rise through the mechanism discussed above. This is an example of the exogenous trigger we

have been referring to above. Thus, if, as a result, the proportional change in RER is large and

the economy exhibits high DLD, for example, massive bankruptcies might ensue, generating a

full-fledged Sudden Stop.

        The negative effect of a rise in RER can be rationalized in a variety of different ways.

For example, although they do not deal with bankruptcies, models such as Izquierdo (1999) or

Arellano and Mendoza (2002) help rationalize the effects of changes in the RER on output via

external credit contraction, where the relevant price is that of non-tradable collateral relative to

the tradable good being produced. Another scenario is given in Aghion, Bacchetta, and Banerjee

(2001), a paper that is close in spirit to the present discussion because it specifically analyzes the

effects of liability dollarization. The paper exploits the fact that with incomplete pass-through

from exchange rates to domestic prices, currency depreciation impacts negatively on net worth

5
   Say, a margin call due to the fall in the price of asset holdings from a particular country.
6
  This can occur when the variance of returns to investment projects in EMs is high relative to the variance of the
liquidity shock to informed investors (see Calvo (1999)).


                                                        7
due to the increase in the debt burden of domestic firms indebted in foreign currency, thus

reducing investment by constrained firms as well as output levels in future periods. The

associated fall in future money demand and consequent future currency depreciation, coupled

with arbitrage in the foreign exchange rate market, imply that currency depreciation must take

place in the current period as well, opening the door for expectational shocks that could push an

economy into a bad (low output) equilibrium.7 8 Therefore, given the damaging effect of real

exchange rate fluctuations on balance sheets, output and repayment capacity, it can be argued

that the probability of a 3S episode will be an increasing function of CAD/Z, and the degree of

Liability Dollarization, especially Domestic Liability Dollarization , DLD, among possibly other

variables.9 This is the central conjecture that will be put to a test in the next sections.

         In closing this section, it is worth pointing out that following the empirical literature on

these issues we also include as an explanatory variable a measure of financial integration with

the rest of the world. Interestingly, empirical results suggest that such a variable might increase

the probability of Sudden Stop in the first stages of financial integration, while it might decrease

the probability of Sudden Stop for highly financially integrated economies. The result is

intuitively plausible given that, in the first place, to suffer from Sudden Stop economies must

exhibit some degree of financial integration. Thus, financial integration must, in principle,

increase the probability of Sudden Stop. However, for highly financially integrated economies

7
  Sudden Stops could also be rationalized in terms of models displaying a unique equilibrium, as long as the
equilibrium outcome is a discontinuous function of fundamentals. For example, Calvo (2003) shows that there
could exist a critical level of government debt beyond which the economy plunges into an equilibrium that displays
Sudden Stop features. Calvo (2003) is a non-monetary model, where public debt is denominated in terms of
tradables. Thus, Liability Dollarization is actually assumed for the entire debt, implying that the higher the degree
of Liability Dollarization (measured in this model by the public debt/output ratio), the higher the probability that a
given negative shock will generate a Sudden Stop.
8
  Uniqueness could also be obtained along the lines suggested by Morris and Shin (1998). Consider the limit case in
which informational noise (ε in their notation) goes to zero, and let currency devaluation after crisis be an increasing
function of the degree of Liability Dollarization. In this case, the likelihood of a crisis as a result of a deterioration
in fundamentals (θ in their notation) would be higher, the higher the degree of Liability Dollarization.
9
  For an explicit derivation of the relationship between CAD/Z and 1-ω, see section IV.


                                                            8
the latter effect could be more than offset by the existence of a better institutional framework

(with better quality creditor rights), or state-contingent financial instruments which, by providing

more orderly instruments for adjustment, lower the probability of Sudden Stop.



III. Sudden Stops: Definition and Characterization

         Recent empirical literature has focused on alternative measures of crisis, whether

currency crises (Frankel and Rose (1996),10 Kaminsky and Reinhart (1999),11 Edwards (2001),12

Arteta (2003), Razin and Rubinstein (2004)13) or current account reversals (Milesi-Ferretti and

Razin (2000), Edwards (2003)). However, to the extent that many of the recent crises were

originated by credit shocks in international markets, as argued in Calvo (1999), the measure of

crisis we want to consider in this case is more closely linked to large and unexpected capital

account movements rather than to measures that focus on large nominal currency fluctuations or

current account reversals (along these lines, Edwards (2004) makes a relevant distinction

between current account reversals and capital account reversals). Besides, current account and

exchange rate behavior may be more affected by endogenous policy choices than Systemic

Sudden Stops, which are, by definition, triggered by large and largely exogenous aggregate

interest rate spreads. Thus, Systemic Sudden Stops may imply quite different timings for the

onset of a crisis compared to exchange rate crises or current account reversals.14



10
   Using a panel of 105 countries for the period 1970-1991, they conclude that the current account has no
significance in explaining currency crises.
11
   Kaminsky and Reinhart (1999) implicitly introduce a link between current account performance and currency
crises by incorporating the growth rate of imports and exports in their analysis. They select the latter as a relevant
early warning indicator of currency crises based on noise-to-signal ratio properties of the series.
12
   This analysis does find that under some definitions of currency crisis, and particularly excluding African
countries, current account deficits are a significant determinant of the probability of experiencing currency crises.
13
   They focus on large RER swings to define a crisis.
14
   According to our definition, for example, Argentina’s Sudden Stop starts in May of 1999, whereas the currency
crisis only hits in February of 2002.


                                                          9
         One indicator of financial crisis that is akin to ours is the one advanced by Rodrik and

Velasco (1999)⎯which, in turn, draws from Radelet and Sachs (1998). According to their

definition, financial crisis takes place when there is a sharp reversal in net private foreign capital

flows.15 However, this indicator does not attempt to capture the “unexpected” component in

Sudden Stops, and it does not discriminate between episodes that may be of a domestic origin

from those of a systemic (and, hence, largely exogenous) origin. In contrast to this approach, as

well as that of Calvo, Izquierdo and Mejia (2004), our indicator of Sudden Stop focuses on

capital account reversals that coincide with sharp increases in aggregate spreads. This is done in

order to pinpoint crises that are highly likely to be associated with an external trigger that is

systemic in nature⎯i.e., Systemic Sudden Stops. It is important to notice that the 3S definition

in the present paper drops the requirement in Calvo, Izquierdo and Mejia (2004) that capital

account reversals coincide with a fall in output, thus reducing the potential influence of domestic

factors in the definition, and helping to focus on external triggers.16

         Rothenberg and Warnock (2006) build on Calvo, Izquierdo and Mejia (2004) to explore

differences between capital account reversals originated in capital flow transactions attributable

to non-residents vis-à-vis those attributable to residents, based on the finding by Cowan and De

Gregorio (2005) that for the case of Chile, much of the movement in the capital account balance

is due to changes in gross flows stemming from residents. For a restricted sample of countries,

they find that many of the net capital flow reversals are due to transactions made by residents

(although more than half of their episodes are still due to transactions made by foreigners).

However, their definition of sudden stops does not require coincidence with a spike in aggregate


15
  Exceeding 5 percent of GDP.
16
  Moreover, this study expands the sample of countries from 32 to 110 given availability of new data on
dollarization. Additionally, given the larger and more heterogeneous sample, controls for financial integration are
introduced in estimations, with significant results reported in section IV.


                                                         10
EMBI spreads, and, thus may be capturing several events of a domestic nature. We do not

follow this approach, not only because our definition likely excludes crises of a domestic origin,

but also because of insufficient data availability on gross flows at a monthly frequency for the

much larger sample of countries used in this study.17

         Against this empirical background, and following Calvo (1998), we look for measures of

a Sudden Stop that reflect large and unexpected falls in capital inflows, a central element in the

characterization of this type of event. In order to make the concept of Sudden Stop operational,

we first define a Sudden Stop as a phase that meets the following conditions:

     •   It contains at least one observation where the year-on-year fall in capital flows lies at

         least two standard deviations below its sample mean (this addresses the “unexpected”

         requirement of a Sudden Stop).18

     •   The Sudden Stop phase ends once the annual change in capital flows exceeds one

         standard deviation below its sample mean. This will generally introduce persistence, a

         common fact of Sudden Stops.

     •   Moreover, for the sake of symmetry, the start of a Sudden Stop phase is determined by

         the first time the annual change in capital flows falls one standard deviation below the

         mean.19

         Notice that there is an important difference between this concept of crisis and the one

used in other studies focusing on measures such as a fixed current account deficit threshold as a


17
   Besides, as it will be come evident later on, from an integrated capital market perspective, it is not crucial whether
domestic or foreign investors are responsible for the cut in financing in terms of the consequences that the
withdrawal of funds will pose on the real exchange rate and the associated balance-sheet effects.
18
   Both the first and second moments of the series are calculated each period using an expanding window with a
minimum of 24 (months of) observations and a start date fixed at January 1990. This intends to capture a learning
process or updating of the behavior of the series.
19
   As a result, a Sudden Stop phase starts with a fall in capital flows exceeding one standard deviation, followed by a
fall of two standard deviations. The process lasts until the change in capital flows is bigger than minus one standard
deviation.


                                                          11
share of GDP in that, in line with the theoretical arguments outlined in the previous section, our

definition accounts for the volatility of capital flow fluctuations of each particular country at

each point in time in deciding whether an event is “large and unexpected”. If anything,

our concept of crisis will tend to include episodes that would otherwise not qualify for crisis

when using measures such as a fixed current account deficit threshold. This is so because the

latter would exclude many crisis episodes in developed countries simply because their volatility

is smaller.

        To maximize the chances of detecting Sudden Stop episodes accurately, we work with

monthly data, since lower frequency data may blur the beginning of these episodes. Assessing

the right timing of these episodes is relevant because, as it will become clear later on, eventual

changes in the RER that may result from potential closure of the current account deficit need to

be measured before a Sudden Stop takes place. Given that capital account information is

typically not available at this frequency, we construct a capital flow proxy by netting out the

trade balance from changes in foreign reserves (both net factor income and current transfers are

thus included in our measure of capital flows, but since they represent mostly interest payments

on long-term debt, they should not vary so substantially as to introduce significant spurious

volatility into our capital flows measure).20 Changes in the 12-month cumulative measure of the

capital flow proxy are taken on a yearly basis to avoid seasonal fluctuations.

        As indicated in the introduction, our interest lies in the identification of Systemic Sudden

Stops (or 3S), i.e. Sudden Stops with an exogenous trigger. For this reason, we require

additionally that the detected Sudden Stop windows coincide with a period of skyrocketing




20
  See the Data Appendix for definitions and sources of these variables. All series are measured in constant 2000 US
dollars.


                                                        12
aggregate spreads. The same methodology outlined above to detect large changes in capital

flows is used for aggregate spreads to detect periods of capital market turmoil.21

        In order to make the analysis as exhaustive as possible, we work with a sample of 110

countries, including 21 developed economies, and 89 developing countries for the period 1990-

2004 (see the Data Appendix for details).22 The set of countries and years in the sample is

essentially restricted by availability of DLD data.

        Two periods of financial turmoil for developing countries are detected in our sample,

namely, the neighborhood of the Tequila crisis (1994-1995), and the neighborhood of the East

Asian-Russian Crisis (1998-1999). For the case of developed countries, financial turmoil is

detected for 1992, reflecting the ERM crisis. Throughout these periods, a total of 77 3S are

accounted for. A list of episodes is provided in Appendix Table 1.

        Our interest and the nature of our methodology to detect 3S, focusing on periods of

widespread financial turmoil, bunches episodes “by construction”. However, it is worth asking

whether bunching takes place when only large changes in capital flows are considered⎯i.e.,

without imposing overlap with large fluctuations in aggregate spreads. Figure 1 displays the

share of economies included in the EMBI+ index as well as other developing countries that

experienced large changes in capital flows across time.23 Bunching seems evident for EMBI+

countries, particularly around the Tequila crisis and the East Asian-Russian crisis (the two

systemic events captured by large fluctuations in aggregate EMBI spreads), whereas there is no

such clear bunching pattern for other developing countries, supporting the conjecture that EMs
21
   More specifically, we use J. P. Morgan’s Emerging Market Bond Index (EMBI) spread over US Treasury bonds
for developing countries, the Merrill Lynch Euro-area Government Index spreads for Euro-area countries (as well as
Nordic countries such as Denmark, Norway, and Sweden), and G7 Government Index spreads for all remaining
developed countries.
22
   The first two years of observations are lost, given that such information is used to construct initial standard
deviations.
23
   The distinction between EMBI+ and other developing countries is made because their levels of financial
integration differ and, thus, bunching behavior may differ.


                                                       13
are particularly prone to contemporaneous, systemic events (our estimations will show that

financial integration may be behind these results, as the probability of a 3S increases with

financial integration in the early stages of integration). Given the heterogeneous nature of EMs

in terms of their fiscal stance and other macroeconomic measures, it would be hard to argue that

there was a common flaw in fundamentals driving these episodes, other than the fact that they

are all EMs.24 This suggests that these episodes were not necessarily crises just waiting to

happen⎯but rather, that they were triggered by an external event⎯although there may be factors

that made them more prone to crisis, an issue that we raised in Section III and we will emphasize

in the following section.

                                                         Figure 1

                                     The Bunching of Sudden Stops Events:
                                Emerging Markets and Other Developing Countries

                              50
                                                                                         EMBI +
                              45                                                         Other Developing


                              40

                              35

                              30

                              25
                      %
                              20

                              15

                              10

                                5

                                0
                               1992m1     1994m1     1996m1     1998m1      2000m1     2002m1     2004m1


                              Note: For each group of countries, this figure displays the share of economies
                                       that experienced large changes in capital flows across time.




24
     For a detailed treatment of the Latin American episodes see Calvo, Izquierdo and Talvi (2002).


                                                              14
           Another topic that is relevant to the hypothesis advanced in this study is whether Sudden

Stop episodes have been associated with large RER depreciation⎯where large RER depreciation

windows are defined along the same lines used to identify periods of large changes in capital

flows. To this effect, we look at the share of 3S associated with large RER depreciation⎯i.e.,

the number of 3S windows that overlap with large RER depreciation windows, relative to the

number of 3S events. 55 percent of 3S episodes can be linked to large RER depreciation,

indicating that this large valuation element of balance sheet effects cannot be ignored.



IV. Determinants of Sudden Stops: Empirical Analysis

           Having defined Sudden Stops and examined some of their empirical characteristics, we

now turn to a search for Sudden Stop determinants. The framework discussed in Section III

suggests balance-sheet factors that exacerbate an economy’s vulnerability to Sudden Stops: The

degree of domestic liability dollarization (both in the private and public sectors), as well as the

sensitivity of the RER to capital flow reversals, which is related to the size of the supply of

tradable goods relative to demand for tradable goods. The latter becomes clear by examining

equation (6), which shows that the size of the increase in the RER depends on the percentage fall

in the absorption of tradables needed to close the current account gap (CAD/Z).25 As a matter of

fact, the less leveraged the absorption of tradable goods is, the smaller will be the effect on the

RER. To see this, rewrite CAD/Z as:

                                   CAD Z − Y + S     Y −S
                                      =          =1−      =1−ω ,                                      (7)
                                    Z      Z           Z

where ω, defined as ω = (Y − S ) / Z , can be though of as the un-leveraged absorption of

tradables. It is evident that the higher the supply of tradables (Y ) , the smaller will be financing

25
     An increase means a real depreciation of the currency.


                                                              15
from abroad (or leverage) of the absorption of tradables. Thus, high values of 1-ω mean that a

country relies less on its own financing of the absorption of tradables, and is therefore more

vulnerable to RER depreciation stemming from closure of the current account gap. Notice that

the denominator in (7) is the absorption of tradables, and not GDP. This points to the fact that

normalization of the current account deficit by the absorption of tradables may be more suitable

than normalization by GDP when analyzing vulnerability to Sudden Stops.

        In order to construct a measure of 1-ω , the first component of balance-sheet effects

tracking potential changes in RER, we need to obtain a value for the absorption of tradable goods

(Z), which is composed of imports plus a fraction of the supply of tradable goods. We do this by

proxying tradable output by the sum of agriculture plus industrial output, i.e., we exclude

services from total output. Next, we obtain the fraction of tradable output consumed

domestically by subtracting exports from tradable output, and adding imports to the latter in

order to get a measure of Z. Having computed values for Z, and using CAD data, we get values

for 1-ω as indicated by equation (7) (see the Data Appendix for details on definitions and sources

for all the variables used in this section).

        Our empirical strategy also highlights DLD, the second component of potential balance

sheet effects, a phenomenon rarely considered in empirical studies of crises determination, with a

few exceptions such as Arteta (2003), who explores the significance of Liability Dollarization in

explaining the likelihood of a currency crisis. Interestingly, he finds no significant role for

Liability Dollarization. This result is not incompatible with our findings below, given that we do

not focus on currency crises, and, as stated earlier, the timing of currency crises may be quite

different from that of Sudden Stops. Moreover, as it will become clear later on, our measure of




                                                 16
dollarization is different.26 A previous version of our study (Calvo, Izquierdo and Mejia (2004))

was the first to introduce the concept of DLD in determining the probability of a crisis. Here we

conduct a much more comprehensive analysis by including a larger set of 110 countries for

which DLD data is now available.27

         For developed countries, DLD is defined as BIS reporting banks’ local asset positions in

foreign currency as a share of GDP. Such data is not available for EMs, so we construct a proxy

by adding up dollar deposits and domestic banks’ foreign borrowing as a share of GDP. This

measure should be a good proxy for liability dollarization, under the assumption that banks have

a tendency to match the size of their assets and liabilities for each currency denomination.28

Data on dollar deposits comes from Levy Yeyati (2006), who, in turn, builds upon the dataset

used by Honohan and Shi (2002). Data on bank foreign borrowing is obtained from IMF IFS

(see the Data Appendix for a full description).

         Notice that, in contrast to measures of DLD previously used in the literature⎯e.g.,

scaling dollar credit as a share of total credit, or dollar deposits as a share of total deposits (as in

Arteta (2003))⎯we rely on liability dollarization as a share of GDP. This is particularly relevant

to capture the fact that even though financial systems may not be heavily dollarized when

considering the share of dollar liabilities in total liabilities, the size of the banking system may be

sufficiently large that dollar liabilities as a share of GDP constitute a sizeable burden to the

economy in the event of large RER depreciation. For example, a region like East Asia, where


26
   Our sample of countries is also different and much larger than that in Arteta (2003).
27
   In a related study, Cavallo and Frankel (2004), using a similar definition of Sudden Stop to that in Calvo,
Izquierdo and Mejia (2004), also introduce measures of dollarization more akin to those in Arteta (2003). These
alternative measures provide mixed results in terms of their contribution to the likelihood of a Sudden Stop. It is
also worth mentioning that our approach focuses on the impact of dollarization on the likelihood of a Sudden Stop,
rather than on the consequences of dollarization and Sudden Stops on relevant variables such as economic growth,
as in Edwards (2003).
28
   Evidence on currency matching of bank assets and liabilities for EMs can be found in Inter-American
Development Bank (2004).


                                                         17
the share of dollar liabilities in total liabilities was not large, comes at a par with Latin America,

where the share of dollar liabilities is big, yet the size of the banking system is small. One

problem with this measure is that ideally one would like to capture only foreign-exchange

denominated loans to nontradable sectors. This would not be a major problem if the share of

foreign-exchange denominated loans to non-tradables in total foreign-exchange denominated

loans were about the same across countries. Preliminary evidence for a small subset of countries

for which information is available suggests that there is a positive correlation between the degree

of DLD and the share of dollar loans to non-tradable sectors in total dollar loans, possibly

reflecting the fact that nontradable sectors are a major client of domestic banking systems.29

Another possibility that would validate our procedure is that in the short run most goods are de

facto nontradable. This has some support in recent crisis episodes in which affected countries

saw export credit dry up, seriously impairing their ability to export even though large currency

devaluation made exports extremely competitive (e.g., Korea and Thailand in 1997, and Brazil in

2002).

         Our estimation procedure uses as a benchmark a panel Probit model that approximates

the probability of falling into a full-fledged 3S episode as a function of lagged values of 1-ω and

DLD, controlling for a set of macroeconomic variables typically used in the literature on

determinants of crises⎯which we describe later⎯ and time effects using year dummies.30 We

use random effects to control for heterogeneity across panel members.31



29
   Based on information used in Inter-American Development Bank (2004).
30
   The use of a Probit model and the construction of a dichotomous Sudden Stop variable are due to our belief that
large and unexpected capital flow reversals have non-linear effects, as they trigger substantial balance-sheet
fluctuations that may lead to serious credit constraints or plain bankruptcies. An alternative, which is not explored
in this paper, would be to use regime-switching models.
31
   Particular attention will be paid to estimation problems that arise from the inclusion of potentially endogenous
variables within a Probit with random effects. See both the robustness section as well as the Technical Appendix for
a discussion.


                                                        18
           In order to reduce endogeneity issues, and given that many of the variables used in our

estimations come at an annual frequency, we switch to lagged yearly data.32 We are particularly

interested in lagged 1-ω because it proxies for the potential change in relative prices that could

occur were the country to face an incipient Sudden Stop (recall the discussion in Section III),

something that would not be conveyed by contemporaneous 1-ω once the current account gap is

closed and relative prices have adjusted.

           A first set of regression results is presented in Appendix Table 2 (robustness checks,

focusing on potential endogeneity issues between lagged 1 - ω and the latent variable behind the

construction of the Sudden Stop indicator, as well as estimations that focus only on developing

countries are presented later in Appendix Tables 3 through 5). They indicate that both 1 - ω and

DLD are significant at the 1% level in most specifications. These results withstand the inclusion

of a set of control variables typically used in the literature, including measures of financial

integration such as the stock of FDI assets plus liabilities (as a share of GDP) and the stock of

portfolio assets plus liabilities (as a share of GDP), terms of trade growth, the public sector

balance and public external debt (all expressed as shares of GDP), the ratio of M2 to

international reserves, as well as two different measures of exchange rate flexibility, and a

developing country dummy (see columns 2 to 10 of Appendix Table 2).

           Balance-sheet effects can be assessed by focusing on the interaction of ω and DLD,

which is particularly amenable to Probit models given their non-linear nature. We find that the

effects of ω on the probability of a Sudden Stop crucially depend on the degree of DLD. Low

values of ω (high leverage of CAD) imply a higher probability of Sudden Stop, but this is

particularly so for dollarized economies. These effects are not only statistically significant, but


32
     Except for terms-of-trade growth, a variable that enters contemporaneously in our estimations.


                                                           19
economically significant as well. Consider, for example, the effects of varying ω on the

probability of a Sudden Stop, keeping all other variables constant at their means, except for

DLD, which could be low (5th percentile in our sample), average, or high (95th percentile). This

is represented in Figure 2 (panel A).33 For small values of ω, there are substantial differences in

the probability of a Sudden Stop depending on whether DLD is low or high. Take, for example,

any two countries with a value of ω of 0.6 (the lowest measure of ω in our sample), and assume

that the first country is highly dollarized (dotted line), whereas the second country is not (solid

line). The probability of a Sudden Stop in the highly dollarized country exceeds that of the lowly

dollarized country by about 17 percentage points. Now evaluate this difference for the same two

countries when ω is equal to 1 (i.e., when CAD = 0). The difference in the probability of a

Sudden Stop is now only about 5 percentage points, about 30 percent of the difference at the

lower ω level. The high non-linearity described by the data implies that low ω and high

dollarization can be a very dangerous cocktail, as potential balance sheet effects become highly

relevant in determining the probability of a Sudden Stop. The effects of DLD on the probability

of a Sudden Stop are particularly important for emerging markets. By end-1997⎯on the eve of

the Russian crisis⎯61 percent of EMBI+ countries in our sample lay above the dollarization

median, whereas 80 percent of developed countries lay below the dollarization median.34




33
   For illustration purposes, we use estimations shown in column (7) of Table 2 of the Appendix to construct this
figure.
34
   Other developing countries are roughly evenly split above and below the median.


                                                       20
                                                                                                Figure 2

       Probability of a Sudden Stop for Different Values of ω and Domestic Liability Dollarization
                                         in the Average Country

                                                     Not controlling for the                                         Controlling for the
                                                       endogeneity of ω                                               endogeneity of ω

                                                               (A)                                                          (B)
                                                                                                       1.00
                                                                        Low dollarization
                                       0.20                             Average dollarization
                                                                        High dollarization

                                                                                                       0.80


                                       0.15
        Probability of a sudden stop




                                                                                                       0.60



                                       0.10

                                                                                                       0.40




                                       0.05
                                                                                                       0.20




                                       0.00                                                            0.00
                                              0.60      0.80    1.00        1.20        1.40                  0.60   0.80   1.00    1.20   1.40
                                                                Omega                                                       Omega




                 We now turn to the set of variables used as controls in our regressions. We first focus on

measures of financial integration based on data constructed by Lane and Milessi-Ferretti (2006).

The first measure adds the absolute value of previous period FDI asset and liability stocks as a

share of GDP, while the second measure does the same for portfolio stocks. A first pass suggests

that both measures are broadly significant (mostly at the five percent level, although not

consistently significant across specifications), indicating that higher integration reduces the

probability of a Sudden Stop (however, these results will change for lower levels of integration

when considering non-linear effects, described in the next section).35


35
  Debt stocks are not included because they are partly captured by public external debt and bank foreign borrowing
(via their participation in DLD).


                                                                                                  21
           The coefficient accompanying terms-of-trade growth is negative as expected but not

significant at the five percent level. (Appendix Table 2, columns 5 through 10). Another variable

of interest regarding Sudden Stops is the exchange rate regime. Two measures of exchange rate

regime flexibility were used alternatively in the estimations presented in Appendix Table 2

(columns 7 through 10). These measures are those constructed by Levy-Yeyati and Sturzenegger

(2002), who classify the flexibility of exchange rate regimes based on exchange rate volatility,

exchange-rate-changes volatility, and foreign reserves volatility.36 The first, narrower measure,

classifies regimes into floating regimes, intermediate regimes, and fixed regimes, while the

second measure extends this classification to 5 categories. This first pass suggests that both

measures of exchange rate flexibility turn out not to be significant (although, as reported later,

results are significant when focusing only on the developing country group and correcting for

potential endogeneity issues). This finding may initially seem somewhat puzzling, but it can be

explained by the fact that the loss of access to international credit is a real phenomenon with real

effects such as output contraction, which in principle does not rely on the behavior of nominal

variables. Indeed, the framework presented in Section II does not rely on any particular nominal

setup to explain the change in relative prices following a Sudden Stop, which would materialize

under both flexible and fixed exchange rate regimes. As a matter of fact, models that provide a

full-fledged version of the effects of Sudden Stops on output such as Izquierdo (1999), Arellano

and Mendoza (2002), and Calvo (2003) are concerned with real effects that are independent of

nominal arrangements. Of course, this does not rule out very different short-term dynamics,

which are likely to be dependent on nominal arrangements, as was evidenced by the very

dissimilar behavior of several emerging economies after the Sudden Stop triggered by the

Russian crisis of 1998. Even though most countries hit by Sudden Stops eventually experienced
36
     Given the way the index was originally constructed, a higher value indicates less exchange rate flexibility.


                                                            22
substantial real currency depreciation and output loss, the dynamics were very different for

countries like Colombia, for example, which quickly depreciated its currency and withstood the

real shock sooner, and Argentina, which took much longer to correct the resulting RER

misalignment.37

        At a first glance, other macroeconomic variables that we added for control, including

government balance as a share of GDP, and public sector external debt as a share of GDP (to

capture effects in the same vein as our DLD variable) do not turn out to be significant across

specifications (at least when not controlling for potential endogeneity of ω; we address this issue

later on (see page 24)), although their coefficients show the expected signs. This is broadly

consistent with other empirical work on the determinants of crises that do not find a strong

relationship between these variables and the probability of crisis. The fact that ω as well as

domestic DLD remain significant, while public external debt measures do not, suggests that

valuation effects, coupled with the materialization of contingent liabilities resulting from public

sector bailouts of private sector debts against the financial system may be key in explaining the

likelihood of a Sudden Stop.38

        A measure of the potential money and quasi-money liabilities that could run against

international reserves, captured by the M2 to reserves ratio, was also added to the control group;

again, although the coefficient accompanying this variable is positive, it is not statistically

significant at the 10 percent level.

        Finally, another vulnerability measure that has been associated with financial crises is the

ratio of short-term debt to international reserves. Rodrik and Velasco (1999) use two versions of


37
  See Calvo, Izquierdo and Talvi (2002) for a more detailed discussion.
38
  An example backing this assertion is the case of Korea, where public sector debt represented only 10 percent of
GDP prior to its 1997 Sudden Stop, before quadrupling once the financial sector bailout was added to the fiscal
burden.


                                                        23
this variable as a determinant of financial crises for a group of emerging markets⎯separating

short-term debt to foreign banks from other foreign short-term debt⎯and find these variables to

be significant in explaining the probability of a financial crisis. In a separate exercise, we use the

same (but updated) data source employed in their study (the International Institute of Finance’s

(IIF) database, comprising 31 emerging markets, substantially shrinking the sample size) to

evaluate the impact of alternative measures of the short-term-debt-to-reserves ratio on the

probability of a Systemic Sudden Stop. For this relatively small subset of countries (compared to

our sample of 110 countries used in other estimations), and controlling for balance-sheet effects,

we do not find consistent evidence of either measure of short-term-debt-to-reserves-ratios being

significant as a determinant of Systemic Sudden Stops.39 This evidence is more in line with

Frankel and Rose (1996), who find that short-term debt does not have an incidence on currency

crises, and Eichengreen and Rose (1998), who actually find that short-term debt may decrease

the probability of banking crises.



Robustness Checks

Addressing Endogeneity. Preliminary results indicate that a key driver of the balance-sheet

effects affecting the probability of a Sudden Stop is the potential change in relative prices

captured by 1 - ω. Yet it is quite likely that this particular variable could be endogenous with the

latent variable behind Sudden Stops (capital flows) given their tight linkages through

adjustments in the balance of payments, as well as unobserved and persistent characteristics

common to both variables. Such would be the case of variables proxying credibility or political

factors. To tackle this potential endogeneity problem, we carried out a Rivers-Vuong test to the

39
 In part, this result may be due to the lack of control groups (i.e., other developing and developed countries for
which IIF does not report data). Results are available upon request.


                                                         24
estimations previously presented in Appendix Table 2.40 Based on the results of this test (see

Appendix Table 3), we cannot reject the presence of endogeneity since the residuals obtained in

the first stage of this method are significant in Probit estimations.41 A second element to

consider is that this correction for endogeneity is done in the presence of random effects.

Therefore, in order to assess the significance of all variables included in the estimations in the

presence of endogeneity and random effects, we need to construct appropriate measures of the

standard deviation of their coefficient estimators, as standard test statistics may no longer be

valid (see the Statistical Appendix for a discussion). In order to do this, we rely on a non-

parametric hierarchical two-step bootstrap methodology. Random effects introduce an intra-

group correlation structure among observations. This is accounted for by first randomly

sampling countries with replacements, and, in a second stage, randomly sampling without

replacement within the countries sampled in the first stage. According to Davison and Hinkley

(1997), this procedure closely mimics the intra-group correlation structure of the data mentioned

above (see the Technical Appendix for a detailed explanation). Confidence intervals are

computed using the percentile method at the 1, 5 and 10 percent significance levels, based on

500 replications.

         Including residuals of the first-stage regression in Probit estimations to control for

endogeneity and using bootstrapped confidence intervals, we confirm that both 1-ω and domestic

liability dollarization remain significant, this time at the 1 percent level in every specification.


40
   Probit models can be reduced to latent variable models. For this particular case where endogeneity in 1-ω is
suspected, a system of two equations can be defined, one representing the latent variable behind the Sudden Stop
variable (which is assumed to be a linear function of all variables in the Probit, including 1-ω), the other
representing 1-ω, which is considered to be a linear function of all other variables included in the Probit estimation,
as well as a lag in 1-ω. Residuals from this second regression are included in the Probit regression to determine
their significance. If the latter are significant, endogeneity cannot be rejected. For further details, see Rivers and
Vuong (1988), or Wooldridge (2002).
41
   Following the Rivers-Vuong approach, in the first stage we used all the other explanatory variables in the Probit
equation and the second lag of ω as instruments of the potentially endogenous variable (ωt-1).


                                                         25
Results are reported in Appendix Table 3. It is worth considering that, in particular, the

coefficient accompanying 1-ω increases substantially compared to results shown in Appendix

Table 2, indicating that the relevance of 1-ω increases once controlling for endogeneity.42 This

can be seen graphically by replicating panel (A) of Figure 2 with the new estimates, to show that

for any given value of 1-ω, the probability of a Sudden Stop increases compared to previous

estimates that do not control for endogeneity (see panel B of Figure 2). Also, the non-linearity of

balance-sheet effects prevails.

        After controlling for endogeneity and using bootstrapped confidence intervals, the public

sector balance becomes significant at the five percent level in all specifications. Some

specifications show significance in terms of trade growth, although not consistently across all

specifications.

Working with the developing country sample. In order to explore whether differences in

potential balance-sheet effects remain a key explanatory variable within the developing-country

group, and that they are not just capturing differences between developing and developed

countries (despite the inclusion of a developing country dummy), we repeat our estimations, this

time excluding developed countries. Results (already controlling for endogeneity and using

bootstrapped confidence intervals) are shown in Appendix Table 4. Interestingly, we confirm

the same results reached with the full dataset. Both 1 - ω and DLD remain significant at the 1%

level. Public balance is significant at the 1 percent level across most specifications and terms of

trade growth is significant at the 5 percent level in columns (4) and (5). This last result is

consistent with the case made by Caballero and Panageas (2003) that in countries where

commodities are relevant, a fall in commodity prices may be accompanied by a Sudden Stop,

42
  None of the previous point estimates of the coefficient accompanying 1-ω in Appendix Table 2 fall within the
confidence interval shown in Appendix Table 3.


                                                     26
thus amplifying the original shock. But perhaps the key element to highlight here is that, for the

group of developing countries, the exchange rate regime is significant across different definitions

(3-way and 5-way classification) in some specifications, in the sense that fixed exchange rate

regimes are associated with a higher probability of a Sudden Stop.

Non-linearities in Portfolio Integration. An interesting result of having split the sample to

include developing countries only is that portfolio integration changes sign and is significant at

the 1 or 5 percent level in most specifications (see Appendix Table 4), indicating that the

probability of a Sudden Stop increases with portfolio integration for this particular group. This

stands in stark contrast to results stemming from estimations including developed countries, for

which the probability of a Sudden Stop decreases with financial integration. Bordo (2007)

suggests that so-called “financial revolutions” leading to financial stability depend on a set of

“deep institutional factors” that countries can grow up to based on a learning process derived

from experiencing financial crises. This would imply that while countries are integrating, they

may be prone to financial crises, from which they can learn, so as to advance in their integration

process until they become financially stable and therefore devoid of episodes such as Sudden

Stops.43

         Our findings regarding the switching sign of portfolio integration and the view stated

above led us to explore the issue of non-linearities in financial integration. To this effect, we

included a quadratic term of our portfolio integration measure in our estimations for the full

sample including both developing and developed countries (see Appendix Table 5).44 The

coefficient accompanying this quadratic term is negative and significant at the 1 percent level

43
   Recently, Ranciere et. al. (2006) show that while developing countries may be exposed to crises, there are still
long-term benefits stemming from financial liberalization. Their empirical findings show that financial
liberalization fosters economic growth at the cost of a higher propensity to crises. Overall, they find a positive net
effect of financial liberalization on growth.
44
   These estimations already control for endogeneity in 1-ω and use bootstrapped confidence intervals.


                                                           27
accross specifications, while the linear term of portfolio integration is positive and significant at

the 1 percent level. The inclusion of a quadratic term does not affect the significance at the 1

percent level of 1-ω or DLD across specifications, while the coefficient accompanying FDI

integration is negative and now significant in almost all specifications. The public sector balance

remains significant at the five percent level.

        Figure 3 depicts the relevance of non-linearities in portfolio integration with respect to

the probability of a Sudden Stop. Using estimations shown in column (4) of Appendix Table 5

(and keeping all other variables at their sample means), results suggest that countries with

portfolio integration below 7.6 percent of GDP face an increasing probability of a Sudden Stop

while, beyond this threshold, the probability of a Sudden Stop decreases with portfolio

integration. Of particular interest is the placement of developed, EMBI+, and other developing

countries along this figure. Notice that while most developed countries lie to the very right, and

other developing countries mostly lie to the left, emerging markets that are part of the EMBI+

index are concentrated in the region where the probability of a Sudden Stop is the highest. This

is the group of countries that despite the benefits of financial integration may be facing the

challenge of developing deep institutions that will ensure financial stability and reduce the

probability of financial crises. An interesting result of this analysis is that it provides a rationale

for a classification of emerging markets in accordance with their particular positioning in terms

of integration and the likelihood of experiencing a Sudden Stop (a complete list of countries used

in estimations and their position in terms of integration is provided in Table 6).




                                                  28
                                                                                Figure 3

               Probability of a Sudden Stop for Different Values of Portfolio Integration

                                                            0.20
                                                                                               Probability of SS
                                                                                               EMBI+
                                                                                               Other
                                                                                               Developed


                             Probability of a sudden stop   0.15




                                                            0.10




                                                            0.05




                                                            0.00
                                                                   0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0
                                                                                 Portfolio Integration
                     Note: The probability of a sudden stop is based on the
                     estimation shown in column (4) of Appendix Table 5, with all
                     other variables affecting the probability of a Sudden Stop
                     evaluated at their sample means.


V. Conclusions

       Focusing on the characteristics and determinants of large capital flow reversals of a

systemic nature (suggestive of shocks to the supply of international funds) for a large set of

developing and developed countries, we obtained a few key empirical findings that open up

several areas of research:

   •   Systemic Sudden Stops tend to come hand in hand with large RER fluctuations, a key

       ingredient for balance-sheet effects.

   •   Sudden Stops seem to come in bunches, grouping together countries that are different in

       many respects, such as fiscal stance, monetary and exchange rate arrangements. This


                                                                                   29
       particular type of bunching suggests that when analyzing Sudden Stops, careful

       consideration should be given to financial vulnerabilities to external shocks.

   •   A small supply of tradable goods (relative to the absorption of tradable goods), a proxy

       for large potential changes in the RER, and Domestic Liability Dollarization, are key

       determinants of the probability of a Sudden Stop.

   •   Both the supply of tradable goods as well as the currency structure of Balance Sheets are

       in many respects the result of domestic policies. Countries may be tested by foreign

       creditors, but vulnerability to Sudden Stops is enhanced by domestic factors, such as

       tariff and competitiveness policies affecting the supply of tradable goods, and badly

       managed fiscal and monetary policies that result in Domestic Liability Dollarization.

   •   The effect of balance-sheet factors on the probability of a Sudden Stop could be highly

       non-linear. In particular, high leverage of tradables’ absorption and high Domestic

       Liability Dollarization could be a dangerous cocktail.

   •   The probability of a Sudden Stop initially increases with financial integration⎯departing

       from low levels of financial integration⎯but eventually decreases, and is virtually nil at

       high levels of integration. Emerging markets largely stand in a gray area in-between

       developed and other developing countries, where the probability of a Sudden Stop is the

       highest, suggesting that financial integration can be risky when not accompanied by the

       development of institutions that will support the use more sophisticated and credible

       financial instruments.



       Although our work has established the empirical relevance of balance-sheet effects on the

likelihood of Sudden Stops, it does not cover two other topics that represent important extensions



                                               30
of the present line of research, namely, the consequences of Sudden Stops and balance sheet

effects on economic growth, particularly in dollarized economies, as well as the role that

international reserves could have in lowering the probability of Sudden Stops, by ameliorating

the impact of balance-sheet effects . 45 46 We leave these topics for future research.




45
   Relevant work in this direction has recently been conducted by Edwards (2003), Ranciere, Tornell and
Westermann (2006), but balance-sheet effects still need to be incorporated into this line of research.
46
   Preliminary work by Calvo, Izquierdo and Loo-Kung (forthcoming) suggests that DLD net of foreign reserves as
a share of GDP also works as a significant determinant of the probability of a Systemic Sudden Stop. This result
could be used to compute an optimal level of international reserves that balances the costs of holding reserves
against the benefit of lowering the probability of Sudden Stop.


                                                       31
References

AGHION, PHILIPPE, PHILIPPE BACCHETTA, and ABHIJIT BANERJEE (2001). “Currency Crises and
       Monetary Policy in an Economy with Credit Constraints,” European Economic Review,
       45: 1121-50.
ARELLANO, CRISTINA AND ENRIQUE MENDOZA (2002). “Credit Frictions and Sudden Stops in
       Small Open Economies: An Equilibrium Business Cycle Framework for Emerging
       Market Crises”, NBER Working Paper No. 8880.
ARTETA, CARLOS O. (2003). “Are Financially Dollarized Countries More Prone to Costly
       Crises?” International Finance Discussion Paper 763, Board of Governors of the Federal
       Reserve System.
BORDO, MICHAEL (2007). “Growing up to Financial Stability”, NBER Working Paper No.
       12993.
CABALLERO, RICARDO, and STAVROS PANAGEAS (2003). “Hedging Sudden Stops and
       Precautionary Recessions: A Quantitative Framework,” mimeograph, M.I.T.
CALVO, GUILLERMO A. (1998). “Capital Flows and Capital-Market Crises: The Simple
       Economics of Sudden Stops,” Journal of Applied Economics (CEMA), 1(1): 35-54.
       Reprinted in Guillermo A. Calvo, Emerging Capital Markets in Turmoil: Bad Luck or
       Bad Policy, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2005.
       ——— (1999). “Contagion in Emerging Markets: When Wall Street is a Carrier,”
       mimeograph, University of Maryland. Partial version in Proceedings from the Congress
       of the International Economic Association, Buenos Aires, Argentina, 2002. Full version
       in Guillermo A. Calvo, Emerging Capital Markets in Turmoil: Bad Luck or Bad Policy,
       Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2005.
       ——— (2003). “Explaining Sudden Stop, Growth Collapse, and BOP Crisis: The Case
       of Distortionary Output Taxes,” IMF Staff Papers, 50, Special Issue. Reprinted in
       Guillermo A. Calvo, Emerging Capital Markets in Turmoil: Bad Luck or Bad Policy,
       Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2005.
CALVO, GUILLERMO A., ALEJANDRO IZQUIERDO, and ERNESTO TALVI (2002). “Sudden Stops, the
       Real Exchange Rate and Fiscal Sustainability: Argentina’s Lessons”, NBER Working
       Paper No. 9828. Reprinted in Guillermo A. Calvo, Emerging Capital Markets in
       Turmoil: Bad Luck or Bad Policy, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2005.


                                              32
CALVO, GUILLERMO A., ALEJANDRO IZQUIERDO, AND LUIS FERNANDO MEJIA (2004). “On the
       Empirics of Sudden Stops: The Relevance of Balance-sheet Effects”, NBER Working
       Paper No. 10520.
CALVO, GUILLERMO A., ALEJANDRO IZQUIERDO, AND RUDY LOO-KUNG (FORTHCOMING).
       “Systemic Sudden Stops and Optimal Reserves, mimeo.
CAVALLO, EDUARDO, AND JEFFREY FRANKEL, J. (2004). “Does Openness to Trade Make
       Countries More Vulnerable to Sudden Stops, Or Less? Using Gravity to Establish
       Causality”, NBER Working Paper No. 10957.
COWAN, K., AND J. DE GREGORIO (2005). “International borrowing, capital controls and the
       exchange rate lessons from Chile”, NBER Working Paper 11382.
DAVISON, A. AND HINKLEY, D. (1997). “Bootstrap Methods and Their Applications”,
       (Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press).
EDWARDS, SEBASTIAN (2001). “Does the Current Account Matter?” NBER Working Paper No.
       8275.
EDWARDS, SEBASTIAN (2003). “Current Account Imbalances: History, Trends and Adjustment
       Mechanisms,” paper prepared for the Fourth Mundell-Fleming Lecture at the
       International Monetary Fund, November 6th, 2003.
EDWARDS, SEBASTIAN (2004). “Thirty Years of Current Account Imbalances, Current Account
       Reversals and Sudden Stops, NBER Working Paper 10276.
EICHENGREEN, BARRY, AND ANDREW ROSE (1998), "Staying Afloat When the Wind Shifts:
       External Factors and Emerging-Market Banking Crises," NBER Working Paper No.
       6370.
FRANKEL, JEFFREY, and ANDREW ROSE (1996). “Currency Crashes in Emerging Markets: An
       Empirical Treatment,” Journal of International Economics, 41(3/4): 351-66.
HONOHAN, PATRICK, and ANQING SHI (2002). “Deposit Dollarization and the Financial Sector in
       Emerging Economies," World Bank Working Paper No. 2748.
INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (2004). Unlocking Credit: The Quest for Deep and
       Stable Bank Lending. Economic and Social Progress in Latin America Report. The Johns
       Hopkins University Press.
IZQUIERDO, ALEJANDRO (1999). “Credit Constraints, and the Asymmetric Behavior of Output
       and Asset Prices under External Shocks”, doctoral dissertation, University of Maryland.



                                              33
KAMINSKY, GRACIELA L., and CARMEN M. REINHART (1999). “The Twin Crises: The Causes of
       Banking and Balance-of-Payments Problems,” American Economic Review, 89(3): 473-
       500.
LANE, PHILLIP R. AND MILESI-FERRETI, GIAN MARIA (2006). “The External Wealth of Nations
       Mark II: Revised and Extended Estimates of Foreign Assets and Liabilities, 1970–2004”.
       IIIS Discussion Paper No. 126.
LEVY-YEYATI, EDUARDO, and FEDERICO STURZENEGGER (2002). “Classifying Exchange Rate
       Regimes: Deeds vs. Words,” European Economic Review, 49 (6), p.1603-1635, Aug
       2005.
LEVY-YEYATI, EDUARDO (2006), “Financial dollarisation: Evaluating the Consequences”,
       Economic Policy, 21(45):61-118.
MILESI-FERRETTI, GIAN MARIA, and ASSAF RAZIN (2000). “Current Account Reversals and
       Currency Crises: Empirical Regularities”, in P. KRUGMAN (ed.), Currency Crises
       (Chicago, USA.: University of Chicago Press).
MORRIS, STEPHEN, and HYUN SONG SHIN (1998). “Unique Equilibrium in a Model of Self-

       Fulfilling Currency Attacks”, American Economic Review, 88(3): 587-97.

RADELET, STEVEN, AND JEFFREY SACHS (1998) “The East Asian Financial Crisis: Diagnosis,
       Remedies, Prospects", Brookings Paper, Vol. 28, no. 1 : 1-74
RANCIERE, ROMAIN, AARON TORNELL, and FRANK WESTERMANN (2006). “Decomposing the
       Effects of Financial Liberalization: Crises vs. Growth”, NBER Working Paper No.
       12806.
RAZIN, ASSAF, and YONA RUBINSTEIN (2004). “Exchange Rate Regimes, Capital Account

       Liberalization and Growth and Crises: A Nuanced View”, mimeograph, Tel-Aviv

       University.

RIVERS, DOUGLAS and QUANG H. VUONG (1988), “Limited Information Estimators and
       Exogeneity Tests for Simultaneous Probit Models,” Journal of Econometrics, 39(3): 347-
       366




                                              34
RODRIK, DANI, AND ANDRES VELASCO (1999), “Short-term Capital Flows”, NBER Working
      Paper 7364 (also published in Annual World Bank Conference on Development
      Economics 1999).
ROTHENBERG, D. AND FRANCIS WARNOCK (2006). “Sudden Flight and True Sudden Stops”,
      NBER Working Paper 12726.
WOOLDRIDGE, JEFFREY M. (2002). Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data.
      (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press).




                                           35
                                      Appendix Table 1
                            List of Systemic Sudden Stop Episodes


Country                Begins     Ends        Country                          Begins     Ends
                                              Developing countries
Developing countries                          (continued)
Angola                 1999m12   2001m3       Malawi                           1997m12   1998m2
Argentina              1995m1    1995m12      Malaysia                         1994m12   1995m9
Argentina              1999m5    1999m11      Mexico                           1994m3    1995m11
Armenia                1997m12   1998m1       Moldova                          1998m6    1999m8
Armenia                1998m9    2000m2       Mozambique                       1995m3    1996m5
Azerbaijan             1997m9    1998m3       Nepal                            1998m5    1999m7
Azerbaijan             1999m11   2001m4       Oman                             1999m11   2001m4
Barbados               1999m1    1999m3       Pakistan                         1995m9    1996m2
Belarus                1999m2    2000m1       Pakistan                         1998m5    1999m1
Belize                 1994m10   1995m9       Paraguay                         1999m9    2001m5
Bolivia                1999m12   2000m10      Peru                             1997m7    1998m2
Brazil                 1995m1    1995m6       Peru                             1999m2    1999m11
Brazil                 1998m9    1999m8       Philippines                      1995m5    1995m11
Bulgaria               1995m12   1996m10      Philippines                      1997m5    1999m7
Cape Verde             1993m9    1994m7       Poland                           1999m3    2000m5
Cape Verde             1997m3    1998m1       Sierra Leone                     1998m1    1998m11
Chile                  1995m10   1996m8       Slovak Republic                  1997m7    1998m4
Chile                  1998m6    1999m6       Slovak Republic                  1999m5    1999m9
Colombia               1997m12   2000m7       Slovenia                         1998m6    1999m6
Costa Rica             1998m8    2000m8       Sri Lanka                        1995m1    1996m8
Croatia                1998m9    1999m11      St. Kitts and Nevis              1993m7    1994m6
Dominican Republic     1994m3    1995m5       St. Vincent and the Grenadines   1995m2    1995m9
Ecuador                1995m5    1996m11      St. Vincent and the Grenadines   1999m3    1999m9
Ecuador                1999m7    2000m10      Suriname                         1993m1    1994m5
El Salvador            1999m2    1999m10      Thailand                         1996m12   1998m7
Estonia                1998m10   2000m2       Tonga                            1998m4    1998m9
Guinea-Bissau          1999m1    1999m6       Turkey                           1994m3    1995m1
Honduras               1995m10   1996m9       Turkey                           1998m10   1999m9
Hong Kong, China       1998m7    1999m7       Uruguay                          1999m3    1999m4
Indonesia              1997m12   1998m11      Uruguay                          1999m12   2000m2
Indonesia              1999m12   2000m11      Yemen, Rep.                      1994m6    1996m3
Jordan                 1994m12   1995m5       Zimbabwe                         1992m8    1994m10
Jordan                 1998m10   1999m6       Zimbabwe                         1997m6    1998m6
Korea, Rep.            1997m8    1998m11      Zimbabwe                         1999m9    2001m5
Lao PDR                1997m7    1998m9       Developed countries
Latvia                 1999m4    1999m9       Austria                          1992m2    1992m2
Lithuania              1999m5    2000m5       France                           1992m1    1992m9
                                              Greece                           1992m11   1993m7
                                              Portugal                         1992m10   1993m9
                                              Spain                            1992m4    1993m8
                                              Sweden                           1992m1    1992m3




                                             36
                                                                  Appendix Table 2
                                                                    Panel PROBIT
                                               All Countries – Dependent Variable: Systemic Sudden Stop

                                     (1)          (2)          (3)           (4)           (5)          (6)          (7)          (8)          (9)           (10)
l-ωt-1                             1.583         1.339        2.986         2.828         2.249        2.793        2.022        2.010        1.957         1.656
                                (0.489)***    (0.495)***   (0.679)***    (0.683)***   (0.709)***   (0.658)***   (0.711)***   (0.709)***   (0.718)***    (0.771)**
DLD t-1                            1.005         0.769        2.109         2.168        2.611         1.571        1.977        1.957        2.063        2.203
                                 (0.419)**     (0.421)*    (0.726)***    (0.736)***   (0.812)***    (0.631)**    (0.786)**    (0.784)**    (0.808)**   (0.825)***
Developing Dummy                                 0.859        0.482         0.075        -0.218        0.184        0.132        0.120        0.274         0.249
                                              (0.315)***     (0.343)       (0.424)      (0.454)      (0.366)      (0.451)      (0.448)      (0.474)       (0.548)
FDI Integration t-1                                          -1.803        -1.359        -0.671       -1.223       -0.840       -0.833       -0.806        -0.923
                                                           (0.530)***    (0.527)***     (0.581)    (0.463)***     (0.578)      (0.576)      (0.587)       (0.608)
Portfolio Integration t-1                                                  -3.022        -5.018       -2.531       -4.460       -4.462       -4.953        -4.269
                                                                           (1.872)     (2.167)**     (1.667)     (2.150)**    (2.142)**    (2.220)**     (2.299)*
TOT Growth t                                                                             -0.752       -0.233       -0.585       -0.575       -0.542       -0.354
                                                                                        (0.745)      (0.707)      (0.767)      (0.767)      (0.777)       (0.807)
Public Balance/GDP t-1                                                                                -0.006       -0.004       -0.004       -0.003        -0.003
                                                                                                     (0.004)      (0.005)      (0.005)      (0.005)       (0.005)
Ex. Regime 3 t-1                                                                                                    0.151
                                                                                                                  (0.116)
Ex. Regime 5 t-1                                                                                                               0.092        0.098         0.097
                                                                                                                              (0.074)      (0.075)       (0.077)
M2 over Reserves t-1                                                                                                                        0.014         0.014
                                                                                                                                           (0.011)       (0.012)
Public External Debt/ GDP t-1                                                                                                                             0.000
                                                                                                                                                         (0.000)
Constant                          -2.432        -3.060       -2.077        -1.776       -2.318       -1.486       -2.579       -2.587       -2.871       -2.863
                                (0.197)***    (0.339)***   (0.359)***    (0.437)***   (0.472)***   (0.373)***   (0.546)***   (0.555)***   (0.611)***   (0.669)***
Observations                       1081          1081          927           921          903          849          796          796          795          661
Number of Countries                 110           110           94            94           90           84           83           83           83           72

    McFadden adj R2                   0.138         0.146         0.176      0.187        0.207      0.120        0.216        0.216        0.215        0.196
    % correctly predicted             0.884         0.884         0.894      0.893        0.889      0.876        0.883        0.887        0.889        0.870
    (PCP)
    Adjusted PCP                     -0.025        -0.025         0.125      0.116        0.065      0.000        0.079        0.109        0.129        0.122
 Standard errors in parentheses. All regressions include time dummies and random effects.
 * significant at 10%, ** significant at 5%, *** significant at 1%.




                                                                                 37
                                                                                          Appendix Table 3
                                                                              Panel PROBIT – Rivers & Voung Approach
                                                                       All Countries – Dependent Variable: Systemic Sudden Stop

                                           (1)              (2)                (3)              (4)                   (5)              (6)              (7)              (8)              (9)               (10)
 Residuals t                            -3.485***        -3.344***           -7.839***        -7.776***             -8.812***        -7.321***        -7.795***        -7.748***        -7.597***        -12.172***
                                      [-8.34,-1.97]    [-8.20,-1.85]      [-15.55,-5.49]   [-17.41,-5.59]        [-21.35,-6.11]   [-16.12,-5.17]   [-19.81,-3.82]   [-19.82,-5.58]   [-21.38,-4.81]    [-40.69,-5.32]
 l-ω t-1                                 3.490***        3.224***             8.895***         8.920***             9.443***         8.250***         8.012***          7.969***        7.781***         12.127***
                                       [2.61,9.47]      [2.39,9.03]        [6.97,18.94]     [7.66,24.40]          [7.63,25.34]     [6.26,20.04]     [5.93,26.58]     [5.89,26.21]     [6.42,28.31]      [8.75,47.90]
 DLD t-1                                 1.983***         1.755***            4.119***         3.900***              4.164***         3.227***         4.100***         4.062***         4.082***          2.324***
                                       [1.06,4.92]      [0.12,4.83]         [3.29,8.68]      [2.70,8.92]           [3.01,9.89]      [2.17,8.22]     [3.33,11.93]     [3.14,11.55]     [3.32,13.03]       [1.29,8.07]
 Developing Dummy                                         0.757**               0.03            -0.379                  -0.01            0.172          -0.055           -0.073            0.099            -0.185
                                                        [0.13,2.25]        [-0.64,0.99]     [-1.48,0.92]          [-1.06,1.21]     [-0.65,1.43]     [-1.37,1.61]     [-1.33,1.63]     [-1.27,1.71]      [-1.67,1.54]
 FDI Integration t-1                                                         -2.675***        -2.129***              -0.969**        -1.660***        -1.958***        -1.920***        -1.806***         -2.665***
                                                                           [-6.45,-2.23]    [-5.86,-1.45]         [-3.71,-0.18]    [-4.69,-0.74]    [-8.51,-0.37]    [-8.47,-1.18]    [-9.36,-0.62]     [-8.94,-1.85]
 Portfolio Integration t-1                                                                      -3.112                 -2.672           -1.249          -2.683           -2.694           -2.413             -0.47
                                                                                            [-8.92,0.28]          [-9.72,0.58]     [-5.06,2.21]    [-10.61,1.76]    [-11.06,1.79]    [-10.80,1.85]      [-7.17,4.81]
 TOT Growth t                                                                                                         -1.363*          -1.296*          -0.903           -0.898           -0.914            -0.734
                                                                                                                  [-4.58,-0.14]    [-3.78,-0.15]    [-3.79,0.81]     [-3.54,0.76]     [-3.90,0.73]      [-3.58,0.94]
 Public Balance/GDP t-1                                                                                                               -0.065**         -0.093**        -0.093***         -0.091**         -0.100***
                                                                                                                                   [-0.19,-0.03]    [-0.47,-0.03]    [-3.91,-0.02]    [-0.36,-0.02]     [-1.40,-0.02]
 Ex. Regime 3 t-1                                                                                                                                        0.182
                                                                                                                                                    [-0.02,0.60]
 Ex. Regime 5 t-1                                                                                                                                                       0.093            0.092               0.081
                                                                                                                                                                     [-0.04,0.36]     [-0.05,0.33]      [-0.06,0.33]
 M2 over Reserves t-1                                                                                                                                                                    0.005              -0.007
                                                                                                                                                                                      [-0.03,0.03]      [-0.06,0.02]
 Public External Debt/ GDP t-1                                                                                                                                                                               0.000
                                                                                                                                                                                                        [-0.00,0.00]
 Constant                               -2.610***       -3.169***           -2.108***        -1.847***             -3.135***        -2.083***       -3.090***         -3.029***        -3.266***         -2.7294***
                                      [-4.24,-2.75]    [-6.0, -3.28]      [-4.29,-1.83]    [-4.39, -1.27]        [-6.25, -2.87]   [-4.53, -1.58]   [-8.46,-2.64]    [-16.96,-2.67]   [-9.62, -2.85]   [-17.04, -1.87]
 Observations                              1071            1071                919              913                   897              843              792              792              791                 658
 Number of Countries                        110             110                 94               94                    90               84              83                83               83                 72

      McFadden adj R2                       0.144            0.15            0.229             0.232            0.261             0.182            0.286            0.285                0.280             0.273
      % correctly predicted                 0.873            0.875           0.887             0.885            0.893             0.875            0.896            0.895                0.900             0.881
      (PCP)
      Adjusted PCP                         -0.115           -0.098           0.071             0.063            0.103             0.000            0.188            0.178                0.218             0.204
All regressions include time dummies and random effects.
•    significant at 10%, ** significant at 5%, *** significant at 1%, using bootstrapped confidence intervals constructed by the percentile method, shown in brackets.




                                                                                                            38
                                                                                    Appendix Table 4
                                                                       Panel PROBIT – Rivers & Voung Approach
                                                             Developing Countries – Dependent Variable: Systemic Sudden Stop

                                           (1)                (2)                (3)                (4)                (5)                (6)                (7)              (8)               (9)
 Residuals t                            -4.327***          -8.898***           -9.718***         -10.674***         -10.035***          -9.082***          -9.008***        -8.820***        -13.806***
                                      [-10.85,-1.34]     [-24.07,-5.86]     [-32.82,-5.99]     [-33.07,-6.82]     [-33.11,-6.05]     [-30.03,-5.61]     [-29.75,-5.06]   [-28.88,-5.66]    [-50.70,-7.35]
 l-ω t-1                                 3.681***          9.037***            9.865***           10.876***          9.978***           8.893***           8.823***         8.625***         13.259***
                                       [2.13,10.59]       [6.01,31.34]       [7.51,37.21]       [8.71,39.70]       [7.43,41.68]       [7.35,34.11]       [6.61,33.12]     [6.09,31.45]     [10.38,58.06]
 DLD t-1                                 2.387***           4.138***            3.587***          3.720***           3.578***            3.771***           3.728***         3.715***          2.477***
                                        [1.12,7.16]       [3.02,11.16]       [2.60,12.33]       [2.74,11.96]       [2.54,12.61]       [3.16,14.24]       [3.11,13.38]     [3.02,12.31]      [1.29,11.11]
 FDI Integration t-1                                          0.229             -0.732**            -0.459           -1.170**            -1.196**           -1.153**         -1.145**          -1.314**
                                                          [-1.24,1.15]       [-3.24,-0.02]       [-2.85,0.36]      [-5.87,-0.15]      [-6.99,-0.32]      [-6.55,-0.02]    [-5.85,-0.26]     [-6.13,-0.07]
 Portfolio Integration t-1                                                     7.914***           8.202***           8.274***            6.895***            6.706**          6.505**            3.827
                                                                             [0.91,28.89]       [0.53,36.30]       [0.98,31.00]       [0.38,32.01]       [2.75,22.64]     [2.17,22.58]     [-0.44,14.19]
 TOT Growth t                                                                                      -1.924**          -2.015**              -1.504             -1.493           -1.454           -1.519*
                                                                                                [-6.32,-0.52]      [-6.58,-0.11]       [-4.72,0.02]       [-5.00,0.02]     [-4.86,0.11]     [-5.18,-0.17]
 Public Balance/GDP t-1                                                                                              -0.103**           -0.099***          -0.098***        -0.097***         -0.096***
                                                                                                                   [-0.45,-0.03]      [-5.26,-0.02]      [-7.46,-0.01]    [-4.39,-0.02]     [-6.30,-0.01]
 Ex. Regime 3 t-1                                                                                                                         0.249**
                                                                                                                                       [0.04,1.00]
 Ex. Regime 5 t-1                                                                                                                                          0.133*            0.129              0.068
                                                                                                                                                         [0.03,0.53]      [-0.01,0.54]       [-0.10,0.40]
 M2 over Reserves t-1                                                                                                                                                         0.01              0.013
                                                                                                                                                                          [-0.03,0.06]       [-0.02,0.07]
 Public External Debt/ GDP t-1                                                                                                                                                                  0.000
                                                                                                                                                                                             [-0.00,0.00]
 Constant                               -3.685***          -4.162***          -4.043***         -4.307***           -4.051***         -4.465***          -4.416***         -4.420***          -4.137***
                                      [-6.93,-3.77]      [-13.10,-4.16]     [-10.11,-4.04]    [-10.69, -4.21]     [-12.26,-3.95]    [-13.76, -4.65]    [-17.67, -4.41]   [-12.98, -4.26]   [-14.15, -3.93]
 Observations                             833                681                675                660                606                566                566               565               540
 Number of Countries                       89                 73                 73                 70                 64                 63                 63                63                60

       Mcfadden R2                        0.225                0.306             0.304             0.304              0.315               0.310            0.309             0.305             0.299
       % correctly predicted              0.845                0.858             0.858             0.862              0.863               0.862            0.862             0.869             0.867
        (PCP)
       Adjusted PCP                       -0.085               0.093             0.103             0.108              0.170               0.196            0.196             0.237             0.242
All regressions include time dummies and random effects.
* significant at 10%, ** significant at 5%, *** significant at 1%, using bootstrapped confidence intervals constructed by the percentile method, shown in brackets.




                                                                                                     39
                                                           Appendix Table 5
                                Panel PROBIT – Rivers & Voung Approach – Non-linear Portfolio Integration
                                        All Countries – Dependent Variable: Systemic Sudden Stop

                                           (1)                (2)                (3)                (4)                (5)                (6)                (7)
Residuals t                               -8.462***          -9.253***          -8.624***          -7.865***          -7.628***         -7.920***         -12.376***
                                       [-19.29,-5.20]     [-19.64,-6.16]     [-24.96,-5.73]     [-22.08,-5.02]     [-19.07,-4.94]    [-30.02,-4.63]     [-39.99,-7.07]
l-ω t-1                                    9.418***         10.069***            8.719***          8.159***           7.915***          8.104***          12.166***
                                        [7.16,23.11]       [8.77,25.05]       [6.76,32.24]       [6.42,23.84]       [6.41,22.22]      [6.45,38.68]       [9.19,46.31]
DLD t-1                                    3.275***           3.390***           3.847***           3.613***           3.364***          3.742***           1.934***
                                         [2.66,8.29]        [2.55,8.58]       [3.07,12.93]       [2.90,11.36]        [2.65,8.31]      [2.74,13.72]        [0.97,6.87]
Developing Dummy                             0.074             -0.014              -0.026            -0.063              0.193            -0.117             -0.178
                                         [-0.71,1.56]      [-0.86,1.68]       [-1.05,1.19]       [-1.06,1.49]       [-0.48,1.67]      [-1.22,1.30]       [-1.48,9.04]
FDI Integration t-1                       -1.118***           -0.881**             -0.472          -1.743***          -1.369***         -1.337***          -2.046***
                                        [-5.98,-0.40]      [-3.69,-0.20]       [-3.40,0.26]      [-8.78,-1.02]      [-7.80,-0.20]     [-8.67,-0.09]     [-12.03,-0.95]
Portfolio Integration t-1                 19.795***         19.255***           21.041***         17.352***          17.256***         17.477***          19.979***
                                       [11.31,57.80]      [11.06,63.73]       [9.84,76.56]       [3.54,66.24]       [8.52,60.49]      [2.29,67.24]       [3.09,74.52]
(Portfolio Integration t-1)2            -131.847***        -129.510***        -146.245***        -114.123***        -106.417***       -122.164***        -114.179***
                                     [-383.44,-69.52]   [-392.86,-73.46]   [-486.64,-86.21]   [-453.30,-47.81]   [-319.77,-61.04]   [-477.44,-46.08]   [-515.38,-31.34]
TOT Growth t                                                   -1.016             -1.741*            -0.688             -0.468            -0.811             -0.614
                                                           [-3.67,0.18]       [-4.66,-0.40]      [-3.30,0.98]       [-3.28,0.98]      [-3.70,0.83]       [-3.47,1.40]
Public Balance/GDP t-1                                                           -0.091**           -0.095**           -0.076**         -0.092***          -0.098***
                                                                              [-0.36,-0.02]      [-0.39,-0.02]      [-1.80,-0.02]     [-5.21,-0.02]      [-3.82,-0.02]
Ex. Regime 3 t-1                                                                                      0.125
                                                                                                 [-0.08,0.48]
Ex. Regime 5 t-1                                                                                                      0.045              0.077               0.067
                                                                                                                   [-0.08,0.23]       [-0.06,0.36]       [-0.09,0.29]
M2 over Reserves t-1                                                                                                                     0.007              -0.002
                                                                                                                                      [-0.02,0.04]       [-0.05,0.03]
Public External Debt/ GDP t-1                                                                                                                                0.000
                                                                                                                                                         [-0.00,0.00]
Constant                                -2.813***          -2.847***         -3.973***          -3.153***           -2.954***         -3.484***           -3.229***
                                      [-6.11, -2.61]     [-6.92, -2.64]    [-15.71, -3.87]    [-10.21, -2.98]     [-6.50, -2.67]    [-10.74, -3.23]    [-16.45, -2.75]
Observations                               913                897               843                792                 792               791                  658
Number of Countries                         94                 90                84                 83                  83                83                  72

      McFadden adjR2                       0.275              0.269            0.320            0.300              0.275             0.307            0.295
      % correctly predicted (PCP)          0.900              0.899            0.897            0.896              0.896             0.899            0.884
      Adjusted PCP                         0.188              0.150            0.171            0.188              0.188             0.208            0.224
All regressions include time dummies and random effects.
* significant at 10%, ** significant at 5%, *** significant at 1%, using bootstrapped confidence intervals constructed by the percentile method, shown in brackets.




                                                                                40
                                                               Appendix Table 6
  Countries in which Portfolio Integration Affects Positively the                     Countries in which Portfolio Integration Affects Negatively the
                   Probability of Sudden Stop                                                          Probability of Sudden Stop


 Country                                      Portfolio Integration                  Country                                          Portfolio Integration
  Azerbaijan                                          0.0%                            Czech Republic                                            8.0%
  Bolivia                                             0.0%                            Mexico                                                    9.5%
  Cyprus                                              0.0%                            Thailand                                                 11.4%
  Ethiopia                                            0.0%                            Greece                                                   11.6%
  Kyrgyz Republic                                     0.0%                            Japan                                                    12.1%
  Mozambique                                          0.0%                            Chile                                                    14.1%
  Sudan                                               0.0%                            Austria                                                  14.2%
  Zimbabwe                                            0.0%                            Italy                                                    19.2%
  Haiti                                               0.0%                            Malaysia                                                 20.1%
  Zambia                                              0.0%                            New Zealand                                              20.1%
  Nigeria*                                            0.0%                            Spain                                                    20.2%
  Yemen, Rep.                                         0.0%                            Portugal                                                 22.8%
  Uganda                                              0.0%                            Norway                                                   22.9%
  Kuwait                                              0.1%                            Germany                                                  23.9%
  Ecuador*                                            0.1%                            United States                                            24.0%
  Jamaica                                             0.1%                            Denmark                                                  24.9%
  Paraguay                                            0.1%                            South Africa                                             26.8%
  Angola                                              0.1%                            France                                                   27.2%
  Belarus                                             0.1%                            Australia                                                28.1%
  Lao PDR                                             0.1%                            Canada                                                   42.4%
  Armenia                                             0.2%                            Sweden                                                   54.8%
  Georgia                                             0.2%                            Belgium                                                  55.9%
  Kenya                                               0.3%                            Finland                                                  62.1%
  El Salvador                                         0.4%                            United Kingdom                                           69.5%
  Trinidad and Tobago                                 0.4%                            Netherlands                                              88.5%
  Romania                                             0.4%                            Hong Kong, China                                        133.7%
  Malawi                                              0.5%                            Switzerland                                             149.7%
  Uruguay                                             0.6%
  Costa Rica                                          0.6%
  Dominican Republic                                  0.7%
  Moldova                                             0.7%
  Lithuania                                           0.8%
  Sri Lanka                                           0.8%
  Bulgaria*                                           0.8%
  Oman                                                0.9%
  Jordan                                              1.0%
  Ukraine*                                            1.1%
  Kazakhstan                                          1.2%
  Slovenia                                            1.3%
  Latvia                                              1.4%
  Colombia*                                           1.5%
  Pakistan                                            1.7%
  Mauritius                                           1.8%
  Poland*                                             2.0%
  Croatia                                             2.4%
  Egypt, Arab Rep.*                                   2.9%
  Turkey*                                             3.0%
  Indonesia                                           4.3%
  Peru*                                               5.4%
  Venezuela, RB*                                      5.7%
  Korea, Rep.*                                        6.0%
  Brazil*                                             6.4%
  Argentina*                                          6.7%
  Philippines*                                        7.2%
  Hungary                                             7.4%
  Estonia                                             7.6%
* Countries tracked by JP Morgan’s EMBI+.
Note: Countries in which portfolio integration affects positively (negatively) the probability of sudden stop are those whose average portfolio integration
is below (above) 7.6%. This cutoff value was calculated as the level of portfolio integration that maximizes the probability of sudden stop: -α/2β; where α
is the estimated coefficient of the linear term of portfolio integration and β is the estimated coefficient of the quadratic term of portfolio integration. This
cutoff value was calculated using equation 4 of Appendix Table 5. The list shows the average of portfolio integration for observations that were included
in the estimation of equation 4. If instead averages were computed for all available data of portfolio integration from 1990 to 2004, Czech Republic
would move to the group of countries in which portfolio integration affects positively the probability of a Sudden Stop. In addition, Iceland, Israel,
Bahrain, Libya, United Arab Emirates, Ireland and Luxemburg would be listed in the group in which portfolio integration affects negatively the
probability of a Sudden Stop. The rest of countries in Lane and Millesi-Ferreti’s (2006) dataset not mentioned in this note or in the table would be listed
in the group in which portfolio integration affects positively the probability of a Sudden Stop.




                                                                             41
Data Appendix

Our sample of 110 countries is divided into 21 developed economies and 89 developing economies. Our choice of developed countries
is dictated by OECD membership, and it includes Australia, Canada, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom, and USA. The list of developing countries includes:
Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Bolivia, Brazil, Bulgaria, Cape
Verde, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt Arab Rep., El
Salvador, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Georgia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, Haiti, Honduras, Hong Kong (China), Hungary,
Indonesia, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Korea Rep., Kuwait, Kyrgyz Republic, Lao PDR, Latvia, Lithuania, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mauritius, Mexico, Moldova, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Romania, Rwanda, Sierra Leone, Slovak Republic, Slovenia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, St.
Kitts and Nevis, St. Lucia, St. Vincent and the Grenadines, Sudan, Suriname, Thailand, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey, Uganda,
Ukraine, Uruguay, Venezuela RB, Yemen Rep., Zambia and Zimbabwe. Data are collected on an annual basis unless otherwise stated.
Data spans from 1992 to 2004.

                   Variable                                                    Definitions and Sources
Capital Flows Proxy                          A monthly proxy is obtained by netting out changes in international reserves from the trade
                                             balance. Based on this proxy, 12-month cumulative annual flows are constructed for each month
                                             Annual differences of the latter are then used to measure capital account changes. All figures are
                                             expressed in 2000 US dollars. Source: IMF IFS.
Aggregate Sovereign Bond                     EMBI for EMs (source: J.P. Morgan), Euro-area government bond spread index for Euro-area
Spread Index                                 countries (source: Merrill Lynch), G7 government bond spread index for all remaining
                                             developed countries (source: Merrill Lynch).
Systemic Sudden Stop (3S) Dummy              We define a 3S dummy as a capital-flow window that overlaps at any point in time with an
                                             aggregate-spread window. A capital-flow window contains a large fall in the capital flows
                                             proxy exceeding two standard deviations from its mean (that starts when the fall in the capital
                                             flows proxy exceeds one standard deviation, and ends when it is smaller than one standard
                                             deviation). Capital-flow windows less than 6 months apart were considered as part of the same
                                             event. Aggregate-spread windows contain those years in which a spike in the corresponding
                                             bond spread index exceeds two standard deviations from its mean (it starts when I the spread
                                             exceeds one standard deviation, and ends when it is smaller than one standard deviation). All
                                             calculations were performed at a monthly frequency and then transformed to annual frequency
                                             for Probit estimation.
Absorption of tradable goods (Z)             Imports plus tradable output domestically consumed, proxied by the sum of agricultural and
                                             industrial output minus exports. More specifically, we construct the share of tradable output in


                                                                  42
                                                  total output as the ratio of agriculture plus industrial output to total GDP at constant prices.
                                                  Next, we multiply this share by total dollar GDP to obtain the dollar value of tradable output.
                                                  We do this in order to avoid excessive fluctuations in output composition due to valuation
                                                  effects that are present in sectoral data at current prices. Source: World Bank, World
                                                  Development Indicators.
CAD                                               Current account deficit. Source: IMF’s World Economic Outlook (WEO) database.
Domestic Liability Dollarization                  For developed economies: BIS reporting banks’ local asset positions in foreign currency as a
(DLD)                                             share of GDP (since data for Australia and New Zealand is not available from this source, we
                                                  used data from their respective Central Banks). For developing economies: dollar deposits
                                                  obtained from Levy-Yeyati (2006) (based on Honohan and Shi (2002)) plus bank foreign
                                                  borrowing (IMFIFS banking institutions line 26c) as a share of GDP.
FDI Integration                                   FDI Liabilities plus FDI Assets over GDP. Source: Lane and Millesi-Ferreti (2006)
Portfolio Integration                             Portfolio Liabilities plus Portfolio Assets over GDP. Source: Lane and Millesi-Ferreti (2006)
External Public Debt                              Data on external public debt were obtained from IMF IFS (for some developing countries, data
                                                  was obtained from World Bank’s Global Development Finance database (GDF).
TOT growth                                        Annual rate of change of terms of trade on goods and services. Source: IMF’s WEO (April
                                                  2006).
Ex. Regime 3                                      3-way exchange regime classification: 1 = float; 2 = intermediate (dirty, dirty/crawling peg); 3 =
                                                  fix. Source: Levy-Yeyati and Sturzenegger (2002)
Ex. Regime 5                                      5-way exchange regime classification: 1 = inconclusive; 2 = float; 3 = dirty; 4 = dirty/crawling
                                                  peg; 5 = fix. Source: Levy-Yeyati and Sturzenegger (2002)
GDP                                               Gross domestic product. Source: IMF’s WEO database.
M2                                                Money plus quasi-money. Source IMF IFS.
Public Balance                                    General government balance to GDP ratio. Source: IMF’s WEO database.
Large RER depreciation dummy                      Dummy variable that takes the value of 1 when a large rise on RER (vis-à-vis US dollar) occurs
                                                  and 0, otherwise. We define a rise in the RER (i.e., real depreciation of the currency) to be large
                                                  when it exceeds two standard deviations above the sample mean prevailing before the rise.
Reserves                                          International Reserves. Source: IMF IFS
Short-term debt to foreign banks and other short- Source: International Institute of Finance Database. Short-term debt to foreign banks (series
term debt due to foreigners                       D353). Other short-term debt was obtained by subtracting series D353 from series D204 (total
                                                  short-term debt).




                                                                        43
                                         Technical Appendix

                  Inference with Random-Effects Probits under Endogeneity

                                       Walter Sosa Escudero47


        This note is concerned with estimation and inference in a random effects Probit
specification allowing for possibly endogenous explanatory variables. The standard random
effects Probit model with exogenous explanatory variables is:

                            yit* = xit′ β + μ i + ε it , i=1,2, … , n; t=1,2, …,T


where xit is a k vector of exogenous explanatory variables, β is a k vector of coefficients, μi is
IN(0, σ μ2 ), and εit is IN(0, σ ε2 ). The observed binary random variable yit is related to the model
through:

                                             y it = 1[ y it* > 0]

       Maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) of this model is extensively studied in Heckman
(1981) and reviewed in Hsiao (2003). The likelihood function for this problem is given by:

                                    ⎧⎪ ⎡             ⎛ ρ ⎞ ⎤
                                                               1/ 2
                                                                            ⎫⎪
                                           (   )
                       N   +∞ T
                  L ∏ ∫ ∏ ⎨ ⎢ xit β/σ ε μi ⎜⎜
                   =              Φ          ′   + ~                [      ]
                                                             ⎟⎟ ⎥ 2 yit − 1 ⎬ f (~
                                                                                 μi ) d ~
                                                                                        μi
                     i =1
                          −∞
                             t =1    ⎪⎩ ⎣⎢           ⎝ 1 − ρ ⎠ ⎦⎥            ⎪⎭


where ρ ≡ σ μ2 / σ ε2 . The evaluation of the integral in the previous expression is not trivial and it
is usually carried out through Hermite integration or simulation.

       Guilkey and Murphy (1993) conducted an extensive Monte Carlo experiment to study the
small sample behavior of alternative estimation strategies of the random effects Probit model.
The most important results that are relevant for this study are summarized below:

     1. Standard probit and MLE of the random effects Probit provide consistent estimation of β.
     2. The standard Probit estimator of the standard errors of the estimators is markedly
        downward biased, leading to incorrect inferences, in the sense of suggesting significant
        coefficients when in fact they are not.
     3. The random effects MLE based estimator provides more accurate estimators of the
        standard errors but the gain in performance is relatively mild when compared to that of
        the standard Probit.

47
   Universidad de San Andrés, Victoria, Argentina. Email: wsosa@udesa.edu.ar. Martin Cicowiez provided
excellent computing support.


                                                    44
     4. For small individual observations (N around 25), the numerical accuracy problems
        involved in the evaluation of the integral shown above severely affect the performance of
        the procedure, invalidating the use of standard asymptotic approximations.

       The possibility of allowing for endogenous explanatory variables has been studied in the
context of the standard Probit model:


                                      y *j = z j γ + x ′j β + u j ,     j=1,2,…,J


where uj is IN(0, σ u2 ), and xj, β and y *j are defined as in the previous model, and zj is a possibly
endogenous explanatory variable. Rivers and Vuong (1988) provided a simple estimation
strategy for the case where:

                                                    zj = ~
                                                         x 'j δ + v j

and (uj, vj) have a bivariate normal distribution independent of ~
                                                                 xj . ~
                                                                      x j is a vector of exogenous
explanatory variables in the reduced-form model for zj, which in this context is endogenous if
and only if uj and vj are correlated. Rivers and Vuong (1988) propose a consistent estimation48
based on a two-step approach:

•    Step 1: Run the OLS regression of zj on ~
                                             x j and save residuals v̂ j .

•    Step 2: Run a standard Probit regression of yj on xj, zj and v̂ j .

       Details of the procedure can be checked in the original reference and in Wooldridge
(2002). The main intuition behind the result comes from the fact that under bivariate normality of
u and v, we can write uj = θvj + ηj where ηj is independent of ~x j and vj. Then, replacing in the
definition of y *j :

                                            y *j = z j γ + x ′j β + θv j + η j

        If vj were observable, consistent estimation could proceed by a standard Probit regression
of yj on zj, xj and vj, since, by construction, all explanatory variables are exogenous with respect
to ηj. The first stage of the Rivers-Vuong procedure replaces vj by a consistent estimate obtained
from OLS regression in a first stage.

        The performance of the Rivers and Vuong (1998) procedure in the context of the random
effects specification has not been explored, and though it deserves a more detailed exploration

48
  It is important to remark that, as it is usual in binary choice index models, not all the parameters are identified,
hence appropriate normalizations must be adopted. See Rivers and Vuong (1998) for details on this subject.


                                                           45
than the one offered here, some insights can be discussed. A simple extension in the panel
context, as described in the first equation of this appendix, is to allow for endogenous
explanatory variables by allowing for correlation between the observation specific error term of
the index model (εit) and the error term of the reduced form of the possibly endogenous
explanatory variable (vit). In this context, the index model can be written as:

                                  y *it = z it γ + xit′ β + θvit + μ i + η it

and, again, if vit were observable, the model should be unaltered albeit for some redefinition of
relevant parameters. In this case, the Rivers-Vuong procedure is replacing an exogenous
explanatory variable (vit) with a consistent estimate obtained from a first stage regression.

        An important problem is how to perform reliable inference with the proposed method.
As discussed previously, Guilkey and Murphy (1993) suggest that the numerical accuracy
problem related to the evaluation of the likelihood function of the random effects Probit makes
asymptotic approximations very unreliable. A natural possibility is to consider a bootstrap
approach. The nature of such procedure in this context is complicated due to the fact that, by
construction, observations are not independent due to the presence of a random effect. In this
note we follow Davidson and Hinkley (1997) and use a non-parametric hierarchical two-step
bootstrap strategy, where in a first stage, individuals are randomly sampled with replacements,
and, in a second stage, observations are randomly sampled without replacement within the
individuals sampled in the first stage. According to Davison and Hinkley (1997, pp. 100-102),
this procedure closely mimics the intra-group correlation structure of the data, due to the
presence of the individual random effect.

References

Davison, A. and Hinkley, D. (1997). Bootstrap Methods and Their Applications, Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge.

Guilkey, D., and Murphy, J. (1993). Estimation and Testing in the Random Effects Probit
Model, Journal of Econometrics, 59, 301-317.

Heckman, J. (1981). Statistical Models for Discrete Panel Data, in C. Manksi and D. McFadden,
eds. Structural analysis of discrete data with econometric applications, MIT Press, Cambridge,
MA.

Hsiao, C. (2003). Analysis of Panel Data, 2nd edition, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

Rivers, D. and Vuong, Q. (1988). Limited Information Estimators and Exogeneity Tests for
Simultaneous Probit Models, Journal of Econometrics, 39, 347-366.

Wooldridge, J. (2002). Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data, MIT Press,
Cambridge.




                                                    46
