NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

NUTRITION MID THE DECLINE IN MORTALITY

SINCE 1700: SOME PRELIMINARY FINDINGS

Robert W. Fogel

Working Paper No. lbO2

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue

Cambridge, M 02138
July l98b

This paper is a progress report on two projects jointly sponsored
by the NBER's program in the Devleopment of the American Econonr and

the Center for Population Economics of the University of
Chicago. The findings presented in this paper are tentative and
subject to change. The research reported here is part of the
NBER's research programs in Development of the American Econonr and
Health Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the author
and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research or any of
the other cooperating institutions or funding agencies. See pp.
87—88 for the acknowledgements.
by

NEER Working Paper #1402
July 1984

Nutrition and the Decline in Mortality
Since 1700: Some Preliminary Findings

ABSTRACT
This paper uses the data in the NBER/CPE pilot sample of
genealogies to create a new time series on life expectation in the

U.S. since 1720. After attaining remarkably high levels toward
the end of the eighteenth century, life expectation as measured by

ê began

a decline that lasted about 80 years before beginning the

new rise with which we have long been familiar. Second, time series
on the average adult stature of national populations in North America

and Europe are used as a measure of nutritional status. The properties
of this measure in the analysis of labor welfare and an explanation for

the high correlation between stature and the Cmi ratio are discussed.
The time series on stature is strongly correlated with the series on

and other measures of mortality. Third, these correlations are used
to estimate the contributionof improvements in nutritional status (not
diet alone but diet net of prior claims) to the decline in mortality in
Europe and America since 1800.

Improvements in nutritional status may

have accounted for as ifiuch as four tenths of the decline in mortality

rates, but nearly all of this effect was concentrated in the reduction

of infant mortality. The new findings are used to resolve several
paradoxes and the implication of the findings for the standard-ofliving controversy are considered.
Robert W. Fogel
Center for Population Economics
University of Chicago
1101 East 58th Street

Chicago, Il 60637
(312) 962—7709

Contents of
Nutrition and the Decline in Mortality Since
1700: Some Preliminary Findings

1.

The Issues

i

1.1 The Nutritional Contribution: The English Experience

1

1.2 The Nutritional Contribution: The American Experience 6
1.3 Objections to the Nutritional Argument

2.

3.

7

1.4 The Concepts of "Nutritional Status" and
"Nutritional Adequacy"

12

New Sources of Evidence

13

2.1 The DAE/CPE Genealogical Sample

15

2.2 The Height-by-age Samples

77

Some Preliminary Findings on the Relationship between
Improvements in Nutritional Status and the Decline in

42

Mortlity

4.

3.1 The Secular Trends in the Height and in the Life
Expectation of U.S. White Males, 1700-1930

43

3.2 Slaves and Poor London Boys

48

3.3 Evidence from Regressions Between Height
and Mortality

57

Discussion

60

4.1 A Provisional Estimate of the Contribution
of Nutritional Status to the Decline in
English Mortality Rates, c.1800-c.1980

60

4.2 A Possible Explanation for the Peerage Paradox

67

4.3 A Possible Explanation for the Wrigley/
Schofield/Lee Paradox

70

4.4 Some Implications for the Standard of Living
Controversies in England and the United States

72

5.

Concluäion

81

6.

Footnotes

87

7

References

103

List of Tables

1.

The probable decline.in standardized death rates between
1700 and 1980 in the United States and Great Britain

2

2.

Cohort life expectation (e) in the English peerage

9

and in the English population as a whole
3.

Tentative estimates of the temporal distribution of
observations in the completed genealogical sample

17

4.

The mean value of real estate of native-born males
age 20 and over in 1850 in two samples

22

S.

A comparison of a period life table for U.S. males
derived from the genealogical sample with two other
period life tables

26

6.

The principal samples in the nutrition project

38-40

7.

A comparison between the cohort life expectations
for native-born U.S. white males, British peers,
and the English population, 1700-1925

47

8.

Mean heights by age and mortality, 1813-1815,
Trinidad Born

49

9.

Height regressions, slaves under age 26, Trinidad

born

So

10.

The effect of a shift in the distribution of birth
weights on the neonatal death rate, holding the
schedule of death rates (by weight) constant

66

11.

Nutritional influence on outcomes of infections

12.

The changes in the price of grains associated
with changes in the quantity supplied for
elasticities of 1.0, 0.5, 0.25, 0.1

68
71

List of Figures

1.

A comparison between the trend in the mean final
height of native-born white males and the trend in

44

their life expectation at age 10 (e0)

2.

The extent to which the mean height of male slaves
and poor Londoners deviated from the modern height
standard

52

3.

The difference between age-specific death rates of
U.S. slaves and whites, estimated for the late
antebellum era

54

4.

•Perinatal mortality by birth weight in Ghana, India,
U.K., and U.S.A.

5.

The percentage of male births with weights below
2,501 grams in two modern populations and the
possible percentage among Trinidad slaves and the
London poor during the early nineteenth century

64

6

A comparison of the aggregate time profile of
the, final heights for native-born white males
with those for native-born white farmers and
urban laborers.

79

62

—1—

1. The Issues
Between c. 1700 and 1980 there was a decline of about 35 points

in

*

the standardized American death rate (see Table 1).

Between the same

years, the British rate declined by about 21 points. About 70 percent of
the American decline and about 50 percent of the British decline took place
before 1911.1

The causes of this remarkable decline remain a puzzle. Until
the mid l9SOs it was widely attributed to improvements in medical tech-

nology. During the past three decades Thomas McKeown vigorously disputed
that view in a series of highly influential papers and books. McKeown
agreed that there had been a considerable expansion of hospital services
and important advances in medical knowledge during the eighteenth and
nineteenth centuries but he argued that such advances had little effect

on the decline in death rates until the twentieth century. A pediatrician,
McKeown gained prominence for his studies of the relationship between
birth weight and perinatal mortality rates in Eitmingham after World
War II (McKeown and Gibson, 1950, 1951) before turning his attention to
long-term changes in medical practices and demographic rates.

1.1 The Nutritional Contribution: The English Experience
McKeown's explanation for the decline in mortality rates after
1700 is most fully set forth in his book on The Modern Rise of Population
(1976) and he subsequently restated and cogently summarized his argu-

ment in 1978 and 1983. In the place of medical technology, McKeown
substituted improvement in nutrition as the principal factor affecting

the decline in mortality. He does not make his case for nutrition
directly but through a residual argument in which he rejects the other

principal explanations. The alternatives to nutrition are advances in medical

-2Table

1

THE PROBABLE DECLINE IN STANDARDIZED DEATh RATES
BETWEEN 1700 AND 1980 IN THE UNITED STATES
AND GREAT BRITAIN

Part

A.

Standardized Death Rates (per thousand)

Approximate

United States

Great Britain

40
23

28
24
17
7

Date

1.
2.
3.
4.

1700
1850
1910
1980

15
5

Part B. Percentage of the Total Decline Which
Occurred Between c. 1700 and the Specified Date

Approximate

Great Britain

United States

Date

1850
6. 1910
7.
1980

Sources.

19

49

5.

71

52

100

100

United States: The age distribution is standardized on the

weights computed from persons alive in 1700 in the pilot sample of gen-

ealogies that is described in the next section of this paper. Line 1.
Fogel et al, 1978, p. 76, with New England and Chesapeake rates weighted
by the New England and Southern populations for 1700 as given in U.S.

Bur. Cen. 1975 p. 1168. Line 2. Unpublished mortality tables for whites
in 1850, cited in Haines, 1979. Line 3.
1972, pp. 728, 730.

Line 4.

Nat.

Preston, Keyfitz, and Schoen

Cent. Health Stat., 1983, p.. 12.

Great Britain: The age distribution is standardized on the

in

weights given

Wrigley and Schofield, 1981, p. 529 for 1701-1705;male and female

death rates were equally weighted. Line 1.
1963, pp. 41, 53, 65, 76. Line 4.

Ibid. Lines 2 and 3. Case,

G.B. Cent. Stat. Off., 1983, p. 43.

-3-

technology; reductions in the virulence of pathogens; human acquisition of immunity through natural selection, genetic drift, or
acquired immunities; personal hygiene; and public sanitation.
McKeown's analysis turns on a careful consideration of the
British pattern of decline in death rates due to specific infectious

diseases between c. 1850 and 1971. During this period the standardized
death rate attributable to infectious diseases declined from 13.0 per

thousand to 0.7 per thousand. About 54 percent of the decline was
associated with airborne diseases, 28 percent with water- and foodborne diseases, and 18 percent with diseases spread by other means

(McKeown 1976, pp. 54-63). This simple classification permits HcKeown
to assess the probable impact of public health measures and personal

sanitation. Cleaning up the public water supply and

improving

sewage

systems, he argues, would have had little effect on the airborne diseases.
Moreover, as long as water supplies were polluted, individuals could not

protect themselves against such water-borne diseases as typhoid and cholera

by

washing regularly. Under such circumstances "the washing of hands is

about as effective as the wringing of hands" (McKeown, 1978, p. 540).
In

his view public health measures did not become effective until.the very end

of the nineteenth century. The sharp declines in

food- and water-borne

diseases (which he dates in England and Wales with the start of the
eighth decade) were not only
but

due to better water and

sewage systems

to improvements in food hygiene, especially pasteurization. He

attributes the rapid decline of infant mortality between 1900 and 1931

-4-

mainly to the development of a "safe milk supply" (McKeown, 1976,

p. 122; McKeown, 1978, p. 540). McKeown argues that improvements
in personal or public hygiene would not have reduced deaths from
airborne diseases unless they reduced crowding, and crowding generally
increased during the nineteenth century.

McKeown's skepticism about the efficacy of early medical
measures is based on his study of the temporal pattern of decline in
the death rates of the most lethal diseases of the nineteenth century.
Tuberculosis, the leading killer in England and America during much
of the nineteenth century, is

case in point. During 1848-54 tuber-

culosis caused nearly one out of every six English deaths from all causes,

and one out of every four due to infectious diseases. It was not until
1882 that the tubercle bacillus was identified and an effective chemo-

therapy for this disease was not developed until 1947. Nevertheless,
the death rate of respiratory tuberculosis declined to just 43 percent
of its 1848-54 level by 1900 and to just 10 percent of that level before

the introduction of streptomycinin 1947. Similarly, the major decline
in the death rates from bronchitis and pneumonia, whooping cough,
measles, scarlet fever, and typhoid all preceded the development of effective

chemotherapies. McKeown also doubts the efficacy of the 1ying-in
hospitals which were established during the eighteenth and nineteenth
centuries, noting that well into the third quarter of the last century
"hospital death rates were many times greater than those for related
home deliveries" (McKeown, 1975, p. 105).

——

McKeown is skeptical of the contention that the decline in

mortality rates was due to a decline in the virulence of pathogens.
He notes that scarlet fever and influenza have fluctuated in their
severity in short periods of tine and acknowledges that these fluctuations may be due to changes in the character of these diseases.

He lists typhus as another disease that might have declined due to

changes in the pathogens. However, the fraction of the total decline
attributable to these three diseases is small. On a more general plane
he notes that infectious diseases that are now relatively benign in
developed nations are still quite virulent in less developed countries
and argues that it is quite unlikely that pathogens would have lost

their virulence only in developed countries. McKeown also minimizes
the impact of natural selection, arguing that in the case of tuberculosis
too much of the population had been exposed to the bacillus for too long
a period before the decline, and the decline itself was too rapid, to
be consistent with natural selection.
McKeown's arguments in favor of a nutritional explanation fall

into two categories. First, he cites evidence that per capita food
supplies in England increased sporadically during the late eighteenth
and early nineteenth centuries and then regularly in the late nineteenth

and in the twentieth centuries. Second, he emphasizes findings of medical
researchers currently working in the developing countries who have concluded
that there is a synergistic relationship between malnutrition and infection,
and that malnutrition significantly increases the likelihood that a victim

will succumb to an infection. In this connection he cites a report of
the World Health Organization which concluded that malnutrition was an

associated cause in 57 to 67 percent of the deaths of children underage $

-6-

in Latin America (1975, p. 136).
1.2 The Nutritional Contribution: The American Experience

McKeown's argument has been extended to the American experience by

Meeker (1972) and by Higgs (1973, 1979). According to Meeker, the
period from 1880 to 1910 witnessed both a substantial rise in per capita

income and a decline in mortality rates. In cross-sectional regressions
for 1890 and 1900, city mortality rates are significantly related to
housing density vat

'

les and state mortality rates are significantly

related to income, in his 1973 paper Riggs estimated the decline in
rt.iral mortality rates for the period from 1870 to World War I. Despite

the absence of direct observations on rural mortality, Riggs was
able to infer a series by making use of three other series (the
aggregate crude death rate, the urban crude death rate, and the share

of the population that was urban) and an thentity that related the rural
crude death rate to these series. This procedure produced a rural
crude mortality series which declined at approximately the same rate
as the urban mortality series, the total decline over 50 years amounting

to between 30 and 40 percent. Riggs argues that whatever role public
sanitation and medical care might have played in the urban context,
they were of minor consequence in rural areas which were undersupplied
with physicians, and which continued to draw water mainly from wells,
springs, and cisterns, continued to rely on prM'ies, and continued to

consume unpasteurized milk. Like McKeown, Higgs concluded that "the
great bulk of the decline in rural mortality before 1920 is probably
attributable to rising levels of living among the rural population"
(1973, p. 189).

-7-

1.3 Objections to the Nutritional Argument
Virtually all those who are attempting to explain the secular
decline in mortality rates in Europe and America agree that improvements

in nutrition made a contribution. But some scholars believe that
McKeown and others have greatly exaggerated the case (Livi-Bacci, 1983).
The doubts arise partly because of major gaps in the evidence. Razzell,
for example, doubts McKeown's claim that the food supply in England grew

more rapidly than the population before 1840. He argues that at least
for the eighteenth century the evidence is "much more consistent with a
reversed hypothesis- -that the standard of the diet was a function of

population change" (Razzell, 1973, p. 8). Even more basic is the
absence of adequate evidence on mortality rates. Before 1837 in Great
Britain and before 1900 in the United States information on death rates

is so sparse that historical demographers are at odds not only on the
levels of mortality but even on the direction of change (Linden, 1983;
Easterlin, 1977; Vinovskis, 1972).

In the American case, for example, fragments of evidence led
Thompson and Whelpton (1933) to believe that mortality rates declined
fairly steadily from the middle of the eighteenth century to 1900.

This judgment has recently been reinforced by Easterlin who, primarily
on the basis of the trend in per capita income, estimated that U.S.
life expectation increased by 6.1 years between 1800 and 1840 and

by 5.8 years between 1840 and 1880 (Easterlin 1977, p. 138). On

-8-

the other hand1 Yasuba's (1962) examination of available urban death
registrations and some scattered registrations from rural communities
led him to conclude that mortality rates increased between 1800 and
1860. More recently, a study, of Deerfield, which has vital records
that extend back to the early eighteenth century, revealed that mortality
was low and stable within this rural town of western Massachusetts until

the turn of the nineteenth century. Between 1795-99 and 1840-44,
however, mortality rates nearly doubled (Meindl and Swedlund, 1977,
p. 398).

It is not merely the evidential gaps in the argument of McKeown

and others that aroused the concern of critics. Certain facts seemed
to contradict the case for nutrition. The absence of a significant gap
between the mortality rates of the peerage and the laboring classes in

England before 1725 was particularly vexing. "If the foodsupply was
the critical variable," Razzell argued (1973, pp. 6-7), mortality
reductions should have been "concentrated almost exclusively

amongst

the poorer" classes and the mortality rates of the aristocracy should
have been 'Cinaffected."

Yet as Table 2 shows, between the fourth

quarter of the eighteenth century and the beginning of the second
quarter of the nineteenth century, the mortality rates of the aristocracy

were about as high as those of the general population. Both the high'
mortality rates of the nobility before 1725 and the rapid fall in these
rates thereafter, although there was no apparent change in the diet of the
peerage, predisposed Razzell "to look at the food. supply hypothesis very
critically."

-9-

Table 2

Cohort Life Expection (e) in the English Peerage
and in the English Population as a Whole

Birth cohort
(century and quarter)

16th

19th

20th

England and Wales
(both sexes)

III

38.0

35.6

IV

37.2

38.0

34.7

37.3

II

33.0

35•5

III

31.9

34.2

IV

34.2

33.5

I

36.2

35.1

II

38.1

33.8

III

40.2

36.3

IV

48.1

37.0

I

50.6

II

55.3

41.5

III

58.6

44.6

IV

60.2

I

65.0

17th

18th

Peerage
(both sexes)

Sources: Column 1: Hollingsworth 1977, Table 3. Column 2: The
observations for 16-Ill through l8-IV are from Wrigley and Schofield
1981, p. 530; the observations for 19-Il and 19-Ill are computed from
the cohort life tables in Case et al 1962, pp. 1-28, which were derived
from registration data.

—

-10-

Efforts to relate both short- and long-term variations ii, the

mortality rates to variations in bread or wheat prices have also

undermined the nutritional explanation. Appleby's (1975) regressions,
which related London deaths from specific diseases to bread prices
over the period from 1530 to 1750, led him to conclude that there was
no correlation between the supply of food and deaths due to plague,
smallpox, or tuberculosis and only slight correlations between bread

prices and deaths due to typhus and "ague and fever." More sophisticated
analysis by Lee (1981) revealed statistically significant but weak
relationships between short-term variations in death rates and in wheat

prices. According to Schofield (1983, p. 282) short-run variations
in English mortality were "overwhelmingly determined" by factors other
than the food supply and the long-run trend in mortality was
unaffected by the trend in food prices.

Lindert's (1983) examination of the work of Lee, Wrigley, and
Schofield confirmed their conclusions on the absence of a notable

relationship between food prices and mortality rates. Nevertheless,
he was discontent with results that implied that living standards

"left little or no mark on mortality." The puzzle, he
acknowledged, extended to his own work with Williamson, since they

have not yet been able to "find a firm causal link behind the obvious

correlation between income and life expectancy after 1820. He
suggested that the resolution to "the mystery of independent mortality"
trends might require more complex attacks on the issue. That would
be the case if the "life-extending" effect of income "was hidden
behind the shift toward earlier death in the growing unhealthy cities."

—11—

He also suggested that diets may "have improved in ways unmeasured
by income" (pp. 147-48).

Other investigators have found evidence which indicates
that factors which McKeown diminished had a substantial impact on

the decline in mortality during the nineteenth century: Estimates
of the cause of mortality rates in the three largest urban areas
of France during the nineteenth century by Preston and van de Walle
(1978) led them to the conclusion that water and sewage improvements

played a major role in the urban mortality decline. Not only were
the declines concentrated in the waterborne diseases but the rate
of decline was much more rapid in the two cities that introduced

vigorous sewage and pure water programs than in the one that did not.
On the other hand, deaths due to tuberculosis did not decline in
Paris over a 33 year period, although deaths due to other airborne

diseases showed small declines. Even these declines could have been
due to the clean-up of the water supply.

Preston and van de Walle

stress that diarrheal and other waterborne diseases have important
nutritional consequences because they "reduce appetite, reduce the
absorption of essential nutrients, increase metabolic demands and

often lead to dietary restrictions" (p. 218). Thus cleaning up the
water system not only reduced deaths caused by water borne diseases but
also contributed to the reduction in deaths due to airborne diseases because the reduction in water borne diseases improved the nutritional
status of the population, especially of infants and young children.

—12—

1.4 The Concepts of "Nlutritional Status"
and "Nutritional Adequacy"

The last point calls attention to a terminological issue
that has confused the debate over the contribution of improvements

in nutrition to the decline in mortality. Although some
investigators have equated the term nutritional status with the
amount of food that is consumed, epidemiologists and nutritionists

use the term in a different way. To them nutritional status
denotes the balance between the intake of nutrients and the claims
against it.

It follows that adequate levels of nutrition are not

determined solely by the level of nutrient intake but varies with
the circumstances of an individual .

Whether the diet of a particular

individual is nutritionally adequate depends on such matters as his
level of physical activity, the climate of the region in which he

lives, and the extent of his exposure to various diseases. As Nevin
S. Scrimsha put it, the adequacy of a given level of iron

consumption

depends critically on whether or not an individual has hookworm.1

Thus it is possible that the nutritional status of a population may
decline even though that population's consumption of nutrients is
rising if the extent of exposure to infection or the degree of physical

activity is rising more rapidly. It follows that the assessment of
the contribution of nutrition to the decline in mortality not only
requires measures of food consumption but of the balance between
food consumption and the claims on that consumption.

—13—
2.

New Sources of Evidence

The major obstacle to a resolution of the debate oil the causes

of the decline in mortality is the absence of data rather than the

absence of analytical ingenuity or credible theories. Recognition of
this point has led to numerous attempts to find sources of data that

could fill the gap. The most impressive of these undertakings have
been the work with parish records in England and France which have
produced important new series on population and vital events that reach

back to the first half of the sixteenth century. The publication of The
Population History of England and of a summary of the second volume in
the series (Wrigley and Schofield1lg83) reveal that we are now coming
into possession of a new long-term series that will greatly illuminate

the evolution of demographic processes in England. Similar promise for
French demography resides in the parish data assembled by INED, a part
of which has been insightfully analyzed by Weir (1982), and in the new
project based on the collection of a random sample of genealogies that

has been launched by Dupaquier and his colleagues. Despite the demonstration by Henripin (1954) and his colleagues that genealogies could
be used to reconstruct the population history of French. Canada during

the eighteenth century, historical demographers made little use of this
type of evidence during the three decades following the publication of

that study. The situation now appears to be changing. In Germany
samples of genealogies are also being employed as the principal source
of evidence in attempts to reconstruct long-term series on population
and vital events in that nation (Imhof, 1977).
It has been far more difficult to obtain data on standards of
living and nutrition that could be used in conjunction with the demographic

series that are now coming on line. Wrigley and Schofield (1981), for
example, were forced to rely on a wage series of a small class of workers

-14-

in a single region and to treat the price of wheat as a proxy for the

consumption of food (cf. Thirsk, 1983). This difficulty is also being
addressed and promising new sources of data on economic variables are

now being exploited. It has recently been demonstrated that probate
records, bailiffs accounts, tax lists, and similar archival records
can provide data on economic information suitable for both cross-

sectional and time-series analysis. From these sources scholars have
been able to measure such variables as grain yields, meat supplies,
rental prices of housing, changes in occupational structure, income,
and wealth (Overton, 1979 and 1980; Schuurinan, 1980; Lindert, 1980;

Lindert and Williamson, 1983; B. Campbell, 1983).
Although European scholars have led the way in the exploitation
of many of the new data sources, Americans have not been far behind.
Much of the work on this side of the Atlantic has been pioneered by
historians of the colonial period who have exploited the full array
of these difficult but now highly valued documentary sources to produce
evidence on demographic, economic, and social behavior (Demos, 1970;
Lockridge, 1966; Creven, 1970; Carr and Walsh, 1980; Smith, 1972; McCusker,
1970; Menard, 1975; Walsh and Menard, 1974; Rutman and Rütrtan, 1979; fischer

and Dobson, 1979; Kulikoff, 1976; McMahon, 1980; Calenson, 1981; Main,
1982; Rothenberg, 1984; Jones, 1980; IL Gallman, 1982; M. Callman,

1980; Levy, 1984). Although for the most part these studies have
focused on local coninunities and particular periods, collectively they
aduznbrate regional and national patterns and demonstrate the feasibility

of extending this approach to the national level and to the entire span
of U.S. history.

In 1977 the NBER launched a new Program in the Development of

the American Economy (DAE) which is investigating

-15long-term

changes in the U.S. economy that have occurred at the micro-

economic level. To facilitate this objective the DAE has organized
several studies of the feasibility of creating representative data sets

consisting of intergenerationally linked households. Such data sets
could open up entirely new possibilities for examining the interaction
of economic and cultural factors and their mutual influence on such
variables as the saving rate, the rate of female entry into the labor
force, fertility and mortality rates, the inequality of the wealth distribution, migration rates, and rates of economic and social mobility.
These data sets cannot be created from a single set of records but

require the linking of several different types of records. The pilot
studies have been aimed at determining whether the creation of the projected data sets is economically feasible and whether it is likely that

such data sets will yield the desired information. The results to
date have been quite encouraging on both counts.

2.1. The DAE/CPE Genealogical Sample
One of
of

Mortality

the projects in the DAE

program is called "The Economics

in North America, 1650-1910." Jointly sponsored by the

-16—

Center for Population Economics of the University of Chicago, this
project turns on the collection of a large sample of genealogical records.
The demographic information in the genealogical sample is being linked,
on an individual or household basis, to economic information contained
in probate records, tax lists, manuscript schedules of federal and local
censuses, military and pension records, and eventually with medical

records. The projected size of the ultimate sample is approximately
1,000,000 individuals in 200,000 families that will be linked intergenerationally for up to ten generations (see Table 3).

During the past five years we have retrieved a sample of
approximatelY 80,000 persons who were born or entered the United States

between 1640 and 1910. Our objective during this phase

has been to

investigate the various categories of genealogical records in order to
determine which types of records would yield the most desirable prop-

erties and which are most cost effective. Of the various categories
of genealogies that we have examined the two most promising are published
family histories and family group sheets.

There are at least 40,000 published histories of families that
contain information on over 20,000,000 people who have lived in North

America. The largest collection, with 24,000 volumes, is in the Library

of Congress, but the New York Public Library, the Library of American
Antiquarian Society, the Genealogical Society Library in Salt Lake City,

and the Newberry Library have extensive collections. We have surveyed
the resources in these and other collections and have put information from

-17-

Table 3

Tentative Estimates of the Temporal Distribution of Observations in
Completed Genealogical Sample

Families established
during the period

Persons born or entering
U.S. during the period

Period
1

Number
1851 or after

2

Percent

3
Number

4

Percent

144,000

77

608,000

65

34,000

18

246,000

26

1751-1800

6,000

3

51,000

5

1700-1750

3,000

2

26,000

3

Before 1700

1,000

1

8,0O0

1

188,000

100

939,000.

100

1801-SO

Totals

Sources: Fogel et al,1978. A family is defined by a marriage ot a bldbfline
individual, whether or not that marriage produces progeny. See Appendix B,
ibid., for a description of the simulation model on which this table is based.
It should be kept in mind that children in one family are parents in the next

one. Since column 3 does not count such individuals twice, the ratio of
column 3 to column 1 for a generation is not equal to the average size of
completed families during the period covered by that row.

-18—

a sample of the family histories into machine-readable form. At
the present time the sample of published family histories consists
of about 60,000 individuals drawn from about 270 books.
Most of the family histories begin with an iunnigrant to North

America or some other individual who may

be

viewed as a patriarchal

or matriarchal figure. The book then records the descendants of this
initial individual so that a descending tree or a pyramid is described

within the family history. Dates of birth, death, and marriages are
recorded in the family history, along with the place of each vital

event, although omission of some vital information is common. The
typical family history in the pilot sample covers six to eight gener-

ations and contains about 2,000 individuals. Families of New England
are overrepresented in the histories but a significant number of books

or each region of the country. The paucity of black family
histories is the most serious shortcoming of this source. But the
exist

source is sufficiently diverse with respect to religion, European
origins; places of settlement in North America and period of imini-

gration

to be useful for studies of the white population.

We have experimented with a variety of strategies in sampling

from these books. An initial concern was the distribution of the
sample over the largest feasible number of books in

order

to insure

geographic and other forms of diversity. More recently we have been
experimenting with the recording of all of the information in a book,

which may be the most cost effective procedure. This new approach
was encouraged by the discovery that whatever the initial location of
the patriarch, subsequent generations were so mobile that each book
generally had wide geographic coverage.2

-19-

Of the 72,000 observations in machine-readable form only
two-thirds have been integrated into the two files currently em-

ployed for demographic analysis. For the analysis of fertility we
created an intergenerationally-linked file of about 10,000 families

embracing about 41,000 unduplicated individuals. The subsample
currently being used to investigate mortality consists of about 19,000

individuals at risk from birth. About 15 percent of the individuals
in these two working subsamples have been linked so far to economic
information obtained from probate records and from the manuscript
schedules of the federal censuses.3
Family group sheets are also family histories but each sheet

consists of just three generations. It is posible to link successive
group sheets together in order to form longer genealogies but we have

not yet attempted to do so. So far we have used them mainly for the period

between 1830 and 1900 when foreign immigration was heavy. The group
sheets are well suited for that purpose since patriarchs who arrived
during the second half of the nineteenth century would only have had

one or two generations of eligible descendants. The family group sheets
were constructed by Mormons and there are about 101000,000 of these
records in the files of the Genealogical Library in Salt Lake City.

Although the compilers were Mormons, the ancestors included in the group

sheets usually were not.4 Much of our work with the group-sheet sample has been
concerned with whether its members are similar enough to the members of the
published family histories to consider both samples as constituting a single pooi

of information. So far the results of our tests indicate that they do,
and for many of our runs we have been pooling the two samples, although

we continue to test for differences. The current working ample of roup sheets

-20-

4

consists of about g,soo individuals who belonged to 1,500 families.
A priori considerations suggest that genealogies are likely
to be a biased source of information on demographic and other socio-

econonic characteristics. For example, it seems reasonable to assume
that the probability that a family history will be constructed is pro-

portional to the fertility of the family and
its mortality.

inversely proportional to

It follows that genealogies may yield upward biased

estimates of fertility rates and downward biased estimates of mortality

rates. Whether the magnitude of such biases is large or small and
whether they are correctable

cannot, however, be determined on a priori

grounds and the investigation of the direction and magnitude of various
biases has been at the center of our work.
One approach to this problem has been to run a series of
regressions of the form:
(1)

D. =

g(X..1B..),

D. =

a dichotomous variable for persons in the
jth

3

where

age group that takes the value one in the event
of a death,
X.. =

the

ith behavioral factor affecting the
mortality
rate of the jth age group,

B. = the

ith distortion in the data set which
spuriously
affects the probability of dying in the jth group.

The regressions described by equation (1) can be used to produce values

of nx corrected for the biases measured by the
tine only a portion of the

At the present

variables that we intend to consider have

been brought into analysis.. Still missing are the main economic variables,
which we are now in the process of

linking to the demographic variables.

-21-

Nevertheless, the initial nms on age-specific risk of death (for each
sex, on each of the seven age intervals, for each of four birth cohorts)

are rather promising. Birth order is statistically significant and
has a relatively large impact on the probability of dying in most of
the age intervals, with first and last births having a higher probability of dying than intermediate births in families with at least four

live births. Place of birth has a significant impact on the probability
of dying and the high risk regions change over time.

The bias variables (B3) indicate that practices by the compilers
of genealogies had a small but statistically significant effect on the

measured level of risk. So far these biases do not appear to have had
much effect on the coefficients of the

generally changing the values

only of the second or third significant digit. Much remains to be done,
however, on investigating alternative ways in which the bias variables

may be introduced into the regressions. But so far the impact of the
various biases identified on a priori ground appear to be small in

well chosen and carefully screened genealogies. Even in the case of
wealth, the upward bias in the genealogies is smaller than had been

conjectured. Adams and Kasakoff have collected a sample of genealogies
for northern states which they linked with the manuscript schedules of

the 1850 census. They then computed mean wealth of the men in their
sample who were age 20 or over in 1850, by occupation. Table 4 compares their results with the means reported by Soltow (1975) for his
random sample from the 1850 census schedules.

Table 4

—22—

Table 4

The Mean Value of Real Estate of Native-born Males Age 20 and Over
in 1850 in Two Samples
(in dollars)

Genealogical sample

Random sample
of 1850 census

N

Mean

S.D

N

Farmers

325

1,547

1870

n.a.

Non-farmers

276

1,037

2803

n.a.

Source: Adams and Kasakoff, 1983; n.a. = not available

Mean

1,401

805

S.D.

n.a.
n.a.

—23-

shows that although the means in the salnple•ofAdaAs and Kasakoff

are biased upward as one would expect, the differences are not very
large and clearly indicate the genealogies cover virtually the whole

range of wealth holders. Consequently, by including wealth as an arguwent of equation (1), it is possible to adjust for errors in estimates
of mean mortality rates due to the overrepresentation of rich individuals
and underrepresentation of poor ones.

Potential biases in the mortality rates because of the
nature of different categories of genealogies raise more troublesome

issues. One of the first issues we investigated was whether the
family histories were truly family histories or merely pedigrees.
Family histories include all of the descendants of the partrtarch

but pedigrees include only the direct ancestors of the compiler (his

father, his grandfather, his great grandfather, and so on). Quite
clearly pedigrees would bias mortality rates downward severely since
the individuals in a pedigree had to live at least long enough to have

procreated. The creation of a pedigree is the first step in the
compilation of a family history since the compiler

must trace his

lineage to the patriarch. Only then can he come forward in time to

construct a complete family history. The simplest test of whether
a book is a family history or a pedigree is to observe the fullness
of the tree.

Some books can be discarded because it is obvious that

the compiler traced only a few lines. Such inspection will not, however,
reveal more subtle omissions. To get at these we devised other tests,

-24-

such

as whether the number of lines

that

died out in a given

genealogy was consistent with the predictions generated by reasonable
guesses at

appropriate life tabland fertility schedules. The results

of the various tests have indicated that the majority of the family

histories in our sample are indeed what they purport to be. It appears
that once they determined who their patriarchs were, the compilers usually
sought to fill in the entire family tree, although they were not always
entirely successful.

Other tests of potential bias have involved evaluation of
the behavior of various fertility and mortality statistics in order
to determine if they conform to patterns observed in comparable

populations. We have, for example, compared age-specific fertility
schedules and the mean birth intervals at various parities with
those obtained from a variety of family reconstitutions and found

them to be normal for non-contraceptive populations. We are
currently comparing the age structure of the individuals in the sample
who are alive at given dates with the age structure in censuses per-

formed at the same date but have not yet completed these

tests. We

have also computed both period and cohort life tables from the data
in our sample in order to determine whether the internal structures- of
these tables are consistent with known

characteristics of life tables

and these are.
One

such

life table has been constructed fnr 920 native-born

white males in the pilot

sample who were at risk to die during the

decade of the lSSOs (see panel A of Table 5). It should be emphasized

—25—

that during the pilot phase of data collection the individuals included

in the sample have been chosen in such a way as to be representative
of the collections of genealogies that have been the focus of our con-

cern. Consequently1 the observations in the pilot sample are not
necessarily representative of the national population to which the

final sample will pertain. Although the individuals at risk during the
lSSOs come from all of the major regions, the Northeast is overrepresented

and the South and Midwest are underrepresented. The rural areas are
also overrepresented and urban areas are underrepresented. In principle
the deficiencies in the sample could be remedied by reweighting each of

the cells in an appropriate manner. I have not engaged in such an exercise
for two reasons. First, the current sample is too small; on average
there are only about 13 observations for each of the 70 cells that need

to be reweighted. Second, the life tables which are available for
comparison suffer from similar sample selection biases which cannot

at present be defined with the precision required for reweighting.
Panel B of Table 5 presents the average of the 1850 and 1860
life tables recently estimated by flames (1979) from the data in the

censuses of mortality for these two years. Because these censuses
suffer from substantial underreporting, flames fitted model life
schedules to data for persons aged 5-19, ages during which the reporting

tends to be most complete. Nevertheless, it is still likely that the
mortality rates in his tables are to some degree biased downward. The
downward bias is likely to be present even at the ages he focused on
because underreporting was greater in the South than in the North and
because underreporting was severe in urban areas at all ages (cf. Kahn,

1978; Condran and Crimmins, 1980). Panel C presents the life table for
1900 constructed by the Bureau of the Census for the ten original death

521
3'!2

157

280.2

344.3

539.7

1000.0

40

'0

70

80

A:

1000.0

656.9

360.0

328.2

192.8

48.6

113

328

512

763

951

1000

4.4

8.3

13.5

25.8

38.7

46.6

e

See the text and footnote 7 for the sources.

4.5

9.0

14.2

27.4

37.9

46.7

1000Q

149

377

S77

812

962

1000

4.7

8.8

14.0

27.1

41.3

49.5

e

The number of observations

1000.0

603.6

346.3

289.9

155.2

38.3

i

registration states

C
All whites, 1900,

nx

I

used the value of

in Model West (Coale and Derneny,

1966)

consistent with

slightly below that reported in the source.

nx

= 46.6. Panel C: Constructed from the
values in the 1900 life table in Preston, Keyfitz and
e10
Schoen, 1972. The use of longer age intervals in the estimation of Lx resulted in a value of e10

estimate the

on which each

value was computed ranged between 126 and 212. The value of e80 was computed from
the approximation in Coale and Demeny, 1966, p. 20. Panel B: This table was built up from the average
of the
values in the unpublished tables for 1850 and 1860 of Haines, 1979. Since Haines did not

Panel

971

253.7

;20

Sources and notes:

1000

29.4

10

724

Lx

lOOOQ

1860

sample
__________

tables for 1850 and

from the genealogical

B

All whites, 1850-1860,
average of Haines's

A
Native-born whites,
1850-1860, derived

FROM THE GENEALOGICAL SAMPLE WITH TWO OTHER PERIOD LIFE TABLES

Age

_______—

5

A COMPARISON OF A PERIOD LIFE TABLE FOR U.S. MALES DERIVED

Table

—27—

registration states. Unlike the Haines tables it is difficult to know
the direction of bias in this table because the biases run in both

directions. The exclusion of the South from the
states tends to bias mortality rates downward.

that all 48 states were included in the

original registraj0

It was not until 1933

death registration system (U.S.

Bur. Cen., 1975, p. 44). On the other hand, the states included in
the original registration area

are Overrepresented, in comparison with

the nation as a whole, in two high

risk groups: the foreign born and

residents of large cities.

Table 5 indicates that life
decade of the l8SOs in the
almost identical with the

expectation at age 10 during the

genealogical sample is 46.7 years, which is
corresponding figure in the average of the

I-lames tables for 1850 and 1860 (46.6

than that indicated by the 1900 table

years) and about three years less

(49.5 years). These results are

generally consistent with what is known about the extent of improvement
in mortality between the 1850s and 1900. There are some differences
in

the nx values between the

genealogical sample and the average of the

Haines tables, but because of the
are within the range of sampling

relatively small sample sizes, these

variability. Sampling variability can,

however, be reduced by further aggregation and for this reason the
preliminary findings presented in part 3 of this paper turn on 25-year

averages (averages of five quinquennial intervals). Allin all, the
life tables derived from the genealogies conform well to those derived
from registration data and other sources even before adjusting the
sample

for the underrepresenta-tion of various sections of the ref-

erence population.

The prospect for further improving the genealogical

sample by both fuller sampling of underrepresented groups and various
statistical adjustments is quite good.

-28-

2.2 The Height-by-Age Samples
One

of

the variables that we wanted to include in the regressions

run on equation (1) was a measure of nutritional status. Measures of
the mean consumption of various foods are so scarce for modern populations
that it is unlikely that even the most assiduous search of archival
documents would produce reliable annual estimates of the consumption
of the principal nutrients for any significant number of individuals,

certainly not for the whole span of time that we wish to consider.
Moreover, since nutritional status depends not only on the amount of
nutrients that are consumed but also on the claims against that
consumption, a measure of food intake alone would be insufficient.

Fortunately, there is a class of measures that are relatively
abundant, that reach far back into time, and that are sensitive to

variations in nutritional status. Both laboratory experiments on
animal populatons and observational studies of human populations have
led physiologists and nutritionists to conclude that anthropometric

measurements are reliable indexes of the extent of malnutrition among

the socioeconomic classes of particular populations. Measures of
height and weight at given ages, the age at which growth of stature

terminates, attained final height, and the rate of

change

in height or weight during the growing ages "reflect accurately the
state of a nation's public health and the average nutritional status
of its citizens" (

Eveleth

and

Tanner, 1976, p.1). Consequently,these measures

are now widely used by the World Health Organization and other agencies to

assess the nutritional status of the population of underdeveloped
nations.

The use of anthropometic measures as measures of nutrition
rests on a well-defined patterns of human growth between childhood and

maturity. The average annual increase in height (velocity] is greatest
during infancy, falls sharply up to age three, and then falls more

slowly throughout the remaining pre-adolescent years. During adolescence,
velocity rises sharply to a peak that is approximately one half of the

-29-

velocity achieved during infancy, then falls sharply and reaches zero

at maturity. In girls the adolescent growth spurt begins about two
years earlier, and the magnitude of the spurt is slightly smaller
than in boys.

This growth pattern reflects the interaction of genetic,

environmental, and socioeconomic factors during the period of growth.
According to Eveleth and Tanner (1976, p.222)

Such interaction may be complex. Two genotypes which
produce the same adult height under optimal
environmental circumstances may produce different

heights under circumstances of privation. Thus two
children who would be the same height in a well-off
community may not only both be smaller under poor

onomic conditions, but one may be significantly smaller
than the other. .

. . If

a particular environmental stimulus

is lacking at a time when it is essential for the child
(times known as 'sensitive periods'), then the child's
development may be shunted, as it were, from one line
to another.

The relative importance of environmental and genetic factors

in explaining individual variations in height is stillamatter of
some debate. For most well-fed contemporary populations, however,
systematic genetic influences appear to have very little impact on
mean heights.

Thus, the mean heights of well-fed West

Europeans, North American whites, and North American blacks are nearly

identical. There are some ethnic groups in which mean adult heights

-30-

of

well-fed persons today do differ significantly from the West European

or North American averages, presumably due to genetic factors. However,
since such ethnic groups have represented a minuscule proportion of
American and European populations, they are irrelevant to an explanation
of the secular trends in mean adult heights in the U.S. and in the

various European nations since 1750. Nor do they contribute significantly to differences, at various points of tine, between the height

means of the U.S. population and of the principal populations from which

the U.S. population was drawn. In this connection, it should be noted
that today the mean final heights of well-fed males in the main African
nations from which the U.S. black population is derived also fall within
the narrow band characteristic of Western Europe (Eveleth and Tanner1

1976; Fogel etal., 1983).
Biologists, epidemiologists, and nutritionists have charted
the effect of nutritional deficiencies on the human growth profile.
Short periods of severe undernutrition or prolonged periods of moderate
undernutrition merely delay the adolescent growth spurt; severe, prolonged

undernutrition may diminish the typical growth-spun pattern and
contribute to substantial permanent stunting. If undernutrition is both
prolonged and moderate, growth will continue beyond the age at which

the growth of well-fed adolescents ceases. Hence, the average age at
which the growth spun peaks, the average age at which growth terminates,
the mean height during adolescent ages, and the mean final height are
all important indicators of mean nutritional status (Frisancho, 1978).
Any one of these factors can be used to identify secular trends in nutrition.

-31—

The more of these measures that are available, the more precise the
determination of the severity and duration of periods of malnutrition.
In considering the relationship between nutrition and height,
it is important to keep in mind that height is a net rather than a gross

measure of nutrition. Moreover, although changes in height during the
growing years are sensitive to current levels of nutrition, mean final
heights reflect the accumulated past nutritional experience of an individual over all of his growing years including the fetal period.

Thus it follows that when the final heights are used to explain differences
in adult mortality rates, they reveal the effect, not of adult levels of
nutrition on adult mortality rates, but of nutritional levels during

infancy, childhood, and adolescence on adult mortality rates. Similarly,
when heights at age 8 are related to mortality at age 8, the exercise
reveals the effect of nutritional experience up to that age.

The measure of net nutrition represented by mean heights
depends on the intake of nutrients, on the amount of nutrients available for physical growth after the necessary claims of work and other
activities (including recovery from infections), and on the efficiency

with which the body converts nutrients into outputs. The body's
ability to generate a surplus for growth will vary with such factors
as age, the climate, the nature of the available food, clothing and
shelter, the disease environment, the intensity of work, and the quality

of public sanitation. In other words, the same nutritional input can
have varying effects on physical growth, depending upon environmental

conditions. Consequently, mean height corresponds quite well to the
type of measure of nutritional status called for in Section 1.4: it is
a measure of the balance between food consumption and the claims on
that consumption.

-32—

Some social scientists have suggested that height (or weight)
at given ages should not be called measures of "nutritional status,"
but

"generalized indexes of health" or "non-specific indicators of

health status" (Mosley and Chen, l983) The definition of "nutritional
status" that I have set forth here is not my own, but rather the definition employed by medical nutritionists, epidemiologists, and physi-

ologists. It is an unfamiliar concept to most economists (and other
social scientists) because we are not steeped in the medical literature.

Moreover, "nutritional status" sounds too much like "diet" to most of
us, although medical nutritionists and epidemiologists draw a sharp

distinction between the two terms. To some social scientists the use
of the ten "nutritional status" seems to be a subtle way of supporting
the oversimplified view that low levels of nutritional intake are the
only sources of malnutrition, and so use of the term appears to give
covert support to oversimplified theories of the relationship between
diet and mortality.

Will the use of such alternative tens as "health" or "nonspecific indicators of health status" avoid the problem? These terms
have been advanced as though their meaning was unambiguous; yet as F.K.
Taylor (1979) has pointed out, "health" is difficult to define rigorously.

We can try to give it rigor by using available information on morbidity and

mortality rates. Then "healthy" populations may be defined as populations
having rates in these dimensions that fall within a "normal" range.
The difficulty with this procedure is not only that reliable measures
of mortality and, especially, of morbidity are often lacking; there is

-33-

the

more fundamehtal issue that "normal" ranges of morbidity and nor-.

tality vary so widely with tine, place, and circumstances that epidemiologists
often turn to anthroponetric measures in order to detennine what is "normal"
in a given environment (Hytten and Leitch, 1971; Waterlow et al, 1977;

Habicht et al, 1974; Meredith, 1970; Naeye, 1981; Raman, 1981; Thomson and

Bellewicz, 1976; Goldstein, 1976). So the mere substitution of one term
for

another, of "generalized indexes of health status" for "nutritional

status," will not renove conceptual ambiguities or prevent oversimplified
characterizations of the empirical relationships we seek to uncover.
Quite the contrary, striking out on our own, without adequate

attention to and connection with the extensive medical investigations
on which we must base our own work, is far more likely to be misleading
than acceptance of medical terminology that now seems strange or even

questionable. Long experience with the problems of the interrelationship
between nutritional status and infectious diseases has led medical
specialists to the conclusion that anthropometric measures are the best
single index of the average nutritional status of a population and of
the relationship between undernutrition and the outcome of a significant

range of infections (Habichtet al, 1979). Both clinical studies and laboratory
experiments have shown that body wasting, retardation in the rate of
physical development, and stunting are usually caused by undernutrition
during the developmental years, which both reduces the rate of cell

accumulation and the size of cells (Winick and Brasel, 1980). These
findings do not, however, imply that inadequate nutrient intake is the
primary source of undernutrition or that undernutrition can be remedied
merely, or even primarily, by increasing nutritional intake, since the
source of the undernutrition may be a disease which makes it impossible
for the body to assimilate those nutrients which are ingested.

-34-

Moreover both laboratory experiments on animal populations and
field studies of human populations have identified a set of infections
whose outcome is sensitive to the nutritional status of the population

at risk. The most carefully controlled of these field studies has
been underway in the Narangwal district of IndIa for more than a decade

(C.E. Taylor 1982; Kielmann et al, 1982; Kielmann et al, 1983). The
Naraugwal project has revealed that perinatal mortality is particu-

larly sensitive to the nutritional status of mothers. Perinatal mortality rates were reduced by more than 40 percent when the diets of
pregnant women were supplemented by various nutrients, particularly

iron and folic acid. Public health measures, such as the immunization
of mothers for neonatal tetanus and improved delivery procedures, also
were effective, contributing about half as much to the reduction in

perinatal mortality rates as did nutritional supplementation. Infant
mortality during the balance of the first year and mortality between

ages one and three were also reduced by both measures. Interestingly,
public health measures were more effective than nutritional

supplemen-

tation in curbing late infant mortality, and the two types of intervention were about equally effective in curbing mortality at ages 1-3.
Both nutritional supplementation and public health measures had marked
effects on height and weight at given ages and deviations from the
50th centile of prevailing standards for height and weight were strongly

correlated with death rates. Whatever the nature of the infections

to

which they were exposed, children whose diets were supplemented grew
more rapidly up to age three (the final age of the test) than children
in the control group.
In other words, improvements in nutritional status, whether the
consequence of nutritional supplementation (which enables the body to
resist infections) or medical intervention (which reduces the virulence
of infections) were associated with reductions in morbidity and mortality

-35-

rates.

However, these associations are not identical or even symmetrical.

Increases in nutritional intake and medical or public health measures
often have different effects on particular diseases (and these effects
vary with different stages in the life cycle) as well as on the pattern
of human growth. For the range of issues that we are exploring it. is
particularly important to stress that every infection affects nutritional
status;

the survivors of an infection suffer a depravation .of nutrients

required for growth which slows down the rate of cell accumulation and
reduces cell mass (Winick :and Brasel, 1980). It does not follow., however,

that improvements in nutritional status necessarily reduce morbidity and

mortality rates. Not all infections are nutritionally sensitive and the
body's capacity to resist a nutritionally-sensitive infection may be

inconsequential if the pathogen is sufficiently virulent. In àther words,
nutritional status is likely to be "a

determining

factor" in

the

outcome

of an infection when that infection is both nutritionally sensitive and of

an intermediate degree of virulence (J.l.H., 1983, p. 506). Physidlogists
have also identified the "mechanisms responsible for the increased number
and severity of infections in the malnourished host" (Feigin, 1981, p. 18).
Furthermore, although mean height is a good measure of nutritional
status, it

does

not by itself indicate whether fluctuations in net nu-

trition are due to fluctuations in the consumption of food, in the claims
on the food intake, or in the efficiency with which food is converted into

outputs. Such decomposition is possible because of the asymmetries to
which I have referred. Although both infection and inadequate nutritional
intake retard the process of

growth,

they do not do

so

in precisely the

same way. Because the body draws more heavily on nutritional stores when
it is fighting an infection than when it

is

not, an infection may cadse

growth to cease during a period of infection. However, if a child is

-36-

normally well fed, and if there is sufficient time between infectious
episodes, there will usually be full catch-up in growth when an infection

ceases. Normal, well-fed children do not grow at equal daily rates but
alternate periods of growth well in excess of the daily average with
periods of little or no growth, as disease and other claims on nutritional

intake wax and wane. In well-fed children these lacunae in growth have
no affect on final heights, because of full and rapid catch-up, but in
malnourished children they contribute to permanent stunting (Fogel et al, 1983).
The more data which are available on heights at each age, the
more numerous and disaggregated the links between age- and diseasespecific death rates, not only with anthropometric data, but with a
variety of other socioeconomic variables, the more complete the decomposition of the determinants of the decline in mortality will be, including

the determinants of nutritional status. It is not easy to construct a
data base as varied and abundant as I have indicated, but the objective

is not out of reach. Some initial stabs at decomposition with the data
currently in hand are undertaken for a few specific cases that are considered in Sections 3.2 and 4.4.

—37-

The collection of a modest sample of height-by-age data was
launched in early 1978 as an adjunct of the mortality project in order
to produce. a measure that could be employed in equation (1)..

However,

it quickly became apparent that this hody of evidence was filled with.

so much useful infornation on economic behavior that the scOpe of the
sampling effort was enlarged and the woxk on this body of evidence became the foundation for a new Bureau project called "Secular Trends in
Nutrition, Labor Welfare and Labor Productivity," which is also cosponsored by the Center for Population Economics.

The nutrition project currently involves a set of sixteen
samples (see Table 6) containing information on height by age,

weight, and various socioeconomic variables. The samples, which
cover the period from 1750 through. 1937, reveal aspects of physical

development in the United States, Trinidad, Great Britain, Austro-

Hungary, and Sweden. Ten of the samples were drawn from military

of Observations

5,000

Union army, rejects

Regular U.S. army,

4.

S.

7.

6.

5,000

Amnesty records,
white southern males

3.

of Observations

51,000

75,000

Coastwise manifests,

1807-1862

13,000

13,000

43,000

Other U.S. Samples (5-10)

s,ooo

5,000

10,000

53,000

Civil War Samples (1-4)

References

I,

plus

corn-

& Steckel
(1982)

Walker

Steckel (1982b)

(1984)

Fishman

Steckel (1984'b)

Steckel (19823)

Margo

Margo G Steckel
Height, age, color,
(1982)
sex, dates and points
of embarkation and
arrival; covers all
ages of both males and
females
(continued)

Height, age, birthplace, residence,
occupation, marital
status, mainly ages
18-49

Same as 1

Same as 1 (except mortality information) plus
reason for rejection

Height, age, place of
residence, occupation,
ages 12-80

plexion,

Same as

Margo t Steckel
Height, age, mortality,
(1983)
cause of death, various
socioeconomic characteristics; covers mainly
ages 18—45

Included

Categories of

Information

Main

in the Nutrition Project

Currently on Tape

Number

Ohio National Guard,
1870-1925

1790-1910

5,000

blacks

Union army,

2.

100,000

40,000

Originally Planned

Number

Union army, whites

Samples

I.

Title of

Table 6 The Principal Samples

-

Marine Society,

12.

.

30,000

Trinidad, 1813-1834

11.

-

3,000

-

Cost of living
surveys, 1934-1937

-

4,S00

20,000

Number of Observations
Originally Planned

10.

-

Philadelphia Alms
House, 1847-1877

9.

-

Colonial muster
rolls, 1750-1783

of Samples

8.

Title

Saioples (12-li)

50,000

British

25,000

3,000

-

3,000

14,000

Number of Observations
Currently on Tape

-

a

Sokoloff
Villaflor
(1982)

References

of

(Continued)

Height, age, and various socioeconomic
characteristics including occupationS
fathers and sons, literacy and
vaccination (or innoculation); ages
mainly 13-17

height, age, color, births, deaths,
and various other socioeconomic
variables for all ages and both sexes

Height for all family members by age,
sex, and various socioeconomic
characteristics includimg occunation,
wages, days ill, education and family
wealth

(197)

Floud
Wachter
(1982)

Friedman (1982)

Coldin

Birthweight
birthlenght, gestationa! Goldin
Margo
age, birth order, characteristic of
(1984)
labor, mortality of child and mother
during hospital stay, sex of child,
race, characteristics of mother cage.
ethnicity, residence marital status,
health status (eg. yeneral,
drunkenes$)

Same as 1. except no
mortality information

Main Categories of
Information Included

Table 6 (Continued

-

C,.

Sandhurst, boys,
1808-1893

Military recruitment
records, 1750-1910

Swedish conscript
rolls, 1750-1910

Hapsburg monarchy,
1720-1920

13.

14.

15.

16.

Title of Samples

•

75,000

30,000

130,000

11,000

19,000

30,000

Other European

130,000

11,000

Samples (15-16)

-

Number of Observations
Currently on Tape

(Continued)

Number of Observations
Originally Planned

Table 6

Floud (19$3a)

References

W!

Height by age, occwpation, residence,
19-SO
mainly

Komlos (1984)

Height by age, years
Sandberg and
of service, and various Steckel (1979)
socioeconomic characteristics for males

Same as 11, except for
father's occupation;
mainly for males aged
16—45

Height by age, date
of recruitment, fees
paid

Main Categories of
Information Included

—'+1—

records and hence pertain to males of military age. One of the
Rritish samples is composed of poor teen-aged boys taken in by the
Marine Society, a charitable organization, from 1750 to 1910; another

is composed of upper class boys admitted to Sandhurst. Three of the
samples contain information on both sexes from infancy to old age.

One sample is of birth weights and lengths in Philadelphia from the

1840s to the end of the 1870s. The data in these samples are being
linked with additional data obtained from probate records, tax lists,

pension records, and manuscript schedules of censuses. Such linking
increases both the range of variables that can be brought into the
analysis and the complexity of the interrelationship between height,

nutritional status, and economic and social behavior that we can

investigate. As of late 1983, information had been collected on
about 400,000 individuals, which is about 75 percent of the anticipated
final number.

Much of our work on the height data between 1977 and 1982
dealt with problems of estimating and correcting biases that arose
from using military records to estimate the mean height of the

population from which the recruits were drawn. These biases fall
into three categories. Firsts there are the self-selection biases
that are peculiar to volunteer armies. Then there are a variety of
more general measurement biases, some of which relate to the
accuracy of the age information and others to the accuracy of the

height information. Finally, there is the bias that arises because
military organizations may have height limits. Most frequently these

-42-

organizational restrictions produced a jagged truncation.of the left
tail of the height distribution, but right-tail truncation is also

encountered. Since we have published several papers dealing with
the techniques developed for coping with these problems (Trussell

and Bloom, 1979, Wachter 1981; Wachter and Trussell, 1982; Fogel etal,

1982; Floud, l983a; Fogel etj, 1983; Floud and Wachter, 1983;
Trussell and Wachter, 1984), I will not attempt to describe them here
but merely state that both simulation techniques and practical experience
have demonstrated the effectiveness of the procedures.

3. Some Preliminary Findings on the Relationship
between Improvements in Nutritional Status
and the Declinr in Mortality

At the present time we have three pieces of evidence linking
mortality rates with nutritional status (as measured by height).

Before presenting these findings, I wish to reemphasize that
they are provisional.

Although the work on the

height

data is fairly advanced we are still in the pilot phase of the drawing
of the genealogical sample. The pilot sample is still relatively
small, lacking in the geographical diversity we desire, especially
before 1750, and only partly linked to the economic, medical, and

social information that we will eventually have. Nevertheless, there
are several findings which have arisen out of these data sets which

are highly suggestive, and which appear to be sufficiently robust to
warrant their presentation.

-43-

3.1 The Secular Trends in the Height and in the
Life Expectation of U.S. White Males, 1700-1930
Figure 1 compares the time series that we have developed so
far in both the height and the life expectation of U.S. white males.

Before considering this diagram some characteristics of the series and

their limitations should be kept in mind. First, the secular trend
in height is controlled for shifts in the distribution of the region of
birth, of occupation, and several other relevant characteristics while
the life-expectation series is not, but merely gives the mean life expectation at age 10 of all of the individuals at risk during each period.6
Second, southerners are underrepresented in both the height and life-

expectation series. The correction of these deficiencies, which we hope
to make in the near future, will probably have a greater effect on the
e10 series than on the height series, especially before c.1750.7

It is possible to estimate tentatively the effect of the
correction by making use of Levy's(l984) estimates of the life

ewectaion of Maryland legislators. The value of e10 estimated
from his data for l7Oe-49 and 1750-99 are shown in the lower
8

portion of the diagram. Also shown is the effect of averaging his
observations and those in the genealogical sample, using weights that
9

correct for the undercount of southerners in the genealogical sample.
As can be seen the impact of the correction will be greatest before
1750, partly because the differential in mortality between the regions
closed .rapidly during the first half of the eighteenth century and

partly because the current representation of the South in the sample

improves considerably after 1750. Thus I expect a more representative
sample to show a more rapid rise in e10 between 1700 and 1750. The

beginning of the peak nay be shifted

by one or two decades and

the level of the peak may be lowered slightly.

e10

0

cm

in

30

40

50

60

169

170

171

-

linear

interpolation

o

I

I

A
I

I

I

I

I

I

I—

—

—.

fo147l

and

I
1860

moving average of

0

171017201730y4hh7501760l77017801790l8001310182o13301840

I

V

southern

Possible weigh

S-year

(5-item

trend in e

1860

I

I

_J_I

I

I

1940

I

data

1960
Year

foreign born)

ion

year of birth

(includes

1940

68

69

I n ches

in

Height

TREND IN

egistrat

1900

1920
188018901900191

1880

on!

r

1920

MALES AND THE

trend in average final
height
(S-year birth cohorts)

17101720173017401750u76f1770178017901800l810182o18301840185

--

-

-

173
172

-

174

175

176

A COMPARISON BETWEEN THE TREND

Ueight

1

IN THE MEAN FINAL HEIGHT OP NATIVE-BORN WHITE
THEIR LIFE EXPECTATION AT AGE 10
(e?
(height by birth cohort; e?0 by perio3).

Figure

a
a

-45-

These corrections will not change the striking and unexpected

similarities in the two series. Both series appear to be rising during
most of the eighteenth century, attaining both substantially greater
heights and life expectations than prevailed in England during the same

period. Life expectation began to decline during the 1790s and continued
to do so for about half a century. There may have been a slight decline
in the heights of cohorts born between 1785 and 1820, but the sharp
decline, which probably lasted about half a century, began with cohorts

born c. 1830. A new rise in heights, the one with which we have long
been familiar, probably began with cohorts born during the last decade
of the nineteenth century and continued for about 60 years.

We do not, at present, have data on final heights in
America for cohorts born before 1710, but the relatively f1at
profile between':c. 1710 and c.l750 and the tall stature compared with the

ng1ish in c. 1750 suggests that heights were probably rising rapidly
for several decades before our series begins. This inference is supported
by data on food consumption in Massachusetts discovered by McMahon (1980).
Wills deposited in Middlesex county between 1654 and 1830 indicate a
sharp rise in the average amount of meat annually allotted to widows for

their consumption. Between c. 1675 and c. 1750 the average allotment
increased from approximately 80 to approximately 168 pounds per annum;

about half the increase took place by c.l710. The evidence both on
stature and on food allotments suggests that Americans achieved an
average level of meat consumption by the middle of the eighteenth
century that was not achieved in Europe until well into the twentieth
century (McMahon, 1980; Holmes, 1907; Fogel, 1985).

-46-

Figure 1 and Table 7 reveal that Americans not only achieved
modern heights by the middle of the seventeenth century, but that they
reached levels of life expectation that were not attained by
the general population of England or even by the British peerage

until the first quarter of the twentieth century. Correction of the
e10 series for the underrepresentation of southerners may push the

period

estimate of e10 in c.l725 to about 47 years and the estimate

for c.1775 to about 54 years1 but these would still be remarkably high

values for e10. Although a more refined downward adjustment will eventually need to be made to obtain a reliable national average, there is
at present no obvious reason for believing that the figures shown were
not representative of the Northeast.

The early attainment of modern stature and relatively long life
expectation is surprising, and for that reason alone calls for further

verification. Yet in light of the evidence that has accumulated in
recent years it is by no means unreasonable. By the second quarter of
the eighteenth century Americans had achieved diets that were remarkably

nutritious by European standards, and particularly rich in protein. The
American population was low in density, probably below the threshold

needed to sustain major epidemics of such diseases as smallpox. The
low density probably also reduced exposure to the crowd diseases of the
nineteenth century that took a heavy toll of life in both England and

America. This is not to say that there were no epidemics in America
between c.l725 and c.1800, but with the exception of a few port cities,
outbreaks of epidemic diseases appear to have been much milder than in
England.

The discovery of the cycling in both height and e10, especially
of the amplitude of the movements, is so new and so surprising that many

-47-

Table 7
A Comparison Between the Cohort Life Expectations for Native—Born U.S. White
Males, British Peers, and

the

English Population, 1700—1925

1

2

England

British
Peerage

and
Wales
(both sexes)

Century and Quarter

18th

(males)

3

British
Peerage
(males)

4
U.S. Native-Born
Whites
(males)

e0

I

35.1

34.9

39.4

50.3

II

33.8

38.8

44.4

55.5

III

36.3

44.6

46.3

55.8

TV

37.0

46.9

46.1

51.9

49.3

48.3

52.3

e10
19th

T

TI

41.5 47.1

52.2

49.5

48.9

III

44.6 50.6

54.7

51.4

55.3

53.7

47.4

60.1

54.0

IV

20th

(males)

I

-

56.9

Sources: Column 1: Table 2, above. The two observations of e 0 (males)
for 19-IT and 19-lIT were computed from Case etal, 1962, in tAe manner
described in Table 2. Columns 2 and 3: Hollingworth 1977, p.328. Column
4: The genealogical sample (N = 4,210) for all observations except 20-I,
which is derived from U.S. registration data in the sources listed in
notes to Table 3 and from U.S. Nat. Cent. Health Stat. 1983. The
v1ues for
late
after 1980 were
ages reached
projections of the entries in the 1980 life table using the rate of
decline in age-secific death rates obtained from medical records during
1968-1978 and reported in Wilkin 1981. The entry for 20-I is the average
of e10 for cohorts born in 1900, 1910, and 1920. This entry includes the
foreign born, while all the other entries in column 4 do not. Consequently,
a comparison between 19-ITtand 20-T may understate the extent of the
improvement in e10 for cohorts born during the first quarter of the twentieth century.

-48-

issues will have to be pursued before doubts about the discovery can

be set aside. Not least of the tasks is the need to enlarge the genealogical sample and to investigate characteristics that night be inducing
spurious cycles or exaggerating the amplitude of the cycles in the un-

controlled trend. In this paper, however, it is the hitherto unsuspected
pattern in the height series and its strong correlation with the mortality
series that I want to emphasize.

3.2. Slaves and Poor London Boys
The second piece of evidence linking mortality and nutritional

status cones from data on slaves and on the London poor. Under abolitionist pressures the British colonial office conducted two registrations
of slaves in Trinidad within a twenty month period, the first in 1813

and the second in 1815. Because the aim of the registrations was to
prevent smuggling of slaves, physical characteristics, including height,

were recorded. The second registration also included information on
the disposition of all the slaves who were registered in 1813. Friedman
(1982) was the first to investigate the differences between the height

of the slaves who died and those who survived. The difference is evident
in Table 8, which presents the heights of surviving and non-surviving males

under age 26. The extent of the difference is more apparent in a regression format. Table 9 shows that Trinidad-born males under age 26
who died between 1813 and 1815 were 1.2 inches shorter than those who

survived. The corresponding figure for females is 0.9 inches.
Table 8 not only shows that non-survivors were shorter than survivors, but that even the survivors were exceedingly short by modern standards.

-49-

Table 8

Mean Heights by Age and Mortality, 1813-1815, Trinidad-Born
Non-Survivors
Survivors
N
Height
SD
Age
N
Height
SD
Males
O

23.9

3.29

118

22.2

3.44

26

1

26.6

3.38

159

26.4

2.91

30

2

29.9

3.22

131

28.1

2.96

16

3

33.8

3.09

177

33.1

3.75

11

4

36.2

4.09

158

36.7

2.90

11

5

38.6

3.39

128

37.0

4.38

8

6

41.2

3.72

134

39.9

2.27

7

7

43.0

3.22

119

43.2

4.09

5

8

44.5

3.95

104

45.0

3.16

5

9

46.8

2.70

67

44.5

3.54

2

10

49.7

3.75

110

42.0

11

49.9

3.25

70

12

52.3

2.75

84

13

52.7

3.34

14

56.1

is

.

1

.

0

54.0

.

1

60

52.0

.

1

3.96

68

59.5

58.3

3.86

59

60.0

16

59.4

2.99

43

59.0

17

61.6

4.05

30

18

62.5

3.05

50

19

63.7

2.87

18

20

64.6

3.29

48

21

64.8

2.17

16

.

22

65.0

3.07

40

.

23

66.3

2.69

9

.

24

65.3

2.99

20

.

25

65.2

3.00

33

.

.

61.5
.

64.0

65.0

0.71
.

1.41

.
2.12

.
5.66

2
1

2

0
2

0
2

.

0

.

0

.

0

.

0

.

1

Source: Friedman, 1982. Age and height are those recorded in 1813. Due
to a transcription error the standard deviations of non-survivors
were misreported in the original source. Those shown here, supplied
by Friedman, are the correct ones.

—50-

9

Table
Height Regression, Slaves Under Age 26, Trinidad-Born
Dep.nd.nt Var1able Slave'i 84ht.
Variable

.4nn

rntercept

Me

6.737.

77.1.127

Ag. Squared
Age Cubed

11.55.665
200148.90

Me to the toartb
!Iumber of Sian.
on the Unit

75.6142

at Slave.

Nuaber

Squared

9109.626

Sugar WiLt
Sugar

0.6975

tine

Nuaber of Si.av.e

Cottoa Unit
Light ChU4 of
Dart

ther

Creole CtSr
Creole Stnar Tine
an Keight

Si...
Co.tficiot
9.2

Fealee
T—rstio

4.64

5.0927

ZT.05

—0.1.11.8

—11.71

0.0227

9.50

-0.0005

—8.90

0.0054

0.95

o.ooooi6

0.63

on WiLt

Keight

Died 1813 to 1.815
Mean of Depeoden

1243.841.

22013.99

76.8831
931.9.246

15.8
4.9525

1—ratio

7.71
26.05

-.0.3533
0.0171
-0.0001.

—9.93

o.oco6

0.13

0.000034
0.1958

1.31.

7.47
—7.13

—0.42

0.6722

63.9059

-.0.0032

.0.0031

—0.3918

—0.78
—0.22

62.81.78

0.014796

0.0577

0.1.115

1.02

0.0496

0.9285
2.9238

2.41

0.01.32

3.2436

0.74

0.2803

..0.5810
.8.5058

—1.38
—2.33

15.0205

—0.0561

-0.87

0.2803

-8.5058

—2.33

0.0399

_4.5971.

-1.85
6.13

—3.1587

—1.12

0.1983

0.Cj73

60.8135

0.0652 —1.1687

—3.33

60.7981
0.0812

0.0830
..0.8538

—2.61

Variabl.

R—.quared

F—ratio

Degree. of

6.8528
61.0743

Coetftcwnt

—0.11.37

Crude Death Rate

Mother'.

San

Freedoa

Source: Friedman, 1982

40.3

0.56

2.49

40.1.

0.92

0.91.

1358.35

1296.09

1749

1857

—51—

Figure 2 indicates how bad their nutritional status was. In this diagram
the heights of Trinidad-born male slaves, at ages from infancy to
maturity, are superimposed on a set of curves which describe the current
British standard for assessing the adequacy of physical development.
The curve marked "50th centile" gives the average height at each age

among generally well-fed persons in Great Britain today. Also shown
on the diagram are the heights of U.S. male slaves (which come from
documents designed to prevent the smuggling of slaves into the U.S.), the
height of poor adolescent boys in London during the last half of the eight-

eenth century, and the height of English laborers at maturity.c. 1780.
Figure 2 shows that during early childhood slaves in both

Trinidad and the U.S. were exceedingly malnourished. The figures
for ages 0.5 and 1.5 are probably biased downward because the legs of
the children were not fully stretched out when they were measurixi.

But at ages 2.5 and 3.5 the children were walking and would have been

measured in a standing position. Yet they were still exceedingly short
by modern standards, falling at or below the 0.1 centile. Such poor
of

development is indicative4kwashiorkor and other diseases caused by

severe protein-calorie malnutrition (P04). Although the gap with modern
height standards was reduced after age 3, it remained in a range

suggesting at least mild to moderate PCM through age 8. Between ages
10 and 17 the growth patterns of U.S. and Trinidad slaves diverged,
with the heights of U.S. slaves climbing into the normal range, while
the heights of Trinidad slaves fluctuated in the range of moderate to

severe PCM. By the mid-twenties, U.S. slaves were well into the normal
range and Trinidad-born slaves were borderline normal. Thus it appears

20

30

40

50

60

70

incites

1.

+

2

A

a

+

3

5

6

Poor Londoners

7

8
9

centiles
centiles
centiles
centiles

Trinidad—born slaves

U.s. slaves

4

2

50

10

11

S

Age

12

13

I
15

.

14

16

---—-4

17

18

19

20

21

22

r
5'

normal range
possible protein—calorie deficiency
mild to moderate protein—calorie deficiency
0.1 — 1
0.0001 — 0.1 severe protein—calorie deficiency

5—
1—

0.0001

0.1

1

and Poor Londoners
The Extent to Which Mean Height of Male Slaves
Deviated From The Modern Height Standard

Figure

23

24

centiles

25

U'
"a

-53--

that the diet that U. S. slaves received when they began working at
adult tasks was good enough not only to sustain their work effort but
to permit a substantial degree of catch-up growth as well. In the case of

Trinidad slaves, however, the diet appears to have been inadequate to

permit the same degree of catch-up, given the character of the physical
environment.

Figure 2 suggests that nutritional deficiencies of early childhood, rather than the overwork or underfeeding of adults, was the main

cause of the relatively high death rate of U.S. slaves. This possibility
is supported by available data on the death rates. Figure 3 indicates
that it was excess death rates of slave children under 5 that accounted
for the difference between the overall death rates of U.S. slaves and

U.S. whites during the late antebellum era. Moreover, the fact that U.S.
slaves and whites had similar life expectations after age 20 suggests
that it was not the general virulence of the disease environment but

conditions specific to young children. J. Campbell's (1984) examination
of a large cotton plantation in Georgia revealed a correlation between
the infant death rate and the intensity with which planters worked pregnant

women. Steckel (19844 has also found evidence that overwork of pregnant
women increased the stillbirth and neonatal death rates. His examination
of the monthly pattern of a sample

of

such deaths indicated that these

rates were highest among the babies of women whose first trimester coincided with the planting season and who were in their third trimester when
the peak period of harvesting occurred.

The small heights at ages 2.5 and 3.5 suggest not only that
fetal malnutrition was prevalent but that chronic undernourishment was

widespread during infancy and early childhood. Breastfeeding of slave
babies was common throughout the South, but its average duration is

-S4-

Figure 3

i-- Diszraaa 8ETW AGE-SflCIflC DEAfl taxEs or

u.s.

SLAVEs AXlE watns, £srnarw
LATI ANTDCSZM S

white

(Slav. death rats

vot rsz

death !)

percent
14 —
12
10

3

a

—

6

4

2

n
______
V _______

—
0

______
_______

—

1—4

1!

20—24
_________________________________________________________________
5—9

10—14

13—19

Age iaterva.Ls

—2

—4

Sources:

Haines and Avery, 1980; Steckel, 1984a; Fogel 1985

-.55-

uncertain. On some of the larger plantations most of the infants may

have been at least partially weaned within 3 or 4 months. Plantation
records which describe the diets of weaned infants and young children

suggest that it was ample in calories but low in protein. Cruels and
porridges, usually made with cornmeal and sometimes containing milk, were

a common fare. After age 3 these were supplemented to some extent by
vegetable soups more likely to contain lard than meat, potatoes,

molasses, grits, hominy and cornbread. These more balanced diets contributed to catch-up growth between ages 3 and 8, although even the
eight-year-olds were still quite short by modern standards (Fogel, 1985).
Both the available descriptions of the diets of young children and the
small stature of children, especially those under age 3, are consistent
with the evidence on protein deficiency culled from the antebellum

medical reports by Kiple and King (1981). They argue that frequent
descriptions

of the "glistening fat and corpulent paunches" of young

children, the frequent listing of "dropsy" and "swelling" as a cause
of death, and the concern of southern physicians with "the distention
of slave children's stomachs," suggest that kwashiorkor or prekwashiorkor
was prevalent.

In Trinidad as in the U.S. the exceedingly small stature of

slaves under 3 suggests intra-uterine malnutrition of fetuses. But
in the case of Trinidad consumption of alcohol during pregnancy, which
retards fetal development and induces a number of other abnormalities
that are referred to as the Fetal Alcohol Syndrome, may have been a

complicating factor. On sugar plantations liberal rations of rum were
usually provided to slaves, especially during harvest time.

Thus although the absence

of catch-up growth before

-56-

age 3 may indicate that the early childhood diet was very low in
protein, it could also reflect the residual effect of Fetal Alcohol

Syndrome. However, since Trinidad slaves had a weaker adolescent growth
spurt and a lower final height than U.S. slaves, the nutrients available
for adolescent growth were obviously less in Trinidad than in the slave

South. Not only was the nutrient intake of Trinidad slaves relatively
low, but the more virulent disease environment of Trinidad undoubtedly

exercised relatively greater claims against that intake. It is doubtful
that adult slaves in Trinidad could have worked harder than U.S. slaves;
the nutrient value of their diet would not permit it (Sheridan, 1985).

But in combination, the claims of work and disease and the disfunctions

caused by alcohol appear to have left Trinidad slaves with a lower net
nutrition to sustain an adolescent growth spurt than U.S. slaves.

There are no measurements of the stature of the
poor London boys during infancy or early childhood, but their heights
between ages 13 and 16 are one to two inches less than those of

Trinidad-born slaves of the same ages. Moreover, the adult height of
the English laborers who formed the pooi from which the Royal Marines were
recruited was about one inch less than the adult height of the Trinidad-

born slaves. It thus appears likely that some combination of intrauterine malnutrition, poor weaning diet, and an adolescent diet inadequate
to sustain catch-up growth (under the conditions of their environment)
stunted the physical development of poor English boys between 1750
and 1800.

When Tanner assessed this evidence (1981, p. 158)

—57—

he said that the causes of such short stature, which persisted into
adulthood without an acute retardation of the teenage growth spurt,

have to be sought in early childhood and even the fetal period..
Severe malnutrition of the pregnant mother followed by chronic
and severe undernutrition of the infant could cause this
result. More likely still is a low birthweight and/or a
low weight gain in infancy caused by injurious substances
breathed or eaten by the pregnant mother and the newborn
child.

The substances to which he referred are opium, laudanuin, and morphia which
he pointed out were the ingredients of popular patent medicines for
children and which are thought to have been widely used by working
mothers unaware of their contents to keep their children quiet while they
worked at hotne or in factories. When these "elixirs" and "cordials" were
administered from birth

3.3

they often led to a permanent stillness.

Evidence From Regressions Between Height and Mortality
Table 9 revealed a strong correlation between height and mortality

in Trinidad. This relationship has been investigated further by John (1984)
who ran a series of logit regressions relating the probability of dying be-

tween 1813 and 1815 to a number of variables including height. Among
adults and children

under age 15, the elasticity of the death

rate with respect to height averaged about

_l.4.0

The effect of height on the death rate appears to have been greater
among young children than adults, and on males than on females.
There are reasons for believing that the effect of height (or length)
on mortality rates would be greatest for infants, especially neonates,
although this proposition cannot be tested against the Trinidad sample
because both infants and infant deaths were undercounted by margins that

-58-

render them of little use.
Floud (1983b) has assembled data for eight European nations

over the years from 1880 to 1970 which permit an examination of the

relationship between adult male height and mortality.11 Equations
(2) and (3) present the results of regressions which related both
the crude death rates and infant mortality rates to height (numbers
in parentheses are t

(2)

values)

C = 30.7877 -5.3851 H -0.0363 Y -0.006647 T
(5.292)(—4.534)
(-0.382) (—4.040)
=

(3)

I

=

0.85;

88.9781

-

N = 64

15.9106 H - 0.3889 Y — 0.00837 T

(12.327) (-10.797)
=

0.96;

(-3.294)

(-4.213)

N = 64

where
C =

the

crude death rate per thousand

I =

the

infant mortality rate per thousand

H =

adult

Y =

per

T =

time

male height measured in centimeters

capita income measured in U.S. dollars of 1970
(year

=

1880)

= a hat over a variable indicates the natural logarithm

of that variable
From these equations it can be seen that a one percent increase in
height was associated with a change in infant mortality rates that was
three times as large as the corresponding change in crude mortality rates.
In both equations height has an independent effect on mortality rates, even
after controlling for per capita income and time.

Indeed, the addition

of time to these regressions had virtually no effect

on the

—S9-

coefficients of height, although it reduced the coefficient on per
capita

it made

income in equation (2)

by

more than half, and in equation (1)

the coefficient of per capita income statistically insignificant.

Equation (2) implies that the decline in heights accounted for 39
percent of the decline in the infant mortality rate and per capita
income accounted for another 27 percent, leaving only about 33 percent
attributable to the unknown factors which are measured by time.12
There is a question regarding the interpretation that should
be placed on the coefficients of height and per capita income when both

are included in the regression. Steckel's (1983) analysis suggests that
when per capita income is held constant, height becomes a proxy for the

degree of inequality in the income distribution. His regression on adult
height implies that a one percent change in the Gini ratio (holding the
level of income constant) had about four times as large an effect on
mean

heights

as a one percent change in the level of per capita income

(holding the Gini ratio constant).

Equations (2) and

(3)

suggest that height and income together were

only about half as important in explaining the decline in the crude death
rate between 1880 and 1970 as in explaining the decline in infant death

rates in the eight countries covered by these equations. Even this last
statement tends to exaggerate the effect of improvements in income and
nutrition on the decline in adult mortality rates since infant death rates
represent as much as a quarter of the crude death rate in high mortality regimens
such as those which existed in Europe during the nineteenth century.
Of course the crude death rate is a poor proxy for life expectation

since it is so sensitive to variations in age structure. Nevertheless,

-60-

when considered in conjunction with the Trinidad regressions, equations
(2) and (3) add to the evidence that the mortality rates of infants and
very young children are much more sensitive to nutritional status than
13
the mortality rates of adolescents and adults.

4. Discussion
In combination, the several pieces of evidence make a fairly
strong case for the view that nutritional status had a significant im-

pact on mortality rates. Yet even those scholars who are skeptical of
nutritional arguments acknowledge that nutrition is a relevant consider-

ation. The real issues are the size of the nutritional contribution
to the long-term decline in mortalIty and the' locus of its impact. Much

work remains before it will be nossible to provide an adequate resolution

of these issues. But t believe that a provisional estimate of the
nutritional contributioh is possible and might be useful.

4.1. A Provisional Estimate of Improvements in Nutritional
Status on the Long-Term Decline in Mortality
I will first estimate the impact of improvements in nutritional

status on non-infants. Because of the absence of data a more indirect
approach is required for infants. This illustrative calculation will
be applied to the British case.

-61-

Let us begin by supposing that the nutrition of lower class
English males of c. 1800 had been improved to the point that they were

able to achieve modern stature. Then their mean final height would have
increased from 64.5 to 69.5 inches, which is an increase of 7.75 percent.
How much of an impact would such an improvement in nutritional status have

had on mortality? As previously noted, the Trinidad sample revealed
that the elasticity of the death rate of non-infants with respect to

height is about -1.4. Hence, a 7.75 percent increase in the final
height of males would have reduced the non-infant death rate by about
11 percent (-1.4 x 7.75 =—lO.85).
The

Trinidad registrations undercounted mortality so badly

that they cannot be 'used to estimate reliably the elasticity of infant
mortality

with respect to height. We can circumvent this problem by

using the schedule that relates neonatal death rates to birth weight.14
The probability of dying at given birth weights is very high at weights
below 2,501 grams (5.5 pounds). The schedule which, relates the probability of dying to bir'thweight is stable below 2,501 grams. It varies
little from one socioeconomic group to another within a nation or even

across nations. This stability is evident in Figure 4.

is

-62-

Figure 4

Perinatal Mortality by Birth Weight in Ghana, India, U.K., and U.S.A.

GMna
USA nrwW'ts

iT-

USA whits

India Icharfty)
I-

w

0.

'IS

India private)

£
A

C

1

2

3

Birth weight, kg

Source: Hytten

i

Leitch, Physiology of Human Pregnancy
(2nd ed.) p. 324.

-63—

Mean birth weights vary greatly with the nutritional status of
populations (Eveleth and Tanner, 1976; WHO, 1980). This point is
illustrated in Figure 5. The lines on this graph are normal approximations
of the frequency distributions of birth weights.16 Birth weight is
represented on the vertical axis, and the horizontal axis represents z
scores (deviations of birthweight from the mean measured in units of the

standard deviation). Hence, the cumulative frequency distribution is
represented by a straight line. The lowest line represents the distribution

of U.S. non-whites in 1960. They had a mean birth weight of 3,128
grams

and, as indicated by Figure. 5,

weighed

less

about 13 percent of the neonates

than 2,501 gxams at bir;h. The second line is the distribution

of birth weights for lower class women in Bombay (Jayant,1964);

Figure 5

indicates the mean birth weight in this population was just 2,525 grams. In this

case nearly half (46 percent) of the births were below the critical level,
although the women in the sample were not the lowest of the low.
The third curve is my estimate of the probable distribution of
17
the birth weights of the children of London poor c.1800. In deriving

this distributioji I employed established correlations between height

and birth weight as well as both published and unpublished information
18

on the heights of the London poor developed by Floud and Wachter.
is probable that the distribution of the birth weightS of the

It

London poor

in c.lSOOhada mean of 2,276 grams, which is about 249 grams (about
a half pound )below the avenge in the deliveries of the lower class
women in Bombay. It follows that about 79 percent of the births
the London poor of c. 1800 wre at weights below 2,501 grams.19

among

4501

4001

3501

3O01 —

2501

2001

1501

grains

I

-2

I

-3

13

-1

I

0

II
46

NINETEENTh CENTURY

74

BELOW 2501
THE PERCENTAGE OF MALE BIRTHS WITH WEIGHTS PERCENTAGE
POSSIBLE
TIlE
AND
POPULATIONS
GRAMS IN TWO MODERN
POOR DURING THE EARLY
TRINIDAD SLAVES AND THE LONDON

FIGURE 5

A}4ONG

scores
2501 g.

percentge below

z

£x=3128; a=572)

U.S. NONWHITES, 1060

0MBAY LOWER CLASSES,
'63 (x=2525; a=513)

POSSIBLE CURVE OF
TRINIDAD SLAVES AND
lONDON POOR, C. 1815
(x=2276; c=309)

a'
a

-65The implication of this distribution of birth weights is
revealed by Table 10. Column 2 represents the actual schedule of
neonatal death rates by weight for non-white U.S. males in 1950 and

Column 3 gives the actual distribution of their birth weights. The
product of these two columns yields an implied neonatal death rate of
26.8 per 1,000 which, of course, was also the actual death rate.

If,

however, this U.S. population had had the distribution of the birth
weights of the London poor of c. 1800 which I have estimated, their
neonatal death rate ;ould have been 173.0 per thousand (see Column 3).

The implication of Table 10 is that improvements in nutrition sufficient
to have shifted the mean birth weight from 2,276 grams to 3,128 grams

would have reduced the infant death rate by 86 percent 1 346.0) =

(48.94-

o.so}.20
Equation 5 can be used to estimate the overall contribution of

improvements in nutritional status to the decline in English mortality
between c. 1800 and c. 1980.

21

(5)

S =

the counterfactual percentage decline in the

standardized

death rate due to improvements in
nutritional status
I =

the

percentage change in the infant death rate
due to improvements in nutritional status

the percentage change in the standardized non-infmt
death rate due to improvements in nutritional stan's

the share of infant deaths in total deaths c. lSO0
as indicated by the data in Wrigley and Schofield.
Substituting into equation (5) we obtain:
(6)

29 =

0.24

(86) +

0.76

(11).

Since the age-standardized death rate acutually declined by

about 69 percent, equation (6) btiplies that irtprovements in

-66-

Table .lO

THE EFFECT OF A SHIFT IN THE DISTRIBUTION OF
BIRTH WEIGHTS ON THE NEONATAL DEATH RATEJ
HOLDING THE SCHEDULE OF DEATH RATES
(BY WEIGHT) CONSTANT

(1)

(2)

Neonatal

death rate
of single nonwhite
U.S. males in 1950
(per 1000)

Weight
(grams)

(3)

Distribution of birth
weights of single
nonwhite U.S. males
in 1950

(i—3128 g.; 572 g.)

(4)

Distribution of
birth weights in a
population with
= 2276 g.
a = 399 g.

1500 or less

686.7

0.0117

0.1339

1501 - 2000

221.3

0.0136

0.2421

2001 - 2500

62.1

0.0505

0.3653

2501 - 3000

19.7

0.1811

0.2198

3001 - 3500

10.7

0.3510

0.0372

3501 - 4000

12.1

0.2599

0.0017

4001 - 4500

13.0

0.0865

4501 or more

23.2

0.0456

Implied neonatal
death rate
(per 1000)

Possible infant
death rate
(per 1000)

26.8

173.0

48.9

346.0

Note: The infant death rate in the last line of column 4 is estimated at twice
the neonatal rate.
Sources: Columns 2 and 3: U.S. Nat. Off. Vital Stat., 1954; Column 4: See footnotes
16

and

17.

-67-

nutritional

status accounted for about 42 percent of

the total decline in the age-standardized English mortality rate since

1800. This figure is neither inconsequential nor everything. It shows
that although improvements in nutrition made a substantial contribution
to the decline in English mortality, other factors accounted for the

majority of the decline. The main impact of the nutritional contribution
was on the infant death rate. The reduction in non-infant deaths that
may be attributed to nutrition account for just 12 percent of the total

decline in English mortality since 1800.23 Plausible upper and lower
bounds on the variables in equation (5) indicate that 42
bounds the nutritional contribution at all ages.

10 probably

It should be empha-

sized that these figures refer not merely to the diet but also to the
other factors that affected the nutrients available for growth.24

4.2 A Possible Explanation for the Peerage Paradox
Although the calculation suggests a more modest role for nutrition than some have argued, other scholars may find even four tenths
is much too high a number, since the question about the peerage is still

unanswered. If nutrition was so imponant, why did the English peerage
have virtually the same mortality as the general population until the

middle of the eighteenth century? And why did life expectation of peers
improve

so rapidly after 1750 when no great change in their diet is

apparent?
Two points seem relevant here. Nutrition does not have an equal

influence on the outcome of every disease. Table 11 classifies diseases
according to whether nutritional status is likely to influence tneir out-

come. The point to notice is that the diseases on which nutritional influence is minimal were probably the greatest killers before 1700 (McNeill,

1976). For reasons still unclear, the prevalence of these diseases
declined between 1600 and 1800, and the main infectious diseases became

those in which the influence of nutrition is large. Consequently it is

-68-

Table 11

Nutritional Influence on Outcomesa of Infections

EQUIVOCAL
OR

DEFINITE

Measles

Diarrheas
Tuberculosis

Most Respiratory
Infections
Pertussis

Most Intestinal Parasites
Cholera
Leprosy
Herpes
a Morbidity or mortality

Source:

JIll,

1983

MINIMAL

VARIABLE

Typhus
Diphtheria

Smallpox
Malaria

Staphylococcus
Streptococcus
Influenza
Syphilis

Plague

Systemic Worm
Infections

Typhoid
Tetanus

Yellow Fever
Encephalitis
Poliomyelitis
.

-69-

unlikely that improvements in nutrition had as large an impact on the
level of mortality before 1700 as it had afterwards.

The second point is that investigators searching for the possible influence of nutrition on the longevity of peers appear to have

dwelt on the wrong issue: the diet of adults. As we have seen, nutrition
has its greatest impact on the mortality of infants, not of adults. The
fact that dukes and earls ate well as adults does not mean they were

well nourished in infancy or in early childhood. Weanling peers of the
eighteenth century did not eat joints of beefs but like weanling peasants,

dined on a pap or watery gruel. During this era privilege and wealth did
not insure a diet or a nutritional status for the upper class infants and
young children that was better than that experienced by the conunon people.

Although the housing, clothing, and personal care of upper class infants
probably was better than that received by their lower class counterparts,
these advantages do not appear to have affected the infant and early childhood mortality rates of the peerage during the first half of the eighteenth

century. Examination of the Hollingsworth (1977) mortality schedules
indicates that 60 percent of the increase in life expectation between the
cohorts of 1700-24 and of 1900-24 was due to the decline in deaths under

age 10. Indeed if the peerage had continued to suffer the10Q0 value of
1700-24 in 1900-24, but experienced the improved mortality rates of the
twentieth century at all other ages, then the life expectancy of the
peers (both sexes combined) born during 1900-24 would not have been
65.0 but only 46.4.

This finding suggests that the peerage did benefit from improved
nutritional status during infancy, the weaning years, and perhaps in

utero. Several new questions now come to the fore:

Did noble womefl

consume large amounts of alcohol during their preg1ancy? Was it fashionable in the court during some

periods for pregnant women to keep their

—70—

weight gain low? To what extent did the weaning diet of peers expose
then to virulent infections from contaminated water or raw milk and

when did this risk diminish? Research into these issues should, of
course, be extended to cover the experience of the lower as well as
of the upper classes.

4.3. The Wrigley/Schofield/Lee Paradox
In interpreting the regressions between mortality rates and
wheat prices, it has often been assumed that the price of wheat was so
highly correlated with all other grain prices that it could serve as a

proxy for the price of food. It has also been assumed that food shortages
would be reflected in their price. Although the second assumption is
quite reasonable, it does not follow that a large rise in prices necessarily

implies an equally large decline in the supply of food. That would be
the case only if the demand elasticity for food was one. The demand
elasticity for a food that was a small part of the diet, such as lamb

chops or buckwheat, might be equal to or greater than one. But since
grains as a whole probably accounted for 75 percent or more of the
consumption of English calories during the eighteenth century, they
must have had a very low elasticity of demand.

Table 12 shows the decline in the quantity of grain implied by a

given price rise under various values of C,

the

demand elasticity. For

a food as vital as grains were, cwas probably below 0.25, and perhaps
even as low as 0.1. It follows that even the so-called !FextrenelP

fluctuations in grain prices (20 percent or more above trend) were prob-

ably between 2 and 5 percent below the trend. If that is so, then even
the weak relationship between mortality and wheat prices found by various

investigators is consistent with the nutritional case. Their regressions
imply that mortality rose even when declines in the supply of food were

quite small. The fact that their regressions revealed any connection
between mortality and grain prices is all the more remarkable, since the
dependent variable was dominated by non-infant deaths which are much
less sensitive to nutritional status than infant deaths.25

-71—

Table 12

The Changes in the Price of Grains Associated With Changes in the
Quantity Supplied, for Elasticities of 1.0, 0.5, 0.25, and 0.1

Percentage
increase
in price

Percentage Decline in Quantity of Grain If

c =

1

e =

0.5

=

0.25

C

= 0.1

10

9.1

4.7

2.3

0.9

20

16.7

8.7

4.5

1.8

30

23.1

12.3

6.3

2.6

40

28.6

15.4

8.0

3.3

50

33.3

18.3

9.6

4.0

4.4. Some Implications for the Standard of Living Controversies in
Europe and America
The long and sustained upward movements in physical growth
schedules in Europe and the United States that began late in the nineteenth century and continued through most of the twentieth century were

a sharp break with the past. Before the last quarter of the nineteenth
century, only the United States had experienced a long period of relatively rapid upward movement in growth schedules, with most of it

occurring before 1710. Between cohorts born in 1710 and in 1780 final
heights of native-born white American males increased at a rate of only

0.25 centimeters per decade.26 During the next century the final heights
of Americans oscillated in a narrow band or declined fairly sharply,
losing about 3 centimeters in just two decades beginning with cohorts

born about 1835. Rapid upward shifts in growth schedules probably did
not resume until the last decade of the nineteenth century. The new
period of increase in final heights which lasted for about 60 years was
more rapid than the increase experienced during the late seventeenth and
early eighteenth centuries (Sokoloff and Villaflor, 1982; Margo and

Steckel, 1983; Fogel etal, 1983; Fishman and Walker, 1984).
The principal upward shift in English growth schedules before
1900 came later and was shorter than that experienced in the United

States. The mean final height of English working-class males born
c.1760 was about 64.5 inches (which was about 9 centimeters below those
of U.S. whites) and remained more or less at that level for the next half

century. The succession of cohorts born between c.18l5 and c.1840 appears
to have experienced a fairly rapid upward shift in growth schedules,
so that the final heights of the c.1840 cohort was about 4 centimeters

taller than the c.lSlS cohort. Thereafter, the upward shift in growth

-73.

schedules slowed down so that the final heights of cohorts born half a
century later were only about a centimeter taller than their c. 1840
counterparts (Sokoloff and Villaflor, 1982; Floud and Wachter, 1982;
Floud and Wachter, 1983; Floud, 1983a; Floud, l983b).

There were also relatively constant growth curves for France
between c.l820 and c.l900, and for Belgium between c.1830 and c.l900.
In both countries heights at age 20 remained below 65.5 inches down

through the end of the nineteenth century (Flóud, 1983b). In the
Netherlands and the Scandanavian countries the laboring classes appear
to have experienced improved living conditions sometime during the third

quarter of the nineteenth century. In the case of the Netherlands, for
example, mean adult heights between 1865 and 1905 increased at about
1 cm per decade, which is about 5 tines as large as the British rate of

increase during the same period. Even so, the Dutch rate of increase
during the late nineteenth century was only half as great as the rate
of increase during the half century following World War I (Van Wieringen,
27
1978)

A1though the standard of living of the laboring classes in the
United States was quite high early in the nineteenth century by European
standards, it appears that the difference narrowed considerably over
the course of the nineteenth century, partly because U.S. height declined
for nearly half a century and partly because the heights of Europeans

increased somewhat. At the end of the nineteenth century when the United
States entered a new phase of rapid upward shift in growth curves, living
standards for U.S. workers, as measured by final heights, were quite similar to those prevailing in Northwestern Europe, but they were still sig-

nificantly better than those of Southern Europe. As late as 1900 the
mean height

of adult Italian males was below 65 inches (Terrenato and

Ulizzi, 1983).

-74-

In

recent decades economists and economic historians have tended to

assume
an

was

that if the

"real waget' (an index of nominal wages divided by

index •of prices) was rising, then the standard of living of workers

rising. Beginning with the late nineteenth century, but especially

after

1930 when large investments were made in the gathering of wage

and price data, older measures of the standard of living, such as height,
weight, housing conditions, and mortality rates began to be abandoned in

favor of the newer and presumably mote comprehensive index. Numerous
criticisms have been made of the quality of the data from which longterm series of real wages were constructed (Von Tunzelmann, 1979;
Thirsk, 1983), and far-reaching questions have been raised about what
"real wages" actually measured, even when the indexes were ideally

constructed (A.J. Taylor, 1975). Nevertheless, the tendency of economists
and historians has been to employ "real wages" not just as a measure (or
even as the principal measure) of the standard of living but sometimes
to convert it into a synonym for the standard of living.

The point is not that "real-wage" measures should be discarded
but that the interpretation that has been placed on them needs to be

reconsidered. We may be able to obtain a deeper understanding of the
changing standard of living of workers, develop a subtler appreciation
of the manifold dimensions of the phenomenon, if the information embodied in both real-wage indexes and measures of per capita income is
reviewed in the light of the information contained in anthropometric
measures, mortality and morbidity rates, and other measures of living
conditions that are now becoming available.
IThat, for example, are we to make of a situation in which real

wages were rising rapidly, as apparently occurred in England during the

—75—

last

half of the nineteenth century

(Mitchell and Deane, 1962;

Matthews

et al, 1982) while working class heights remained at relatively low

levels, showing little increase over half a century? How should we
characterize conditions of workers in the United States between 1820
and 1860 if "real wages" were generally constant or rising, sometimes

rising quite rapidly (Williamson, 1976; David and Solar, 1977), but

heights and life expectation were decreasing? During an era in which
from 50 to 75 percent of the income of workers was spent on food1 is it
plausible that the overall standard of living of workers was improving

if their nutritional status and life expectations were declining? These
are not questions that can easily be resolved and I will not attempt to

do so here. Rather, I want briefly to sketch some of the new issues about
the course of the standard of living that are suggested by the anthro-

pometric and demographic data. When "real wages," per capita income, and
other measures all move in the same direction there is little need to

probe into their exact meaning. The interesting issues arise when the
measures diverge, and it is on some of these issues that I wish to focus.
The evidence so far developed on height and mortality rates
suggests that improvements in the living conditions of workers during

the nineteenth éentury may have been more sporadic and uneven (both in
time and among subgroups of workers) than is suggested by indexes of

real wages or the movements in per capitadneome.

In England the

period of rapid improvement in nutritional status of workers
seems to have been confined largely to the three decades following the

end of the Napoleonic wars. In France there was little change from
the end of the Napoleonic wars until the beginning of the twentieth

century. In the United States, the nutritional status of the laboring
classe, which was initially quite high by European standards, appears
to have deteriorated during the middle decades ot.the nineteenth
century.

-76-

Although the substantial declines in both heights and life
expectation shown by Figure 1 are too new and provisional to be accepted
without substantial additional evidence, let us suppose for the moment

that further investigation supports the provisional findings. Will
these series then contradict prevailing estimates of rapid increases

in per capita income? Since Williamson and Linden (1980) have provided weighty evidence that the inequality in the income distribution
increased during this period, the answer is that they probably will not.

Quite the contrary, by combining the prevailing estimates of per capita
income with the information in the series on heights it is possible to
obtain a measure of the magnitude of the increase in inequality during

the middle quarters of the nineteenth century. Steckel's (1983) analysis of the relationship between mean final height, per capita income,

and the Cmi coefficient reveals that with respect to final heights an
increase of 100 percent in per capita income would just offset an in-

crease in the Cmi ratio of 0.066. It follows that current estimates
of the increase in per capita income and the estimated decline in mean

heights of 1.5 inches together indicate that the Cmi ratio increased
by about 0.17, going from perhaps 0.30 in c.l830 (the current figure

for Australia) to about 0.47, which is a plausible estimate of the Cmi
ratio for the U.S. near the turn of the twentieth century (Sawyer, 1976;

Williamson and Linden, 1980). Thus the decline in final heights of
native-born U.S. white males appears to add to the evidence recently
developed by others which suggests that the middle quarters of the nineteenth century witnessed significant but not remarkable increases in
the inequality of the American income distribution (Williamson and Lindert,
1980; Pessen, 1973).

-77-

It may seem odd to those unfanilar with this body of evidence
that changes in height should be used as a measure of changes in the

inequality of the distributions of income and wealth. However, as
Floud and Wachter (1982) have recently pointed out, there was a time
when height was the most compelling and the most widely used index of in-

equality. Moreover, because of the abundance of height data and their
wide coverage of geographic regions and socioeconomic groups it is possible
to probe more deeply into vexing issues regarding variations in the conditions of the population of particular regions and occupations than has
so far been possible with wage data which are skimpy in their coverage of

particular categories. Two examples suggest the possibilities that now
appear to be opening up.

The first is drawn from the work on British sources. Data recently collected by Floud on the British upper classes (1984) when combined with his data on the laboring poor make it possible to estimate how

much of the improvement in the average nutritional status in Great Britain
over the past century and a half has been due to a closing of the gap between
the upper and lower classes and how much was due to an upward shift in

attainable average height. By "attainable" I mean not genetically attainable
but, within genetic constraints, attainable under the mpst favorable pre-

vailing socioeconomic circumstances. Floud's research indicates that about
two-thirds of the increase in the mean final height of British males since
c. 1830 was due to the decrease in class differentials in height and
the balance to an upward shift in the mean final heights of the upper
class (which may be taken as a measure of the attainable mean height at
any point in

time).28 In this connection it is worth noting that Sweden

and Norway, which have two of the lowest after-tax Cmi ratios, are the
only countries in which height differentials by socioeconomic class have
disappeared (Sawyer, 1976; Lindgren, 1976;

Brundtland et al, 1980). The

means of adult height in these nations now exceed those of high-Gmni-ratio

-78-

nations, such as the U.S. and Great Britain, by several centimeters (U.S.
But. Cen., 1983).

The second example pertains to the effect of urbanization on

changes in inequality. Previous research has revealed an association
between the increase in the inequality of the American distributions of
income and wealth during the nineteenth century and urbanization (Soltow,

1971; R. Gallman, 1969). Analysis of the height data in the samples drawn
from the Union and the regular army rolls supports this finding but calls

attention to the other mechanisms at work. Figure 6 shows the beginning
of the long downward trend in the aggregate series on native-born whites
(cf. Figure 1).

It also shows that when this series is disaggregated into

occupational and residential groups, the series for farmers exhibits a
rising trend until c.1830 and then declines for the next two cohorts.

The trend for urban laborers is basically flat at the beginning, rises

slightly between 1825 and 1830 and then declines. These curves indicate
that about 85 percent of the initial decline in the aggregate series
was due to a decline in the mean heights of farmers and other rural

residents. The balance of the decline in the aggregate series was
due to the increased proportion of the population experiencing the
poor nutritional and health conditions of the cities as well as to
declining heights among urban residents (Margo and Steckel, 1983;
Fishman and Walker, 1984).

The deterioration in the mean final height of farmers apparent
in the last two cohorts of Figure 6 continued in subsequent decades.

Native-born farmers who were born c.1860 were about 1.5 inches shorter

than those who were born three decades earlier. Over the same period
the final heights of urban laborers declined by about 0.8 inches. Thus,
although deteriorating conditions in the cities and the shift of population from the countryside to the cities played a role, they explain

only about one-fifth of the decline in the aggregate series shown in

169

170

171

172

173

174

175

In cm

Height

6

SOURCE:

1815

1825

1830

Fishinan and Walker (1984)

1820

1835

1840

68
67
69

in inches

Height

Birth

cohort

Urban laborers

Aggregate series

Farmers

A COMPARISON OF ThE AGGREGATE TIME PROFILE OF FINAL
HEIGHT FOR NAT!yE-BORN WHITE MALES WITh THOSE FOR NATIVE-BORN
WHITE FARMERS AND URBAN LABORERS

Figure

-J
tO

Figure 1 for cohorts born between c.1830 and c.1860. About four fifths
of the decline was due to a deterioration of conditions affecting growth
in the rural areas.

Current research is aimed at explaining this surprising

decline in rural heights. One possibility is that an increasing
proportion of the native-born rural males were children of foreign-

born parents. It is likely that foreign-born mothers were relatively
malnourished during their own developmental years and that foreign-born

parents generally had lower incomes than native-born parents. Both
factors would have made the children of foreign-born parents shorter

than the children of native-born parents. Support for this hypothesis
is found in a subsample of the Union Army recruits which has been linked

to the manuscript schedules of the 1860 census. This subsample reveals
that in the rural areas native-born males of foreign parents were 0.4
inches shorter in final height than native-born males of native-born

parents. The effect of parental ethnicity was even greater in the
cities, with children of foreign-born parents averaging 1.2 inches less
in final heights than children of native-born parents. It thus appears
that the low incomes of foreign-born parents and the malnourishment of
foreign-born mothers had an effect on children both in the cities and
in the countryside, but that effect was greater in the cities than in

the countryside. It is plausible that as much as half of the urbanrural differential in native-born heights was associated with parental
29
ethnicity.
The decline of heights in the rural areas is puzzling, since
the ethnic effect could only have accounted for a small share of the

rural decline. Another possibility is that exposure of farmers to
disease increased as farming pushed into

swampy areas in

the northern states that were by-passed during the earlier waves of

farm settlement. There is also the possibility that part of the decline
is a statistical artifact.

It may be that children of the

-81-

farm families who enlisted during the peacetime years of the early
1880s came on average from poorer families than those who enlisted
30.

during the wartime years. On the other hand, the mean height of
the native-born population as estimated from the recruits who

joined the regular army during the peacetime years of 1850-1855 was
68.1 inches, which is just a tenth of an inch below the corresponding
figure for the Union army (Sokoloff, 1982).

5. Conclusion
The decline in mortality rates since 1700 is one of the
greatest events of human history.

I was inclined to say "one of

the greatest achievements of humankind," but the fact remains

that we still do not know how much of that achievenent was due to
human intervention and how much was due to causes beyond human

control. The paper published by McKeown and Brown in 1955 marked
a turning point in the effort to provide a warranted explanation of
the decline in mortality. Bridging the worlds of social. scientists
and of medical specialists, they brought into the discussion most
of the range of issues that have been under debate for the past

three decades. That debate not only defined the issues more
clearly than previously, but also revealed that the critical
differences were quantitative rather than qualitative. Nearly all
the specialists agree on the range of factors that were responsible
for the decline in mortality but they have had quite different views
about the relative importance of each of the factors.

—82—

The unresolved issue, therefore, is not really whether a particular factor was involved in the decline, but how much each of the

various factors contributed to the decline. Resolution of the issue is
essentially an accounting exercise of a particularly complicated nature,
-

which involves not only measuring the direct effect of particular factors
but also their indirect effects and their interactions with other factors.
Our preliminary investigations indicate that the construction of data sets
rich enough to permit such complex accounting is critical to the successful

outcome of the exercise. What is needed is a data set that can cope
with the changes in the cause-of-death structure which, as Preston (1976)

indicated, has varied significantly over time and place. To identify
the locus of influences of each of the principal factors that contributed
to the decline we need not only desease-specific but age-specific, and
generation-specific information, because the influence of both riskincreasing and risk-averting factors appear to vary markedly both over
lifetimes and over generations.

The findings on the extent and the locus of the nutritional
contribution presented in this paper are preliminary in two respects.
First, we anticipate that more complete data will lead to revisions in

the estimates we have presented. Second, nutrition is only the first
of numerous other factors which contributed to the mortality decline in

America since 1700 that we hope to measure. Our preliminary results
indicate that the contribution of improvements in nutritional status was

neither inconsequential nor overwhelming; although it made a substantial
contribution, the factors which contributed to the majority of the decline

are still unmeasured. Moreover, although our preliminary estimates indicate that improvements in nutritional status nay have accounted for

about four-tenths

of the mortality decline, this contribution was

-83—

confined largely to the reduction in infant deaths, particularly to late
fetal

and neonatal deaths. The concentration of the impact of improved

nutrition in this age group raises the possibility that increases in
diarrhea

and other diseases which divert ingested nutrients from growth,

rather than a decline in food intake, was the main cause of the decline
in nutritional status and the rise in mortality during the middle decades
of the nineteenth century.

The preliminary results not only indicate that the factors
contributing to the unanticipated cycles in heights and mortality were
concentrated at particular ages but that the routes of influences might

have been quite round about. In commenting on this paper at the Williansburg
conference, Paul David suggested that urbanization could have contributed
to the decline in rural nutrition, and to the possible rural increase in nortality,by exporting pollution into the rural counties immediately surrounding

them. Using Chicago as a case in point, he noted that the direction of
the Chicago River was reversed so that it emptied into the Mississippi

River, carrying city waste with it, instead of into Lake Michigan. Agricultural historians have called my attention to the extensive draining
of rural swamp lands during the last two-thirds of the nineteenth century,
especially in the central states, which might have impaired the health and
nutritional status not only of rural adults, but of their children who
became more exposed to water-borne diseases that diverted nutrients
from growth.

These possibilities point to new issues in the standard-ofliving controversy. If David is correct it may turn out that the difficulties created by the rapidly growing cities carried over into the

-84-

rural regions surrounding the cities, so that urban disamenities imposed
costs on the rural populations that have not yet been measured (cf.
Williamson, 198la; Williamson, 198lb; Williamson, 1982;

Pollard, 1981). In the

American case it is difficult to believe that per capita food consumption
was declining during the last two-thirds of the nineteenth century since
there is so much evidence pointing in the opposite direction (Towne and

Rasmussen, 1960; Gallman, 1960; Bennett and Pierce, 1961). Yet there
have been more unequal distribution of food products, especially
of meat, which adversely affected the nutritional status of the poor.
This appears to have been the case with blacks whose nutritional intake
apparently declined, and whose mortality increased, between 1860 and

1880 (Meeker, 1976; Fogel and Engerman, 1974; Atwater and Woods, 1897;

Frissell and Bevier, 1899; U.S. Dept. Lab., 1897). A more subtle and
possibly more pervasive effect on the living standards of laborers and
their families, both in the cities and the countryside, may have come from

increased exposure to risks not captured or only partially captured by current measures of real wages) that more than offset the rises

in consumption. This possibility does not invalidate indexes of real
wages which were designed to cope with a specific set of issues. Rather
it raises new issues which require new measures, measures that will supplement the information obtained from the older ones.
The new findings suggest that much more attention needs to be
given to the way that population pressures, urbanization and other economic

affected not just those of working age but the very young. It
may well be that the main damage to the standard of living of workers
factors

occurred

at exceedingly young ages, in ways that no one at the time fully

appreciated, and in a manner that does not conform well to current scenarios

regarding the factors and

.individuals responsible for the

hardships

-85-

of working-class life during the nineteenth century. Nutritional insults
delivered early in life not only appear to have affected adult health and
longevity, but significantly reduced the later productivity of those who
recovered from early insults (cf. Fogel et al, 1983).

The search for data sources capable of dealing with buth the
new and the old issues on the interrelationship between demographic
and socioeconomic variables has gained considerable force in recent

years. Scholars have pushed in many different directions, and nearly
all of the work has borne fruit. Careful examination of published
data on disease-specific causes of death in U.S. cities have revealed
that expenditures on sewers and waterworks had a relatively small effect
on the decline in urban mortality before the beginning of the twentieth
century (Condran and Crimmins-Gardner, 1978), that the main diseases
in which rural death rates were consistently lower than urban death
rates in 1890 axid 1900 were those which are nutritionally sensitive, and

that the urban-rural differential was greater for infants and young
children than for older persons (Condran and Criminins, 1980). Close

examination of these published sources have revealed subtle aspects of
the mortality structures (Preston, 1976) and of influences upon them

that were not adequately appreciated in the past. Condran and Cheney
(1982), for example, have found that in Philadelphia during 1870-1930,
medical intervention was effective, despite the absence of "high-tech"
chemotherapy, because of the role of medical personnel in spreading
knowledge about the environmental sources of diseases and in isolating

carriers of diseases. Among the more suggestive findings of these
recent studies of published data was the discovery by Higgs (1979) of

-86-

marked cycles, around a declining trend, in the mortality rates of 18
large American cities between 1871 and 1900 that is strongly associated
with variations in the rate of immigration.3'

Work on the manuscript sources is still at an early stage, but
as the studies by Wrigley and Schofield (1983), Preston and van de Walle
(1978), 1-James (1983) and Preston and Haines (1983) have already indicated,

these sources will not only permit us to push the empirical analysis of
the causes of the decline in mortality further back in time but also to

shed light on factors that are not apparent in published data. Linked
micro data sets will make it possible to disentangle factors that are

intricately convoluted in aggregate data. The ability to measure the
separate and joint effects of diet, claims on nutritional intake, medical
practices, public sanitation, and intergenerational transmission of behavioral patterns will not only illuminate the past but will directly
contribute to a better understanding of important issues in current
economic and social policies.

-87-

6. Footnotes

*This paper is a progress report on two projects jointly sponsored by the National Bureau of Economic Research and by the Center for

Population Economics of the University of Chicago. Aspects of the research
reported here were supported by grants from the National Science Foundation;
the Social Science Research Council, London; the British Academy; the
exxon Educational Foundation; the Walgreen Foundation; Brigham Young
University; the University of California at Berkeley; Harvard University;
Ohio State University; the University of Pennsylvania; Princeton Uni-

versity; the University of Rochester; and Stanford University. I have
drawn on the work of fellow collaborators in the two projects including
S.L. Engerinan, R. Floud, C. Friedman, C.D. Goldin, R.A. Margo, C. Pope,

K. Sokoloff, R.H. Steckel, T.J. Trussell, C. Villaflor, K.W. Wachter,
and L. Wimmer. J. Bourne, M. Fishmari, J. Moen, and J. Walker have been
effective.research assistants and have permitted me to draw on material in their

own papers. A.M. John has generously made material from her study of
Trinidad available to me, and D. Levy permitted me to cite some of the
results of his study of life expectation in colonial Maryland.

I am especially

indebted to J.M. Tanner for his encouragement and advice since the
beginning of both projects and to P.11. Lindert for insightful comments

and criticisms and for the correction of several errors in the draft presented
at the Williamsburg conference.
nt

earlier

vcrsion of this paper was commissioned by Gunter

Steinmann and other organizers of the "Conference on Economic Consequences
of Population Change in Industrialized Countries," which was held in

Paderborn, West Germany, during June 1983. Successive versions of the
paper were presented to seminars at Caltech, the London School of Economics,
the Graduate Institute of International Studies (Geneva), Harvard, Chicago,
Birkbeck College, Minnesota, Northwestern, Pennsylvania, Princeton, Toronto,

and Rochester. Numerous revisions were made as a consequence of points

-88-

raised during these sessions. I have also benefitted from comments and
criticisms by ILK. Chandra, E. Crimmins, P.A. David, L.E. Davis,

A. Fishlow, R.A. Easterlin, F. Furet, D. Galenson, H. Goldstein, M.R.
Haines, S. Horton, L. Neale, D.C. North, G.H. Pelto, S.H. Preston,
R.S. Schofield, N.S. Scimshaw, S.G. Scrikantia, J.L. Simon, C.E.
Taylor, B. Thomas, S.C. Watkins, and L.A. Wrigley.

The findings presented in this paper are tentative and subject

to change. They do not necessarily reflect the views of the NBER or
any of the other cooperating instituions or funding agencies.

1From comments made at the Bellagio Conference on Hunger and
History, June, 1982.

2The principal disadvangtage of an emphasis on whole books is
that a single aberrant book will have a large influence on the whole

sample. Although such instances can be handled by reweighting, the
aberrations reduce the efficiency of the sample and diminish its use-

fulness for some purposes. This problem will diminish as the sample

size increases. The final sample will contain over a thousand books.

3The mortality file is smaller than the family file partly
because a requirement far entry into that file is that both the birth

date and the death date of an individual is known. Non-bloodline spouses,
who are at risk only after their marriages, have not yet been integrated
into the mortality file. Their inclusion will increase the size of the
mortality file by about 25 percent.
A family is defined by the existence of marriage, whether or not

the family produces progeny. Families with multiple marriages have

—89—

not yet been integrated into the family file, but they are a relatively

small percent age of the families already in the file. Bloodline individuals who marry

will

appear in both their families of birth and

the

families formed by their marriages. The number of families suitable
for the computations of various statistics varies because of the com-

pleteness of information. For example, it is possible to compute total
births in completed families for about 77 percent of the families. In
most of the other 23 percent of the families, date of publication of the
genealogy preceded the end of the childbearing period Of families at

risk to have children. However, mothefl age at last birth can be computed
only for about 35 percent of the families since computation of this
statistic not only requires that the date of publication of a genealogy
follow the end of the childbearing period, but also requires information
on the date of birth of both the mother and

of

the last child.

The small percentage of the individuals in the sample who have
been linked to economic information reflects the recent start on this

task. As of May, 1984 we had searched for economic information on only
20 percent of the individuals in the sample. In other words, so far
we have been able to obtain economic information on about 75 percent
of the individuals for which this information was sought.
4

The Mormon Church was not founded until

1830.

The religious

objective behind the compilation of family group sheets required the

identification of ancestors who had not been Mormons. There are three
parts to the collection of family group sheets. The Main Section consists of about 4,700,000 sheets submitted mainly before 1962 and
information qn about 25,000,000 individuals, only a small proportion of

whom are Mormons. The New Patrons Section was started in 1962 when members

-90—

of the Mormon Church were asked to submit sheets on the most recent

four generations of their families. Their are about 1,000,000 sheets
in this part of the collection, and a fairly large proportion of the

individuals in these sheets are Mormons. The Old Patrons Section was
launched in 1924 and consists of any genealogical records held by

Church members that they desired to place on deposit in the Genealogical

Library. There are about 4,000,000 sheets in this part of the collection.
The DAB/CPE pilot sample of groups sheets is drawn from the Main Section.
S

.

The first term was suggested by P.H. Lindert at the Williamsburg

meeting.

6Because the series of e10 is not yet controlled for the variables
that were controlled in producing the height series, considerable caution
needs to be exercised in interpreting leads and lags which are evident in
the two series of Figure 1.

See Fishman and Walker, 1984, for a more

detailed description of the height series. See Bourne et al, 1984, for
a more detailed description of the e10 series.

7(This footnote will describe briefly the derivation of the two

curves in Figure 1. Cleaning and processing of the data are still in
progress so that the current version of Figure 1 is still provisional
and subject to change, as is the discussion of Figure 1).

—91-

8Levy's life tables begin with age 25. The e10 values shown for
his data in Figure 1 were extrapolated to age 10, using the model West
tables of Coale and Demeny (1966)..

9Levy also has a life table for 1650-1699 which was used to

establishthe location and slOpe of the line segment between 1715 and 1725
which shows the effect of a possible correction for the undercount of
southern observations in the genealogical sample employed in Figure 1.
10The elasticity of the mortality rate with respect to height in
Trinidad was estimated from regressions (and the mean values of the
variables in these regressions) reported in a memorandum from Meredith
John to Robert W. Fogel dated November 30, 1983.

I used four of Johns

logit regressions relating the probability of surviiring to a series of vari-

ables including height. These regressions were for ma1es,age 15 (p.36),
females 3 age 15 (p. 39), males C age 15 (p. 42), females age C 15

(p. 43). The elasticities for these four groups (estimated over the
arc between the average height of each group of Trinidadians and the
current British height standard for the mean age of each group) were:

615= -2.00
6f<15 -1.54

6)lS -2.50
6f)l5

The average of these four elasticities (weighted by the share of each

group in the total population of Trinidad) was -1.57. If English population weights in 1801-OS are used (Wrigley and Sóhofieid, 1981,

p. 529), the average elasticity is -1.44 (the sex ratio was assumed
to be equal both above and below age 15,. since Wrigley and Schofield

do not give the sex ratio by age). U.S. population weights for 1980
(U.S. Bur. Cen. 1983, p. 33) yield an elasticity or -1.33. Population

-92-

weights for England and Wales for 1851 and 1961 (Mitchell, 1975, p. 52)
yield elasticities of -1.41 and —1.32.

The eight nations included in the Floud (1983b) study and
the dates covered are Belgium (1880-1969), Denmark (1880-1975), France
(1880-1960), Italy (1880—1952), Netherlands (1877-1970), Norway (1880-1960),
Sweden (1880-1961), and Switzerland (1884—1957).

12

Total differentiation of equation (3) yields:
(3.1)

I =

-15.9106H -0.3889Y -0.00837,

where an asterisk over a variable indicates the rate of change in that

variable. Regressions of the log of each of the variables in equations
(2) and

(3)

on time yielded the following estimates of average annual

rates of change:

Variable

C

Average annual
rate of change('in percent
-1.05
—2.51

I

H

0.0610

Y

1.75

It follows that height accounts for 39 percent (15.9106 x
0.0610

0.27),

2.51 =

0.39), income for 27 percent (0.3889 x 1.75

2.51 =

and time for 33 percent (0.837 ; 2.51 = 33) of the average annual

decline in the infant death rate.

—93-

13The similarity between the results of equations 2 and 3 and

John's (1984) set of logit regressions on the probability of dying in
Trinidad should not obscure the significant differences in the nature

of the two sets of regressions. The Trinidad regressions related the
owj height of an individual to his or her probability of dying between

two points in time. Equation 3, on the other hand, relates the average
height of males (mainly in their early twentiesi to a nation's infant

death rate. When used in this way adult heights have only indirect
bearing on the nutritional status of infants. Since the adult heights
measure the nutritional status of males during the preceding two or
three decades, and since the mean nutritional status of a nation exhibits
high serial correlation, such a lagged measure of average nutritional
status may be a fairly good predictor of a nation's current nutritional
status especially during a period when the nutritional status of particular

nations has been changing in a fairly steady way. Adult heights also
have bearing on current infant mortality rates to the extent that they
indicate the nutritional circtcnstances of mothers during their develop-

mental years. When comparing several ñations,lagged measures may be a
good predictor of differences in current nutritional status if the
different nations had different starting levels and different rates of
change in nutritional status.

14Neonatal deaths are those which occur within the first 28 days
of life. Perinatal deaths are late fetal deaths (generally of 20 or 28
weeks of gestational age) plus early neonatal deaths (generally deaths

during the first seven days after birth). In the U.S. and Great Britain
during the early l960s the distribution of infant deaths has been approximately as follows (Shapiro et al, 1968):

-94-

percent

days

cumulative
percentage

1

40

40

2—7

25

65

8

73

27

100

8-28
29—365

Late fetal deaths in Britain and the U.S. have recently been approximately
equal to neonatal deaths (U.S. Bur. Cen., 1983, p. 77). With infant
death rates in the neighborhood of 50-100 per thousand, neonatal deaths

are about35 to 60 percent of infant deaths (Shapiro, et al, 1968, Table 1;

Mata, 1978, Table 2.16; Ashworth, 1982; Bouvier and Tak, 1976). Wrigley
and Schofield, 1981, p. 97) estimate neonatal deaths in England during
the 17th and 18th centuries at about half of infant deaths.
15

.

However, in recent years new high-technology introduced into

maternity hospitals in the more developed nations has led to some
downward shift in this schedule, especially for births of less than 1,500
grains that are of early gestational age but not otherwise impaired

(Pharoah and Alberman, 1981; Jones et al, 1979; Lancet, 1980, p. 481).

Fhe distribution of birth weights is not normal, mainly because
there are too many observations in the left tail. The fat left tail
nay be treated as the result of adding together a distribution of the
weights of underdeveloped babies (which I will call 'pre-term") to a
much larger distribution of fully developed babies (which I will call

"full term"). Nevertheless, for the purposes to which they are put in
Figures ,

normal approximations to the distributions of the U.S. nonwhite

and Bombay lower classes yield satisfactory results.

The mean

and standard deviation in the normal approximation to the U.S. distribution differs from those of the actual distribution by less than one

percent (Chase, 1969). In the Bombay case the difference in the means
is less than one percent (the standard deviation of the sample was not
reported) (Jayant, 1964).

-9517
In this case it was necessary to estimate the heaping of
pre-terin births on the left tail of the distribution of birth weights.
'r procedure was based on the proposition set forth in. footnote 16

that the observed distribution of birth weights may be viewed as the result

of a convolution of a small distribution of weights of pre-term babies
which is heaped on the left tail of a much larger distribution of

weights of full-term babies that is normally distributed. Under this
assumption the underlying normal distribution can be recovered by truncating
the left tail of the distribution at (say) 2001 grams and then using the
QBE procedure described in Wachter (1981) and Wachter and Trussell (1982)

to estimate the complete normal distribution of full-term babies. It
follows that the difference between the number of observations below

grams in the reconstituted normal distribution and in the original
distribution yields an estimate of the distribution of pre-term babies
2001

that have been heaped on the left tail.
In estimating Column 4 of Table 10, which is graphed in Figure 5,
I assumed that the underlying full-term distribution was N(2,300; 420).

To this distribution I then added the estimated number of pre-term
births at weights below 2001 grams, using ratios obtained from Guha
al (1973) which provides information on birth weight by gestational

age for a Delhi sample quite similar to the Bombay sample. Basically,
the number of births under 2001 grains in the original normal distribution

was inflated by the ratio of all births to full—term births in the Delhi
sample, but the additional births were distributed over two intervals: under 1501 and 1501-2000. This adjustment for pre-terin births
produced a convoluted distribution with a mean of 2276 grams (down 24
grams from

the

underlying normal) and a standard deviation of 399 grains

(down 21 grains from the underlying normal).

-96-

18Several different approaches lead to the same conclusion. The
fact that age.—2 height is a good predictor of final height (Tanner, 1978)

and the fact that the final heights of the London poor was below that of

Trinidad slaves suggests that they were shorter at age two. The inference is supported by their mean heights in adolescence which were

below those of Trinidadians. The small stature in early adolescence
suggest that poor nutritional circumstances in utero, infancy, and
early childhood set the London poor on the law growth path indicated

by both the data for adolescents and for final heights. Correlations
between height and weight during fetal development, at birth, and in
early childhood are discussed in Birkbeck, 1976; Southgate, 1978; and

Cole, 1979. See Steckel (1984a) and Fogel (1985) for a discussion of
methods of estimating birth weight from birth length and early childhood height.

19My estimate of the mean birth weight of the London poor is
about 590 grains (about 1.3 pounds) less than mean weights of about

27,000 births at the Maternit de Port Royal in Paris delivered during
the first decade of the nineteenth century (Tanner, 1981, pp. 255-56).
I suspect that in this and in other European lying-in hospitals at
the time, women who chose to have deliveries in hospitals tended to

have babies that were relatively heavy for their length and that a significant proportion were coming to the hospitals because of difficulties

during pregnancy. This possibility is suggested by the exceedingly high
death rate among deliveries in maternity hospitals, which were as much as
seven times as high as home deliveries (McKeown, 1976), and by the
excessive proportion of babies who appear to have had weights that were

—97—

more than 1.65 standard deviations above the mean (Tanner, 1981). It
is also likely that the left tail of the distribution was truncated
because some infants who died immediately after birth were treated as
still births.

Two recent studies, one on births between 1851 and 1905 at the
University Lying-In Hospital in Montreal (Ward and Ward, 1984), the
other of births between 1848 and 1865 at the Philadelphia Alms House
(Goldin and Margo, 1984) promise to increase our knowledge of nineteenth-

century birth size and of its bearing on perinatal deaths during that

century. The Wards have discovered a decline in mean birth weight of
about 420 grams between the late 1860s and the beginning of the twen-

tieth century. Preliminary analysis of the Philadelphia data by Goldin
and Margo, not only indicates a decline in birth weights between the
mid 1850s and the mid l860s, but also reveals that the first-day death
rate, even for live births in the range of 3,000 and 4,000 grams, was
about twice as high as in tht U.S. national sample in 1950.

201 have not distinguished birth weight and length by sex since
it is a refinement not justified by the rough calculations which follow.

At birth the mean weight of girls is less than that of boys, but the
difference is only about 100 grains (about 3 ounces). The average
difference of birth length between the sexes is about 0.6 centimeters
(about a quarter of an inch) and shows less variation across nations

than weight differences. Cf. Seal, 1980; Tanner et
and

Tanner,

al, 1966;

Evelyth

1976; Hytten and Leitch, 1971; and the sources cited in

WHO, 1980.

21Equation (5) is derived from the identitiy:
(5.1)

—98—

which may be rewritten as
S =

(5.2)

Ia + Sn

S

Total differetion of (5.2) yields
(5.3)

SnS

ia)
Since

=

1
D.

1

('cisn

?).

=
+ D

0.

ii

1

+Dn

p
equation (5.3) may be rewritten as

(I

=

(5.4)

+

)+

n +

where

the

0. =
1

0

=

the number of non-infant deaths

=

the number of births

U

B

number of infant deaths

the number of non-infants alive at midyear

Pn =

P = the

total number of individuals at all ages alive at midyear

S = the

age_standardized death rate

I = the

infant death rate

Sn =

the

age_standardized non-infant death rate

ci =

the

crude birth rate (B/i')

5 = the
*

proportion of non-infants in the population

asterisk over a variable indicates the rate of
change in that variable.

= an

0.

=

=

0i

+

the

share of infant deaths in total deaths

0n

It follows that if the birth rate and the age structure of
the population are held constant, which is the assumption of the computation presented in the text, then equation (5.4) reduces to equation
*

*

(5), since a5 = 0.

-99-

22

Wrigley and Schofield (p. 529) give the following values for
1801—05:
=

35.89

cdr =

27.08

cbr =

37.71

e
0

The appropriate value of 1% (179.0

per

thousand) for the indicated

value of e was obtained from their Table A14.5 (p. 714) by interpolating

between their levels 8 and 9. Then 37.71 x 0.179 = 6.42 is the number
of infant deaths per 1000 persons in the total population. Consequently,
infant deaths were 23.7 percent of all deaths (6.42

27.08 =

0.237).

23The age-standardized death rate in Britain c. 1980 was 8.32
per thousand, using the Wrigley and Schofield (1981, p. 529) age dis-

tribution for 1801-OS and the 1978-80 life table for the United Kingdom

to estimate the nx values (C.B. Cent. Stat, 0ff., 1983, p. 43). Since
the crude death rate for 1801-03 in Wrigley and Schofield (1981, p. 529)
was 27.08, the decline in the standardized mortality rate is 18.76.

Non-infant deaths were 20.66 per thousand in 1801-1805 (.763 x 27.08 =

20.66).

Then 20.66 x .1085 =

2.24 is the reduction in non-infant mor-

tality due to improved nutrition. The last figure is 12 percent of
the total decline in mortality (2.24 4

18.76

=

.119).

24Some caveats about the foregoing estimates are in order.

After maturity height will not adequately measure nutritional status
unless the relationship between nutritional status during the growing

ages and after maturity is not only strong but of a simple form. Consequently, the computations presented in the text may miss pan of the
effects of improvements in nutritional status after maturity on the

decline in adult mortality. The assumption that the elasticity between
nx and height is stable with respect to time, place, and circumstances
(which is involved in the application of the Trinidad elasticity to

-loathe

British case) requires confirmation and may have to be modified as

additional evidence becomes available.

25Even

small

reductions

in

the

quantity of grain could have had severe nutritional consequences on
particular groups or classes.

If, for example, the maldistribution of

grain increased during a shortfall, the mortality of the poor, especially the urban poor, might have risen even though the food consumption of most of the population changed little (Sen, 1981; Tilly,

1983). Highly aggregated analysis might miss effects that would show
up in regressions targeted at groups whose consumption was most likely
to suffer even when declines in food production were quite moderate.
One of the advantages of the height data and the genealogies is that

they permit a far finer differentiation in the experiences of particular
socioeconomic groups than has hitherto been possible, so that this
sort of disaggregated analysis can be pursued.

26Galenson(l981) has shown. that the najority of English immigrants

to North America were from the lower classes. If it is asswned that the
mean height of adult male immigrants before 1650 was 64.5 inches (the
approximate mean male adult height of the English laboring population for
cohorts born c.l70), then the implied rate of 4.ncrease in adult height
between

immigrants born c. 1630 and native cohorts born c. 1710 was about

one centimeter

per decade. There is no information currently available

on the mean height of English cohorts born before c.1750. However, the
high mortality rates in England between c.1625 and c.1790 (Wrigley and
Schofield, 1981, pp. 528-529) suggest that there was little change in
height schedules during this period.

-101-

27Swedish

and Norwegian adult .heights •appear to have increased

fairly rapidly during the first third of the nineteenth century. However,
the secular increase slowed during the middle third of the century and
accelerated during the last third (Kijl, 1939; Udjus, 1964; Sandberg
and Steckel, 1980).

28

The equation used in this computation can be derived as
follows:
(7.1)

H

(7.2)

H = H

(l_iT)Hu

+

- 0).

ir(H

Hence
-irD.

Differentiating (7.2) totally yields:
(7.3)

H

-

(-l)@

+

D)

where
H =

the

mean height of the population

Hu= the mean height of the upper class
D =

the

=

the

difference between the mean height of the
upper and the lower class
share of the lower class in the total population

*=Hu 4H
*

= an asterisk over a variable indicates the rate
of change in that variable.

The following estimates were used (rates of change are in percentage

years);

change perU annum; the period of change was assumed to be 150
*

1

64.75; H = 69.5)

H = 0.047

(H

H= 0.015

(H° = 69.5;

=

1.0734 (69.5 4 64. 75)

71)

—102-

291t is likely that immigrants too poor to provide their growing
children with adequate nutrition (which may be viewed as an intergen-

erational transfer of human capital) also were unable to provide children
with adequate transfers of ordinary capital.
30

It is possible that the inequality of the income and wealth
distributions of farmers and

other

rural occupaticns increased and that

an increasing share of rural households experienced impoverishment
during the relevant period, even though the mean income and the mean wealth of

the rural population were rising. Leaders of farm protest movements
during the nineteenth century claimed that the incomes of sizable groups
of farmers were declining both relatively and absolutely.
31The fact that the debate launched in the mid-1950s still continues
should not distract attention from the considerable advances in knowledge

that have occurred because of the debate. Investigators have probed increasingly into aspects of issues that were obscure at the outset. The
point is well illustrated by the evolution of research on the pathways

of airborne diseases. McKeown (1975) stressed direct exposure; Preston
and van de Walle (1978) called attention to the risk-increasing effects
of the lowering of resistance to airborne pathogens brought about by

infections caused by water-borne pathogens. Thus in the course of the
debate the concept of nutritional status has been refined and the factors

which affect it have been elaborated. Similarly, Condran and Chaney (1982)
have provided evidence that medical intervention became increasingly
effective before the dramatic chemical breakthroughs that became apparent

during and after World War II. However, the extent of mortality reduction
due to these less dramatic contributions has yet to be measured.

-103-

7. REFERENCES
Adams, J.W. and Kasakoff, A.B., 1983, Migration and life-cycles in
the American north: age-specific migration rates 1700 to 1850,
minteo, Univ. of N. Carolina.

Appleby, A.B., 1975, Nutrition and disease: the case of London,
1550—1750, J. Interdiscip. Hist. 6:1.

Ashworth, A., 1982, International differences in infant mortality and
the impact of malnutrition: a review, Hum. Nut. : Clin, Nut.
36c:7.

Atwater, W.0. and Woods, C.D., 1897, Dietary studies with reference
to the food of the Negro in Alabama in 1895 and 1896, U.S.D.A.
Off. £xp. Stat. Bull. 38
Beal, V.A., 1980, Nutrition in the Life Span, John Wiley, New York.
Bennett, M.K. and Pierce, R.H., 1961, Changes in the American national
diet, 1879-1959, Food Res. Instit. Stud. 2:95.

Birkbeck, J.A., 1976, Metrical growth and skeletal development of the
human fetus, in: The Biology of Human Fetal Growth (D.F. Roberts
and A.M. Thomson, eds.), p. 39, Taylor and Francis, London.

Bourne, J., Fogel, R.W., Pope, C., and Wimmer, L., 1984, A description
and analysis of the data in the DAE/CPF pilot sample of genealogies, mimeo, Univ. of Chicago.

Bouvier, L.F. and van der Tak, J., 1976, Infant mortality: progress and
problems, Pop. Bull. 31: No. 1
Brundtland, G.M., Liest*l, K., and IVall$e, L., 1980, "Height, Weight,

and menarcheal age of Oslo schoolchildren during the last 60
years, Ann. Hum. Bio. 7:307.

-104—

Campbell, B.M.S., 1983, Arable productivity in medieval England:
some evidence from Norfolk, J. Econ. [list. 43:379.•

Campbell, J., 1984, Work pregnancy, and infant mortality among
southern slaves, J. Interdiscip. Hist. 14:793.

Carr, L.G. and Walsh, L.S., 1980, Inventories and the analysis of
wealth and consumption patterns in St. Mary's County, Maryland,
1658—1777, Hist. Meth. 13:81.

Case, R.A.M., Coghill, C., Harley, J.L., and Pearson, J.T., 1962,

Chester Beatty Research Institute Abridged Life Tables, England
and Wales 1841-1960, Part 1, London, 1962.

Chase, H.G., 1969, Infant mortality and weight at birth: 1960 United
States birth cohort, Am. J. Pub. H. 59:1618.

Coale, A.J. and Demeny, p., 1966, Regional Model Life Tables and
Stable Populations, Princeton Univ. Press, Princeton.

Cole, T.J., 1979, A method for assessing age-standardized weight-for-

height in children seen cross-sectionally, Mn. Hum. Rio.
6:249.

Condran, G.A. and Cheney, R.A., 1982, Mortality trends in Philadelphia:
age- and cause-specific death rates 1870-1930, Demography 19:97.
Condran, G.A. and Crimmins, E., 1980, Mortality differentials between
rural

and niban areas of states in the northeastern United States

1890-1900,

Condran,

J. Hist. Geog. 6:179.

G.A. and Criinmins-Gardner, F.,

1978, Public health measures

and mortality in U.S. cities in the late nineteenth century,
Hum. Ecol. 6:27.

David, P.A:, and Solar, P., 1977, A bicentenary contribution to the
history of the cost of living in America, Res. Econ, list. 2:1.

—105—

Demos, John, A Little Commonwealth: Family Life in PlymoUth Colony,
Oxford Univ. Press, New York.
Easterlin, R.A., 1977, Population issues in American economic history:
a survey and critique, Research in Econ. lUst., 1 Supplement:l31.

Eveleth, P.B. and Tanner, J.M., 1976, Worldwide Variations in Human
Growth, University Press, Cambridge.
Feigin, R.S., 1981, Interaction of infection and nutrition in Textbook

of Pediatric Infectious Diseases (R.D. Feigin and J.D. Cherny

eds.), p. 18, LB. Saunders, Philadelphia.
Fischer, D.H. and Dobson, M.S., 1979, Dying times: changing patterns of
death and disease in England and America 1650-1850, mimeo,
Brandeis Univ.

Fishman, M.J. and Walker, J.R., 1984, Trends in American stature,
1708-1877, mimeo, University of Chicago.

Floud, IL, 1983a, Inference from the heights of volunteer soldiers and
sailors, mimeo, NBER.

Floud, R., l983b, The heights of Europeans since 1750; a new source
for European economic history, mimeo, Birkbeck College, London.
Floud, R., 1984, Measuring the transformation of European economies:
income, health and welfare, mimeo, Birkbeck College.
Floud, ft. and Wachter, K.W., 1982, Poverty and physical stature:

evidence on the standard of living of London boys 1770-1870,
Soc. Sci. Hist. 6:422.

Floud, It. and Wachter, LW., 1983, The physical state of the British
working class, 1860-1914: evidence from army recruits, mimeO,
Birkbeck College, London.
Fogel, R.W., 1985, Without Consent, or Contract: The. Rise and Fall of

American Slavery, Norton, New York.

-106-

Fogel,

R.W., Engennan, S.L., Floud, R., Margo, R.A., Sokoloff, K.,
Steckel, R.I-L, Trussell, J., Villaflor, G.C., and Wachter, K.W.,

1983, Secular changes in American and

British

stature and

nutrition, J. Interdiscip. Uist. 14:445.
Fogel, R.W., Engerinan, S.L., and Trussell, J., Exploring the uses of
data on height: the analysis of long-term trends in nutrition,

labor welfare, and labor productivity, Soc. Sc

Hist. 6:401.

Fogel, R.W., Engerman, S.L., Trussell, J., Floud, R., Pope, C.L.,
Winmier, L.T., 1978, The economics of mortality in North America,
1650-1910: a description of a reserach project [list. Meth. 11:75.

Friedman, G.C., 1982, The heights of slaves in Trinidad, Soc. Sd.
Hist. 6:482.

Frisancho, A.R., 1978, Nutritional influences on human growth and

maturation,

Yrbk, Phy. Anthro. 21:178.

Frissell, H.B. and Bevier, I. , 1899, Dietary studies of Negroes in

Eastern Virginia in 1897 and

1898,

U.S.D.A. Off. Exp. Stat.

Bull., 71.

Galenson, D.W., 1981, White Servitude in Colonial America: An Economic
Analysis, Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge.

Galiman, J.M., 1980, Mortality among whites: colonial North Carolina,
Soc. Sci. lUst. 4:295.
Gallman, R.E., 19.60, Commodity output, 1839-1899, in: Trends in the

American Economy in the Nineteenth Century (Confer. on Research
in Income and

Wealth),

pp. 13-71, Princeton University Press,

Princeton.

Gallman, R.E., 1966, Gross national product in the United States, in:
Output,

Employment and Productivity in the United States after

1800 (Confer. on Research in Income and Wealth) p. 3, Columbia

Univ.

Press, New York.

-10 7—

Gallman, LB., 1969, Trends in the size distribution of wealth in the

nineteenth century: some speculations, in: Six Papen on the
Size Distribution of Wealth and Income (Confer. on Research
in Income and Wealth),. p. 1, Columbia Univ. Press, New York.

Gallman, R.E., 1982, Influences on the distrubution of landholdings in
early colonial North Carolina, J. Econ. Hist. 42:549.

Goldin, C.D., 1979, Evolution of the female labor force in the United
States, mimeo, NBER.

Goldin, C.D., and Margo, R.A., 1984, The poor at birth: birth weights
and lengths at Philadelphia Alms House, 1847-1874, mimeo,
University of Pennsylvania.

Goldstein, H., 1976, Birthweight, gestation, neonatal mortality and
child development, in: The Biology of Human Fetal Growth
(D.F. Roberts and A.M. Thomson, eds.), pp. 81-102, Taylor and
Francis, London.
G.B. Cent. Stat. Off. ,

1983, Annual Abstract of Statistics No. 119,

London, HMSO.

Greven, P.J. Jr., 1970, Four Generations: Population, Land and Family
in Colonial Andover, Massachusetts, Cornell Univ. Press, Ithaca.

Guha, D.K., Rashmi, A., and Kochar, M., 1973, Relationship between length
of gestation, birth weight, and certain other factors, Indian
J. of Pediat. 40: 44.

Habicht,j.-P., Yarbrough, C., and Martoreel, R., Anthropometric field
methods: criteria for selection, in Nutrition and Growth (D.B.
Jelliffe and E.F.P. Jelliffe, eds.), pp. 365-387, Plenum Press, New York.

Haines, M.R., 1979, The use of model life tables to estimate mortality
for the United States in the late nineteenth century, Demog.
16, 289.

-108—

Haines, M.R., 1983, Inequality and child mortality: a comparison of England
and Wales, 1911, and the United States, 1900, mimeo, Wayne State Univ.
Haines, M.R. and Avery, R.C., 1980, The American life table of 1830-1860:
an evaluation, J. Interdiscip. Hist. 11:73.

Henripin, J., 1954, La Population Canadienne an Debut du XVIIIe Sic1e:
Nuptia1it—Fecondite-MoTtalitit6 Infantile, I.N.E.D., Paris.
Higgs, R., 1973, Mortality in rural America, 1870-1920: estimates and
conjectures, Explor. Econ. Hist. 10:177.

Higgs, R., 1979, Cycles and trends of mortality in 18 large American
cities, 1871-1900, Explor. Econ. Mist. 16:381.

Hollingsworth, T.H., 1977, Mortality in the British peerage families
since 1600, Population, nuiné'ro sp6cial :323.

Holmes, G.K., 1907, Meat supply and surplus, U.S. But. Stat. Bull. 55.
Hytten, F.E. and Leitch, I., 1971, The Physiology of Human Pregnancy,
2nd ed. Blackwell Sci. Pub. Oxford.
Imhof, A.E., 1977, Historical demography in Germany: a research note,
I-list. Meth. 10:122.

Jayant, K., 1964, Birth weight and some other factors in relation to
infant survival: a study of an Indian sample, Ann. Mu. Genet.
27: 261.

John, A.M., 1984, The demography of slavery in nineteenth century
Trinidad, unpublished Ph.D. thesis, Princeton Univ.
Jones, A.J., 1980, Wealth of a Nation to Be: The American Colonies on
the Eve of the Revolution, Columbia Univ. Press, New York.

Jones, R.A.K., Cummins, M., and Davies, P.A., 1979, Infants of very
low birth weight: a 15-year analysis, Lancet, i:1332.

I-

-109-

J. Interdiscip. Hist., 1983, The relationship of nutrition, disease,
and social conditions: a graphical presentation, 3. Interdiscip.
Hist. 14:503.

Kahn, C., 1978, The death rate in Memphis in 1860: an application of an
alternative estimating technique, mimeo, Harvard Univ.
Kielinann, A.A., Ajello, C.A., and Kielniann, N.S., 1982, Nutrition in-

tervention: an evaluation of six studies, Stud. Fain. Plan. 13:246.
Kielinann, A.A., De Sweemer, C., Chernichovsky, U., Uberoi, I.S., Masih,

N., Taylor, C.E., Parker, R.L., Reinke, W.A., Kakar, D.N., and
Santa, R.S.S., 1983, Child and Maternal Health Services in Rural
India: The Narangwal Experiment, Vol. 1: Integrated Nutrition
and Health, Johns Hopkins Press, Baltimore.

Kiil, V., 1939, Stature and Growth of Norwegian Men during the Past
Two Hundred Years, Oslo.
Kiple, K.F. and King, V.H., 1981, Another Dimension to the Black Diaspora:
Diet, Disease, and Racism, Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge.

Komlos, J., 1984, Stature and nutrition in the Habsburg monarchy, a
study of secular changes in the standard of living and economic
development, 1720-1920, mimeo, Univ. of Chicago.

Kulikoff, A., 1976, Tobacco and slaves: population, economy, and society
in eighteenth-century Prince George's county, Maryland, unpub.
Ph.D. thesis, Brandeis Univ.
The Lancet, 1980, The fate of the baby under 1501 g. at birth, Lancet:461.

Lee, R., 1981, Short-ten variation: vital rates, prices and weather, in:
The Population History of England, 1541-1871 (E.A. Wrigley and

R.S.

Schofield), p. 356, Harvard Univ. Press, Cambridge, MA.

Levy, D., 1984

Lindert, P.1-I., 1980, English occupations, 1670-1811, J. Econ. Flist. 40:685.

-110—

Lindert, P.1-h, 1983, English living standards, population growth and

Wrigley-Schofield,
Lindert, P.H., and

Explor. Econ. Hist. 20:134.

Williamson,

J.G., 1983, English worker's living

standards during the industrial revolution: a new look,
Econ. I-list. R. 36:1.

Lindgren, G., 1976, Height, weight, and menarche in Swedish urban school
children in relationship to socio-econoinic and regional factors,
Ann. Hum. Bio. 3, 501.

Livi-Bacci, M., 1983, The nutrition-mortality link in past times: a
comment, J. Interdiscip. Hist. 14:293.

Lockridge, K.A., 1966, The population of Dedham, Massachusetts, 16361736, Econ. Hist. It. 19:318.

Mccusker, J.J., 1970, The ruin trade and the balance of payments of the

thirteen continental colonies, 1650-1775, unpub. Ph.D. thesis,
Univ. of Pittsburgh.

McKeown, T., 1976, The Modern Rise of Population, Academic Press, New York.
McKeown, 1., 1978, Fertility, mortality and causes of death: an exaini-

nation of issues related to the modern rise of population, p.

Studies
McKeown, 1. ,

32:535.

1983, Food, infection, and population, .3.

Interdiscip.

Hist.

14: 227.

McKeown, T. and Brown, R.G., 1955, Medical evidence related to English
population changes in the eighteenth century, Pop. Studies 9:119.
McKeown, T. and Gibson, J.R., 1950 and 1951, Observations on all births
(23,970) in Brimingham, 1947, Brit. .3. Soc. Med. 4:221, 5:98, 5:177.

McMahon, S.F., 1980, Provisions laid up for the family, Hist. Meth. 14:4.

McNeill, W.H., 1976, Plagues and People, Doubleday, Garden City, N.Y.

—111—

Main, G.L., 1982, Tobacco Colony: Life in Early Maryland, 1650-1720,
Princeton Univ. Press, Princeton.

Margo, R.A. and Steckel, R.H., 1982, The heights of American slaves:
new evidence on slave nutrition and health, Soc. Sci. Hist. 6:516.

Margo, R.A. and Steckel, R.H., 1983, Heights of native-born whites
during the antebellum period, .3. Econ. Hist. 43:167.

Mata, L.J., 1978, The Children of Santa Maria Caugue: A Prospective
Field Study of Health and Growth, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

Matthews, R.C.O., Feinstein, C.H., and Odling-Smee, 1982, British
Economic Growth 1856-1973, Stanford Univ. Press, Stanford.
Meeker, E., 1972, The improving health of the United States, 1850-1915,
Explor. Econ. Hist. 9:353.
Meeker, E. ,

1976, Mortality trends of southern blacks, 1850-1910:

Some preliminary findings, Explor. Econ. Hist. 13, 13.
Meindl, R.S. and Swedlund, A.C., 1977, Secular trends in mortality in
the Connecticut Valley, Hum. Bio. 49:389.
Menard, R.R., 1975, Economy and society in early colonial Maryland,
unpub. Ph.D. thesis, Univ. Iowa.

Meredith, H.V., 1970, Body weight at birth of viable human infants: a
world-wide comparative treatise, Hum. Bio. 42:217.
Mitchell, B.R., 1975, European Historical Statistics 1750—1975, Macmillaji, London.

Mitchell, B.R. and Deane, P., 1962, Abstract of British Historical
Statistics, Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge.

Moseley, N.H. and Chen, L.C., 1983, An analytical framewoik for study
of child survival in developing countries, mimeo.

—112—

Naeye, R.L., 1981, Nutritional/nonnutritional interactions that affect

the outcome of pregnancy, Am. 3. din. Nut., 34:727.
Overton, M., 1979, Estimating crop yields from probate inventories:
an example from East Anglia, 1585-1735, 3. Econ. Hist. 39:363.

Overton, M., 1980, English probate inventories and the measurement of
agricultural change, A.A.G. Bijdragen 23:205.
Pessen, F., 1973, Riches, Class, and Power Before the Civil War, D.C.
Heath, Boston.

Pharoah, P.0.D. and Alberman, E.D., 1981, Mortality of low birthweight
infants in England and Wales 1953 to 1979, Arch. Dis. Child. 56:86.
Pollard, S., 1981, Sheffield and sweet Auburn--Amenities and living
standards in the British Industrial Revolution: a comment,
J. Econ. Hist. 41, 902.

Preston, S.H., 1976, Mortality Patterns in National Populations: With
Special References to Recorded Causes of Death, Academic Press,
New York.

Preston, S.H., Keyfitz, N. and Schoen, R., 1972, Causes of Death: Life
Tables for National Populations, Seminar Press, New York.
Preston, S.H., and van de Walle, E., 1978, Urban French mortality in
the nineteenth century, Pop. Studies 32:275.

Preston, S.H. and Haines, M.R., 1983, New estimates of child mortality
in the United States at the turn of the century, mimeo, Univ.
of Pennsylvania.

Raman, L., 1981, Influence of maternal nutritional factors affecting

birthweight, Am. J. din. Nut. 34:775.
Razell, P.E., 1973, An interpretation of the modern rise of population-a critique, Pop. Studies 28:5.

-113-

Rothenberg, W.B., 1984, Markets and Massachusetts farmers: a paradigm
of economic growth in rural New England, 1.750-1855, unpublished
Ph.D. thesis, Brandeis Univ.

Rutman, D.B. and Rutman, A.H., 1979, Now-wives and son-in-law:
parental death in a seventeenth-century Virginia County, in:

Chesapeake in the Seventeenth Century: EsSays in Euramerican
Society and Politics (T.W. Tate and D.L. Aimnerinan, eds.).

Sandberg, L.G. and Steckel, R.H., 1980, Soldier, soldier what made you
grow so tall?, Econ. and Hist. 23:91.

Sawyer, M., 1976, Income distribution in OECD countries, OECD Economic
Outlook: Occasional Studies., July:3.

Schofield, R., 1983, The impact of scarcity and plenty on population
change in England, 1541—1871, J. Interdiscip. Hist. 14:265.

Schuurman, A., 1980, Probate inventories: research issues, problems
and

results,

A.A.G. Bijdragen 23:19.

Sen, A., 1981, Poverty and Famines: An Essay on Entitlement and
vation, Oxford Univ. Press, Oxford.

Shapiro, S., Schlesinger, E.R., and Nesbitt, R.E.L., 1968, Infant Pennatal, Maternal, and Childhood Mortality in the United States,
Cambridge, MA., Harvard Univ. Press.

Sheridan, R.B., 1985, Doctors and Slaves: A Medical History of Slavery
in the British West Indies, 1680-1834, Cambridge Univ. Press,
Cambridge.

Smith, D.S., 1973, The demographic history of colonial New England,
J. Econ. I-list. 32:165.

Sokoloff, K.L. and

Villaflor,

G.C., 1982, The early achievement of

modern stature in America, Soc. Sd. Hist. 6:453.

-114—

Sokoloff, K.L., 1982, The heights of Americans

in

three centuries:

some economic and demographic implications, inimeo, U.C.L.A.

Soltow, L., 1971, Patterns of Wealthholding in Wisconsin Since 1850,
U. of Wisconsin Press, Madison.

Soltow, L., 1975, Men and Wealth in the United States 1850-1870, Yale
Univ. Press, New Haven.

Southgate, D.A.T., 1978, Fetal measurements, in: HumanGrowth: Principals
and Prenatal Growth (F. Falkner and J.M. Tanner, eds.), v. 1,
p. 379, Plenum Press, New York.
Steckel, R.H., 1982a, fleight, health, nutrition and labor productivity
in the antebellum South, mimeo, NBER.

Steckel, R.H., l982b, Height, nutrition, and mortality in Ohio, 18701900, mimeo, NBER.

Steckel, R.H., 1983, Height and per capita income, Hist. Meth. 16:1.
Steckel, R.H., l984a, Adversity and diversity: the nutrition, health,
and

mortality

of American slaves from conception to maturity,

mimeo, Ohio State Univ.

Stecket, R.H., l984b, Characteristics of men rejected by the Union
Army, mimeo, Ohio State Univ.
Tanner, .J.M., 1978, Fetus into Man: Physical Growth from Conception to

Maturity, Cambridge, MA, Harvard Univ. Press.
Tanner, J.M., 1981, A History of the Study of Human Growth, Cambridge
Univ. Press, Cambridge.

Tanner, J.M., Whitehouse, R.H., and Takaishi, M., 1966, Standards from
birth to maturity for height, weight, height velocity, weight
velocity: British children, 1965, Arch. Dis. Child. 41: 454-71,
613—35.

—115-

Taylor, A.J., ed., 1975, The Standard of Living in Britain in the
Industrial Revolution, Methuen, London.

Taylor, C.E., 1982, Infections, famines, and poverty, mimeo, Johns
Hopkins Univ.

Taylor, F.K., 1979, The Concepts of Illness, Disease, ajdMorbus,
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

Terrenato, L. and Ulizzi, L., 1983, Genotype-environment relationships:

an analysis Of stature distribution curves during the last
century in Italy, Ann. Hum. Bio. 10:335.

Thirsk, J., 1983, The horticultural revolution: a cautionary note on
prices, J. Interdiscip. list. 14:299.

Thomson, A.M. and Billewicz, W.Z., 1976, The concept of the "light-fordates' infant, in: The Biology of Human Fetal Growth (D.F.
Roberts and A.M. Thomson, eds.) pp. 69-80, Taylor and Francis,
London.

Thompson, W.S. and Whelpton, P.K., 1933, Population Trends in the
United States, McGraw-4-lill, New York.

Tilley, L.A., 1983, Food entitlement, famine, and conflict, J.
discip. Hist. 14:333.
Tow-ne, M.W. and Rasmussen, W.D., 1960, Farm gross product and gross
investment

in the nineteenth century, in: Trends in the American

Economy in the Nineteenth Century (Confer. on Research in

Income and Wealth), pp. 255-315, Princeton Univ. Press, Princeton.

Trussell, J.

and Bloom, E.E., 1979, A model distribution of height or

weight

Trussell,

J.

in

at a given age, Hum. Rio. 51:523.

and Wachter, K.W., 1984, Estimating covariates of height

truncated samples, mimeo, NBER.

-116-

Udjus, L.G., 1964, AnthroJnetrical Changes in Norwegian Men in the
Twentieth Century, tjniversitetsforlaget.

U.N. Stat. Off., 1983, Demographic Yearbook, New York.
U.S. Bur. Cen. ,

1975, Historical Statistics of the United States

Colonial Times to 1970, Washington DC.
U.S. Bur. Cen., 1983, Statistical Abstract of the United States 1984.
Washington, D.C.

U.S. Dept. Labor, 1897, Conditions of Negroes in various cities. Bull.
No. 10.

U.S. Nat. Center Health Stat., 1974, Vital Statistics of the United

States 1970, Vol. II, Mortality Pan A. Rockville, MD.
U.S. Nat. Cent. Health Stat., 1983, Advance report of final mortality
statistics, 1980, Monthly Vit. Stat. Rep. 32, No. 4.

U.S. Nat. Off. Vital Stat., 1954, Weight at birth and its effect on
survival of the newborn in the United States, early 1950,
Vital Stat. Spec. Dept. v. 39, No. 1.

Van Wieringen, J.C., 1978, Secular growth changes, in: Human
vol. II

Postnatal

Growth,

Growth (F. Falkner and J.M. Tanner, eds.),

pp. 445-473, Plenum Press, New York.

Vinovskis, M.A., 1972, Mortality rates and trends in Massachusetts
before 1860, J. Econ. Hist. 32:184.
Von Tunzelmann, G.N., 1979, Trends in real wages, 1750-1850, revisited,
Econ. Hist. 1k. 32:33.

Wachter, LW., 1981, Graphical estimation of military heights, Hist.
Meth. 14:31.

Wachter, K.W. and Trussell, .3., 1982, Estimating Historical Heights,

J. Amer. Stat. Assn. 77:279.
Walsh, L.S. and Menard, ICR., 1974, Death in the Chesapeake: two life
tables for men in early colonial Maryland, Maryland lUst. Mag.
69:211.

—117—

Ward, ICP. and Ward, P.C., 1984, Infant birth weight and nutrition in
industrializing Montreal, Ant. Hist. R. 89:324.

Waterlow, J.C., Buzina, R., Keller, W., Lane, J.M., Nichaman, M.Z.,
and

Tanner,

J.M., 1974, The presentation and use of height and

weight data for comparing the nutritional status of groups of
children under the age of 10 years, Bull. WHO,

55:489.

Weir, D.R., 1982, Fertility transition in rural France, 1740-1829,
unpub. Ph.D. thesis, Stanford Univ.

Wilkin, J.C., 1981, Recent trends in the mortality of the aged
Soc. of Aged Trans. 33:11.
Williamson, .J.G.,

1976, American prices and urban inequality since

1820, J. Econ. Hist. 36:303.

Williamson, J.G., 1981a, Urban disamenities, dark satanic mills, and
the British standard of living debate, J. Econ. Hist. 41:75.
Williamson, J.G., l981b, Some myths die hard--urban disamenities one
more time: a reply, J. Econ. Hist. 41:905.

Williamson, J.G., 1982, Was the Industrial Revolution worth it?
Disamenities and death in 19th century British towns, Explor.
Econ. Hist. 19:221.

Williamson, J.G. and

Lindert,

P.11., 1980, American Inequality: A

Microeconomic History, Academic Press, New York.
Winuner, L.T., 1984, Phases and strategies in the collection and linking

of genealogical data: the status of the DAE/CPE pilot sample as
of May, 1984.

Winich, M. and Brasel, J.A., 1980, Nutrition and

cell

growth, in:

Modern Nutrition in Health and Disease (R.S. Goodhart and
M.E. Shils, eds.), pp. 592-607, Lea and Febiger, Philadelphia.

-118-

World Health Org., 1980, The incidence of low birth weight: a critical
review of available information, World Health Stat. Q. 33:197.

Wrigley, E.A. and Schofield, R.S.% 1981, The Population History of
England, 1541-1871: A Reconstruction, Harvard Univ. Press,
Cambridge, MA.

Wrigley, E.A. and Schofield, R.S., 1983, English population history
from family reconstitution: summary results 1600—1799, !2n.
Studies, 37:157.

Yasuba, Y., 1962, Birth Rates of the White Population in the United
States, 1800-1860, Johns Hopkins Press, Baltimore.

0

