NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CARBON MOTIVATED BORDER TAX ADJUSTMENTS:
OLD WINE IN GREEN BOTTLES?
Ben Lockwood
John Whalley
Working Paper 14025
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14025

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2008

The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Ben Lockwood and John Whalley. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Carbon Motivated Border Tax Adjustments: Old Wine in Green Bottles?
Ben Lockwood and John Whalley
NBER Working Paper No. 14025
May 2008
JEL No. F13,F18,Q56
ABSTRACT
We discuss emerging proposals for border tax adjustments (BTAs) to accompany commitments to
reduce carbon emissions in the EU, the US and other OECD economies. The rationale offered for
such border adjustment is that various entities, such as the EU, if making commitments to reduce emissions
which go beyond those undertaken in other regions of the world, impose added costs on domestic producers
which create a competitive disadvantage for them. Some form of remedy is viewed as reasonable to
maintain the competitiveness of domestic industries when responding to global environmental problems.
In this paper, we argue that despite its current carbon manifestation, the issue of border tax adjustments
and both their rationale and their effects on trade are not new and, despite the present debate (which
seems to overlook older literature), have arisen before. Earlier debate on border tax adjustments occurred
at the time of the adoption of the Value Added Tax (VAT) in the EU as a tax harmonization target
in the early 1960’s. But academic literature of the time showed that a change between origin and destination
basis in the VAT would be neutral and hence the use of a destination based tax in the EU to accompany
the VAT offered no trade advantage to Europe. Here we argue that essentially the same arguments
also apply for carbon motivated BTAs, and in the current debate there seems to be a misconception
between price level effects and relative price effects stemming from a BTA, which needs correcting.
We also argue that the impact of border tax adjustments should be viewed as independent of the motivation
of the adjustments.

Ben Lockwood
Department of Economics
University of Warwick
b.lockwood@warwick.ac.uk
John Whalley
Department of Economics
Social Science Centre
University of Western Ontario
London, Ontario N6A 5C2 CANADA
also NBER, CIGI, and CESifo
jwhalley@uwo.ca

1. Background and Introduction

This piece discusses emerging proposals for border tax adjustments (BTAs) to
accompany commitments to reduce carbon emissions in the EU, the US and other OECD
economies.2 The commitments at issue, with the exception of the EU, are those which
may possibly be made in the future and, in turn, these may be either internationally
negotiated or undertaken unilaterally. However, carbon motivated BTAs could either be
an integral part of a multilaterally negotiated package or unilaterally declared
commitments, or simply follow on after the initial negotiations or commitment.
Current thinking in global environmental policy circles is that due to the cost
implications for domestic producers of emission reduction initiatives, BTAs would
potentially form part of what might emerge from Copenhagen in 2009 as part of the post
Kyoto world/ UNFCCC post-Bali process. These possibilities are in addition to what is
under discussion currently in the EU and the US. The rationale offered for such border
adjustments is the added costs to domestic producers involved which are thought to pose
a competitive disadvantage for them. Some form of remedy is viewed as reasonable to
maintain the competitiveness of domestic industries when responding to global
environmental problems with emissions reduction efforts which raise energy prices.

2

Currently in the EU, there are commitments which have been made by the European Commission for a
20% reduction in emissions by 2020 and a 20% target for use of renewables, with emissions reductions to
go to 30% if other regions match (see Ismer & Neuhoff (2007)). These emission reductions are seen in the
EU as going farther than in any other entity globally and hence, a system of border adjustments involving
tariffs on imports and export subsidies is seen as a way of offsetting the competitiveness effects which are
involved. The EU programmes seem likely to be implemented in ways which are highly sectorally focused,
with a major emphasis on power generation, aluminum, cement and steel. In the US there is discussion of
similar potential legislation even though the US has undertaken no formal commitments at this stage.
Proposals along these lines are contained in the Lieberman-Warner Bill (see Brewer (2008)), which by
2019 would mandate similar US actions.

2

The potential, therefore, is for a world to evolve in which large entities in the
OECD simultaneously go green and protectionist at the same time with border tax
adjustments as the new protectionism and these being seen as a necessary accompaniment
to commitments to carbon emission reductions which raise energy prices and impose
added costs on domestic producers. Perhaps not surprisingly, this prospect is seen instead
by trade economists as a potential threat to the functioning of the global trading system.
Those in lower income countries in Africa, South America, Asia and also in Eastern
Europe (and especially Russia) also see such measures as a threat to their wellbeing,
which will restrict their market access and cause major dislocation of their trade.
In this paper, we argue that despite its current carbon manifestation, border tax
adjustments and both their rationale and effects on trade is hardly a new topic, despite the
present debate which seems to overlook older literature. We also argue that the older
analytical literature on border tax adjustments is highly relevant to current debate on their
recent carbon related manifestation. Earlier debate on border tax adjustments occurred
following the adoption of the Value Added Tax (VAT) in the EU as a tax harmonization
target in the early 1960’s.3 The European harmonized VAT, following the 1958 Neumark
Committee, was agreed to be administered on a destination basis and hence involve taxes
on imports and a rebate of taxes on exports. This arrangement was, however, viewed
initially by US business as conferring a trade advantage on the EU. The argument was
that under the VAT American exports to the EU had to cross a tariff barrier, whereas EU
exports to the US faced no such barrier because of the remission of domestic taxes.
However, this line of argument from the policy community was also countered in the
academic literature at the time. This was because the difference between an origin and
3

See Dosser (1967), Shibata (1967), Krauss & Johnson (1972)

3

destination basis is simply that between a production and consumption tax, both of which
in the broadly based (static, no labor-leisure choice) case are neutral, with no direct
effects on trade. The argument was that a move from an origin to a destination basis in
the VAT would simply have the effect of changing the price level (or exchange rate) in a
model where taxes are broadly based on all commodities. A change between origin and
destination basis in the VAT would have no protective effect, and hence the use of a
destination based tax in the EU to accompany the VAT offered no trade advantage to
Europe. This analytical argument, at the time, caused a change in policy approach from
the US, who had been pushing for a negotiation on border tax adjustments as part of the
then emerging Tokyo Round in the GATT of the day. Since those days, the border tax
adjustment issue has not been forcefully raised in any policy debate.
Here we argue that essentially the same arguments also apply for today’s carbon
motivated BTAs, and in the current debate there seems to be a misconception between
the price level effects and relative price effects stemming from a BTA, which needs
correcting. We also argue that the impact of border tax adjustments should be viewed as
independent of the motivation of the adjustment. BTAs can be motivated by any one of
any number of issues including differential labor standards, social programs, government
provided health care, and other considerations. The fact that the current debate is driven
by carbon emission reductions should be seen as largely irrelevant to an assessment of the
impacts of the border adjustments themselves. And if the BTAs accompanying carbon
emissions reductions are broadly based, the discussion of earlier years still applies. There
will be a price level effect as well as a relative price effect and the price level effect will
have no real effects on trade flows or domestic industry, despite their intent.

4

In discussing carbon motivated BTAs, one thus seemingly has to differentiate
between the variance created in tax rates across industries and products from BTA
impacts from the price level effects which occur uniformly across all industries. However,
we also note that even in cases involving product or sector specific BTAs, one can again
produce neutrality propositions for the tax basis change if there is sufficient sector
specificity in inputs. In essence, we argue that the old literature on BTAs has been lost in
the current debate on carbon motivated border tax adjustments. It needs to be
rediscovered and there needs to be a clearer articulation of the likely effects that their use
would generate.

5

2. The Debate on Carbon Motivated BTAs
The issue of carbon motivated border tax adjustments initially surfaced as part of
the general discussion of leakage associated with country or regional carbon
commitments which went unmatched by others. Most of the debate has centered on the
WTO compatibility of such measures (De Cendra (2006), Demaret & Stewardson (1994),
Goh (2004) and Ismer & Neuhoff (2007)). Relatively little of it has focused on what the
impacts of these border adjustments would actually be, although Ismer & Neuhoff (2007)
provide an initial partial equilibrium analysis of impacts but this does not focus on the
price level or exchange rate effects stressed both here and in earlier border tax adjustment
literature.
The background to this now growing debate is that in a world where different
entities move at different speeds in undertaking carbon emission reductions, and do so
from different initial standing points, the result will be unequal carbon prices across
various countries. In current discussion of the EU emissions trading scheme, the
competitiveness and leakage effects of unilateral climate changes have thus been a major
topic for discussion.4
The leakage discussion focuses on how one country may reduce emissions and
other countries increase emissions as a result. The claim is that along with these effects
go competitive disadvantages to domestic industry associated with leakage, and these
competitiveness effects become critical in securing agreement to the emissions reductions.
The need to offset these competition effects has been portrayed as a way of remedying
leakage, although in reality they become tax induced offsets for cost increases faced by
domestic producers. Although not explicitly discussed as part of the BTA effort,
4

See Dröge & Kemfert (2005).

6

commitments to achieve targets for use of renewables (wind, solar) could also involve
BTAs due to similar effects. In passing, we note that such effects need not be made only
through BTAs; they are only one such possible instrument. Changing corporate tax rates
by sector, R&D tax credits, depreciation rates and many other tax instruments provide
other possibilities, but they seemingly have not been discussed.
Among the countries (or regions) who have embarked on what they see as stricter
climate policies, emissions reductions in these countries are seen as generating
accompanying leakage through a shift in consumption from carbon based goods towards
now cheaper importable substitutes allowing for more carbon intensive production in
regions without comparable carbon pricing. Equally, relocation of production to areas or
regions without carbon pricing is seen as a possible outcome. Furthermore, in a world of
unequal cross-country carbon prices, BTAs are claimed to give more certainty for those
involved in emissions reduction initiatives, especially for long run investments in various
key sectors.
This set of arguments has been made centrally in the EU with their emissions
trading scheme5, but also seems likely to follow in Australia and New Zealand and some
regions and provinces within the US and Canada where emissions reduction policies are
either in place or under discussion. In the EU, there have also been strategic sectors
which have been identified as leading the emission reduction strategy and the need for
certainty of the time profile of carbon pricing when long term investments are made is
seen as a prime motivator of adjustments at the border which preserve international

5

But although EU emissions policy is seen in this way in Europe, in many ways the unilateral
commitments undertaken by China out to 2020 go beyond those in Europe (See Tian & Whalley (2008)).

7

competitiveness. These sectors include cement, iron & steel, aluminum, pulp & paper,
refineries and fertilizer.
These pressures are seen by some in OECD countries as inevitably leading to
border adjustments. The claim from those supporting such initiatives in the EU is that the
negative impacts of unilateral carbon reduction initiatives on the international
competitiveness of industries can only be addressed by balancing cost differentials at the
border.
There are two ways that have been advanced to offset the leakage and cost effects
involved. One is that imported goods would be taxed at the border in ways which reflect
the cost of the emissions trading were they to be produced in the home market they are
entering. This would involve border tax adjustments between countries, and the central
debating point has been the WTO compatibility of such measures. There are, however, no
clear definitions or calculations as to the relevant Dollar or Euro amounts which are to be
used in such adjustments, or even how such calculations would be made. One of the
difficulties is that border adjustments used to offset cost disadvantages imposed on
domestic producers would reflect added production costs not only occurring directly but
also indirectly (ie – emissions involved in the production of the steel which go into a car
as well as carbon emitted assembling the car). Also, the chain of component inputs would
themselves need to be followed across (potentially many) borders. Another complication
is that such calculations should presumably be relative to costs abroad and not only based
on home markets. There would thus be gradations of adjustments across supplying
countries, along with potentially complex rules of origin as now occur in preferential
trade agreements. Thus, this evolving debate on import taxes is but part of discussion of

8

wide ranging new climate change programs which, even in the EU and the US, still need
more clarification in terms of practical implementation.
An alternative approach to BTAs which has been suggested is to use tax
equivalents based on enforcement of emissions allowance trading for all importers. US
debate focuses on this approach. Under this, any importer of products would need to buy
emissions rights domestically to meet required offsets, and exporters could sell some of
their emissions permits acquired for production to gain offset. At issue here is also the
much wider question of whether or not emissions reductions commitments should be
focused on emissions implied by geographical location of production, or geographical
location of consumption. These are also issues for the post-Bali negotiations scheduled to
conclude in Copenhagen in 2009. Chinese negotiators, for instance, have raised the key
issue of carbon emission embedment in exports; arguing that around 35% of China’s
emissions derive from exports which are other countries’ consumption.
This emissions allowance approach to BTAs is currently being taken in the US in
two different bills before the Senate which introduce the concept of international reserve
allowances which are to be issued by the US government (See Brewer (2008)). Under
this scheme, importers will need to buy emissions rights for the carbon content of their
imports even though imports are produced abroad. The claim is that this will reduce
leakage effects by adjusting the prices of imports to reduce substitution from abroad.
Also, exporters will be able to sell some of their emissions rights acquired for production.
The effect is similar to the BTA above; in both cases there is a border adjustment and the
border adjustment will form part of trade policy.

9

The state of the debate is therefore that there are commitments and proposals
currently pending in the EU on these matters and also discussion of alternative possible
actions in the US and vaguer possibilities raised both elsewhere and multilaterally. The
claim is that these border adjustments will level the playing field for domestic producers
and provide an offset to the non-competitive effects involved by taking on various
unilateral or negotiated commitments towards carbon emissions reduction. The current
presumption is that such schemes will arise in the post-Bali UNFCCC negotiations as a
claimed necessary part of an implementable global climate change regime (see Walsh &
Whalley (2008)).

10

3. The Older Debate on Border Tax Adjustments

Our observation in this paper is that current debate on carbon motivated border
tax adjustments, either using international reserve allowances or formal border
adjustments, could usefully recognize fully both previous debate and pre-existing
literature on border tax adjustments. As was mentioned in the introduction, the origins of
earlier border tax adjustment discussion go back to the formation of the European Union
and the commitment in the Treaty of Rome to sequenced integration. Under the Treaty of
Rome there was first to be a customs union for the elimination of tariffs on trade between
member countries and the adoption of a common external tariff to be followed by a tax
union in which there would be harmonization of both tax structure and rates, and eventual
full economic and monetary union (see Dosser (1967) and Shibata (1967)). The tax union
process in the EU as it evolved in the late 1950’s initially focused on indirect taxes and
discussion on the adoption of a common harmonization instrument. The first tax chosen
was the value added tax, which in turn was to replace all pre-existing turnover or indirect
taxes in all EU countries. The idea was eventually for there to be first base harmonization
and then rate harmonization, which has not yet occurred.
With the adoption of the VAT, however, there arose the central issue of the
agreed basis for the commonly adopted tax. Was the tax to be based on production or
consumption? If based on production, the tax would apply to exports, with no rebate at
the border and imports would enter EU countries tax free – the so-called origin basis for
the value added tax. With a tax basis using consumption, taxes would be applied on
imports as they entered each of the EU countries and taxes would also be rebated on

11

exports – the so called destination basis for the value added tax. The choice between
these two bases became a major topic within the harmonization debate within Europe,
and in the late 1950’s it was resolved by the report of the Neumark Committee (Neumark
(1958)), which recommended in favor of the use of a destination basis for a harmonized
European VAT. The Neumark Committee also recommended that the EU eventually
move to a restricted origin basis, where there would be a destination basis applied to trade
outside of the EU, but an origin basis applying to trade within the EU. The idea was to
remove fiscal frontiers between EU states by using the origin basis internally. With the
Neumark Report the destination basis became the common harmonization mechanism for
the value added tax as it was introduced in individual EU countries; who in turn followed
the VAT first introduced in France in 1954.
With the adoption of the destination basis in Europe for the to be harmonized
VAT, the original European countries, and later acceding countries including the UK,
Ireland, Denmark, and Sweden then began to apply tax measures at the border. Imports
were subject to tax and input taxes on exports were rebated.
However, there was also growing opinion in the US business community that this
harmonized tax structure in the EU involved intervention in trade which was
disadvantageous to the US. At this time in the US, however, there was no federal broadly
based indirect or sales tax, as is still the case since the US tax system is characterized by
heavier reliance on corporate and income taxes, with no such federal tax. The argument
was that US exports had to cross a tax barrier in order to penetrate EU markets since
taxes were applied to imports coming into the EU while EU exports left the EU tax free.
As a result, in the mid 1960’s and after the conclusion of the GATT Kennedy Round in

12

1967 (but before the launch of the Tokyo Round in 1973), pressure built in the US for a
border tax adjustment negotiation to be included in then emerging trade round in the
GATT. There was substantial debate about the GATT compatibility of such measures.
GATT Article 3 clearly rules out the use of tax measures which give advantage to
domestic products and there was debate as to whether or not the use of the destination
basis in the EU VAT was a violation of Article 3. There was growing pressure on the US
government to initiate a dispute settlement case on this issue, and focused specifically on
alleged Article 3 violations.
What transpired, however, was that no dispute settlement case was initiated and
ultimately, no GATT negotiation took place on this issue in the Tokyo Round. This was
in large part because of contributions from the academic community which stressed that,
in a very simple world where all consumption goods are taxed at the same rate and there
is no savings and no labor-leisure choice, a movement between an origin and a
destination basis in a VAT or sales tax will have no real effects on trade, production or
consumption (see Dosser (1968), Krauss & Johnson (1972), Shibata (1967)). This is
despite the appearance of there being a tax barrier to imports in the importing country and
a tax subsidy to exports under a destination basis compared to an origin basis. The reason
is that neither form of tax changes the relative prices of goods to either consumers or
producers (budget constraints show no change in slope) and hence moving from one basis
to the other has no effect if trade is balanced. It simply makes no difference whether one
taxes consumption or production.
The argument made was the following. The difference between an origin and a
destination basis is that between a tax on production and a tax on consumption. Assuming

13

that the taxes involved are broadly based and a single rate is used (and, for now, either a
sales or value added tax), either way they are administered there will be no effects either
on the slope of the budget constraint faced by consumers or on the relative prices of
goods faced by the firms who produce them. Therefore a move from one basis to another
would be neutral in terms of its impacts on trade, production or consumption. If a change
between tax bases occurred (origin to destination or vice versa) something would adjust
so that no changes in relative prices across country goods resulted. This could be an
adjustment in the two country price levels, wage rates, and/ or exchange rates. In this
sense, neutrality (no real effects) of trade production or consumption effects would
prevail under a tax basis change.
Put slightly differently, border tax adjustments in such cases would have no real
effects since their intended impacts would be fully offset by changes in exchange rates,
price levels across countries, or wage rates (see also Grossman (1980), Whalley (1979),
and Lockwood, Meza & Myles (1994)). This idea was explicitly set out in analytic form
in Krauss & Johnson (1972), Whalley (1979), Grossman (1980), and Lockwood et al
(1994). They all showed formally that in simple models with trade, if there was an
exchange rate that was endogenously determined then a change from one tax basis to
another would simply be offset by a change in the exchange rate with no real effects on
trade, production or consumption. Equally, in models where there were flexible prices
across countries or flexible wage rates within countries and with labor being immobile

14

between countries, then again changes in tax basis (origin to destination or vice versa)
would simply be offset by changes in the real wage or changes in the price level.6
Whichever way the analysis proceeded, there was simply no effect on trade flows
because the move between the origin and destination basis, while in simple cases having
price level effects across countries, has no relative price effects across goods. These
arguments were then further elaborated on in later papers by Whalley (1979) and by
Lockwood et al (1994) which also examined when such neutrality would break down.
It is all of this analysis of the impacts of border tax adjustments which seems to
have been lost in the current debate on carbon motivated border tax adjustments. The
implication, however, is that if carbon motivated border tax adjustments occur which are
common across all products then independently of the motivation for the border
adjustment they will have no real effects on trade, and importantly offer no protection to
domestic producers and will do nothing to address the leakage issues that, in the
European case, ostensibly motivate them.
In the border tax literature, to our knowledge there has been no discussion of any
tax adjustments being used for any purpose outside of the VAT except for this recent
debate on carbon based border tax adjustments. One could, however, also argue for
border tax adjustments to compensate for any type of competitive disadvantage
seemingly imposed on domestic producers. This could be country specific regulations
such as minimum wages, or country specific provision of government programs such as
health care and education; indeed, any number of other factors beyond emissions
commitments could be argued to be needed to be offset by some form of border tax
6

This border tax argument is closely related to arguments made in the 1930’s by the economist Abba
Lerner that a tariff and export subsidy at the same rate have no effects on trade flows and are equivalent to
a devaluation. This is sometimes referred to as a variant of so called Lerner Symmetry.

15

adjustment. There is thus, also in our view, nothing uniquely carbon related in these
arguments being made in the current debate.
We would thus argue that on the basis of earlier literature, one has to separate out
the motivation for the border tax adjustments from an assessment of the actual impacts
that they will have. And importantly, their impact would seem to be largely independent
of their motivation. Hence, in assessing the impacts of carbon emission reduction
motivated BTAs, one can, in effect, set aside the carbon motivation component when
discussing their impact. And in simple models, as with the VAT, they will have no real
effects.
If the border tax adjustments are sector specific as seems likely in the carbon case,
one can seemingly argue that the relative price effect is the dominant component of the
BTA impact. However, whether or not such BTAs will have significant effects depends
on the implicit model used for evaluation of the counter-factual case following the
introduction of a BTA. One could build models where there are sector specific forms of
labor and the sector specific wage rates would be the adjusting mechanism in response to
a BTA reestablishing neutrality, even in sectorally focused border tax adjustments. Thus,
again there seemingly need be no real side effects to follow even from sector specific
BTAs in such models. Whether such models are realistic, and how long and short run
effects enter with differing forms of sector specificity would thus be key. Hence, we
would argue that even with sector specific BTAs, the older literature on border tax
adjustments can still be applied directly to the carbon motivated adjustments that are the
subject of debate today and may continue to take one in a direction missing from current
debate, even recognizing the likely sector specificity of carbon motivated BTAs.

16

4. Concluding Remarks, and the Implications of Older Literature for Carbon
Motivated BTAs

The implications of this discussion of older border tax adjustment literature for
carbon motivated BTAs seems to us to be clear. There is much discussion of the need to
offset the competitive disadvantages which are associated with commitments on carbon
emissions reductions of the type currently proposed in the EU and possibly eventually in
the US, and legislation is pending on these matters in both cases. However, one must
recognize the older literature which stresses the potential neutrality of such tax measures,
and seemingly separate out the price level and relative price effects involved in assessing
the impacts of BTAs. One also has to separate out the motivation for their use from an
assessment of their actual impact. Their potential price level effects could likely have
little or no impacts on trade flows, and even offer no offset to either leakage or
competitive disadvantage from cost impacts of emissions commitments on domestic
producers.
Hence, what may appear as an offset to competitiveness effects of environmental
policies may not be so. Indeed, the seeming relative price effects themselves may not
even have an impact on trading patterns if there is sufficient specificity in the production
technology. If there are rents involved, either with sector specific wage rates or through
specific factors which would absorb the effects of the tax change again, there would
again be no effect on trade. Finally, and in repetition of earlier discussion, BTAs are not
the only instrument available for the chosen objectives; corporate tax manipulation of
rates and structure is another.

17

All of these issues thus seemingly have to enter any evaluation of what carbon
motivated BTAs might actually achieve. We also argue that one has to separate out the
motivation for these adjustments from discussion of what the actual impacts of these
adjustments might be, in contrast to current debate.

18

Bibliography
Asselt, Harro van & Frank Biermann (2007) “European Emissions Trading and the
International Competitiveness of Energy-Intensive Industries: A Legal and
Political Evaluation of Possible Supporting Measures” Energy Policy 35 (1), pp
497-507.
Brewer, T. (2008) “US Climate Policy – Trade Policy Intersections, Current Status,
Prospects and Implications for Carbon Leakage” Presentation to the Climate
Strategies Carbon Leakage Workshop, February 4th, Paris.
De Cendra, Javier (2006) “Can Emissions Trading Schemes be Coupled with Border Tax
Adjustments? An Analysis Vis-à-vis WTO Law” Review of European Community
and International Environmental Law 15 (2), pp 131-145.
Demailly, Damien & Philippe Quirion (2005) “Leakage from Climate Policies and
Border Tax Adjustment: Lessons from a Geographic Model of the Cement
Industry” www.centre-cired.fr/perso/quirion/demailly_quiron_venice_final.pdf
Demaret, Paul & Raoul Stewardson (1994) “BTA Under GATT – Trade, Environment
and the Future” Washington, D.C.
Dosser D. (1967) “Economic analysis of tax harmonization” in: C.S. Shoup, ed., Fiscal
harmonization in common markets, vol. I, Theory, Columbia University Press,
New York.
Dröge, S. & C. Kemfert (2005) “Trade Policy to Control Climate Change: Does the Stick
Beat the Carrot?” Quarterly Journal of Economic Research 74 (2), pp 235-248.
Fauchild, Ole Kristian (1998) “Environmental Taxes and Trade Discrimination” Olso.
Goh, Gavin (2004) “The World Trade Organization, Kyoto and Energy Tax Adjustments
at the Border” Journal of World Trade 38 (3), pp 395-423.
Grossman, Gene M. (1980) “BTA: Do They Distort Trade” Journal of International
Economics No. 10, pp 117-128.
Hufbauer, Gary C. (1996) “Fundamental Tax Reform and Border Tax Adjustments”
Washington D.C.
Ismer, R. and K. Neuhoff (2007) “Border Tax Adjustment: A Feasible Way to Support
Stringent Emission Trading” European Journal of Law and Economics 24, pp
137-164.
Krauss, M. B. & H. G. Johnson (1972) “The Theory of Tax Incidence: A Diagrammatic
Analysis,” Economica, Vol. 39(156), London School of Economics and

19

Political Science, pp 357-82.
Lockwood B., Meza D. & Myles G. (1994) “When are origin and destination regimes
equivalent?” International Tax and Public Finance, 1 (1), pp 5-24.
Neumark Report (1963) “Report of the fiscal and financial committee” in: The EEC
reports on tax harmonization, International Bureau of Fiscal Documentation.
Shibata, H. (1967) “The theory of economic unions: A comparative analysis of customs
unions, free trade areas, and tax unions” in: C.S. Shoup, ed., Fiscal harmonization
in common markets, vol. I, Theory, Columbia University Press, New York.
Tian Y. & J. Whalley (2008) “China’s Unilateral Emissions Reduction Commitments,
and Chinese Incentives to Participate in and Structure Global Environmental
Negotiations” (unpublished).
Walsh, S. & J. Whalley (2008) “The Global Negotiating Framework for Climate
Change Mitigation” (unpublished).
Whalley, J (1979) “Uniform Domestic Tax Rates, Trade Distortions and Economic
Integration” Journal of Public Economics, 11(2), pp 213-21.

20

