                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          GOVERNMENT SPONSORED VERSUS PRIVATE VENTURE CAPITAL:
                          CANADIAN EVIDENCE

                                          James A. Brander
                                            Edward Egan
                                         Thomas F. Hellmann

                                         Working Paper 14029
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w14029


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2008




We are very grateful to Scott Stern, Antoinette Schoar, Josh Lerner and other participants at the Savannah
NBER conference on International Differences in Entrepreneurship. We also thank participants at
workshops at Carleton University and at the Ottawa Economics Association. Financial support from
SSHRC grants 844-2007-0212, 410-2008-0331, and 410-2005-1174 is gratefully acknowledged. The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by James A. Brander, Edward Egan , and Thomas F. Hellmann. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Government Sponsored versus Private Venture Capital: Canadian Evidence
James A. Brander, Edward J. Egan, and Thomas F. Hellmann
NBER Working Paper No. 14029
May 2008
JEL No. G24,H0,O3

                                               ABSTRACT

¸

This paper investigates the relative performance of enterprises backed by government-sponsored venture
capitalists and private venture capitalists. While previous studies focus mainly on investor returns,
this paper focuses on a broader set of public policy objectives, including value-creation, innovation,
and competition. A number of novel data-collection methods, including web-crawlers, are used to
assemble a near-comprehensive data set of Canadian venture-capital backed enterprises. The results
indicate that enterprises financed by government-sponsored venture capitalists underperform on a
variety of criteria, including value-creation, as measured by the likelihood and size of IPOs and M&As,
and innovation, as measured by patents. It is important to understand whether such underperformance
arises from a selection effect in which private venture capitalists have a higher quality threshold for
investment than subsidized venture capitalists, or whether it arises from a treatment effect in which
subsidized venture capitalists crowd out private investment and, in addition, provide less effective
mentoring and other value-added skills. We find suggestive evidence that crowding out and less effective
treatment are problems associated with government-backed venture capital. While the data does not
allow for a definitive welfare analysis, the results cast some doubt on the desirability of certain government
interventions in the venture capital market.


James A. Brander                                      Thomas F. Hellmann
University of British Columbia                        Sauder School of Business
Faculty of Commerce                                   University of British Columbia
2053 Main Mall                                        2053 Main Mall
Vancouver, B.C. V6T 1Z2 CANADA                        Vancouver, BC, V6T 1Z2
james.brander@commerce.ubc.ca                         Canada
                                                      hellmann@sauder.ubc.ca
Edward J. Egan
University of British Columbia
ed@edegan.com
1. Introduction

       Entrepreneurship is frequently cited as an important force promoting economic growth. There are

several possible reasons for such an effect, but perhaps the most significant is the relationship between

entrepreneurship and innovation. We are all familiar with major corporations that began as small

entrepreneurial firms but that ultimately had a major impact on the business environment and on our

personal lives. Start-up firms often innovate long before established rivals and therefore speed up

economic growth. In the computer sector, for example, it seems that the personal computer, which has

dramatically transformed many aspects of modern life, was due to innovative efforts of entrepreneurial

firms such as Apple, Intel, and Microsoft. Presumably we would have had to wait much longer if the only

sources of innovation had been large established firms like IBM, Sperry, Burroughs, and Digital (of which

only IBM still exists). And we would perhaps still be waiting if we had to rely on the public sector for

such innovation.

       Despite this apparent link between entrepreneurial activity, innovation, and economic growth,

most entrepreneurship is not particularly innovative and not particularly successful1. Firms such as

Microsoft and Intel are interesting not because they are typical or representative of entrepreneurship, but

because they are so atypical or unusual. It is not entrepreneurship in general that is so valuable for

economic growth; it is a small sub-class of highly innovative entrepreneurial ventures that provide the

most important contributions. This small sub-class of entrepreneurial firms is the particular focus of the

venture capital industry. Most venture capital activity consists of seeking out, investing in, and

contributing to innovation-intensive entrepreneurial ventures.

       It is perhaps not surprising that national governments and governments of sub-national political

jurisdictions often seek to promote, support, and expand venture capital as a means of promoting

innovation and economic growth. From an economist’s perspective, however, the case for government

intervention in venture capital is far from clear. It is certainly not enough to say (as many politicians do)

that intervention in venture capital is appropriate simply because venture capital might be important for
                                                                                                        3
economic growth. If economic importance were in itself a basis for government intervention this would

justify significant government intervention in all major sectors and would suggest a return to government-

controlled economic planning of the sort that has, on the basis of much evidence, been widely discredited.

A reasonable economic rationale for interventionist policy in a particular market, such as the venture

capital market, must rely on the existence of significant market failure that might reasonably be addressed

by public policy.

       This paper has two primary objectives. First, we seek to describe the conceptual foundations of

government intervention in the venture capital sector. We ask what we would expect to observe if

government policy were well-structured according to appropriate normative principles. We then turn our

attention to an empirical analysis using Canadian data. The Government of Canada and provincial

governments within Canada have made significant efforts to expand venture capital activity through a

variety of policies. Our second primary objective is therefore to assess the record of governments within

Canada in seeking to promote venture capital investment, focusing in particular on the effects on value

creation, competition, and innovation.

       There is a substantial body of research (discussed in more detail in the literature review)

suggesting that problems arising from asymmetric information can lead to market failures in the financing

of early-stage entrepreneurial ventures – much more than in other parts of the financial sector.

Specifically, one important characteristic of innovative early-stage technologies or business models is that

investors, including venture capitalists, typically know much less about them than the innovator, creating

a classic informational asymmetry of the “hidden characteristics” type. Furthermore, once investment in

such ventures is undertaken it is difficult to monitor the activities of the innovator so as to infer whether

appropriate decisions are being made and appropriate efforts undertaken, creating a classic informational

asymmetry of the agency or “hidden action” type. In addition, new ventures typically lack the level of

collateral and/or reputation that might be used to mitigate market failures arising from informational

asymmetries.
                                                                                                           4
       Despite these informational market failures, it is highly questionable as to whether government

intervention can reasonably resolve the informational problems directly. Governments cannot readily

reduce informational asymmetries. One approach to reducing informational asymmetries is to impose

strengthened disclosure requirements (as with the much-discussed Sarbanes-Oxley legislation in the U.S.).

However, such requirements impose costs and are of questionable merit even for large and established

publicly traded corporations. In the entrepreneurial sector, imposing additional disclosure requirements

would probably create an excessive and unworkable burden for many entrepreneurial ventures.

       In addition to this market failure associated with financing innovation, the innovation process itself

is subject to market failure of the externality type. Innovation, and the research and development

underlying it, typically generates positive externalities. In the extreme, an innovation might be easily

copied and therefore be almost like a public good. Even patentable or copyright-protected innovations

such as computer chips and computer software give other firms substantial new information that is useful

for further innovation. For these reasons, it is plausible that innovation would be under-provided. The

innovators can expect to receive only a modest share of the benefits from the innovation and would

therefore lack sufficiently strong incentives to undertake the efficient level of investment in innovation.

This potential under-provision of innovation is partially addressed by intellectual property policy,

especially patent policy and copyright policy. However, much innovation is not covered by these policies,

and protection remains imperfect for those innovations which are covered.

       As both information-based and externality-based market failure would lead to inefficiently low

levels of entrepreneurial innovation, one possible approach to dealing with this problem is to subsidize the

venture capital sector. If the costs of finance in this sector were lowered and the supply of such finance

were increased, this would increase entrepreneurial innovation and would therefore potentially offset the

innovation-reducing effect of market failure problems. One argument for such an approach is that relying

on venture capitalists to “pick winners” and make appropriate investments is likely to be more effective

than having governments try to pick winners by subsidizing innovation directly.
                                                                                                           5
       On the other hand, critics argue that government intervention is itself subject to informational

problems. The government still has to pick which venture capitalists to subsidize, and this process is prone

to error. In addition, the incentives facing venture capitalists might well be distorted as such government

programs are typically burdened with a variety of additional features or conditions that seek to promote

other public policy (or political) objectives that might have significant economic costs. Government-

sponsored venture capitalists (GVCs henceforth) might simply replicate market failures that would occur

anyway and possibly add new ones. Informational problems might be amplified and GVCs might simply

crowd out more efficient private venture capitalists (PVCs henceforth). In any case, it is important to

assess the impact and efficacy of government support to venture capital.

       As will be discussed in our literature review, there has been only a modest amount of empirical

research into the effectiveness of government-sponsored venture capital, and we hope to contribute to this

literature. Our analysis focuses on the Canadian context, where several government interventions in

venture capital markets have important effects on those markets. As described more fully in Section 3, the

quantitatively most important government intervention in venture capital arises through the so-called

“labour-sponsored” venture capital funds (LSVCCs).2 This program provides what is, in effect, a subsidy

to a particular group of venture capital funds. In addition a very large provider of venture capital in

Canada is a public enterprise (or “crown corporation”) known as the Business Development Bank of

Canada (BDC). Furthermore, various provincial governments also provide subsidies through a variety of

other programs. We refer to these programs collectively as government-sponsored venture capital (GVC)

funds and compare them with private venture funds (PVCs). GVCs account for well over half of all

venture capital under management in Canada.

       The basic data on Canadian firms obtaining venture capital is surprisingly incomplete. One of the

contributions of this paper is to introduce some novel data gathering techniques, including the use of web-

crawlers. This allows us to identify more than twice as many venture-capital backed enterprises than are

reported in official or commercially available data sources. For these firms, our data contains information
                                                                                                          6
on the number and type of investors, as well as some basic characteristics such as industry and founding

date. We then augment the data by examining a variety of performance measures related to the creation of

value and innovation by these enterprises. However, the data also contains important limitations. Most

notably, we are unable to measure the actual amount of funding provided by the various types of

investors.

       The GVCs, particularly the labour-sponsored funds, have generated a substantial controversy

within Canada. One of the most frequently voiced criticisms concerns the relatively low rates of return

generated by GVCs. We would argue that this criticism, while clearly relevant, is far from the whole

story. The returns to the funds do not reflect the full social return on the investments. From a public policy

perspective, it is far from clear that the objective of the program is to create profitable venture capital

funds per se. The policy background to the legislation creating and amending GVCs includes a variety of

objectives, of which generating reasonable returns for investors is only one such objective. At the broadest

level, the ultimate objective of the programs is to enhance overall economic performance, focusing

particularly on the entrepreneurial sector. Investor returns are a component of economic performance but

other performance measures are also very important. This paper provides an analysis of the performance

of GVCs with respect to important outcome measures that have not been previously studied in this

context.

       One goal of GVC programs is to develop and support entrepreneurial firms that will create

significant value in the economy. Consistent with the venture capital literature we measure this as the

value of the firm at either an initial public offering (IPO) or a third-party acquisition. Both of these events

are associated with successful venture capital investment, as successful ventures normally either “go

public” with an IPO or are acquired by a third party. Either of these so-called “exit” events signals the end

of the firm’s life as a stand-alone privately-held enterprise and allows venture capitalists and other early

stage investors to obtain liquidity on their financial stakes, and possibly withdraw from any managerial

functions in the enterprise.3 Typically these successful exit events generate substantial earnings for
                                                                                                     7
venture capitalists, and possibly other early stage investors, as well as for the founders and employees of

the venture.4 On the other hand, going out of business is typically considered as an unsuccessful outcome.

In between those two outcomes (successful exits and going out of business) are firms that remain

privately-held. Therefore, we can reasonable consider successful exits as an indicator of success, or we

could consider “survival” (successful exits plus continuing as a privately held enterprise) as an alternative

measure. We investigate both.

       A second important goal of GVC programs is to promote innovation, although it is hard to

measure. We compare the patent portfolios of firms financed by GVCs with the patent portfolios of

otherwise comparable ventures financed by PVCs. While patents are an imperfect measure of innovation,

they are certainly the best and most widely used single measure. Effects on patents are therefore the

natural place to start in assessing the effect of venture capital on innovation, although we emphasize that it

would desirable in future work to supplement patent information with other measures of innovation. As a

small first step in that direction, we examine R&D spending for ventures that went public, noting that

these are the only companies for which R&D data is systematically available. Yet another interesting

aspect is the choice of industry, especially whether the investments pertain to high versus low technology

industries.

       A third goal of GVC programs relates to the promotion of competition and of a more

“entrepreneurial” economy. New enterprises supported by venture capital might or might not provide

additional competition in the marketplace. Specifically, if a venture capitalist supports an enterprise that

becomes successful, has an IPO, and continues to grow as independent competitor, this typically increases

competition in the relevant marketplace. If, on the other hand, an acquisition by a potential or actual rival

occurs, this could reduce competition in the market. Therefore, we assess the relative record of GVCs in

supporting the creation of new stand-alone business entities (thereby enhancing competition) compared

with their role in contributing to acquisitions and thereby possibly reducing competition. In other words,


                                                                                                            8
we compare the relative incidence of exit by IPO with exit by acquisition for GVCs and compare it with

the record of PVCs.

       A fourth frequently-mentioned goal of GVC programs is employment creation, although

economists normally express reservations about whether employment promotion is appropriate addressed

by such policies. In any case, we do seek to assess the employment creation record of GVCs. The biggest

challenge for our analysis is unavailability of data. In particular, our analysis of employment creation is

limited to the subset of ventures that went public, which is a small and unrepresentative sample.

       In summary, our analysis examines the empirical relationship between the receipt of government-

sponsored venture capital funding and the likelihood and size of a successful exit event, the enterprises’

innovation activities, as well as measures of competition and employment. To provide a brief overview of

the main results, we find that enterprises funded by GVCs tend to underperform on most outcome

measures. They are less likely to have successful exits and, in particular, are much less likely to have IPOs

on major exchanges. Furthermore, they generate lower exit values when they do have a successful exit.

GVCs invest less in high technology industries, and their enterprises generate fewer patents (even after

controlling for industry selection). Our results provide no evidence that GVCs increase employment or

competition.

       We recognize that government-sponsored venture capital might be worthwhile even if the

associated enterprises are less successful than enterprises funded by private venture capitalists. If the

problem is that the private sector would not provide enough venture capital, then we would want the

public sector to expand the pool, picking the “next best” set of enterprises who would, presumably, not be

quite as good as the set selected by the private sector in the absence of government support.

       It therefore very important to ask whether publicly supported venture capital does add to the pool

of supported enterprises or whether it simply displaces or “crowds out” private investment. A complete

answer to this question would require consideration of counterfactuals of what would have happened in

the absence of government intervention, something that we cannot do here. Nonetheless we examine some
                                                                                                    9
indirect evidence which suggests that there is considerable crowding out but that crowding out is not

complete. Government VC support might therefore promote modest market expansion.

       One important issue relates to “endogeneity”. If we observe that enterprises supported by PVCs

are better than enterprises supported by GVCs, this might arise for one of two reasons. Either the PVCs

might select better enterprises or the PVCs might provide more useful value-added to the enterprises and

might therefore create more success for a given pool of enterprises than GVCs. These two effects can be

thought of as the “selection effect” and the “treatment effect”.

       From an econometric point of view, to estimate the “treatment effect” we would want to

(exogenously) assign venture capitalists to enterprises on a random basis and observe the performance of

the enterprises. This is not how the observations are generated as the PVCs select the enterprises they

want to invest in. Therefore, as an explanatory variable for performance, a PVC indicator is actually

endogenous in the sense that we expect PVCs to choose enterprises with good potential to perform well. If

we are interested in the selection effect, the resulting estimates are interesting. However, if we wish to

identify the treatment effect then standard OLS is compromised by a classic endogeneity problem

generated by the selection effect.

       The normal solution to such endogeneity problems is to use instrumental variables, if good

instruments can be found. In this case we have a very interesting and, in our view, very useful instrument

that can be used for this purpose. This instrument is based on the exogenous variation in the political

leadership of provincial governments, as explained more fully later. We find that the funding by GVCs is

related to having left-leaning provincial governments. Moreover, the negative effect of GVC funding on

the various outcomes measures becomes even stronger in the instrumental variable specifications. These

results are at least suggestive of a significant treatment effect for private venture capital relative to

government-sponsored venture capital.

       Section 2 of this paper contains a literature review of related work. Section 3 provides a

conceptual framework for our analysis. Section 4 describes the venture capital market in Canada,
                                                                                             10
including a review of relevant government policy. Section 5 provides an overview of our data and Section

6 is devoted to our empirical analysis and major results. Section 7 contains concluding remarks.

2. Literature Review

       We take the view that the primary conceptual rationale for government intervention in

entrepreneurial finance is based on asymmetric information. Informational asymmetries are particularly

important in entrepreneurial finance and these asymmetries might cause significant “market failure” in the

sense that markets would fail to achieve economic efficiency. The basic theory of asymmetric information

was pioneered by Akerlof (1970), Arrow (1973), and Jensen and Meckling (1976), among others.

Asymmetric information can lead to both “hidden characteristics” and the associated adverse selection

problem, and to “hidden action” and the associated agency problem. Early work on venture capital,

including Sahlman (1990), and Amit, Glosten, and Muller (1990) emphasize the importance of both

adverse selection and agency problems in venture capital finance and, by inference, in entrepreneurial

finance more broadly. Amit, Brander, and Zott (1998) suggest that the venture capital market exists as a

specialized component of financial markets precisely because venture capitalists (VCs) have or acquire a

comparative (and absolute) advantage in dealing with situations of asymmetric information. VCs devote

significant effort to obtaining information about particular enterprises and technologies, and often have

highly relevant technical background experience.

       There is considerable evidence that venture capitalists provide a signal of the quality of firms

under conditions of asymmetric information. This is highlighted in the extensive literature on the effect of

venture capital and underwriting on IPO pricing. See, in particular, Beatty and Ritter (1986), Booth and

Smith (1986), Megginson and Weiss (1991), Barry, Muscarella, Peavy, and Vetsuypans (1990), Brav and

Gompers (1997), and Jain and Kini (2000, 2006), among others. The literature on the role of venture

capitalists in mitigating informational asymmetries in the acquisition process is much more modest. See

Brander and Egan (2007). Notwithstanding the ability of venture capitalists to ease informational

asymmetries, markets for entrepreneurial finance still have sufficient potential for market failure that there
                                                                                                           11
might be a case for government intervention on this basis. Specifically, we might expect informational

asymmetries to imply undersupply of entrepreneurial finance relative to the efficient or “first-best”

outcome.

       Although we emphasize the importance of venture capitalists in mitigating informational

asymmetries we recognize that VCs have other important functions. In particular, they provide managerial

“value-added” to the firms in which they invest, often providing needed financial, marketing, human

resource management, and operations management skills to entrepreneurial firms. Papers emphasizing

and providing empirical support for this “value-added” view of venture capitalists include Brander, Amit,

and Antweiler (2002) and Hellmann and Puri (2002). The role of venture capital in value creation has

been explored in Hellmann, Egan and Brander (2005) and elsewhere, and is largely complementary to the

literature on returns in venture capital, including, Kaplan and Schoar (2004), Jones and Rhodes-Kropf

(2002), Ljungqvuist and Richardson (2003), and Gompers and Lerner (1997), among others.

       The second type of market failure that is relevant to government intervention in venture capital

markets is the externality associated with R&D and innovation. There is an extensive literature on this

subject that we cannot do justice to here. A valuable textbook treatment of this topic is provided by Tirole

(1988, Ch. 10). The key point is that there is reason to believe that innovation might be underprovided

because of the substantial positive externalities associated with it. Much effort has gone into estimating

the extent of such externalities. One classic study of this type is Bresnahan (1986). See also Griliches

(1992) and Jaffe (1996) for empirical evidence concerning the extent of R&D spillovers.

       For our purposes, one important question concerns the relationship between venture capital and

R&D. If there is under-provision of innovation, does venture capital act to partially offset this under-

provision? The literature on this topic is not extensive, but we would draw attention to Kortum and Lerner

(2000), Gans and Stern (2003), and Hellmann and Puri (2000), all which suggest that venture capital does

tend to promote innovation. Accordingly, it is possible that a subsidy to venture capital might expand the


                                                                                                         12
supply of venture capital and might therefore boost innovation toward the efficient level, offsetting or at

least mitigating the market failure associated with insufficient innovation.

       The primary question we address concerns the effect of government subsidies to venture capital on

economic performance in the form of value-creation, enhancement of competition, and innovation. We

have found only a handful of papers that address the effects of government intervention on venture

capital. Valuable papers in this category include Cumming and MacIntosh (2006), Leleux and Surlemont

(2003), and Wallsten (2000), all of which find significant “crowding out” of private venture capital by

publicly supported venture capital. Such crowding out suggests very limited benefits to government

subsidies of venture capital. On the other hand Lerner (1999, 2002) and Gans and Stern (2003) provide

some evidence of success for the U.S. Small Business Investment Research (SBIR) program. Anderson

and Tian (2003) document the poor investor returns arising from the Canadian LSVCC program.



3. Conceptual Framework

       One important question for our purposes concerns what we would expect to see arising from a

successful government program. We can then compare what we do observe with such expectations. The

first important point is that we should not be surprised if GVC-supported enterprises earn lower returns

than PVC-supported enterprises. Consider the following very useful diagram, suggested by Scott Stern

(see also Gans and Stern (2003)). The diagram provides a simplified view of the venture capital market.

The private venture capitalists have a private upward-sloping (marginal) cost of finance shown in the

diagram. There is also an expected private marginal return to venture capital, given by the lower of the

two downward-sloping curves. We would expect the private market outcome to yield investment level VP.

However, there are external benefits or “positive externalities” associated with venture capital.

Accordingly, the marginal social value of venture capital finance is given by the upper downward-sloping

line. At the private outcome, VP, the equilibrium level of venture capital investment is less than the

socially efficient outcome given by V*, where the (private) marginal cost is just equal to the social
                                                                                                  13
marginal benefit. An appropriate subsidy, provided through GVCs, could increase the equilibrium

quantity of venture capital investment to the socially efficient level, as shown.

                                             Insert Figure 1 here

       An effective program would leave intact the “inframarginal” projects to the left of point A on the

private (marginal) value schedule and would have the effect of adding the “extensive margin” – consisting

of projects in the range A to B along the schedule. Private VCs would continue to support the

inframarginal projects and GVCs would support the projects in the extensive margin.

       If the program worked in this way then the private value or return arising from the GVC

enterprises (i.e. drawn from the segment AB) would be lower than the private value associated with

inframarginal projects funded by PVCs. On the other hand, there is no reason to expect the external value,

given by the difference between the upper and lower downward sloping lines, to be lower for GVC funded

enterprises than for PVC funded enterprises. As drawn, this external value is constant. In general, there

could be any relationship between private and social value for GVC enterprises. It could be higher, lower,

or the same. The principle of insufficient reason suggests that similar value would be the appropriate “null

hypothesis”.

       The diagram also clarifies the crowding out point. A good program would add an extensive margin

as shown by AB. However, it is possible that GVCs do not add any extensive margin but simply compete

for inframarginal projects – those to the left of point A on the private value schedule. In the extreme there

might no additional enterprises funded. This would be a negative outcome as it would imply that GVC

programs create a transfer of resources from taxpayers to participants in the market with no corresponding

additional social benefit.

       This diagram also implies that there is no “treatment effect” associated with GVCs. As drawn, the

private and social value of an enterprise is not affected by whether the enterprise is funded by GVCs or

PVCs. The difference in return or private value simply arises from a selection effect: PVCs select higher

quality projects as is consistent with their higher (i.e. unsubsidized) return threshold. This implies that any
                                                                                                             14
value-added provided to an enterprise (either private or social) is provided equally by both PVCs and

GVCs. However, it is possible that GVCs might have a less positive “mentoring” effect on enterprises

than PVCs. If so, this would be an important negative effect of GVC programs, particularly if crowding

out occurs. With crowding out and a negative treatment effect GVC programs would replace PVC

investment and, in addition, reduce the (private and social) value of the enterprise.

       The key inferences to be drawn from the conceptual framework for interpreting our results are as

follows:

       i)         We should not be surprised or alarmed if GVC-supported enterprises exhibit lower

                  private performance than PVC-supported enterprises. This would be expected under a

                  well-designed program.

       ii)        We should be concerned if the external (i.e. non-private) effects of GVC-supported

                  enterprises fall short of PVC supported enterprises.

       iii)       The extent of crowding out is very important. If GVCs appear to be crowding out private

                  venture capital, this would be a negative finding.

       iv)        If GVCs have weaker private performance than PVCs this could be due to either

                  selection or treatment (or both). To the extent the effect is due to selection, this is

                  consistent with a good GVC program: PVCs would simply have a higher threshold for

                  returns, as we would expect of unsubsidized funds. However, if weaker performance is

                  due to a “treatment effect” – less effective mentoring, then this would a negative finding.

                  Therefore, it is very important to see what happens when we “correct for” the selection

                  effect and focus only on the treatment effect. A poor program would be characterized by

                  a large negative treatment effect and a small selection effect. The small selection effect

                  would suggest crowding out – that GVCs were competing with PVCs for projects that

                  would be funded in any case, and it would suggest that GVCs generate lower values

                  when they do replace PVCs.
                                                                                                          15
All four of these points can be assessed empirically.



4. An Overview of the Canadian Venture Capital Market

        As the Canadian economy is roughly 10% of the size of the U.S. economy, we might expect the

venture capital markets in the two countries to be characterized by a similar 10 to 1 ratio. In fact, however,

size estimates vary considerably for both countries, depending in part on how broadly venture capital is

defined. The Canadian Venture Capital and Private Equity Association (CVCA) reports that its members

have over C$50 billion of venture capital under management in Canada in 2007. Presumably the full size

of the venture capital market including venture capital from non-CVCA members would be significantly

larger. To keep things in perspective, we might note that Canadian GDP for 2007 exceeded C$1.2 trillion.

        Relative to GDP, population, total R&D expenditure, or other suitable measures of economic size

and activity, the Canadian venture capital market is usually reported as comparable to its U.S. counterpart.

If anything Canadian venture capital markets might be slightly larger than the pro-rata 10% share

suggested by relative GDP. See Brander, Egan and Boardman (2005) for a discussion of various metrics

of this type.

        Canadian venture capital data, whether reported by the CVCA, the Global Entrepreneurship

Monitor (GEM), Industry Canada, the OECD, or academic papers comes largely (although not

exclusively) from one commercial source: Thomson Financial Canada, also known as Thomson-

Macdonald (formerly Macdonald & Associates Ltd.). While this is a valuable source, its survey methods

necessarily yield incomplete coverage and the incompleteness appears to vary systematically by region

within Canada. This incompleteness particularly applies to non-Canadian venture capital investments in

Canadian enterprises. The methods we use (described in the next section) allow for more complete

coverage and should not be subject to biased regional coverage.

        The Canadian venture capital market differs from its US counterpart with respect to two important

structural characteristics. First, US venture capitalists appear to invest heavily in Canada, while the
                                                                                                     16
converse is not true. Industry Canada (2003) reported that US venture capital accounted for approximately

one quarter of the total venture capital dollars invested in Canada between 2000 and 2002. While

Canadian venture capitalists do invest in US firms, they probably accounted for on the order of one

percent of the total dollars invested in the U.S. in the same period. If the U.S.-Canada border had no

effect, and distance did not matter either, we might expect that about 90% of the venture capital in Canada

would come from the U.S. and about 10% of the venture capital in the U.S. would come from Canada.

Borders and distance do matter, so the actual proportions are much less. However, the shortfall is much

greater in the direction from Canada to the U.S. rather than vice versa.

       Second, there appears to be more government intervention in venture capital (and a larger net

subsidy) in Canada than in the U.S., although it is hard to be definitive given the proliferation of state

programs in the U.S. and corresponding provincial programs in Canada. At the federal level in Canada

there are two major interventions. One is the Business Development Bank of Canada (BDC), a

government-owned venture capitalist.5 The other major federal initiative is the labour-sponsored fund

program. The associated venture capital funds are often referred to as Labour Sponsored Venture Capital

Corporations (LSVCCs) or as Labour Sponsored Investment Funds (LSIFs). The main feature of the

program is that investors receive a 15% tax credit from the federal government on their investments, in

effect providing a 15% subsidy to such funds. In addition some provincial governments add an additional

tax credit, typically an additional 15%, making the total effective subsidy 30%. An individual investing

$1000 would, after tax, in effect be getting $300 of the investment money from governments. These funds

have been the subject of much study, including Ayayi (2002), Cumming and MacIntosh (2002, 2003a,

2003b, 2006), and Osborne and Sandler (1998). See Sandler (2004) for a very thorough account of

LSVCCs and other subsidies to venture capital in Canada and the United States.

       At the provincial level there are both provincially operated funds and the provincial equivalents of

the LSVCC program. Provincially operated funds are particularly prevalent in Quebec6, however, Ontario,

Manitoba, New Brunswick, Nova Scotia, and Saskatchewan have all had provincially operated funds that
                                                                                                 17
were active in the 1994 to 2004 period.7 Likewise, there are, or have been, provincial equivalents to the

LSVCC program in Alberta, British Columbia, Manitoba, Ontario, Quebec, Nova Scotia, and

Saskatchewan, and the remaining three provinces (as well as one territory, the Yukon), all have active

direct investment tax credit programs. Collectively these provincial programs are often referred to as

VCCs8, although there is considerable heterogeneity in the corresponding policies. Typically these

programs require a variety of conditions that correspond to other policy objectives in addition to simply

increasing the supply of venture capital, such as job creation, rural development, economic diversification,

increasing export sales, supporting women, aboriginal or other disadvantaged entrepreneurs, and

promoting community integration.

           In addition to government-sponsored funds, Canada also has the conventional private limited

partnerships that characterize venture capital in the United States. These funds get much of their resource

base from institutional investors such as pension funds, but these institutions have not been as aggressive

in venture capital finance in Canada as in the United States. There are also some corporate venture capital

funds, and there is some participation in the venture capital market by investment arms of commercial

banks. In Canada, it is estimated that government-sponsored venture capital funds provide over 50% of

all venture capital invested in Canadian enterprises. As a point of comparison, we estimate that the

corresponding GVC policy interventions in the US account for approximately 5% of the total invested

capital.

           Cumming (2006) finds that the Canadian private limited partnerships and corporate venture capital

funds are analogous to their US counterparts, which have been studied in Gompers and Lerner (1996,

1998a, 1998b and 1999) and elsewhere. Gompers and Lerner (1999) found that US limited partnership

contracts provide considerable performance incentives to PVCs and change over time to adapt to new

legislation and market conditions; and Kaplan, Martel and Stromberg (2003) found that non-US venture

capitalists perform better when using US style investment contracts with their entrepreneurs. Cumming

(2002) supports this latter finding but notes that the tax regime in Canada causes US venture capitalists to
                                                                                                         18
alter their contracting preferences towards Canadian entrepreneurs, and particularly to limit their use of

convertible preferred shares.

       In addition to the tax credits associated with LSVCCs, investors also receive capital gains tax

relief, providing that they hold their investment for a suitable period, which is generally about 5 to 8

years. Although Cumming and MacIntosh (2003a) found that LSVCC returns are “extremely poor” and

Brander, Amit, and Antweiler (2002) found that their “performance significantly lags” their private

counterparts. LSVCCs are typically constrained to make investments within their province of registry, and

sometimes face stage and industry investment requirements.

       An interesting institutional feature is that Canada has an active lower-tier stock market segment,

targeted at “early stage” ventures, called the TSX Ventures Exchange. It was formed from the merger of

three provincial exchanges: The Montreal Exchange, the Alberta Stock Exchange, and the Vancouver

Stock Exchange all became the Canadian Venture Exchange which in turn became the TSX Venture

Exchange (TSX-VN). This segment of the stock market has lower listing and disclosure requirements than

the main stock market segment (called the Toronto Stock Exchange or TSE). It also attracts less funding

for firms and provides less liquidity to investors. A listing on the TSX-VN is therefore a less impressive

exit event than a listing on the TSE, NYSE or NASDAQ.



5. Data Description

       The unit of observation in our data is the enterprise (or “venture”). In principle, our data set

consists of all Canadian enterprises in which one or more Canadian venture capital funds had an

investment at any time in the 1996-2004 period. We use a fairly strict definition of venture capital,

excluding so-called angel investments, mezzanine investments, buyout investments, private investments

in public entities (PIPEs), and issuance of credit.

       Figure 2 provides an overview of the data collection process. Although it is never possible to

ascertain this with certainty, we believe that our data does capture practically all Canadian venture-capital
                                                                                                          19
backed firms. We obtain data on these firms using an iterative search process. We started by compiling a

list of Canadian venture capital funds from a variety of sources including the Canadian Venture Capital

Association (CVCA), Réseau Capital and industry association membership lists, Pratt’s guide,

government websites, and legislative reports, as well as forum and network websites. We then

supplemented this list using custom built web-bots9 and a human review of search engine results. We

identified the venture capital firm responsible for each fund, and for each venture capital firm we then

obtained list of all the ventures in which the firm had investments from 1996 through 2004 by going

through both their current website (if available) and their historic websites (using Internet archives, which

are available back to 1996). We recorded, where possible, the year that a venture first appeared in a fund’s

portfolio, and any other information about the venture and its financing. We then searched on the internet

for information about these ventures and their financing histories. These searches were conducted by both

web-bots and human agents. The resulting information typically came the venture’s website, press

releases, news items or regulatory filings. From the information about each venture we obtained a list of

additional investors (including American venture capital funds, angel investors, investment banks and so

forth). We then obtained additional (Canadian) ventures from investment portfolio information about

these additional funds. We iterated this process until convergence was reached. We believe that our data

set is more comprehensive than other sources sometimes used. For example, for the 1996 to 2004 period,

we identify 3,720 enterprises. This compares with 1,763 enterprises meeting our criteria identified by

Thomson Financial for the same period.

                                            Insert Figure 2 here

       Conveniently, it is relatively easy to classify venture capital funds into government-sponsored or

private categories. Government-sponsored funds include all LSVCCs, the BDC, all VCCs and venture

capital funds operated by provincial governments. We can therefore distinguish among enterprises

receiving investments from private funds, from government-sponsored funds, or from both.


                                                                                                          20
       Given the list of venture-backed enterprises, we then identified IPOs and acquisitions for these

enterprises. Documentation was taken from the System for Electronic Document Analysis and Retrieval

(SEDAR) and Strategis in Canada and the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) in the U.S., as

well as from press reports and other public disclosures (again gathered by web-bots), and cross-checked

against data from the FP Advisor, Global New Issues and SDC Mergers and Acquisitions databases. In the

case of multiple exits for a single enterprise, such as a listing on a junior exchange followed by an upgrade

to a senior exchange, we took the first event where the venture capitalists had the opportunity to exit,

unless there was evidence to suggest that they retained their holdings in the firm. For further information

of the determination of our exit set see Hellmann, Egan and Brander (2005).

       Venture founding year information and some address information was also taken from Strategis

for those ventures that were federally incorporated. Furthermore, additional addresses and the operational

status of the firms in 2006 were determined by custom data-mining software designed to work with the

Canadian Yellow Pages, if this information was not evident from the firm’s website. Investments from US

venture capitalists into Canadian enterprises were recorded from Thomson VentureXpert. Canadian patent

data was retrieved by custom data-mining software from the Canadian Intellectual Property Office’s

(CIPO) online repository. We searched for multiple variations on each firm name and matched the results

back using proprietary name matching software. US patent data was obtained from the National Bureau of

Economic Research patent data, as described in Hall, Jaffe and Trajtenberg (2001), and joined using name

matching software. Measures of patent citations received and patent originality were averaged on a per

firm basis.

                                            Insert Table 1 here

       Table 1 shows the discrete or indicator variables first. The first row should be read as saying that

we have an indicator variable called “PVC”. This is an indicator variable that takes on the value 1 for

enterprises that received venture capital only from private VC funds and 0 otherwise. There are 3,720

enterprises in the data set overall. This variable takes on value 1 for 1,208 (32%) of these, indicating that
                                                                                                          21
1,208 enterprises received venture capital only from private funds. Similarly, the GVC variable tells us

that 1,784 (48%) of the enterprises received venture capital only from government-sponsored venture

capital funds. The remaining 728 (20%) of the enterprises received venture capital investments from both

private and government-sponsored funds. We call these MVC, meaning that the company has a mix of

private and government-sponsored venture funds. The variables Number-of-PVC and Number-of-GVC

measure the number of each investor type participating in a venture. We find that the average venture had

1.32 GVCs and 0.85 PVCs. The variable Number-of-VC simply measures the total number of investors

for a given enterprise. Finally, for the analysis it will be useful to work with the fraction of venture funds

that are government-sponsored, as measured by Fraction-of-GVC, which is obtained as the ratio of

Number-of-GVC over Number-of-VC.

       To be in the data set, an enterprise simply needed to be in the investment portfolio of one of more

venture capital funds at some time in the 1996-2004 period. This includes some enterprises that received

investments prior to 1996. Of these 3,720 enterprises, 408 (about 11%) had a “successful” exit event over

the period studied. In future years more of these enterprises will of course have IPOs or be acquired by

third parties. Our empirical analysis attempts to control for this censoring problem in a simple manner,

namely by including founding year effects (see below).10 Figure 3 shows the frequency distribution of the

ventures’ founding year, over the sample period. Consistent with previous observations of the venture

capital market, the period 1999-2000 witnessed the largest number of venture-capital backed firm

foundings.

                                            Insert Figure 3 here

       The successful exits consist of 293 acquisitions (129 of which are by publicly traded U.S. firms)

and 115 IPOs. The IPOs can be divided into “junior” and “senior” categories. Junior IPOs are IPOs on

exchanges that specialize in small, relatively early stage IPOs, most of which are on the TSX Venture

Exchange (or its predecessors). Senior IPOs are larger IPOs on larger exchanges, mostly the Toronto

Stock Exchange (TSE). Some senior IPOs are on the NYSE or the NASDAQ. As can be seen in Table 1,
                                                                                             22
the median senior IPO is almost 10 times the size of the median junior IPO. However, some junior IPOs

are larger than some senior IPOs, and the largest junior IPO is on the same order of magnitude as the

median senior IPO. Figure 4 shows the frequency distribution of IPOs and M&As over the sample period.

It shows that IPOs followed the familiar boom and bust cycle with a peak in the 1999-2000 period.

Interestingly, M&As show a considerable smoother path over time.

                                            Insert Figure 4 here

       An enterprise is defined as “out of business” if it had not had a successful exit and could no longer

be found in the appropriate Yellow Pages as of 2006 or through other means. Using this definition, 40.7%

of the enterprises in the sample survived (i.e., did not go out of business) within the sample period (i.e. by

2006). This reflects an important reality associated with venture capital investment. Even though venture

capitalists are highly specialized in selecting and mentoring innovative enterprises, most investments

either lose money outright or earn less than what would have been earned by investing in Government of

Canada bonds or other very safe assets. Most of the return to venture capitalists comes from a relatively

small number of enterprises that are successful enough to have IPOs or to be acquired by a third party.

       An important question is what kind of enterprises receive venture capital. One of the reasons for

supporting venture capital is to address market failures associated with asymmetries of information;

another is the promotion of innovative activity. Both of these are widely believed to be associated with

high technology firms. We define high technology to consist of both information technology (IT) and

biotechnology, both of which are in turn defined using six digit NAIC codes. See Brander and Egan

(2007) for a detailed description of these two industry classifications and their NAIC code

correspondence. The remaining industries were defined in terms of single-digit NAIC codes. However,

given the relatively small number of exits (and investments) in some industries, it is necessary to do some

agglomeration. Specifically, we combine all single-digit industries with fewer than 100 enterprises into

one of two categories: primary sectors consisting of NAIC codes 1 & 2, and tertiary sectors, or service

industries, consisting of NAIC codes 6 through 9. Of the 3,720 enterprises in our sample, we have
                                                                                               23
industry classifications (6-digit NAIC codes) for 2,832 (about 76%). Of these 2,832 enterprises, 1,226

(about 33%) are in what we describe as the “high-tech” sector11. Our regression analysis includes

specifications with industry fixed effects, represented by single-digit NAIC code groups, as well as a code

for IT and another for biotechnology, as control variables.12

                                             Insert Figure 5 here

                                              Insert Table 2 here

       Figure 5 shows the distribution of venture capital investments by industry, and also indicates the

relative proportions of private, government and mixed investors. To further explore how these types of

investors focus on different industry sectors, we estimate a simple multinomial logit model, where the

dependent variables are GVC (with the omitted category being PVC) and “PVC and MVC” (with the

omitted category being GVC) , and where the independent variables are the industry dummies. This

simple regression estimates the likelihood that firms in a given sector obtain government or mixed/private

investors, and Table 2 presents the results in descending order of the estimated regression coefficient.

Thus, this regression orders the relative importance that different investor have in different industries. The

results are striking. Government-sponsored venture capital firms have a preference for lower technology

industries, such as resource extraction and manufacturing. The major high-technology areas of

information technology and biotechnology, however, are lowest on the list of relative industry

preferences. This ranking is essentially reversed for the mixed and private investor category, suggesting

that syndication between private and government investors is particularly likely in the high technology

sector. We will return to this finding in section 5.4.

       Our data has several notable deficiencies. Most important, we were unable to gather any

systematic information on the amount of capital invested by venture capitalists. Some of that information

is available in the commercial database provided by Thomson Financial Canada, but there are two major

problems with that data source. First, some industry experts have argued that the data contains some

inconsistencies and measurement errors. Second, as noted above, the Thomson Financial Canada data
                                                                                              24
appears to have an incomplete and biased coverage of the population of Canadian venture-capital backed

firms. We attempted to independently collect data on the investment amount, including for those

enterprises not covered in Thomson Financial. However, this attempt failed because our alterative sources

of information, such as web pages, do not contain systematic and reliable information on investment

amounts. Similar problems also explain the lack of other data that would have been of interest to the

analysis, such as the valuation of the venture capital investments, or the post-investment involvement of

venture capitalists in the enterprise (e.g., board seats, control rights, etc…). We also face other severe data

limitations. Our only measure of employment comes from IPO prospectuses, and therefore is available

only for a tiny fraction of ventures. A similar problem holds for our R&D intensity measure. Another

important limitation is that we were unable to collect reliable measures of the total size of the government

subsidy. Moreover, we were unable to systematize any changes in the more detailed rules that affect the

attractiveness of the government subsidies. Despite our best efforts, we were also unable to always obtain

complete information on industry classification and the first year of financing. We continue to include the

associated observations in our analysis by categorizing them into a distinct dummy category. We note that

our data is fundamentally cross-sectional (one observation per enterprise), so that we cannot perform any

panel-based analysis.



6. Analysis and Results

6.1. Choice of empirical specification

       Our primary method of analysis is based on regression analysis as implemented by STATA 10. As

a first step for the analysis we focus on characterizing the relationship between investor types and

outcome variables. It is important to remember that this analysis merely establishes correlations: the

investor type is clearly not exogenous, so that no causation should be inferred from these regressions.

Wherever possible, we use the “robust” option, which corrects for heteroskedasticity using the

Huber/White/sandwich adjustment. We report t or z statistics as is appropriate, along with their p-values.
                                                                                                         25
       There are multiple regression specifications that elucidate different aspects of the underlying data.

In Table 3 we therefore consider one of the most important performance measures, namely whether a

company experienced a successful exit or not, and explore the meaning of a variety of regression

specifications. The dependent variable is a categorical variable taking on value 1 if a successful exit

occurred and value 0 if it did not. Accordingly, we use Probit regressions to estimate the effect of different

types of venture capital funds.

       We distinguish between two different approaches of representing investor types. The first is a

categorical approach, and divides venture backed firms into three types: firms that only receive private

venture capital (PVC) – we will use them as our omitted default category; firms that only receive

government-sponsored venture capital (GVC); and firms that receive a mix of the two (MVC). The

categorical approach has the advantage of being easy to interpret, although the simple categories do not

exploit the full amount of information available. We therefore also consider a continuous variable

approach that uses more of the available information. In particular, we calculate the fraction of a

company’s investors that are government sponsored. Note that in an ideal world, we would want to use

the fraction of money received from GVCs, but unfortunately we do not have sufficiently reliable

investment data to undertake that approach. Table 3 contains two separate row sections, one for the

categorical and one for the continuous variable approach.

       The columns of Table 3 contain a variety of alternative specifications for the control variables. The

first column reports the model without any control variables. We find that having only government-

sponsored has a negative and significant effect on the probability of a successful exit. However, having

both government and private VC actually increases the probability of a successful exit. This result may

seem surprising at first. Before placing any interpretation on this result, we need to realize a fundamental

problem: better ventures are likely to raise more rounds of investment involving a greater number of

investors and so would have a greater likelihood of receiving investment from a GVC. This means that,

for purely mechanical reasons, better ventures that attract more investors are more likely to end up in the
                                                                                                         26
MVC category. Column 2 addresses this problem by adding a control for the number-of-investors. We

find that this alone eliminates the significance of the MVC coefficient. We naturally have to be careful not

to give a causal interpretation to the number-of-investors variable: having more investor may improve a

company’s performance, but better ventures also attract more investors. This specification therefore

allows us to focus on how the type of investor is related to outcomes, after controlling for the obvious

positive relationship between performance and the number of investors. The continuous variable

approach, using the fraction of government investors, provides further evidence that controlling for the

number of investors may be important (especially in the categorical specification). We note that the

number-of-investors variable is again highly significant, but that the Fraction-of-GVC variable is hardly

affected by its introduction. This suggests that the investor type variables (either GVC and MVC, or

Fraction-of-GVC) measure a different effect than the number-of-investors, i.e., these variable separate out

the investor type effect from an enterprise quality effect. Note that, obviously, the number-of-investors is

far from being a perfect control for enterprise quality. In unreported robustness checks we replaced this

variable with an estimate of the number of rounds obtained by the enterprise. Because of data limitations,

we are unable to provide a precise estimate of the number of rounds, but we are able to establish an upper

and a lower bound. Using either of these alternative control variables yields very similar results.

                                              Insert Table 3 here

        It seems natural to also control for calendar time effects. We therefore introduce a set of dummy

variables that indicate the year of founding for the enterprise or, if that is not available, the earliest year in

which the enterprise received venture capital. If this occurred before 1996 we do not have the exact year

and code the enterprise with an indicator code meaning “before 1996.” This year variable is sometimes

used a control variable. As we recall, the period 1996–2004 covers a stock market (and IPO) boom in the

first few years, a “crash” in 2000–2002, and a subsequent recovery. Accordingly, we might expect that

simple timing might have a significant impact on exit valuations and on other performance measures. We

would not want to attribute to a new venture-capital support program losses associated simply with this
                                                                                                    27
stock market cycle. We therefore condition on timing to avoid this problem. The founding date controls

also help to account for the fact that exit events are right-censored. Columns 3 and 4 of Table 3 report the

results of adding year fixed effects, first without and then with the number-of-investors control. We find

that year fixed effects have relatively little impact on our results.

        Columns 5 and 6 report the results of adding industry fixed effects. If one wants to get an idea of

the unconditional performance of the different investor types, it can be useful not to control for industry.

This is because from an investor perspective, choosing the right industries is part of the investment

challenge. In this paper, however, we focus on the effect that different investor types have on the

performance of venture backed firms. Thus it is natural to control for the fact that performance metrics,

such as the probability of a successful exit, may vary across different industries. We already noted in

Section 4 that the different types of venture capital firms have marked differences in their preference for

investing in different industries. Not surprisingly, we find that the addition of industry controls has some

effect on the main dependent variables. In particular we note that the MVC variable looses significance.

This is mostly due to the fact that the exit rate is highest in the high technology sectors (IT and

biotechnology). Interestingly we note again that the Fraction-of-GVC variable is robust and remains

negative and significant.

        Column 7 and 8 finally consider the model with both year and industry fixed effects. Since

Column 8 has the most complete set of control variables, it will become the default specification for the

remainder of the analysis.



6.2 The relationship between investor types and performance measures

        As noted in the introduction, one important measure of performance for early stage investors

concerns whether the venture has a major valuation event – an IPO or a third party acquisition. A majority

of enterprises in our sample did not have such a valuation event in the period studied. Therefore, one basic

question concerns whether private venture capital or public venture capital funds were more likely to
                                                                                                  28
generate positive exit events. Column 1 of Table 4 repeats the results from column 8 of Table 3, showing

that the presence of GVCs is associated with a lower probability of successful exit.

       A second measure of the performance of venture-backed enterprises is simply survival.

Accordingly, column 2 shows how having different types of investors is related to survival. The

coefficients for GVC and Fraction-of-GVC are negative but not statistically significant.

       The next performance measure we consider is the value of the enterprise at exit. We use an OLS

regression where the dependent variable is the natural logarithm of one plus the exit value. For all venture

backed firms that did not experience a successful exit we set the exit value to zero. This is a problematic

approximation for two reasons. First, an enterprise going out of business may still have a small residual

value not observable to us. Second, the sample contains a number of enterprises have not yet had a chance

to realize their true value in an exit event. To at least partially address this, we consider three alternative

sample specifications. Column 3 includes all firms, irrespective of whether they survived or had an exit.

Column 4 considers the sample of firms for which a resolution has occurred, i.e., firms which either had a

successful exit, or else have gone out of business. Column 5 only considers firms that have experienced a

successful exit. The three specifications use different conditioning criteria, and therefore provide

alternative perspectives. Interestingly, the effect of investor types remains quite similar across all three

specifications, although the statistical significance becomes weaker the smaller the sample. Overall,

however, we note that the presence of GVCs is associated with lower exit values.

       Column 6 of Table 4 contains one more variable that is only indirectly related to value creation.

The dependent variable is a categorical variable that takes the value 1 if the enterprise received investment

from US investors, and 0 otherwise. The idea is that attracting U.S. financing is both an indicator of the

firm having good prospects and contributes directly to enhanced value. We find that enterprises with a

higher Fraction-of-GVC are less likely to attract US investors - the GVC coefficient in the categorical

specification is marginally insignificant at 12%.


                                                                                                            29
        Overall, we notice that there is no evidence that GVC outperforms PVC and some significant

evidence to the contrary that PVC outperforms GVC. We now turn to examining other outcome variables,

especially related to innovation.

                                             Insert Table 4 here

                                             Insert Table 5 here

        Turning to Table 5, the first two columns examine the relationship between Canadian patents and

investor types. Column 1 considers a Probit specification where the dependent variable is a categorical

variable that takes the value 1 if the enterprise has at least one Canadian patent, and 0 otherwise. Column

2 uses a count variable of Canadian patents and estimates a negative binominal regression model. We note

that the presence of GVC is associated with a lower propensity to patent. Columns 3 and 4 perform

equivalent regressions for US patents. Interestingly we find that none of the investor type variables are

statistically significant.

        In addition to counting patents, one may want to look at the “quality” of those patents too. Prior

research has established a number of patent quality measures, such as forward citations or patent

originality. This data is only available for US patents, and these measures can only be calculated for

enterprises that have patents. In unreported regressions we investigated the relationship between investor

type and these patent quality measures, but found no statistically significant relationships. However, we

refrain from providing a strong interpretation on this finding, given the severe limitations of the data.

        One fundamental limitation of patent data is that patents only capture limited types of innovation,

and in particular innovation that can be protected (at least partially) against appropriation. Unfortunately

there is no readily available data on innovation externalities. The only other innovation measure available

to us concerns R&D spending. Unfortunately, only stock-market-listed ventures report this data, so that

we relied on IPO prospectuses. We construct a measure of R&D intensity, defined as the amount of R&D

spending per employee. Column 5 of Table 5 reports the result, showing negative but statistically


                                                                                                            30
insignificant coefficients for all the government-sponsored variables. We obtained similar results when

using absolute levels of R&D spending, or normalizing R&D spending by total assets.

       Probably one of the most frequently stated government objectives for subsidizing venture capital is

employment creation. Again we face a serious data collection problem, as only stock-market-listed

ventures publicly report employment figures. Column 6 of Table 5 reports the results for regressing

employment in these firms on their investor types. The GVC coefficients are highly insignificant. Again,

we refrain from providing a strong interpretation of these results, given the extreme limitations of the

available data.

       Overall these results cast a doubt on the argument that there is an innovation externality that

compensates for the lower performance of enterprises backed by government-sponsored VC firms.

       Another interesting but difficult to measure policy objective relates to the promotion of

competition and an entrepreneurial economy. The previous analysis of exit performance grouped together

different types of exits that represent different ownership structures, which are likely to be correlated with

different degrees of competitiveness. We therefore now have a more detailed look at the different types of

exit mechanisms. As previously mentioned, the IPO market is divided into two segments, the senior

exchanges which signal that an enterprise has achieved a certain maturity and viability, and the junior

exchanges, which do not guarantee either maturity or viability of the enterprise. Mergers and acquisitions

naturally represent the third type of exit. The first three columns of Table 6 report the results of a

multinomial logit specification. The omitted category is ventures that have not experienced an exit.

Column 1 reports the coefficients for M&A outcomes, column 2 for junior IPOs and column 3 for senior

IPOs. The most important pattern to recognize is that firms backed by government VCs are much less

likely to get acquired. As for junior and senior IPOs, the coefficients for government VC are statistically

insignificant. This result lays the ground work for the main question of interest, whether there is a

relationship between types of VC and competition.


                                                                                                           31
       The type of exit event is likely to be correlated with the firm’s competitive impact. Firms that

achieve the size and maturity of being able to undertake a senior stock market listing may probably be

viewed as successful new entrants in their industries. This cannot be taken for granted for firms listing on

the junior exchanges, where the fundamental market viability of the firm typically remains uncertain.

Based on this, we define a measure of competitiveness that considers senior IPOs as pro-competitive and

junior IPOs as less competitive. It is important to note, however, that this is not a direct measure of the

competitive impact generated by these firms. Instead the measure consists of what might be considered a

reasonable but imperfect interpretation of exit events. The measure is imperfect for two reasons. First, it

only captures average tendencies; there may by some junior-market listed firms that have a more pro-

competitive impact than some of the senior-market listed firms. Second, we only measure the competitive

impact at the time of exit, but a firm’s status may subsequently change.

                                                 Insert Table 6 here

       Probably the biggest challenge for our measure of competitive impact concerns mergers and

acquisitions. In general it is difficult to say whether such an exit event increases or decreases competition,

since this depends crucially on who the acquirer is. Conceptually we want to distinguish between

acquisitions by industry insiders, which indicate a less competitive outcome, and acquisitions by industry

outsiders, which signify entry of the acquirers into the target firms’ industries, and can thus be thought of

as pro-competitive. Empirically we attempt to distinguish insider and outsider M&As by comparing the

industry classifications of the acquirer and target firms. For this analysis to be meaningful we need to

choose an industry definition that is neither too wide nor too narrow, and we settle on the 5-digit NAIC

definition for an industry.13 Specifically, we classified an exit by M&A as less competitive when the

acquirer had the same 5-digit NAIC code, and pro-competitive otherwise. Again, we consider this as an

indirect and imperfect measure but a useful proxy for measuring the competitive impact of the IPO or

acquisition event. The last two columns of Table 6 report the results of a multinomial logit regression

where the omitted category is firms that have not exited, and the two reported categories are firms that
                                                                                                     32
have a less competitive (column 4) or more competitive impact (column 5). The regressions suggest that

there is no statistically significant relationship between the between government VC and more

competitive exits, but a significant negative relationship between the between government VC and less

competitive exits.

       Overall, these results suggest that while PVCs achieve more exits, this result mainly comes from

achieving more acquisitions. This makes it difficult to assess the full impact on competition. On the one

hand, achieving an acquisition is a sign of better enterprise performance. On the other hand, these

acquired enterprises seem less likely to directly increase market competition. Whether or not there are

indirect effects on competition, either because the threat of new entrants keeps established incumbents

more efficient, or because acquiring firms can use the acquired units to better compete in the market

place, remains a question for future research.



6.3. Treatment vs. Selection: Using political leadership as an instrumental variable

       The results of Table 4-6 provide a rich description of the statistical relationship between investor

types and enterprise outcomes. In general, PVC-supported enterprises perform better than GVC-supported

enterprises. However, as already mentioned, one cannot infer a causal interpretation – that PVC support

causes better performance. It is possible, and indeed likely that PVCs simply choose better enterprises

than GVCs, given their higher (unsubsidized) return threshold. Furthermore, this is exactly what we

expect if the GVC programs were working effectively as they should be funding the “extensive margin” –

projects that would not be funded by PVCs.

       On the other hand, if weaker GVC performance really is a causal or treatment effect – that GVCs

generate weaker performance from otherwise equivalent enterprises, this would lead to a negative

assessment of the GVC programs. In short, the mere fact that enterprise performance is positively

correlated with PVCs does not tell us much about whether the GVC programs are performing effectively.


                                                                                                        33
       To address this question we need to isolate the treatment and selection effects associated with

PVCs (or GVCs). From an econometric point of view, this is a classic endogeneity problem. The PVC

indicator is not assigned randomly but reflects likely performance, making it an endogenous regressor.

The standard solution to this problem is use an instrumental variable approach. We need an instrument

that is itself exogenous in the sense that it is not affected by performance of venture-supported enterprises

(the so-called “exclusion” restriction) but that is correlated with the presence of GVC investment In fact,

there is a very interesting instrument with these properties – the political stance of the provincial

government in place in a particular period.

       In the data, left-leaning governments are associated with additional GVC funding and so additional

GVC investment. They are also associated with reduced PVC investment. Accordingly, having a left-

leaning government provides an exogenous substitution of GVCs for PVCs. This is exactly what we want

an instrument to capture. It will capture the effect of exogenous substitution of GVCs for PVCs on

performance of enterprises. It will therefore provide a good measure of the “treatment” effect as opposed

to the “selection” effect associated with GVCs. While we would not wish the exaggerate the quality of the

instrument the results are at least suggestive and provide a better way of distinguishing between selection

and treatment effects than is otherwise possible.

       We construct a ‘Left Politics’ indicator variable that takes the value 1 if a left leaning political

party held power in the province of the financed firm at the time of its first investment, and 0 otherwise. A

full list of political parties that have held seats in any one of the provincial legislatures was retrieved from

Elections Canada, along with number of seats they held and the total number of seats available in each

year from 1996 to 2005. Each party’s self-declared political ideology was retrieved from Wikipedia. A

party was determined to be left leaning if it identified itself as adhering to the tenets of ‘social

democracy’, as opposed to liberalism or conservatism. As a validity check, we surveyed six economics

professors at the University of British Columbia, asking them to identify each provincial political party as


                                                                                                             34
left, centre or right. They had a 77.8% agreement with the self-identified ideology based classification, as

compared with an expected 37.6% agreement (for kappa of 0.6436***).

       For firms without a date of first investment, we use the average (mode) of the binary left leaning

winner variable over the period 1996-2005. This approximation does not materially alter any coefficients

but does allow us to increase the power of the relevant tests. In an unreported robustness check we

replace the year-based winner variable with the average winner across all years and found broadly similar,

perhaps slightly improved, results. The difference could be attributed to the importance of the effect of

politics on financing through-out the firm’s life, as compared with at the time of first investment, but also

may reflect that a single political party may change its ideology over time, and so be ‘left leaning’ only on

average.

       Our instrumental variables approach involves two stages. The first stage regresses the presence of

GVCs on the “left-leaning” variable. Since we only have a single instrument, we need to combine the

GVC and MVC categories into a single category, inelegantly called GMVC. The dependent variable is

thus either GMVC or Fraction-of-GVC. Table 7 looks at a number of alternative specifications for the

first stage regression. The results indicate a strong statistical relationship between a left-leaning politics

and the relative importance or presence of GVCs. This result is consistent with casual observations. Most

important, it justifies the use of Left-Politics as an instrumental variable. The predicted values from stage

1 then identify exogenous changes in GMVC or Fraction of GVC variable. These exogenous component

of the relevant government support variable is used a regressor to explain enterprise performance in the

stage 2 regressions.

                                             Insert Table 7 here

                                             Insert Table 8 here

       Table 8 reports the results for the (stage 2) IV model. For brevity’s sake, we focus on those

outcome variables from Table 4 and 5 that we would consider economically most important. The results

show that once we exploit exogenous variation in the availability of government-sponsored venture
                                                                                               35
capital, we find an even stronger negative effect. All the regressions that had a negative and significant

effect for GVC continue to do so, typically at similar or higher levels of statistical significance. Moreover,

two of the variables that had insignificant coefficients in Tables 4 and 5 are now found to also have

negative and statistically significant coefficients. In particular, we now find a negative relationship with

survival and with US patents. That is, enterprises funded by GVCs are less likely to survive, and also less

likely to have US patents.

       This is the most important result in the paper. It suggests that the negative association between

GVCs and enterprise performance is essentially entirely due to a treatment effect – to weaker mentoring

or value-added performance by GVCs as compared with PVCs. Also, while we not emphasize this finding

in view of the various data limitations, it also suggests that there is little if any selection effect, which in

turn suggests that the GVC programs are not expanding the extensive margin but instead are competing

with PVCs for inframarginal products that would be funded in any case.

       We emphasize that we do not have as much data as we would like, that the instrument might not

be as good an instrument as we would like, and that there might be alternative explanations of the results.

However, to the extent that these results can be taken seriously, they do raise serious concerns about GVC

programs.



6.4. Market expansion versus crowding out

       Probably the most contentious question about government support of venture capital is whether

government subsidies increase the size of the market, or whether they merely crowd out private

investments. Answering this question, however, remains a challenge; not only because of data limitations

but also because a complete answer requires a counter-factual of what would have happened with

government support. Even though we will be unable to provide a complete or even satisfactory answer,

we nonetheless report some findings that provide some suggestive and indirect evidence.


                                                                                                             36
       First of all, the previous subsection notes two empirical results. First, left-leaning governments are

associated with additional GVC activity and correspondingly less PVC activity. This in itself suggests that

GVC investment substitutes for or crowds out PVC investment. Second, the main finding is that

approximately the entire negative association between GVC and performance is due to a treatment effect

rather than a selection effect. This is also consistent with crowding out as it suggests that GVC are not

adding much to the extensive margin (i.e. they are not financing many new enterprises below the PVC

threshold for investment).

       An interesting question is whether there is complete crowding out, i.e. whether GVC substitutes

PVC on a one-to-one basis? One way of addressing this is to look at the total number of investors. The

coefficient for Left-Politics is positive, but interestingly enough, it is statistically significant only after

controlling for industry. Therefore we perform two additional regressions, one for the subsample of high

technology firms and one for the sample of low-technology firms. We note that the coefficient is positive

and statistically significant in the high technology subsample but statistically insignificant in the low

technology subsample. This evidence is thus consistent with the notion that there is partial crowding out

for high technology enterprises. Moreover, for low technology enterprises we cannot reject the hypothesis

that there is full crowding out.

       As noted above, the analysis of financing patterns among infra-marginal firms is useful but

certainly incomplete. To get a second perspective on the question of whether GVC augments the market

versus crowding out PVC, we consider the pattern of deal origination. In particular, we ask which venture

capitalists are relatively more active in first-round financing, i.e., in bringing new enterprises into the

venture capital market. Table 9 below provides some simple descriptive statistics about origination

patterns.

                                             Insert Table 9 here

        From the perspective of the GVCs, we may ask what fraction of their deals were also originated

GVCs. This includes all pure GVC deals, as well as those MVC deals that were originated by GVCs. One
                                                                                                  37
detail is how to treat MVC deals that were originated by a mix of PVCs and GVCs (called mixed

originations or MixOri in Table 9), hence the distinction between inclusive and exclusive numbers. Table

9 shows that GVCs mostly “self-originate,” i.e., they originate almost all of their own deals. Indeed, if we

include deals with mixed origination, 95% of all enterprises by GVCs were also originated by GVCs. This

pattern is less pronounced for PVCs where that number is 82%. Moreover, the pattern of self-origination

is more pronounced for low technology rather than high technology deals. Another way of looking at the

origination patterns is to ask how many deals become MVC. That is, among all the deals originated by

GVCs, how many of them later add a PVC as a co-investor? Table 9 shows that only 9% of all deals

originated by PVCs ever receive any funding from GVCs. The percentage of deals originated by GVCs

that ever receive any funding from PVCs is slightly higher at 15%. Moreover, we find that these

percentages are higher for high technology firms.

       Table 9 suggests that there a significant bifurcation in the market that relatively few deals are

originated by one type of venture capitalist and subsequently financed by the other. GVCs seem to be

slightly more active originators than PVCs, although the differences do not appear dramatic. Another

interesting finding is that the segmentation of the market appears more dramatic in the low technology

segment than in the high technology segment. Overall, these results are consistent with the notion that

GVCs may be contributing to a moderate market expansion, especially for high technology firms. In the

low technology segment, however the market appears to be particularly segmented.

       The evidence so far suggests that while there is considerable evidence for segmentation and

crowding out, there is also some evidence for market expansion. We may also want to ask to what extent

the additional firms brought into the market by GVC perform on the various outcome measures. We

already saw that enterprises funded by GVC perform worse on average for many outcome variables. The

question remains whether among the enterprises that received funding from both GVCs and PVCs there

are systematic differences depending according to whether the enterprise was originated by GVCs or

PVCs. In unreported regression we explored origination patterns focusing on the MVC subsample MVC.
                                                                                                38
No strong patterns emerged, i.e. the coefficients for the different types of originators were almost all

insignificant.14

        One additional step of our analysis was to examine whether there are systematic differences

between the two main types of subsidies provided by the federal government. Most of the government-

sponsored venture capital funds fall under the so-called “Labour-sponsored” programs, which benefit

from a mix of provincial and federal subsidies. The purely federal government-sponsored venture capital

comes from the largest Canadian government-owned development bank, called the BDC. In additional

unreported regressions we examined whether enterprises funded by the BDC performed systematically

differently from the other GVCs. The coefficients were generally statistically insignificant (though

positive), suggesting that there are no systematic differences between Labour-sponsored and BDC-

sponsored enterprises. The only exceptions were for the presence of US investors and for the number of

Canadian patents, where the BDC coefficient was positive and statistically significant. This may be an

indication of the investment policies of the BDC: to foster relationships with US investors and to file

patents in Canada (although not in the US).

        A concern that is closely related to crowding out is that the presence of GVCs might reduce the

return to PVCs. If GVCs are simply competing with PVCs for the same projects, this might have the

effect of reducing the return to PVCs. We therefore regressed the exit value of enterprises supported by

PVCs on the share of enterprises supported by GVCs in a specific province in a particular year. We refer

to this variable as the GVC deal fraction. We consider the exit value for enterprises funded purely by

PVCs, as well as the exit values for the combination of private and mixed venture capital. The results

presented in Table 10 control for the quality of a venture using the total number of funds that participated

in its financing.

                                               Insert Table 10 here

        The results are interesting but not compelling. It appears that the presence of a larger share GVC

activity lowers the exits values associated with enterprises with mixed PVC and GVC support, but has no
                                                                                                     39
statistically significant or economically meaningful effect on exit values of enterprises with pure PVC

support. Thus, if there is crowding out, it does not seem to have an effect on the exit values of pure

privately supported enterprises.



7. Concluding Remarks

       In this paper we assess the relative performance of private venture capital and government-

sponsored venture capital in Canada. We focus on three general areas of performance: value creation,

competitive effects, and innovation. We do not undertake a full welfare analysis but, presumably, these

three objectives are closely associated with economic welfare. Overall, it appears that there is a consistent

pattern of superior performance for PVCs. Specifically, enterprises supported by private venture capital

are more likely to have successful exits (IPOs or third-party acquisitions) and tend to generate higher

value conditional on successful exit. The expected commercial value of an enterprise financed by private

venture capital (PVC) is significantly higher than for an enterprise financed by government-sponsored

venture capital (GVC). In addition, PVC financed enterprises are less likely to go out of business over

relevant time horizons and are more likely to attract U.S. investment.

       The effects on competition are less conclusive. On the one hand there is clear evidence that PVCs

are associated with a greater likelihood of an IPO on a senior exchange (the TSE, NYSE, or NASDAQ),

and GVCs with IPOs on junior exchanges (mainly the TSX-VN). This suggests that PVCs may generate

more competitiveness. However, PVCs are also associated with more mergers and acquisitions, including

by industry insiders, which may be considered as less competitive outcomes. There also appears to be

some evidence of differential impacts on innovation. Relative to GVCs, enterprises funded by PVC

finance operate more often in high-technology industries. They also show a greater propensity to patent.

       Putting these three areas together – value creation, competition, and innovation, it appears that

enterprises supported by private venture capital have an overall superior performance. These results are

significant even though it is difficult to obtain sufficient data at a precise enough level to draw strong
                                                                                                        40
inferences. In principle, it would be desirable to have data about the actual investment provided to each

venture by the different types of venture capitalists, but insufficient information of this type is available.

Given the available information, we find our results to be strongly suggestive, albeit far from definitive.

       If we accept the apparent fact that enterprises financed by private venture capital exhibit better

performance, on average, than enterprises financed by government-sponsored venture capital, the next

question concerns policy implications. Does the evidence suggest that GVC programs are helpful or not?

       In Section 3 we outlined a set of observable performance measures that would shed light on

whether the GVC programs were providing valuable policy contributions. Abbreviated version of these

“observables” and the actual findings are described below.

       i)         We should not be surprised or alarmed if GVC-supported enterprises exhibit lower

                  private performance than PVC supported enterprises. This would be expected under a

                  well-designed program.

       In fact, GVC-supported enterprises do exhibit weaker “private” performance as measured by the

       frequency of successful exits, exit values, and survivorship than PVC-supported enterprises but, as

       noted, this is not itself inconsistent with a good program.

       ii)        We should be concerned if the external (i.e. non-private) effects of GVC-supported

                  enterprises fall short of PVC supported enterprises.

       While we cannot measure external benefits directly, we believe that the innovation process is

       characterized by positive externalities and we therefore take patents as an indicator of innovation

       externalities. The patent itself of course acts a property right to convert potential external benefits

       to private benefits, but we still expect that some additional externalities are also generated. A

       second external benefit relates to increased competition. On both these measures, PVCs perform

       somewhat better than GVCs. This is a cause for concern about GVC programs.

       iii)       The extent of crowding out is very important. If GVCs appear to be crowding out private

                  venture capital this would be a negative finding.
                                                                                                              41
        We find suggestive evidence of at least some crowding out.

        iv)       If GVCs have weaker private performance than PVCs this could be due to either

                  selection or treatment (or both). A poor program would be characterized by a large

                  negative treatment effect and a small selection effect.

        We use an instrumental variables approach to separate the treatment effect from the selection

        effect. While the results are far from definitive, we find suggestive evidence that the poorer

        performance of the GVC-supported enterprises is due to treatment rather than selection. In other

        words, enterprises supported by GVCs appear to perform more poorly than otherwise equivalent

        enterprises supported by PVCs.



        On the whole, our conclusions cast doubt on the value of government-sponsored venture capital

programs. There are, however, some additional considerations that should be kept in mind. One

consideration is a potential “training effect” of GVC programs. Individual fund managers are typically

less experienced and less well paid in the GVC sector than in the PVC sector. Furthermore, individuals

sometimes move from the GVC sector to the PVC sector, but rarely move the other way. Thus, one

additional benefit of GVC programs might lie in providing training for venture capitalists. However, it is

also possible that the weaker performance of GVCs might be related to other personnel issues. In

particular, success in the GVC sector might lie partially in good lobbying skills and good “government

relations skills” rather than in good mentoring of enterprises. It is also likely that the “survivor” principle

– good fund managers are retained and poor managers are fired or reassigned – operates more vigorously

in the private sector.

        Notwithstanding our findings casting doubt on GVC programs, it must be acknowledged that there

have been some tremendous successes. Possibly the biggest domestic venture success story in Canada

relates to “Research in Motion” (RIM), the developer of the “BlackBerry” Internet communications

device. The external benefits of this one success would cover the costs of at least a portion of the GVC
                                                                                                       42
support in Canada. More broadly, it does not follow from our analysis that government support for

venture capital has been unsuccessful. Even if some of the government-sponsored venture capital

increases the number of firms funded, it remains important to assess whether the benefits of such

investment exceed the costs. Given the market failures associated with venture capital finance and with

innovation, it is quite possible that government subsidies to venture capital to offset these market failures

are important, but a full rate of return or cost-benefit assessment of such subsidies would need to be

undertaken. We would view our analysis as a first step in the direction of a full policy analysis. Still, our

unique data-collection methods allow us to examine data that is considerably more complete than previous

studies of Canadian venture capital and the overall analysis provides some cautionary notes about the

alleged benefits of government-sponsored venture capital.




                                                                                                          43
References



Akerlof, George A. (1970), "The Market for Lemons: Quality Uncertainty and the Market Mechanism",

Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol.84, pp.488-500.



Amit, Rafael, James A. Brander, and Christoph Zott (1998), "Why do Venture Capital Firms Exist?

Theory and Canadian Evidence", Journal of Business Venturing, Vol.13, pp.441-466.



Amit, Rafael, Lawrence Glosten, and Eilat Muller (1990), "Entrepreneurial Ability, Venture Investments,

and Risk Sharing", Management Science, Vol.36, pp.1232-1245.



Anderson, Scott and Yisong Tian (2003), "Incentive Fees Valuation and Performance of Labour

Sponsored Investment Funds", Canadian Investment Review, Fall, pp.20-27.



Arrow, Kenneth J. (1973), "The Limits of Organization", New York: Norton.



Ayayi, Ayi (2002), "Good News, Bad News: Ten Years’ Lessons from the Canadian Labour-Sponsored

Venture Capital Corporations", Faculty of Business Management, Ryerson University, Working Paper,

December



Baldwin, John, Lin Bian, Richard Dupuy, and Guy Gellatly (2000), "Failure Rates for New Canadian

Firms: New Perspectives on Entry and Exit", Published by Statistics Canada, February, Catalogue no. 61-

526-XPE, ISBN 0-660-17933-4




                                                                                                    44
Barry, Christopher B., Chris J. Muscarella, John W. Peavy, and Michael R. Vetsuypens (1990), "The Role

of Venture Capital in the Creation of Public Companies: Evidence from the going public process", Journal

of Financial Economics, Vol.27, pp.447-471.



Beatty, Randolph P. and Jay R. Ritter (1986), "Investment banking, reputation, and the underpricing of

initial public offerings", Journal of Financial Economics, Vol.15, pp.213-232.



Booth, James R. and Richard L. Smith (1986). "Capital raising, underwriting and the certification

hypothesis," Journal of Financial Economics, Vol.15, pp.261-281.



Bourdeau, André (2004), "BDC: Banking on Canadian Entrepreneurs", 2004 Annual Report of the BDC,

Available from: http://www.bdc.ca/



Brander, James A. and Edward J. Egan (2007), "The Role of Venture Capitalists in Acquisitions:

Certification or Bargaining?", University of British Columbia, Working Paper, September. Available from

J. Brander upon request.



Brander, James A., Raphael Amit, and Werner Antweiler (2002), "Venture-Capital Syndication: Improved

Venture Selection vs. the Value-Added Hypothesis", Journal of Economics & Management Strategy,

Vol.11, No.3, Fall, pp.423-452



Brander, James A., Edward J. Egan & Anthony E. Boardman (2005), "The Equity Capital Program in

British Columbia: Program efficiency & policy alternatives", Policy Report, Published by LeadingEdge

BC, April.


                                                                                                     45
Brav, Alon and Paul A. Gompers (1997), "Myth Or Reality: The Long-Run Underperformance Of Initial

Public Offerings Evidence From Venture And Non Venture Capital-Backed Companies", Journal of

Finance, Vol.52, pp.1791-1821.



Bresnahan, Timothy F. (1986), "Measuring the Spillovers from Technical Advance: Mainframe

Computers in Financial Services", American Economic Review, Vol. 76, No. 4, September, pp. 742-755.



Cumming, Douglas J. (2002), "United States Venture Capital Financial Contracting: Foreign Securities",

York University, Working Paper, May



Cumming, Douglas J. (2006), "The Determinants of Venture Capital Portfolio Size: Empirical Evidence",

Journal of Business, Vol.79, pp.1083-1126



Cumming, Douglas J. and Jeffrey G. MacIntosh (2002), "Venture Capital Exits in Canada and the United

States", University of Toronto Law Journal, Vol.53, pp.101-200



Cumming, Douglas J. and Jeffrey G. MacIntosh (2003a), "Canadian Labour-Sponsored Venture Capital

Corporations: Bane or Boon?", Forthcoming in: A. Ginsberg and I. Hasan, eds., New Venture Investment:

Choices and Consequences, Elsevier, pp.169-200.



Cumming, Douglas J. and Jeffrey G. MacIntosh (2003b), "A Cross-Country Comparison Of Full And

Partial Venture Capital Exits", Journal of Banking & Finance, Vol.27, pp.511-548.



Cumming, Douglas J. and Jeffrey G. MacIntosh (2006), "Crowding Out Private Equity: Canadian

Evidence", Journal of Business Venturing, Vol.21, pp.569-609
                                                                                                   46
Gans, Joshua S. and Scott Stern (2003), "When Does Funding Research by Smaller Firms Bear Fruit?:

Evidence from the SBIR Program", Economics of new Technology and Innovation, 12(4), 361-384.



Gompers, Paul A. and Joshua Lerner (1996), "The Use of Covenants: An Empirical Analysis of Venture

Capital Partnership Agreements", Journal of Law & Economics, Vol.39, pp.463-498.



Gompers, Paul A. and Joshua Lerner (1997), "Venture Capital and the Creation of Public Companies: Do

Venture Capitalists Really Bring More than Money?", Journal of Private Equity, Vol.1, No.3, pp.15-32.



Gompers, Paul A. and Joshua Lerner (1998a), "What Drives Venture Capital Fundraising", With

Comments by Margaret M. Blair and Thomas Hellmann, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,

Microeconomics, Issue 1998, pp.149-204



Gompers, Paul A. and Joshua Lerner (1998b), "Risk and Reward in Private Equity Investments: The

Challenge of Performance Assessment", Journal of Private Equity, Vol.1, Winter, pp.5-12.



Gompers, Paul A. and Joshua Lerner (1999), "An Analysis Of Compensation In The U.S. Venture Capital

Partnership", Journal of Financial Economics, Vol.51, pp.3-44



Griliches, Zvi (1992), "The search for R&D spillovers", Scandinavian Journal of Economics, Vol.94,

pp.29-47.




                                                                                                        47
Hall, Bronwyn H., Adam B. Jaffe, and Manuel Trajtenberg (2001), "The NBER Patent Citations Data

File: Lessons, Insights And Methodological Tools", NBER Working Paper Series, Working Paper 8498,

http://www.nber.org/papers/w8498, October



Hecker, Daniel E. (2005), "High-Technology Employment: A Naics-Based Update", Office of

Occupational Statistics and Employment Projections, Bureau of Labor Statistics



Hellmann, Thomas F., and Manju Puri (2000). "The Interaction between Product Market and Financing

Strategy: The Role of Venture Capital," Review of Financial Studies, Vol.13, No.4, pp.959-984.



Hellmann, Thomas F., and Manju (2002). "Venture Capital and the Professionalization of Start-Up Firms:

Empirical Evidence," Journal of Finance, Vol.57, pp.169-197.



Hellmann, Thomas F., Edward J. Egan & James A. Brander (2005), "Value Creation in Venture Capital:

A Comparison of Exit Values", Policy Report, October, Published by LeadingEdge BC.



Jaffe, Adam B. (1996), "Economic Analysis of Research Spillovers: Implications for the Advanced

Technology Program", Washington: Advanced Technology Program, National Institute of Standards and

Technology, U.S. Department of Commerce.



Jain, Bharat A. and Omesh Kini (2000), "Does The Presence Of Venture Capitalists Improve The Survival

Profile Of IPO Firms?," Journal of Business Finance and Accounting, Vol.27, No.9, pp.1139-1176



Jain, Bharat A and Omesh Kini. (2006), "Industry Clustering of Initial Public Offerings", Managerial and

Decision Economics, Vol.27, No.1, pp.1-20.
                                                                                                     48
Jensen, Michael C. and Meckling, William H. (1976), "Theory of the Firm: Managerial Behavior, Agency

Costs and Ownership Structure". The Journal Of Financial Economics, Vol.3, pp.305-360.



Jones, Charles and Mathew Rhodes-Kropf (2002), "The Price of Diversifiable Risk in Venture Capital and

Private Equity", Columbia University, Working Paper.



Kaplan, Steven N. and Antoinette Schoar (2004), "Private Equity Performance: Returns, Persistence, and

Capital Flows", The Journal of Finance, Manuscript 1040, Forthcoming.



Kaplan, Steven, Frederic Martel and Per Stromberg (2003), "How Do Legal Differences And Learning

Affect     Financial      Contracts?",     NBER        Working      Paper       No.      10096/10097,

http://www.nber.org/papers/w10097, National Bureau Of Economic Research, November



Kortum, Samuel and Josh Lerner (2000), "Assessing The Contribution Of Venture Capital To

Innovation", The RAND Journal of Economics, Vol.31, No.4, Winter, pp.674-692.



Leleux, Benoit and Bernard Surlemont (2003), "Public Versus Private Venture Capital: Seeding Or

Crowding Out? A Pan-European Analysis", Journal of Business Venturing, Vol.18, pp.81-104.



Lerner, Joshua (1999), "The Government As A Venture Capitalist: The Long-Run Impact of the SBIR

Program", The Journal of Business, Vol.72, No.3, Jul, pp.285-318.



Lerner, Joshua (2002), "When Bureaucrats Meet Entrepreneurs: The Design Of Effective 'Public Venture

Capital' Programmes", The Economic Journal, Vol.112, February, pp.73-84.
                                                                                                   49
Ljungqvist, Alexander and Mathew Richardson (2003), "The cash flow, return and risk characteristics of

private equity", New York University, Working paper.



Megginson, William L., and Kathleen A. Weiss (1990). "Venture Capital Certification in Initial Public

Offerings," Journal of Finance, Vol.46, No.3, pp.879-903.



Osborne, Duncan and Daniel Sandler (1998), "A Tax Expenditure Analysis of Labour-Sponsored Venture

Capital Corporations", Canadian Tax Journal, Vol.46, No.3, pp.499-574.



Sahlman, William A., (1990). "The Structure and Governance of the Venture Capital Organizations,"

Journal of Financial Economics, Vol.27, pp.473-521.



Sandler, Daniel (2004), "Venture Capital and Tax Incentives: A Comparative Study of Canada and the

United States", Canadian Tax Foundation, Canadian Tax Papers, No. 108, Toronto, Ontario.



Secrieru, Oana and Marianne Vigneault (2004), "Public Venture Capital and Entrepreneurship", Bank of

Canada, Working Paper No. 2004-10, March, ISSN 1192-5434.



Tirole, Jean (1988), "The Theory of Industrial Organization", The MIT Press, January 1, ISBN-10:

0262200716, 479 pages



Wallsten, Scott J. (2000), “The Effects of Government-Industry R&D Programs on Private R&D: The

Case of Small Business Innovation Research Programs” Rand Journal of Economics. Vol. 31, pp. 82-100.


                                                                                                   50
Figures and Tables



Figure 1: Marginal Costs and Marginal Values for Venture Capital




                                                                   51
Figure 2: Data Collection Overview




                                     52
Table 1: Descriptive Statistics
                                                               Std.                       PVC         GVC a         MVC b
  Variable                         N            Mean           Dev.    Min     Max     subsample subsample        subsample
  PVC                            3,720          0.325         0.468      0       1           -           -              -
  GVC                            3,720          0.48            0.5      0       1           -           -              -
  MVC                            3,720          0.196         0.397      0       1           -           -              -
  Number-of-GVC                  3,720          0.852         1.461      0      20           -           -              -
  Number-of-PVC                  3,720          1.317         1.858      0      20           -           -              -
  Number-of-VC                   3,720          2.169         2.575      1      30           -           -              -
  Fraction-of-GVC                3,720          0.591         0.447      0       1           -           -              -
  Exited                         3,720          0.110         0.313      0       1        0.123     0.073***       0.177***
    Exited M&A                   3,720          0.079         0.269      0       1        0.102     0.049***         0.114
      Outsider                   3,720           0.06         0.237      0       1        0.083     0.033***         0.087
      Insider                    3,720          0.019         0.137      0       1        0.019       0.016          0.027
    Exited IPO                   3,720          0.031         0.173      0       1        0.021       0.025        0.063***
      Senior Exchange            3,720          0.018         0.134      0       1        0.012       0.012        0.045***
      Junior Exchange            3,720          0.013         0.112      0       1        0.009       0.013          0.018*
  Exit Value ($m) c              335c            74.4          143      0.9   1240.0       82.7        64.4           74.7
    Senior IPO ($m)                68            176           224      4.5   1240.0      123.2       219.4          170.5
    Junior IPO ($m)               47            16.5           20.5     1.8    109.0       17.6        16.0           16.4
    M&A ($m)                      220           55.4           108      0.9    656.0       84.4      26.7***         40.9*
  Survived                       3,720          0.407         0.491      0       1        0.411      0.368**       0.493***
  US VC Investment               3,720          0.125         0.331      0       1        0.100     0.067***        0.31***
  Canadian Patents               3,720          0.164         0.371      0       1        0.137       0.117        0.324***
  Number-of-CA-Patents           3,720          0.864         7.205      0      297       0.961       0.524          1.537
  US Patents                     3,720          0.039         0.193      0       1        0.031       0.034        0.063***
  Number-of-US-Patents           3,720          0.183         2.053      0      71        0.185       0.156          0.246
  Log-Employment-at-IPO           88d           4.453         1.557 1.386      9.680      4.491       4.558          4.333
  R&D-Intensity                   88d          28660          52682      0   327456         8.2       3.7***          12.2
  Left-Politics                  2884           0.526         0.499      0       1        0.348     0.612***       0.558***
*, ** and *** indicate significance at the p < 10%, p < 5%, and p < 1% levels, respectively
a
  The stars report the significance levels of t-tests that compare the GVC subsample against the PVC subsample.
b
  The stars report the significance levels of t-tests that compare the MVC subsample against the PVC subsample.
c
  Exit values are reported conditional on an exit of the appropriate type.
d
  Although there are 408 exits, we have a disclosed exit value for only 335 of these 408 firms.
e
  Although there are 115 IPOs, we have disclosed information for only 88 of these 115 firms.




                                                                                                                              53
Figure 3: Relative Frequency of Venture Capital Investments by Period and Type.
                                                               50%
   Percent of Total Firms Funded by VC Type




                                                                                                                                                                 Government VC Only
                                                               40%                                                                                               Private VC Only
                                                                                                                                                                 Mixed


                                                               30%


                                                               20%


                                                               10%


                                                                            0%
                                                                                     1996                          97-98                99-00                   01-02                       03-04


Figure 4: Frequency Distribution of Exits by IPO and M&A
                                                             50%
Percentage of Total Number of Exits for Exit Type




                                                                                                                                                                IPO
                                                             40%
                                                                                                                                                                M&A


                                                             30%


                                                             20%


                                                             10%


                                                                            0%
                                                                                     97-98                           99-00                        01-02                     03-04



Figure 5: Venture Capital Investments by Industry and Type

                                                                            1200
                                                    No. of Firms Financed




                                                                            1000
                                                                                                                                                            G
                                                                             800
                                                                                                                                                            M
                                                                             600                                                                            P

                                                                             400

                                                                             200

                                                                                 0
                                                                                     Technology


                                                                                                   Biotechnology




                                                                                                                                  Manufacturing




                                                                                                                                                                             Unclassified
                                                                                                                    Resources &




                                                                                                                                                  Wholesale &

                                                                                                                                                                Finance &
                                                                                     Information




                                                                                                                     Farming,




                                                                                                                                                                  Media
                                                                                                                      Utilities




                                                                                                                                                                               Other /
                                                                                                                                                    Retail,

                                                                                                                                                    T-Log




                                                                                                                                                                                                    54
Table 2: Relative Ranking of Industry Preferences from Multinomial Logit Regression

 Ranking   Government-sponsored VC (GVC)                     Coefficient
    1      Farming, Resources and Utilities                     0.293
    2      Manufacturing                                        0.200
    3      Retail, Wholesale, Transportation and Logistics      0.027
    4      Other and unclassified                               0.000
    5      Finance and Media                                   -0.302
    6      Biotechnology                                       -0.318
    7      Information Technology                              -0.668

 Ranking   Mixed (MVC) and Private VC (PVC)                  Coefficient
    1      Biotechnology                                       2.202
    2      Information Technology                              1.598
    3      Manufacturing                                       1.355
    4      Retail, Wholesale, Transportation and Logistics     0.992
    5      Finance and Media                                   0.897
    6      Farming, Resources and Utilities                    0.786
    7      Other and unclassified                              0.000




                                                                                      55
Table 3: Alternative Model Specifications
                                             Exited        Exited       Exited       Exited       Exited         Exited       Exited        Exited
                                              Coef          Coef         Coef         Coef          Coef          Coef          Coef         Coef
                                            (z score)     (z score)    (z score)    (z score)    (z score)      (z score)    (z score)     (z score)
                                             -0.288        -0.300       -0.286       -0.295       -0.228         -0.243       -0.206        -0.217
                     GVC
                                          (-4.49***)     (-4.67***)   (-4.26***)   (-4.40***)   (-3.29***)     (-3.49***)   (-2.88***)    (-3.03***)
Indicator Variable




                                              0.236        -0.030        0.167       -0.046        0.051         -0.111        0.013        -0.103
                     MVC
                                           (3.30***)       (-0.34)     (2.17**)      (-0.49)       (0.66)        (-1.23)       (0.17)       (-1.11)
    Section 1




                                                            0.066                     0.054                       0.041                      0.030
                     Number-of-VC              -                          -                          -                          -
                                                         (6.02***)                 (4.78***)                   (3.63***)                  (2.60***)
                                             -1.162        -1.257       -0.588       -0.718        -2.359        -2.392       -1.873        -1.925
                     Constant
                                          (-25.01***)   (-25.90***)   (-4.61***)   (-5.40***)   (-16.59***)   (-16.86***)   (-9.95***)   (-10.16***)
                     R-Squared              0.0226        0.0368       0.0445       0.0538        0.1194        0.1246       0.1369        0.1396


                                            -0.286         -0.318       -0.295       -0.314       -0.229         -0.259       -0.212        -0.232
                     Fraction-of-GVC
                                          (-4.92***)     (-5.15***)   (-4.74***)   (-4.85***)   (-3.48***)     (-3.81***)   (-3.08***)    (-3.29***)
Fraction Variable




                                                            0.078                     0.064                       0.044                      0.032
    Section 2




                     Number-of-VC              -                          -                          -                          -
                                                         (8.91***)                 (6.98***)                   (4.58***)                  (3.26***)
                                             -1.070        -1.244       -0.467       -0.703        -2.339        -2.386       -1.842        -1.918
                     Constant
                                          (-25.65***)   (-26.41***)   (-3.80***)   (-5.32***)   (-16.40***)   (-16.88***)   (-9.76***)   (-10.14***)
                     R-Squared              0.0085        0.037        0.0359       0.0542        0.1173        0.1254       0.1361        0.1403


                     Year Fixed Effects       no            no           yes          yes           no            no           yes          yes
    Common




                     Industry Fixed
                                              no            no           no           no           yes           yes           yes          yes
                     Effects
                     N                      3,720         3,720         3,720        3,720        3,720         3,720         3,720        3,720




                                                                                                                                                       56
Table 4: Value Creation
                     Dependent                                                              Exit Value (log)   Exit Value (log)      US VC
                     Variable             Exited           Survive       Exit Value (log)   Resolved Deals      Exited Deals       Investment

                                           Probit           Probit            OLS                OLS                 OLS              Probit
                                       Coef (z score)   Coef (z score)    Coef (t score)     Coef (t score)     Coef (t score)    Coef (z score)
                                           -0.217           -0.048           -0.476             -0.435             -0.355             -0.125
                     GVC
                                         (-3.03***)         (-0.89)        (-2.65***)          (-1.77*)            (-1.54)            (-1.58)
Indicator Variable




                                           -0.103            0.027            0.021              0.252              0.132              0.188
                     MVC
                                           (-1.11)          (0.36)           (0.06)             (0.54)             (0.55)            (2.04**)
    Section 1




                                            0.030            0.001            0.144              0.155              0.023              0.107
                     Number-of-VC
                                         (2.60***)           (0.11)         (2.37**)           (2.08**)             (1.06)          (8.93***)
                                           -1.925           -1.366            1.619              1.797             16.923             -2.239
                     Constant
                                        (-10.16***)      (-10.12***)       (2.61***)           (2.27**)          (21.70***)        (-11.42***)
                     R-Squared           0.139647         0.168921          0.077153           0.13208            0.09413           0.258444


                                           -0.232           -0.059           -0.576              -0.573             -0.371            -0.182
                     Fraction-of-GVC
                                         (-3.29***)         (-1.11)        (-3.22***)          (-2.34**)           (-1.66*)         (-2.44**)
Fraction Variable




                                            0.032            0.006            0.170               0.195              0.039            0.129
    Section 2




                     Number-of-VC
                                         (3.26***)          (0.64)         (3.33***)           (3.06***)           (1.88*)         (11.78***)
                                           -1.918           -1.360            1.680               1.910             17.041            -2.189
                     Constant
                                        (-10.14***)      (-10.12***)       (2.71***)            (2.43**)         (23.08***)        (-11.24***)
                     R-Squared           0.140293         0.168861          0.077534           0.132052           0.089983              0


                     N                     3,720            3,720             3,647              2,542               335              3,720
    Common




                     Year Fixed
                                            yes              yes               yes                yes                yes               yes
                     Effects
                     Industry Fixed
                                            yes              yes               yes                yes                yes               yes
                     Effects




                                                                                                                                                   57
Table 5: Innovation and Employment
                     Dependent                             Number-of-                        Number-of-US                      Log Employees
                     Variable         Canadian Patents   Canadian Patents    US Patents         Patents       R&D Intensity        at IPO
                                           Probit         Neg. Binomial        Probit        Neg. Binomial          OLS             OLS
                                       Coef (z score)     Coef (z score)    Coef (z score)   Coef (z score)   Coef (t score)    Coef (t score)
                                           -0.096             -0.401            0.119           -0.227         -17027.790          0.203
                     GVC
                                           (-1.49)          (-2.13**)          (1.16)           (-0.65)           (-0.97)          (0.46)
Indicator Variable




                                            0.264             0.122             0.177           -0.060         -13011.710          0.092
                     MVC
                                         (3.22***)            (0.50)           (1.30)           (-0.15)           (-0.61)          (0.22)
    Section 1




                                            0.049              0.065            0.035            0.001           266.026           0.090
                     Number-of-VC
                                         (4.33***)           (2.50**)         (2.34**)           (0.03)            (0.13)         (1.96*)
                                           -1.392             -1.433           -2.160           -3.011          -7344.652          2.394
                     Constant
                                        (-9.50***)         (-3.76***)        (-9.62***)       (-4.76***)          (-0.24)          (1.54)
                     R-Squared           0.111133            0.04499          0.123211         0.069326         0.364485          0.487363


                                           -0.109              -0.368           0.065            -0.269        -11544.720           0.039
                     Fraction-of-VC
                                          (-1.77*)           (-1.97**)         (0.67)            (-0.79)         (-0.76)            (0.09)
Fraction Variable




                                            0.074               0.100           0.042             0.006          62.052             0.089
    Section 2




                     Number-of-VC
                                         (7.23***)          (4.21***)        (3.37***)           (0.17)           (0.04)          (2.13**)
                                           -1.388              -1.459          -2.118            -2.974        -13529.260           2.518
                     Constant
                                         (-9.52***)         (-3.83***)       (-9.54***)        (-4.69***)        (-0.46)           (1.67*)
                     R-Squared           0.105401            0.04428          0.12184          0.069441         0.358321          0.485486


                     N                     3720               3720              3720             3720              88                88
    Common




                     Year Fixed
                                            yes                yes               yes              yes              yes              yes
                     Effects
                     Industry Fixed
                                            yes                yes               yes              yes              yes              yes
                     Effects




                                                                                                                                                 58
Table 6: Exit types and Competition
                     Dependent                             Exit Type                                       Competitive Exit
                     Variable                           Multinomial Logit                                  Multinomial Logit
                                           M&A              Junior IPO       Senior IPO      Less-Competitive             Pro-Competition
                                       Coef (z score)     Coef (z score)    Coef (z score)    Coef (z score)                Coef (z score)
                                           -0.610              0.273             0.186             -0.584                       0.011
                     GVC
                                        (-3.88***)            (0.70)             (0.51)         (-3.64***)                     (0.05)
Indicator Variable




                                           -0.439              0.154             0.851             -0.384                       0.250
                     MVC
                                         (-2.21**)            (0.32)           (2.07**)           (-1.84*)                     (0.91)
    Section 1




                                           0.038               0.037             0.080              0.029                       0.079
                     Number-of-VC
                                           (1.48)             (1.02)           (2.53**)            (1.09)                    (2.98***)
                                           -3.991             -6.276            -27.774            -3.888                      -6.404
                     Constant
                                        (-7.67***)          (-5.79***)       (-30.66***)        (-7.93***)                   (-5.88***)
                     R-Squared          0.13429932         0.13429932        0.13429932          0.126857                    0.126857


                                          -0.621               0.348            -0.055            -0.566                      -0.120
                     Fraction-of-GVC
                                        (-3.99***)            (0.89)            (-0.19)         (-3.58***)                    (-0.55)
Fraction Variable




                                           0.033               0.036             0.118             0.026                       0.094
    Section 2




                     Number-of-VC
                                          (1.50)              (0.96)          (4.73***)            (1.15)                   (4.34***)
                                          -3.989              -6.330           -27.565            -3.904                      -6.310
                     Constant
                                        (-7.69***)          (-5.76***)       (-31.09***)        (-7.98***)                  (-5.83***)
                     R-Squared          0.13268511         0.13268511        0.13268511          0.126273                    0.126273


                     N                     3,720              3,720             3,720             3,720                        3,720
    Common




                     Year Fixed
                                            yes                yes               yes               yes                          yes
                     Effects
                     Industry Fixed
                                            yes                yes               yes               yes                          yes
                     Effects




                                                                                                                                             59
Table 7: Politics and Venture Capital
                     Dependent                          Fraction-of-     Number-of-       Number-of-      Number-of-VC     Number-of-VC     Number-of-VC
                     Variable             GVC              GVC              PVC              GVC           Full Sample       High-tech        Low-tech
                                          Probit           OLS              OLS               OLS              OLS              OLS             OLS
                                      Coef (z score)   Coef (t score)   Coef (t score)   Coef (t score)   Coef (t score)   Coef (t score)   Coef (t score)
                                          0.600            0.197           -0.353            0.450            0.097            0.797           0.131
                     Left-Politics
                                       (11.79***)       (12.55***)       (-5.84***)        (6.01***)          (0.92)         (3.55***)         (1.41)
                                          0.301            0.516            1.119            1.296            2.416            3.177           1.729
                     Constant
                                        (8.72***)       (42.52***)       (24.17***)       (25.23***)       (32.92***)       (24.73***)       (25.25***)
Without Controls
   Section 1




                     R-Squared          0.041576         0.052594         0.011861         0.012249         0.000288         0.011907         0.001073

                     Year Fixed
                                           no               no               no               no               no               no               no
                     Effects
                     Industry Fixed
                                           no               no               no               no               no               no               no
                     Effects
                     N                    2,884            2,884            2,884            2,884            2,884            1,116            1,768


                                          0.792           0.223            -0.297            0.593            0.296            0.478            0.163
                     Left-Politics
                                       (13.21***)       (13.50***)       (-4.70***)        (7.38***)        (2.71***)         (2.23**)          (1.48)
                                          0.211           0.006
                     Number-of-VC                                             -                -                -                -                -
                                        (6.75***)        (2.31**)
                                          0.240           0.616             1.130            1.403            2.533            5.172            2.555
With Full Controls




                     Constant
                                          (1.36)        (13.92***)        (4.95***)        (5.08***)        (6.02***)        (8.04***)        (4.52***)
    Section 2




                     R-Squared          0.16803          0.134219         0.124797         0.109129         0.150714         0.068911         0.101006
                     Year Fixed
                                           yes              yes              yes              yes              yes              yes              yes
                     Effects
                     Industry Fixed
                                           yes              yes              yes              yes              yes              yes              yes
                     Effects
                     N                    2,884            2,884            2,884            2,884            2,884            1,116            1,768




                                                                                                                                                             60
Table 8: Instrumental Variables
                     Dependent                                           Exit Value (log)                        Number-of-       Number-of-US
                     Variable              Exited          Survive       Resolved Deals     US VC Investment   Canadian Patents      Patents
                                         IV Probit        IV Probit          IV Reg             IV Probit           IV Reg           IV Reg
                                       Coef (z score)   Coef (z score)    Coef (t score)      Coef (t score)    Coef (t score)    Coef (t score)
                                           -1.219           -0.639            -7.692             -1.319              -3.252           -0.916
                     GMVC
Indicator Variable




                                        (-5.65***)       (-2.91***)        (-3.81***)          (-6.75***)         (-2.43**)         (-1.97**)
                                           0.061            0.007             0.328               0.153              0.201            0.026
    Section 1




                     Number-of-VC
                                        (5.31***)           (0.58)          (3.55***)          (13.89***)         (4.43***)          (1.92*)
                                           -0.686           -0.460            7.848              -1.013              2.331            0.697
                     Constant
                                         (-2.27**)         (-1.95*)         (4.30***)          (-2.99***)          (2.24**)          (1.79*)
                     Wald χ2 or F      χ2 = 302.00***   χ2 = 364.20***    F = 14.77***       χ2 = 644.44***      F = 5.04***       F = 2.23**


                                            -1.246          -0.650            -7.901             -1.399             -3.308            -0.932
                     Fraction-of-GVC
                                         (-5.59***)       (-2.90***)       (-3.86***)          (-6.83***)         (-2.44**)         (-1.97**)
Fraction Variable




                                             0.026          -0.012            0.131               0.118             0.105             -0.001
    Section 2




                     Number-of-VC
                                          (2.85***)         (-1.28)          (1.96*)           (10.33***)         (2.63***)           (-0.13)
                                            -0.684          -0.453            7.748              -1.016             2.373              0.709
                     Constant
                                          (-2.26**)        (-1.91*)        (4.37***)           (-2.91***)          (2.26**)          (1.80*)
                     Wald χ2 or F      χ2 = 298.63***   χ2 = 367.87***    F = 15.05***       χ2 = 651.31***      F = 5.15***       F = 2.28**


                     N                     2,884            2,884             1,763              2,884              2,884             2,884
    Common




                     Year Fixed
                                            yes              yes               yes                yes                yes               yes
                     Effects
                     Industry Fixed
                                            yes              yes               yes                yes                yes               yes
                     Effects




                                                                                                                                                   61
Table 9: Patterns of Origination

                                                                                Full         High tech     Low tech
                                                                                sample       subsample     subsample
  # in total                                                                         3720           1226         2494
  # financed only by PVCs                                                            1208            414           794
  # financed only by GVCs                                                            1784            388         1396
  # financed by a mix of PVCs and GVCs (=mixed)                                        728           424           304
  # of mixed, originated by PVCs                                                       121            84            37
  # of mixed, originated by GVCs                                                       328           150           178
  # of mixed, originated by a mix of GVCs and PVCs (=MixOri)                           194           132            62
  # of mixed, origination unknown                                                       85            58            27
  % financed by PVCs that were originated by PVCs (incl. MixOri)                  82.28%         80.77%        83.38%
  % financed by GVCs that were originated by GVCs (incl. MixOri)                  95.01%         88.86%        97.79%
  % financed by PVCs that were originated by PVCs (excl. MixOri)                  71.80%         63.85%        77.59%
  % financed by GVCs that were originated by GVCs (excl. MixOri)                  87.02%         71.35%        94.08%
  % originated by PVCs then became mixed                                            9.10%        16.87%         4.45%
  % originated by GVCs then became mixed                                          15.53%         27.88%        11.31%

  # stands for number of enterprises
  % stands for fraction of enterprises


Table 10: Exit Values for PVCs and Mixed VCs

                     Sample                PVCs only   Mixed Only     Both
                                             0.187        -7.86       -1.89
                     GVC deal fraction
                                             (0.16)    (-4.03)***   (-2.06)**
                                              0.36         0.08        0.15
                     # of Invested funds
                                            (2.12)**     (0.98)     (2.53)**
Indicator Variable




                     Year fixed effects        yes         yes         yes
    Section 1




                     Industry fixed
                                              yes         yes         yes
                     effects
                                              1.99        7.23         3.11
                     Constant
                                             (1.15)    (3.99)***    (2.77)***
                     R-Squared               0.10         0.10        0.08

                     # obs                   1177         716         1893




                                                                                                                         62
1
    Baldwin et al (2000) find that, for all Canadian startups between 1984 and 1994, “failure rates among

entrants are extremely high. Some 40% have exited [their output market] by their second birthday. About

75% die by their eighth birthday. On average, mean survival time is about six years, while the median

length of life is approximately three years”.
2
    The name comes from the fact that in order to qualify for the program, the venture capital firm must find

a labour organization (normally a union) to act as a formal sponsor. However, the labour organizations

rarely play any significant role in the management of these funds.
3
    Note that the term “exit” refers to exit of the venture capitalist and possibly other early stage investors. It

does NOT refer to the exit of the firm itself from relevant output markets.
4
    Value creation assessed at an exit event is related to the return to investors in venture capital funds.

However, value creation is a more complete measure of performance than simply looking at the return to a

particular group of investors (such as venture capital funds). For example, it is possible that GVCs provide

the extra capital needed to turn potentially unsuccessful ventures into successful ventures, thereby

increasing the returns to other investors, even if the return to GVCs themselves is modest. This value

should be reflected in the overall value of the enterprise at IPO or upon acquisition. Accordingly, it is

important to assess overall value creation – the full value of the firm at an exit event.
5
    Baygan (2003) states that BDC accounts for 2% of the domestic venture capital industry’s capital under

management Bourdeau (2004), in the BDC’s annual reports, states that the 2004 carrying value of their

venture capital portfolio was approximately $350m, expected to rise to $440m in 2005. See also Secrieru

and Vigneault (2004).
6
    Of particular importance in Quebec are the various Quebec Innovatech Venture Capital Funds and the

venture capital subsidiaries of the Caisse de dépôt et placement du Québec.




                                                                                                                63
7
    Examples include the Innovation Ontario Corporation, the Manitoba Science and Technology Fund, the

New Brunswick Innovation Foundation, the Nova Scotia First Fund, and the Saskatchewan Government

Growth Fund, respectively.
8
    Readers should note that VCCs are sometimes referred to as QBICs (Quebec), CBSFs (Ontario), CVCCs

(Nova Scotia), EVCCs (BC prior to 1998), or SBECs (Alberta), depending on the province under study.
9
    A ‘web-bot’ is a network software tool that consists of four components: a ‘crawler’ that retrieves pages

from search engines and through hyperlinks; a ‘parser’ that extracts text from the HTML; a ‘knowledge

ontology’ that is used as a reference framework for interpreting the text; and a ‘reasoning system’ that

determines whether the text contains useful information, with respect to the ontology, and which also

provides direction to the crawler. The information mined from the Internet by our web-bots was validated

against the original source by a human operator, who then entered the data into a database.
10
     To get an estimate of long run outcomes we might, for example, look at what happens by 5 years after

first venture capital investment. This is not shown in the above table (which includes all enterprises).

Applying such a metric to our data suggests that, as of five years after first investment, about 10% of

venture-supported enterprises have an IPO, about 25% are acquired by a third party, about 45% go out of

business, and the remainder either experience another type of venture capital exit or simply continue as a

venture-supported privately held enterprise.
11
     Brander and Egan (2007) provides a definition of IT in terms of 6 digit NAIC codes as follows: 333295,

334111, 334112, 334113, 334119, 334210, 334220, 334290, 334413, 334611, 335921, 423430, 425110,

443120, 511210, 516110, 517110, 517212, 517410, 517910, 518111, 518210, 519190, 541511, 541512,

541513, 541519, 611420, and 811212. Biotechnology is defined as follows: 325411, 325412, 325413,

325414, 541710, and 621511. Note that biotechnology is particularly difficult to define using the NAIC

system.



                                                                                                          64
12
     Specifically we use single digit NAIC codes 1&2, 3, 4, 5, 6-9, IT, Biotech, and 0 as industry controls,

where 0 indicates that the industry classification is missing.
13
     As a robustness check we also run regressions with a definition based on 4-digit NAIC or 6-digit NAIC

but found that this did not affect the main results.
14
     The only exceptions worth mentioning are that the presence of a government originator is associated

with fewer US investors but more US patents. We remain slightly at loss for an interpretation for the

second of these results.




                                                                                                         65
