NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHO LEAVES? TEACHER ATTRITION AND STUDENT ACHIEVEMENT
Donald Boyd
Pam Grossman
Hamilton Lankford
Susanna Loeb
James Wyckoff
Working Paper 14022
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14022

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2008

We are grateful to the New York City Department of Education and the New York State Education
Department for the data employed in this paper. We appreciate comments on an earlier draft from
Tim Sass, Jonah Rockoff and participants at both the Economics of Teacher Quality Conference at
the Australian National University and the New York Federal Reserve Education Policy Workshop.
The research is supported by funding from the Carnegie Corporation of New York, the National Science
Foundation, the Spencer Foundation and the National Center for the Analysis of Longitudinal Data
in Education Research (CALDER). The views expressed in the paper are solely those of the authors
and may not reflect those of the funders. Any errors are attributable to the authors.¸ The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Donald Boyd, Pam Grossman, Hamilton Lankford, Susanna Loeb, and James Wyckoff.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Who Leaves? Teacher Attrition and Student Achievement
Donald Boyd, Pam Grossman, Hamilton Lankford, Susanna Loeb, and James Wyckoff
NBER Working Paper No. 14022
May 2008
JEL No. I21,J24
ABSTRACT
Almost a quarter of entering public-school teachers leave teaching within their first three years. High
attrition would be particularly problematic if those leaving were the more able teachers. The goal
of this paper is estimate the extent to which there is differential attrition based on teachers' value-added
to student achievement. Using data for New York City schools from 2000–2005, we find that first-year
teachers whom we identify as less effective at improving student test scores have higher attrition rates
than do more effective teachers in both low-achieving and high-achieving schools. The first-year differences
are meaningful in size; however, the pattern is not consistent for teachers in their second and third
years. For teachers leaving low-performing schools, the more effective transfers tend to move to higher
achieving schools, while less effective transfers stay in lower-performing schools, likely exacerbating
the differences across students in the opportunities they have to learn.

Donald Boyd
The Center for Policy Research
University of Albany
Milne 300
135 Western Ave.
Albany, NY 12222
boydd@rockinst.org
Pam Grossman
School of Education
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
Pamg@stanford.edu
Hamilton Lankford
School of Education, ED 317
University at Albany
State University of New York
Albany, NY 12222
hamp@albany.edu

Susanna Loeb
524 CERAS, 520 Galvez Mall
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
sloeb@stanford.edu
James Wyckoff
Curry School of Education
University of Virginia
P.O. Box 400277
Charlottesville, VA 22904-4277
wyckoff@virginia.edu

I. Introduction
Almost a quarter of entering public-school teachers leave teaching within their first three
years (U.S. Department of Education, 2007). The rates are higher in schools with low academic
achievement, leading many policymakers to the conclusion that to improve student
performance, policies must focus on improving teacher retention. High attrition would be
particularly problematic if those leaving were the more able teachers. While teachers who have
stronger academic backgrounds, as measured by test scores and the competitiveness of their
undergraduate institution, are more likely to leave teaching (Boyd, Lankford, Loeb and Wyckoff,
2005), there is remarkably little evidence that documents the effectiveness of teachers who
leave low-scoring schools. This paper generates estimates of novice teachers’ value-added to
student test score gains in New York City (NYC) that allow us to assess the relative
effectiveness of teachers who stay in their original school, transfer within NYC, transfer to
another New York State (NYS) district, or leave teaching in NYS public schools. We pay
particular attention to attrition patterns in lower-scoring schools and, for the teachers in these
schools who transfer within the NYC public system, differences between the schools to which
the relatively more and less effective teachers transfer.
Teacher retention may affect student learning in several ways. First, in high-turnover
schools, students may be more likely to get inexperienced teachers who we know are less
effective, on average (Rockoff, 2004; Rivkin, Hanushek and Kain 2005; Kane, Rockoff and
Staiger, 2006). Second, high turnover creates instability in schools making it more difficult to
have coherent instruction. This instability may be particularly problematic when schools are
trying to implement reforms, as the new teachers coming in each year are likely to repeat
mistakes rather than improve upon implementation of reform. Third, high turnover can be costly
in that it takes time and effort to continuously recruit teachers. In addition to all these factors,
turnover can reduce student learning if more effective teachers are the ones more likely to
leave.
Recent research has dramatically increased our understanding of teacher retention (e.g.,
Ingersoll, 2001, 2004; Ingersoll and Kralik, 2004; Ingersoll & Smith, 2003 and 2004; Hanushek,
Kain and Rivkin, 2004; Johnson, 2004; Boyd, Lankford, Loeb, & Wyckoff, 2005; Loeb, DarlingHammond, & Luczak, 2005). These studies show that teacher mobility differs both by teacher
characteristics and by the characteristics of their students. Teachers are more likely to stay in
schools in which student achievement is higher and teachers – especially white teachers – are
more likely to stay in schools with higher proportions of white students. Teachers who score
higher on tests of academic achievement are more likely to leave, as are teachers whose home

1

town is farther from the school in which they teach. Attributes of teachers and the students they
teach appear to interact. In particular, teachers having stronger qualifications (as measured by
scores on a general knowledge certification exam) are more likely to quit or transfer than are
less-qualified teachers, especially if they teach in low-achieving schools (Boyd, Lankford, Loeb
and Wyckoff, 2005).
Reducing teacher attrition might help improve the teacher workforce; however, whether
this is actually the case is an open question. How teacher attrition affects the quality of the
teacher workforce depends upon a number of factors, including the typical gains in
effectiveness teachers realize from additional years of experience, how the average quality of
entering cohorts of teachers differ from those who entered the profession earlier, and how
turnover affects the functioning of the school and in turn the effectiveness of other teachers. A
crucial factor is whether those teachers who leave teaching are more or less effective than their
peers who remain. Research on the relationship of teacher attrition and teacher effectiveness is
just now emerging. Hanushek, Kain, O’Brien and Rivkin (2005) find that the teachers leaving
schools in an urban Texas district on average have lower student achievement gains than do
the teachers who remain in the same school. This is true for those transferring within the district
as well as those leaving. They find that the differences in teacher effectiveness are greater for
teachers making intra-district transfers following their second and third years of teaching.
Goldhaber, Gross and Player (2007) also find that the teachers who transfer and leave teaching
are less effective than those who remain.
The goal of this paper is to supplement this early evidence regarding whether and how
the effectiveness of teachers differ by their retention status. We do this by looking specifically at
how differential attrition varies across schools and grade levels during a teacher’s first three
years of teaching and by following teachers who transfer to assess the extent to which more
and less effective teachers sort systematically into differing types of schools. Using data for
New York City schools from 2000–2005, we find that teacher attrition rates are significantly
higher in schools with lower student achievement. In addition, the first-year teachers that we
identify as less effective in improving student test scores have higher attrition rates than do
more effective teachers in both low-achieving and high-achieving schools. The first-year
differences are meaningful in size; however, the pattern is not consistent for teachers in their
second and third years. For teachers leaving low-performing schools, the more effective
transfers tend to move to higher achieving schools, while less effective transfers stay in lowerperforming schools, likely exacerbating the differences across students in the opportunities they
have to learn and to meet their own goals as well as those set by the city and state.

2

II. Teacher Attrition and Student Performance: Data and Methods
We classify individuals as remaining in the same school, transferring to another school
within NYC, transferring to another public school district in New York or leaving the New York
State public school system. This last category includes individuals who have quit teaching, as
well as those who took teaching jobs in private schools or in public schools in other states.
Figure 1 shows the cumulative transition rates for entering cohorts of NYC teachers in grades
four through eight who started teaching between 2000 and 2003.1 After three years slightly
more than a quarter of the teachers had left the NYS public school system and another eight
percent were teaching in other school districts in New York State. Twenty percent of the
entering teachers were teaching in another school within NYC.2 The net result was that by the
start of the fourth year only 46 percent of teachers continue to teach in the same school where
they began their careers.
Even though the school-level attrition for second-year teachers is almost as great as that
for first-year teachers (17 v. 20 percent), there are meaningful differences in destinations of the
teachers who leave. More than half of the teachers who leave following their first year transfer
to another school within New York City, a third leave the New York State system (e.g., quit
teaching) and only 15 percent transfer to the suburbs. Among those leaving their initial school
placement after the second year, only 27 percent transfer within New York City and more than
half leave the New York State system.
Much of the discussion regarding teacher retention is from a system-wide perspective,
asking what percentage of teachers leave the profession overall. However, it is understandable
that those specifically interested in educational outcomes in New York City (or any other specific
district) take a narrower view, being concerned about those who transfer out of their school
system, as well as those who leave the profession. From an even more local perspective,
school principals, parents and others likely will have a school-level perspective, primarily
concerned with teacher turnover in particular schools. A school-level perspective has broad
policy interest as well, given the systematic sorting of students and teachers across schools.
There are large differences in both student achievement and teacher characteristics across
schools. Interest in improving outcomes for low-performing students often means focusing at
the school level.
1

We stop with the 2003 cohort so that we can follow the teachers for three years to determine whether
they have left teaching.
2
The 20 percent figure does not include the additional roughly one percent of teachers who transferred
within NYC but subsequently transferred to another district or quit teaching.

3

The effectiveness of teachers accounts for a substantial share of the variance in student
learning after students’ own attributes have been taken into account (Sanders and Rivers,
1996). Teachers in schools with the highest proportions of low-performing students are less
qualified as measured by certification status, their own exam performance, and teaching
experience than are those in better performing schools (Betts, Reuben & Danenberg , 2000;
Lankford, Loeb and Wyckoff, 2002; Clotfelter, Ladd, Vigdor & Wheeler, 2007; Peske & Haycock
2006). However, teacher qualifications are not synonymous with teacher effectiveness. We
have little information on how teachers’ actual effectiveness differs across schools.
Determining whether teachers in schools with low performing students are less able than
teachers in other schools is not an easy task. When teachers teach similar students, it is
relatively easy to see whether students learn more in one teacher’s classroom than in another’s.
However, when teachers teach systematically different students or in different schools, it is not
clear whether to attribute differences in student learning to the teachers or to other factors.
While we cannot say definitively whether teachers in one school are more effective than
teachers in another, we do explore whether more effective teachers within each school stay or
leave and whether such within-school differences in attrition differs systematically across
schools.
Data: Our analyses draw on a rich database constructed from administrative data from
the New York City Department of Education and the New York State Education Department.
Over the years included in the analysis, New York State gave statewide student exams in
mathematics and English language arts in grades four and eight. In addition, the New York City
Department of Education tested third, fifth, sixth and seventh graders in these subjects. All the
exams are aligned to the New York State learning standards and each set of tests is scaled to
reflect item difficulty, and are equated across grades and over time.3 Tests are given to all
registered students with limited accommodations and exclusions. Thus, for nearly all students,
the tests provide a consistent assessment of achievement for a student from grade three
through grade eight.
To analyze the contributions of teachers to student achievement, we create a student
database with student exam scores, lagged scores and characteristics of students and their
peers linked to their schools and teachers. The student data, provided by the New York City
3

The mathematics exams in all grades are developed by CTB-McGraw Hill. New York State employs
CTBMcGraw Hill for its 4th and 8th grade ELA exams. In 2003 New York City switched from CTB to
Harcourt Brace for its 3rd, 5th-7th grade exams. At that time there was an equating study done to
accommodate the switch in exams.

4

Department of Education (NYCDOE), consists of a demographic data file and an exam data file
for each year from 1998-99 through 2004-05. The demographic files include measures of
gender, ethnicity, language spoken at home, free-lunch status, special-education status,
number of absences, and number of suspensions for each student who was active in grades
three through eight that year – approximately 450,000 to 500,000 students each year. More
detail is provided in the Appendix.
The exam files include, among other things, the year in which an exam was given, the
grade level of the exam, and each student’s scaled score on the exam. For most years, the file
contains scores for approximately 65,000 to 80,000 students in each grade. The only significant
exception is that the files contain no scores for 7th grade English language arts in 2002 because
the New York City Department of Education is not confident that exam scores for that year and
grade were measured in a manner that was comparable to the 7th grade English language arts
exam in other years.
Using these data, we construct a student-level database where exam scores are
normalized for each subject, grade and year to have a zero mean and unit standard deviation,
to accommodate any year-to-year or grade-to-grade anomalies in the exam scores. For this
purpose, we consider a student to have gain-score information in cases in which he/she has a
score in a given subject (ELA or math) for the current year and a score for the same subject in
the immediately preceding year for the immediately preceding grade. We do not include cases
in which a student took a test for the same grade two years in a row, or where a student skipped
a grade.
To enrich our data on teachers, we match New York City teachers to data from New
York State Education Department (NYSED) databases, using a crosswalk file provided by
NYCDOE that links their teacher file reference numbers to unique identifiers compatible with
both databases. We drew variables for NYC teachers from these data files as follows:
•

Teacher Experience: For teacher experience, we use transaction data from the
NYCDOE Division of Human Resources payroll system to calculate experience in
teaching positions in the New York City public school system. This is supplemented
using NYSED data on whether teachers previously taught in other public school districts
in New York. Teachers are included in the retention analysis only if they first taught in
NYC during the period analyzed and had not previous taught in another NYS district.

•

Attrition: We used the NYCDOE transaction data to identify the schools where novice
teachers initially taught and, in subsequent years, whether they continue to teach in the
same, or some other, NYC school. For those teachers who left the NYC public system,

5

NYSED data is used to determine which of these individuals transferred to another
district in New York.
Finally, we match teachers and students to their schools, and incorporate data on those schools
from the New York City Department of Education Annual School Report database, including:
•

School-average performance on state and city standardized exams

•

Poverty status as measured by the percentage of students eligible for Free and
Reduced-Price Lunch

•

Racial and ethnic breakdown of students

The analysis of teacher retention links teachers to schools and places schools into categories
based on average student math scores. In defining groups, we weight each school by the
number of teachers in our data, so that a school with many teachers will count more than a
school with few teachers.
Measuring Teacher Effectiveness: A student’s acquisition of skills and knowledge is a
complex social enterprise producing a variety of outcomes for students. This paper focuses on
the specific outcomes of test-score gains in math and English language arts (ELA) in grades
four through eight. Teachers clearly affect students more broadly than is measured on these
exams. Thus the analyses in this paper do not fully account for all the contributions that
teachers make to students. Nonetheless, these scores are a reasonable metric for measuring
part of teacher effectiveness, both because they are the State’s chosen measure of student
learning and because similar measures of achievement increasingly have been found to be
strong predictors of students’ later educational and economic success (Murnane, Willett,
Duhldeborde, and Tyler, 2000).
Even when limiting the analysis to achievement gains in math and English language
arts, disentangling the contributions of a particular teacher from the contributions of other school
inputs and the range of other determinants (e.g., home influences) is a challenge. We estimate
the effectiveness of teachers in improving the educational outcomes of students using the fairly
typical value-added model shown in Equation 1. Yijst is the test score of the ith student taught by
the jth teacher in school s during year t. We separately analyze scores in math and ELA.4

Yijst = X it α + C jt β + δ s + γ

jt

+ ε ijst (1)

To net out the effects of a student’s own background and past academic achievement, the
vector of student attributes, X it , includes measures indicating the student’s poverty status,
whether the student is an English language learner, the student’s race, school absences and
4

Test scores are normalized by grade and year to have zero means and standard deviations of one.

6

suspensions in the prior year, whether the student transferred from another school as well as
the students’ scores on both the math and ELA exams in the prior grade and those scores
squared. C jt includes averages of these same variables for the student’s classmates. To
capture the wide range of school-level factors affecting student outcomes, we include school
fixed-effects, δ s . We account for these various factors in an effort to isolate the value-added by
a student’s teacher, here measured by γ jt . Note that this is a teacher-year fixed effect which is
estimated separately for each year a person teaches and that estimates of the γ jt only provide
information about a teacher’s effectiveness relative to other teachers in the same school, as a
result of the model including school fixed-effects. Finally, ε ijst is an error term capturing other
factors affecting a student’s score (e.g., test measurement error).
Descriptive statistics for the variables included in the value-added models are reported in
the Appendix, along with parameter estimates for the four models. That is, we estimate models
that yield both math and ELA value-added estimates for fourth- and fifth-grade teachers and
value-added estimates for both math and ELA teachers in middle-schools. These teacher-byyear fixed-effect estimates are estimated for all teachers in these grades and subjects.
However, the retention analysis focuses upon teachers in their first three years of teaching.
With the inclusion of the many student, class and school controls, the estimated teacheryear effects aim to measure within-school differences in teachers’ effectiveness at improving the
test performance of students.5 Even so, as estimates, the fixed-effects are subject to statistical
error so that part of the observed variation is due to measurement error, not actual differences
in the effectiveness of teachers. We employ the empirical Bayes approach to adjust the
teacher-effect estimates for such estimation error.6 We use with-in school differences in these
adjusted fixed-effects by level of experience as our measure of teacher effectiveness.7 For
example, our measure of a sixth, seventh or eighth grade, second-year teacher in math is
calculated as the difference between the teacher’s adjusted fixed effect and the average of the
adjusted fixed-effects for all the second-year math teachers who taught in that same school
5

An alternative would have been to explicitly model the gains from experience and estimate teacher
effects, instead of teacher-year effects. We chose the latter because of our focus on teachers in the first
few years of their careers and our decision to compare teachers only to other teachers in their same
school having the same level of experience.
6
See Jacob and Lefgren (2005) for a clear summary of the approach we use as well as Kane and Staiger
(2002) and Morris (1983) for earlier references.
7
From the empirical-Bayes-adjusted estimate of a teacher’s effectiveness in a particular year we
subtracted the mean adjusted estimate for all teachers in the school having the same level of experience.
It is these normalized, adjusted estimates of within school (and experience level) differences in teacher
effectiveness we utilize in the remainder of the paper.

7

during the period 2000-2005. This approach yields fairly clean estimates of how effective each
teacher is relative to their equally experienced peers in the same school.
Because most fourth and fifth grade teachers teach both math and ELA, it is possible to
estimate measures of effectiveness for these teachers in both subject areas. In this analysis
teacher effectiveness has a mean of zero for teachers in the same school and with the same
experience, due to the normalization described above. For first-year teachers in these grades,
the standard deviation of our measure of effectiveness is 0.13 in math and 0.10 in ELA. The
correlation between the effectiveness measures for math and ELA for fourth and fifth grade
teachers in their first year is 0.47, indicating that teachers good in one area are generally
effective in the other but that many teachers are relatively better in one area. The student test
score itself is measured in standard deviation units so that a one standard deviation difference
in math effectiveness corresponds to a .132 standard deviation difference in student test
performance. The standard deviation of the gain in student test scores is somewhat lower at
approximately 0.6, so that a standard deviation difference in teacher effectiveness corresponds
to approximately 0.2 standard deviation change in student learning over the course of a year.
The results for the middle-school grades are similar. The standard deviation of our
measure of effectiveness in grades sixth through eight is 0.10 in math and 0.08 in ELA.
Because of course specialization at the middle-school level, only 20 percent of the sixth through
eighth grade teachers in our sample teach both subjects. For them, the effectiveness measures
for the two subjects have a correlation of 0.38.8

III. Teacher Attrition and Teacher Effectiveness in New York City
Teacher attrition for novice teachers in New York City is marked by two dominant
themes. First, teachers of low-performing students are more likely to leave their current schools
during their first two years of teaching than are teachers of high-performing students. And,
second, across both low and high-performing schools, teachers who are less effective in raising
student achievement are more likely to leave their current school than are more effective
teachers. These results hold up across grade levels and across schools grouped by the
performance of students in math or ELA. The results are stronger for teacher effectiveness
measured by math than by ELA value-added. The exception is middle-school ELA teachers
where there appears to be no relationship between teacher effectiveness and retention.

8

The standard deviations for the test groupings are roughly comparable to those reported by Rockoff
(2004) and smaller than those reported by Hanushek, Kain, O’Brien and Rivkin (2005) as well as Jacob
and Lefgren (2005).

8

Teachers in low-performing schools more likely to leave. Figure 2 shows attrition
patterns for teachers by school average achievement scores. The category higher-scoring
schools includes the quartile of schools having the highest mean math scores, while the lowerscoring category includes the quartile of schools having the lowest mean math scores. The
middle-scoring group consists of schools in the middle 50 percent.9 In both the first and second
year, we observe a greater proportion of teachers leaving the lower-scoring schools, compared
to teachers in higher-scoring schools; the lower-scoring schools have higher transfer rates
within NYC as well as relatively more teachers leaving the NYS system. The net result is that,
by the end of the second year, the difference in school-level attrition is eight percentage points
(38 vs. 30 percent). When schools are grouped based on either student poverty measured by
free-lunch eligibility or the percent of students who are either Black or Hispanic, the patterns of
school-level attrition are very similar. For example, when schools are grouped by the percent of
minority students, the difference in the cumulative two-year school-level attrition rate is nine
percentage points (39 vs. 30 percent) between top and bottom quartiles. When schools are
grouped based on student poverty, there is a six percentage point difference. Furthermore, the
attrition patterns for the separate transitions (e.g., leaving the NYS system) are quite similar
whether schools are grouped based on student scores, race or poverty.
Less-effective novice teachers more likely to leave – 4th and 5th grade results.
Figure 3a displays attrition rates for fourth- and fifth-grade teachers grouped according to
whether their value-added is in the top or bottom quartile or the middle half. First-year teachers
with relatively low math value-added are more likely both to transfer to another school within
NYC and to leave the NYS system, compared to their more effective peers. Twenty-three
percent of first-year teachers whose math value-added is in the bottom quartile transfer or leave
teaching, while only 15 percent of those in the top-quartile do so. The differences for secondyear teachers are much smaller. The differences in attrition rates also are smaller when teacher
effectiveness is measured using ELA value-added rather than that for math. (See Figure 3b.)
The patterns evident in Figures 3a and 3b come through in multivariate analysis, as well.
A multivariate approach has the benefit of being able to account for school-specific differences
in attrition as well as possible interactions between school type and teacher effectiveness.
Equation 2 describes the basic model. Here the probabilities of returning to the same school
the following year (h=1), transferring to another NYC school (h=2), transferring to another NYS

9

Schools here are grouped based on the mean math scores of fourth- and fifth-grade students and
weighted by student enrollment in those grades. Similar groupings are employed for middle schools.

9

district (h=3) and leaving the NYS public system (h=4) are a function of E j representing either a
scalar or vector

Pjh

=

exp(α sh + β h E j )

∑ exp(α sg + β g E j )

, h = 1, 2, 3, 4

(2)

g

measure of teacher effectiveness. The α sh are school-specific constant terms that capture the
general attrition patterns in each school. This fixed-effect multinomial logit specification is
attractive in that we need not estimate the school fixed effects. Rather they can be swept from
the model, allowing us to focus on estimating how within-school differences in teacher
effectiveness explain which teachers in a school leave conditional on the schools’ overall
attrition rates.10 Without loss of generality, we employ the normalizations α 1s = β 1 = 0 . Thus,
by estimating the parameters β 2 , β 3 and β 4 , we can make inferences regarding how the
transition probabilities within a school vary with the relative effectiveness of teachers.11 A word
of caution is warranted here in that non-zero values of the β ' s do not necessarily imply a
causal relationship. We are merely interested in obtaining a clearer empirical description of how
attrition varies with teachers’ own effectiveness. Additional information regarding the estimation
strategy is provided in the Appendix.
Parameter estimates for several different specifications for fourth- and fifth-grade
teachers are shown in the top panel of Table 1.12 Model A, estimated for teachers having up to
three years of experience, indicates that less effective teachers are more likely to transfer within
10

Estimating the conditional logit model allows us to avoid the incidental-parameters problem; if the
school-specific constants were estimated along with the effective coefficients, the latter estimates would
be biased. See Chamberlain (1980).
11
Because all the β ' s enter the formula for each of the transition probabilities, interpreting the estimated
coefficients is somewhat complicated. However, given the normalization we employ, it follows
that Pjh Pj1 = exp(α sh ) exp(β h E j ) . Thus, a negative value of β h would indicate that an increase in teacher
effectiveness is associated a reduction in the probability of transition h relative to the probability of
remaining in the same school. Note that the magnitude of the effect depends upon β h as well as the
school’s baseline pattern of transition, captured by the school fixed effect, α sh ; in particular, the
magnitude of the effect of an increase in E j will be larger as exp(α sh ) is larger.
12

N = 3192 shown in the top panel of Table 1 is the number of entering novice teachers included in the
analysis. In specifications where second- and third-year teachers enter the analysis, the number of
observations exceed N since many of these teachers teach multiple years.
The models estimated are somewhat more complicated than the specification shown in (2). In
particular, we included alternative-specific dummy variables indicating one’s years of experience beyond
the first year, in order to account for the fact that transition patters for teachers in their second and third
years might well differ systematically from those for first-year teachers.

10

NYC compared to more effective teachers. There is a similar inverse relationship for the
probability of leaving the NYS system. In contrast, we find no systematic relationship between
the transition probabilities and individuals’ effectiveness in teaching ELA. The estimated
coefficients are small in magnitude relative to those estimated for math, and their standard
errors are somewhat larger. We estimate a range of different specifications, but never find
evidence of a systematic relationship between the transition probabilities and fourth- and fifthgrade teachers’ effectiveness in ELA, except in the case where math effectiveness is dropped
from the model. In light of this finding, ELA effectiveness is not included in the other
specifications reported for teachers in grades four and five.
We also explore whether the systematic pattern for math effectiveness holds equally for
first, second and third year teachers and find that it does not. Model B shows the pattern for
first-year teachers is as just noted. However, the second row of Model B shows that there is no
evidence of a systematic relationship between math effectiveness and the transition
probabilities for second- and third-year teachers. We estimate a range of models and find this
result to be robust. For example, for second- and third-year teachers, we estimate models (not
shown) that include variables reflecting their current and/or first-year effectiveness as well as
models including the average of teacher effectiveness in the current and prior-years. In none of
the cases do we find that retention patterns vary systematically with within-school differences in
the math effectiveness of second- and third-year teachers.
The within-school relationship between attrition and teacher effectiveness in math is
statistically significant, but is it of policy importance? We address this question using Figure 4,
which shows estimated attrition probabilities for first-year teachers corresponding to Model B
estimates of the effectiveness coefficients. To compute such probabilities, one also needs
estimates of the school-specific constants ( α s2 , α s3 and α s4 ), as Equation (2) makes clear. The
probabilities shown in Figure 4 are for the case where the values of α s2 , α s3 and α s4 imply the
estimated transition probabilities, evaluated at the mean value of E j (i.e., zero), equal the
observed transition rates. This is what would result had the α sh been restricted to be the same
across schools (i.e., α sh = α sh' for all schools) and jointly estimated along with the efficiency
coefficients.13 Thus, the general heights of the three curves in Figure 4 (i.e., their intercepts) are

13

The estimated probabilities evaluated at the means of the explanatory variables will equal the relative
frequencies observed in the data used in estimation.

11

determined by the overall transition rates observed in the data, with the slopes of the three
curves determined by the estimated effectiveness coefficients in Model B.
As shown in Figure 4, a first-year teacher whose effectiveness is one standard deviation
below the mean (-0.13) has an estimated probability of transferring within NYC that is 62
percent higher than that for a teacher one standard deviation above the mean (12.8 vs. 7.9
percent). There is a 73 percent difference in the estimated probability of quitting (8.5 vs. 4.9
percent). Note that the range of teacher effectiveness values shown on the horizontal axis, 0.25 to +0.25, is slightly larger than that in going from the fifth to the 95th percentile of math
value-added. The estimated probabilities of transferring within NYC and leaving the NYS
system are well over twice as large at the fifth percentile of value-added compared to estimated
probabilities at the 95th percentile. Less effective teachers are much more likely to transfer or
leave the NYS system than are their more effective colleagues.
The analyses so far show that more effective teachers are less likely to transfer or leave
teaching after their first year, but they do not provide a good measure of how much more
effective, on average, teachers are who stay, relative to those who transfer or leave. Figure 5
shows the distribution of the value-added in math for first-year fourth- and fifth-grade teachers
by their transition status following the first year of teaching. Consistent with the attrition patterns
discussed above, two differences stand out. First, a greater proportion of teachers transferring
within NYC are less effective than those who remain in the same school, as shown by the
greater frequency of transferring teachers having low levels of math effectiveness, in particular
values between -0.35 and -0.15. Consider the somewhat arbitrary thresholds of plus or minus
one standard deviation in math effectiveness (0.13). Fifteen percent of those first-year teachers
who remain in the same school were below the -0.13 threshold, compared to one quarter of
those transferring within NYC. Among the most effective teachers, 17.5 percent of those who
remain in the same school have effectiveness estimates that are at least one standard deviation
above the mean. This contrasts to nine percent for those who transfer within NYC. The second
notable difference in effectiveness is that those leaving teaching in New York State public
schools are substantially less effective than their peers who remain in the same school. Twothirds of the first-year teachers leaving the NYS system are less effective than the median for
first-year teachers who remain in the same school.
As suggested by Figure 5, there are meaningful differences between teachers who leave
and their peers who remain in the same school. The top row of Table 2 shows the average
within-school differences in teacher effectiveness in math for fourth and fifth-grade teachers.
On average, those transferring within NYC are less effective by -0.046 compared to the first-

12

year teachers who remain in the same schools.14 The average difference for those who leave
the New York State public school system is -0.044. To put these numbers into perspective,
0.050 is the average difference in effectiveness between the second year of teaching and the
first, for those individuals who remain in the same school for a second year. From a different
perspective, -0.046 and -0.044 are one third as large as the standard deviation of the math
value-added measure for first-year fourth- and fifth-grade teachers. By either perspective, these
differences in effectiveness across retention groups are meaningful.
The analyses so far have looked at all schools together. However, as discussed above,
teachers systematically sort across schools due to their own preferences and how school
leaders differ in their handling of personnel matters (e.g., counseling-out ineffective teachers).
Thus, it would not be surprising if the aggregate results described so far mask differences
across schools, particularly schools grouped by student achievement, race/ethnicity or poverty.
Model C in Table 1 explores such potential differences using interactions between the measure
of effectiveness in math and dummy variables indicating whether a school is in the quartile of
NYC schools having the lowest average student performance on the fourth- and fifth-grade
math exam (lower-scoring school), whether the school is in the middle 50 percent of schools
and whether the school is in the higher-scoring quartile. In this way, we estimate separate
effectiveness coefficients for each of the three school groupings. All three of the coefficients for
NYC transfers are statistically different from zero and statistically different from each other.15
That is, for each school type, greater effectiveness is associated with a lower probability of
transferring, relative to staying in the same school, but the relationship between effectiveness
and the probability of a NYC transfer is less strong in lower-scoring schools.
The evidence for leaving the New York State system is somewhat different. The
effectiveness coefficients for leaving teaching in New York State are statistically different than
zero for lower- and middle-scoring schools, implying that greater effectiveness is associated
with a lower probability of leaving teaching, relative to remaining in the same school. Note that
the magnitude of the estimated coefficient for lower-scoring schools is twice as large as the
coefficients for middle- and higher-scoring schools, the last of which is not statistically different
from zero. The hypothesis that the three coefficients are equal is rejected at the one percent
level of significance, indicating that the relationship between teacher effectiveness in math and
the probability of leaving teaching in NYS is relatively stronger in the lowest scoring schools.
14

These estimates and standard errors were obtained by regressing the value-added measure on dummy
variables indicating the three transitions as well as school fixed effects.
15
Using a likelihood-ratio test, the hypothesis that the three coefficients are equal is rejected at the fivepercent level of significance.

13

There does not appear to be a relationship between teachers’ effectiveness and their probability
of transferring to another district for any of the school types.
As shown in Figure 6a corresponding to Model C, the relationships between math
effectiveness and the estimated probability of a NYC transfer are somewhat different across the
three school groupings.16 In particular, the decline in the estimated probability of a NYC transfer
associated with a given increase in relative effectiveness is only half as large in lower-scoring
schools compared to higher-scoring schools, as indicated by the slopes of the curves. There
are even larger differences across school groups in the relationship between math effectiveness
and the estimated probability of leaving the NYS public system, as shown in Figure 6b.
However, here the pattern is reversed. For first-year teachers in lower-performing schools, there
is a 14 percentage-point reduction in the probability of leaving the NYS system as one moves
from roughly the fifth to the 95th percentile in teachers’ math effectiveness. In higher-scoring
schools, the change is three percentage points.
As shown in Figure 2, school-level attrition rates in lower-scoring schools are
substantially greater than in higher-scoring schools. Patterns seen in Figures 6a and 6b help
explain this result. First, the lower-scoring schools lose relatively more of their higher-valueadded math teachers, as a result of transfers within NYC. Second, they lose relatively more of
their lower-value-added teachers through attrition from the NYS system. Two statistics
underscore the importance of these patterns. First, among the first-year fourth- and fifth-grade
teachers having relatively high math value-added, 47 percent of those switching NYC schools
transfer out of schools in the lower-scoring quartile. This figure is almost twice as large as
would be the case had the more effective teachers who transfer been drawn uniformly from all
schools. A second statistic is less troubling. Among the fourth- and fifth-grade teachers with
relatively low math value-added, 43 percent of those who leave the NYC workforce come from
schools in the bottom quartile of student performance.
How do these differences in effectiveness vary by the average student performance
level of the school? Table 2 shows the mean differences in effectiveness by attrition status for
teachers grouped by whether the schools in which they teach during the first year are in the
16

The estimated probabilities of a NYC transfer reflected in each of the curves in Figure 6a were
computed using the same strategy as that employed in computing the estimated probabilities shown in
Figure 4. For example, the values of the school-specific constants for teachers in lower-scoring schools
were set so that the estimated probability of a NYC transfer, evaluated at E j = 0 , equals the proportion of
first-year teachers in these schools who actually made such transfers. Thus, the heights of the three
curves reflect the rates at which teachers in the three groups of schools actually transferred within NYC.
The slopes of the curves reflect the relationships between the estimated transition probabilities and
teacher effectiveness implied by Model C. The same is true for the estimated probabilities in Figure 6b.

14

quartile of schools having lower-scoring students, the middle 50 percent of schools or the
quartile of schools having higher-scoring students. The eight percent of first-year teachers in
lower-scoring schools who leave the NYS system are less effective than the first-year teachers
who remain in the same schools by an average of -0.070 – half as large as the standard
deviation of the math value-added measure for all fourth- and fifth-grade teachers and 40
percent larger than the average gain in math effectiveness associated with having the first year
of teaching experience. Less than four percent of first-year teachers in the higher-scoring
schools quit after their first year; their average difference in effectiveness is smaller in
magnitude (-0.028) and not statistically different from zero. The average math value-added for
the fourth- and fifth-grade teachers who transfer within NYC is lower than that for their peers
who remain in the same schools – for all three school groupings (-.039, -.048, and -.059 for low, middle-, and high-scoring schools respectively). These, too, are educationally important
differences.
Measures of the relative effectiveness of fourth- and fifth-grade teachers in improving the
ELA scores of students are shown in the bottom panel of Table 2. Qualitatively, the pattern is
similar to that for effectiveness in math but the magnitudes of the differences generally are
smaller. As noted above, there is no systematic relationship between the transition probabilities
and teacher ELA value-added once the math value-added of teachers is taken into account.
The pattern for differences in ELA value-added in Table 2 results from the correlation between
ELA and math value-added (0.47) and the systematic relationship between math value-added
and the transition probabilities.
Less-effective novice teachers more likely to leave – 6th through 8th grade results.
Figure 7 shows attrition rates for first- and second-year middle-school math teachers and, for
comparison, gives the attrition rates for fourth- and fifth-grade teachers. The rates of NYC
transfer following the first year of teaching is 60 percent higher for middle-school math teachers
than for those in grades four and five (16.4 vs. 10.1). Following the second year, there is a
three-fold difference in NYC transfers. Middle-school math teachers also are relatively more
likely to leave the NYS system after their second year of teaching (13.0 vs. 8.8 percent). The
pattern for middle-school ELA teachers is similar.
The attrition rates for middle-school math teachers are shown separately in Figure 8 for
teachers in schools grouped by student performance. Middle-school math teachers in lowerscoring schools are over twice as likely to transfer to another NYC schools after the first year
and four times as likely after the second year, compared to middle-school math teachers in
higher-scoring schools. A comparison of Figures 2 and 8 shows that the rates at which first-

15

year teachers transfer within NYC are very similar for 6-8 grade math teachers and 4-5 grade
teachers in middle- and higher-scoring schools. The same is not true for these two groups of
teachers in lower-scoring schools. In fact, the higher transfer rates for middle school math
teachers is explained entirely by the transfer rates in lower-scoring schools. Similarly, the
overall higher rate at which middle-school math teachers leave the NYS system after the
second year, compared to teachers in grades four and five, reflects the high quit rates for the
middle-school math teachers in lower- and middle-scoring schools. Forty one percent of the
first-year middle-school math teachers teaching in lower-scoring schools transfer within NYC
during the first two years. With an additional 18 percent leaving the NYS public school system
and modest transfers to other NYS pubic schools, only 38 percent of the first-year math
teachers teaching in lower-scoring schools return to the same school for a third year.
We find no systematic differences in attrition for second- and third-year teachers when
we estimate transition behavior employing the logit model described above; see model D in
Table 1. Unlike for fourth and fifth grade teachers, the probability of middle-school math
teachers making a NYC transfer, relative to that of remaining in the same school, in this model
appears not to vary with teacher’s relative effectiveness in teaching math – at least when all
such teachers are grouped together. However, the aggregate results mask dramatic
differences across school types, as shown by the parameter estimated in model E and the
implied probabilities of NYC transfers in Figure 9a. In all but lower-scoring schools, the
estimated probability of a NYC transfer declines as teachers are more effective; the relationship
reverses in lower-scoring schools. Note that the estimated transfer probabilities (Figure 9a) are
somewhat similar across the three school groups for the least effective teachers. However, the
same is not true for relatively more effective teachers. Consider teachers whose math valueadded is one standard deviation above the average for their school peers (0.10). Such a
relatively more effective teacher in a lower-scoring school is over four times as likely to transfer
within NYC compared to the teacher in a higher-scoring school (26.8 vs. 5.9 percent). An
implication is that most of the more effective teachers who transfer within NYC following their
first year will be leaving schools having relatively low student scores. Remarkably, 60 percent
of the middle-school math teachers in the top quartile of effectiveness who left their initial school
placement after the first year left schools grouped in the lower-scoring quartile
With respect to leaving the NYS system, we do not find a statistically significant
relationship between teacher value-added and the probability of quitting, relative to that of
remaining in the same school, for middle-school math teachers in middle- and higher-scoring
schools. In contrast, the probability that a middle-school math teacher in a lower-scoring school

16

will leave the NYS system is lower as value-added rises (Model E and Figure 9b). The
estimated probability of quitting for a teacher whose effectiveness is one standard deviation
below average is three times as large as that for a teacher whose effectiveness is one standard
deviation above average (14.7 vs. 4.3 percent).
The top row of Table 3 shows average within-school differences in teacher effectiveness
for middle-school math teachers. On average, those who leave the NYS public system are less
effective by -0.043, compared to the first-year teachers who remain in the same schools. The
average difference for all those who transfer within NYC is both small and not statistically
different from zero. However, schools vary significantly in this regard. In middle schools with
higher-scoring students, the value-added of those who transfer within NYC is lower than that of
their peers who remain in the same schools by -0.055 on average. Whereas there is no
difference for those transferring out of lower-scoring schools, the first-year math teachers in
these schools who leave the NYS system are less effective than their peers who remain in the
same schools by -0.062. These systematic differences are quite large when compared to the
0.038 gain in effectiveness from those returning to the same school having a year of
experience. From a different perspective, -0.055 and -0.062 are relatively large when compared
to the 0.101 standard deviation of the value-added measure for all first-year middle-school math
teachers. With more than ten percent of first-year teachers in higher-scoring schools
transferring, their attrition could meaningfully improve student achievement in those schools.
In general, the attrition rates of middle-school ELA teachers by their valued-added in
ELA are less systematic and differences are smaller. For example, consider Model G in the
bottom panel of Table 1. The pattern of estimated coefficients associated with NYC transfers is
qualitatively similar to that for middle-school math teachers. However, none of the coefficients
are statistically different from zero, even though the hypothesis that the three coefficients are
equal is rejected at the one-percent level of significance. The positive estimate of β 2 for lowerscoring schools (1.244) is consistent with the probability of a NYC transfer increasing as the
teacher’s ELA value-added is higher, with the pattern reversed for schools in the other two
categories. There appears to be no systematic pattern for the estimated probability of middleschool ELA teachers leaving the NYS system.
Why might the ELA value-added patterns differ from those for Math in both grade
groupings? One possibility relates to a finding by Jacob and Lefgren (2005) who compare
estimates of teacher’s effectiveness, obtained using an approach quite similar to that we used,
with subjective evaluations provided by principals. In particular, principals are asked to assess
how effective teachers were “at raising student math (reading) achievement.” They find that

17

“principals appear good at identifying those teachers who produce the largest and smallest
standardized achievement gains,” and that principals are less successful at distinguishing
teachers’ effective in reading, compared to math. For example, Jacob and Lefgren estimate
that 69 percent of the teachers principals give the lowest rating in math actually are correctly
classified. In contrast, they estimate that principals only correctly identify 42 percent of the
“bottom” teachers in reading. To the extent that principals “counsel out” teachers they perceive
as being less effective, a difference in their ability to distinguish effective teaching in math vs.
ELA could be a factor in explaining the difference in attrition results. Alternatively, the student
exams may be a better instrument for identifying teachers’ effects in math than in ELA.
The results for both grade-level groupings point to systematic differences in attrition
behavior for more and less effective teachers, but they do not provide a good explanation for the
differences. As noted above, the observed pattern that more effective math teaches have lower
attrition rates does not establish causation. Even if it were true that lower effectiveness were a
cause for higher attrition, we still would not know the mechanism through which effectiveness
causes the observed actions. Do less effective teachers choose to leave their job on their own;
or do they get “counseled out”; or are they subject to a more direct action taken by their
employer? Separating supply and demand in the context of a teacher’s employment or
transition status is very difficult.17 From this perspective, our findings regarding the difference
between math and ELA effectiveness could reflect less effective teachers wanting to leave and
teachers themselves being better judges of their effectiveness in math.

IV. Characterizing NYC Transfers
Less-effective teachers disproportionately leave after their first year. Some of these
less-effective teachers leave teaching but others transfer to other schools. The effect that
transferring has on students depends in part on the schools to which these teachers transfer.
Two mechanisms come into play here. First, if the less effective teachers who transfer are
systematically more likely to transfer to schools serving low-performing students, than are the
more effective teachers who transfer, then the transfer process would further disadvantage
schools with lower performing students. Alternatively if more effective teachers are differentially
more likely to go to low-scoring schools then the transfer process can benefit the quality of
teaching in those schools. Second, teachers who transfer may be more effective in the schools
they transfer to than in the schools they came from. If this is the case then they may benefit the
17

For a discussion of these issues and one method to disentangle supply and demand in the context of
hiring novice teachers, see Boyd et. al. (2006).

18

schools to which they transfer ; the transfer process would then be a net gain for both the
sending and the receiving school.
Between eight and 23 percent of first-year teachers transfer to a different school
following their first year of teaching, depending on grade level and academic performance of the
school. To understand these transfer patterns, we compare the attributes of the schools in
which they initially teach with those to which they transfer, including how such differences vary
with the value-added of teachers in their first year. In so doing, we need to account for a natural
tendency for teachers in low-scoring schools to move to higher-scoring schools – there are
simply more higher-scoring schools to move to – and the reverse for teachers transferring from
high-scoring schools. This regression to the mean is likely to hold for a variety of school
attributes. If the effectiveness of teachers who transfer were correlated with their initial schools’
attributes, such regression to the mean would complicate the interpretation of simple mean
differences between the pre- and post-move schools.
We net out the effect of regression to the mean by regressing the difference in each
school attribute between the pre- and post-move schools on the pre-move school attribute value
where this variable is expressed as a deviation from the overall mean. A negative value for the
regression coefficient associated with this variable indicates regression to the mean. The
coefficients on the variables indicating the value-added category of teachers show how transfer
patterns vary across these categories. The results in Table 4 show a systematic pattern. Net of
regression to the mean, the less effective teachers who transfer move to schools that are very
similar to their initial placements. In contrast, the more effective teachers move to schools
having higher student test scores and fewer poor, Black and Hispanic students.
Consider the average math test scores of students in schools, a measure of school-level
academic performance. On average, teachers move to schools that have math scores that are
greater than the schools they left by 0.065 (column 1). However, the difference between the
new and original schools differs with the first-year math value-added of teachers. Less effective
teachers move to very similar schools; 0.018 in column 5 is not significantly different from zero.
In contrast, more effective teachers move to schools whose scores for students are 0.104
higher on average, with the school difference being almost as big (0.081) for the middle group of
teachers.
These differences are important from a policy perspective, as shown by comparing the
0.104 difference in the school average score to one or more measures characterizing the
dispersion in this measure across schools. For example, consider the interquartile range for this
measure. Twenty five percent of the elementary and middle schools in our sample have

19

average student scores that are below -0.386, with another 25 percent of the schools having
average scores that exceed 0.293. The difference between the 75th and 25th percentile scores
(i.e., the interquartile range), here 0.679 (= 0.293 - -0.386), is an intuitive measure of the
dispersion in average scores across schools as the mean scores of half the schools fall within
this range. The 0.104 average difference for the more effective teachers who move is 15
percent of the change needed to move from a school at the 25th to one at 75th percentile. The
0.104 is over one-fifth as large at the standard deviation in the school-average math score
(0.482).
As a second measure of student achievement consider the percentage of students in a
school whose scores are in the bottom quartile of scores citywide (i.e., the bottom 25 percent of
scores) and how this measure differs between the new schools of those transferring and the
schools from which they moved. After accounting for regression to the mean, teachers on
average move to schools that have 2.9 percentage points fewer lower-scoring students.
However, this differs with teachers’ first-year effectiveness teaching math. Even though the
average difference between the schools is zero for the teachers having lower value-added;
teachers in the highest value-added category move to schools where the incidence of students
scoring in the bottom quartile is 4.4 percentage points lower on average. This difference is
approximately one-fifth of the interquartile range across schools. Table 4 also shows these
same teachers move to schools with more students in the top quartile of student achievement.
Among teachers transferring within NYC, those who are more effective – as measured by their
contributions to the test score gains of their students in math – are more likely than their less
effective colleagues from the same schools to move to schools whose students already are
attaining higher academic achievement. Such systematic sorting disadvantages students in
schools with high concentrations of students failing to achieve even minimal academic success.
A similar though weaker pattern emerges for schools based on student demographic
characteristics. Less effective teachers on average move to schools with student race and
poverty percentages that are similar to those they left. On the other hand, teachers in the
middle half of the effectiveness distribution move to schools with 4.1 percentage points fewer
free-lunch-eligible students and 3.5 percentage points fewer black and Hispanic students. Both
of these average differences are significant and approximately one-tenth of the measures’
interquartile ranges, indicating that these school differences for those transferring are more
modest. The differences for the highly effective teachers are not significantly different from zero
but are in the same direction as those for the teachers of average effectiveness.

20

So far we have seen that the more effective teachers who transfer differentially move to
schools with higher scoring students. This process clearly benefits the higher performing
students more than other students. However, the ultimate effect of the transfer process also
depends on how well these teachers do in the schools to which they transfer. Table 5 shows
that the fourth- and fifth-grade teachers who transfer have value added in their second year (first
year in their new school) that is smaller than those who have taught in that same new school
both years. The same is true for middle-school math teachers. These results are similar to
those found in earlier work (Hanushek, Kain, O’Brien and Rivkin, 2005) and are consistent with
earlier finding that transferring teachers are, on average, less effective than those who remain in
the same school. Similarly, among the teachers in grades four and five who transfer, those who
were relatively more effective in math in the first-year on average are relatively more effective in
the schools to which they transfer; and those transferring who were relatively less effective in
their first year typically are relatively less effective in their new schools. The pattern of moves is
such that the second-year differences in effectiveness are roughly half as large as those in the
first year.
The consistency of teachers’ value-added across schools suggests that the potential
mechanism that would have led to a “better fit” of teachers with their new school is unlikely to
offset the differential sorting of the more effective teachers transferring into the schools with
higher scoring students. In keeping with this, the bottom of Table 5 shows that in grades four
and five, those teachers transferring into lower-scoring and middle group schools are less
effective teaching math than are their new peers, but the same is not true for the higher scoring
schools. Those transferring into higher-scoring schools are equally effective in math compared
to those continuing to teach in the same schools. Middle school math teachers demonstrate a
similar pattern but, again, we find no clear relationships with ELA effectiveness.

V. Summary and Conclusions
A large number of teachers leave their initial placements by the end of their first two
years on the job, especially in schools with large numbers of low performing students. Our
analysis in New York City schools indicates that nearly 40 percent of elementary teachers in
lower-performing schools left their initial school within two years; that figure is closer to 60
percent for middle schools. For these and other reasons, teacher retention is the focus of a
substantial body of recent and ongoing research and dominates many policy discussions
intended to improve classroom teaching.

21

However, researchers and policy makers should not jump to the immediate conclusion
that across-the-board reductions in teacher attrition are desirable. It may benefit students for
some teachers to leave, particularly those teachers who are ineffective in improving student
achievement. While we find little evidence of differential attrition by the effectiveness of
teachers with more than one year of teaching experience, we find that elementary teachers and
middle-school math teachers who leave teaching in New York prior to their second year are
responsible for lower achievement gains for their students, on average, than are their
colleagues who remain. This is particularly true for those teaching in schools where student
achievement is lowest. In other words, the achievement scores of many students will likely
increase as a result of the attrition of some teachers. This may be a reasonable response to a
poor initial career choice and may reflect “counseling out” by school officials.
Yet, some of the problems with the attrition process relate to the pattern of transfers
within New York City. Elementary teachers who transfer to other schools in New York City after
their first year are less effective on average than the colleagues they leave behind. The same is
true for middle-school math teachers in all but the lowest-scoring schools. That is, some
ineffective teachers are leaving schools, which may be good for the students in those schools.
However, these teachers are simply moving to other schools. If these less effective teachers
were a “better fit” with their new schools, such transfers could result in a net gain, but we do not
find evidence that this is the case. Teachers who were relatively less effective in the schools
they left, on average, are relatively less effective in the schools they enter. This churning of
less effective teachers occurs even though educational outcomes likely would improve if many
of these individuals left teaching.
The churning could be sub-optimal even if there were no differential sorting of the
teachers who transfer across schools, but this is not the case. First-year transfers who are
more effective in math tend to move to schools having relatively higher student achievement
and relatively fewer poor, Black and Hispanic students. Ineffective math teachers who transfer,
on average, move to schools very similar in academic performance and racial/ethnic
composition as those they left. Thus, the net effect is that traditionally low-performing students
are further disadvantaged.
Retention policies that discriminate among teachers based on their effectiveness in
improving the educational outcomes of students could be far more beneficial than indiscriminant
policies aimed at reducing attrition across the board. For example, eliminating first-year teacher
attrition could actually be detrimental to student achievement. Even if we assume that leavers
would be replaced by first-year teachers who on average are less effective than second-year

22

teachers, that extra year of experience does not overcome the weak achievement gains of
many of the first-year teachers who leave.
Additional policy issues arise with respect to within-district transfers. First, because a
substantial number of ineffective teachers leave their first school and find jobs in another school,
providing a better means to screen applicants might alter this outcome. Second, many
relatively effective teachers leave their initial placements, disproportionately leaving schools with
relatively more low-performing students and transferring to schools with relatively more higherperforming students, exacerbating achievement gaps. If schools with lower-performing students
were as appealing to teach in as those with higher-scoring students, such sorting could be
alleviated. Improving working conditions in traditionally difficult-to-staff schools is central to
addressing the sorting of more effective teachers.
The results presented here raise questions about the nature of teacher retention
policies. Eliminating or even reducing the achievement gap will inevitably rely on improving the
quality of teachers and teaching for low-achieving, poor, Black and Hispanic students. The
recruitment, selection, development, support, and retention of teachers must be linked to
policies that improve outcomes for students. Several of the policy prescriptions presented here
rely on having good measures of teachers’ abilities to improve a broad range of outcomes for
students. Unfortunately, most states and school districts do not have good measures of a broad
range of student outcomes and there is well-founded concern that a focus on isolating teacher
effectiveness solely employing value-added achievement results will have unintended
consequences. We have much to learn about the properties of such value-added test score
measures and their correlation with a broad set of student learning outcomes. Successful
teacher retention policies likely will need to differentiate among the performance of teachers and
create incentives to retain teachers who are most effective and either support the improvement
of less-effective teachers or encourage them to leave.

23

Figure 1
Cumulative Attrition Rates for Entering NYC Teachers, 2000-2003
25.0%

20.0%

15.0%

10.0%

5.0%

0.0%
1st year 2nd year 3rd year

1st year 2nd year 3rd year

1st year 2nd year 3rd year

Transfer within NYC

Transfer o utside NYC

Leave NYS System

Figure 2
Attrition Rates of First- and Second-Year Teachers in Grades 4-5,
by School Groupings Based on Student Performance, 2000-2005
14.0%
12.0%
10.0%
8.0%
6.0%
4.0%
2.0%
0.0%
1st Year

2nd Year

Transfer within NYC

Higher-scoring schools

1st Year

2nd Year

Transfer o utside NYC

Middle-scoring schools

1st Year

2nd Year

Leave NYS system

Low er-scoring schools

24

Figure 3a
Attrition Rates for First- and Second-Year Teachers in Grades 4-5,
by Groupings Based on Teachers’ Value-Added in Math, 2000-2005
14.0%
12.0%
10.0%
8.0%
6.0%
4.0%
2.0%
0.0%
1st Year

2nd Year

Transfer within NYC

Higher VA (top quartile)

1st Year

2nd Year

Transfer outside NYC

Middle group (middle 50%)

1st Year

2nd Year

Leave NYS system

Low er VA (bottom quartile)

Figure 3b
Attrition Rates for First- and Second-Year Teachers in Grades 4-5,
by Groupings Based on Teachers’ Value-Added in ELA, 2000-2005
14.0%
12.0%
10.0%
8.0%
6.0%
4.0%
2.0%
0.0%
1st Year

2nd Year

Transfer within NYC

Higher VA (top quartile)

1st Year

2nd Year

Transfer outside NYC

Middle group (middle 50%)

1st Year

2nd Year

Leave NYS system

Low er VA (bottom quartile)

25

Figure 4
Estimated First-Year Transition Probabilities by Teacher’s Effectiveness in Math, Grades 4-5
0.16
transition probability

0.14
0.12
0.1
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0
-0.25

-0.15

-0.05

0.05

0.15

0.25

teacher effectiveness
NYC transfer

NYS transfer

leave NYS system

26

Figure 5
Distributions of Fourth- and Fifth-Grade Teacher Effectiveness in Math by Retention Status, Schools in Lower-Scoring Quartile

3.5

3

relative frequency

2.5

2

1.5

1

0.5

0
-0.5

-0.4

-0.3

-0.2

-0.1

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

effectiveness in math
same school

NYC transfer

NYS transfer

leave NYS system

27

Figure 6a
Estimated Probability of Transferring Within NYC by Teachers’ Effectiveness
in Math and School Grouping Based on Student Performance,
First-Year Teachers in Grades 4-5
0.18
transition probabilities

0.16
0.14
0.12
0.1
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0
-0.25

-0.15

higher-scoring schools

-0.05
0.05
teacher effectiveness
middle group

0.15

0.25

lower-scoring schools

Figure 6b
Estimated Probability of Leaving NYS System by Teachers’ Effectiveness
in Math and School Grouping, First-Year Teachers in Grades 4-5
0.18

transition probabilities

0.16
0.14
0.12
0.1
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0
-0.25

-0.15

higher-scoring schools

-0.05
0.05
teacher effectiveness
middle group

0.15

0.25

lower-scoring schools

28

Figure 7
Annual Attrition Rates for First- and Second-Year Math Teachers in Grades 6-8
18.0%
16.0%
14.0%
12.0%
10.0%
8.0%
6.0%
4.0%
2.0%
0.0%
1st Year

2nd Year

Transfer w ithin NYC

1st Year
.

2nd Year

Transfer outside NYC

Teachers in Grades 4-5

1st Year
.

2nd Year

Leave NYS system

Math Teachers in Grades 6-8

Figure 8
Attrition Rates of First- and Second-Year Math Teachers in Grades 6-8,
by School Groupings Based on Student Performance, 2000-2005
26.0%
24.0%
22.0%
20.0%
18.0%
16.0%
14.0%
12.0%
10.0%
8.0%
6.0%
4.0%
2.0%
0.0%
1st Y ear

2nd Y ear

Transf er w ithin NY C

Higher-s coring s chools

1st Y ear

2nd Y ear

Transf er outside NY C

Middle-s coring s chools

1st Y ear

2nd Y ear

Leave NY S system

Lower-s coring s chools

29

Figure 9a
Estimated Probability of First-Year Middle School Math Teachers
Transferring Within NYC by Math Value Added and School Grouping
0.28

transition probabilities

0.24
0.2
0.16
0.12
0.08
0.04
0
-0.15

-0.05
0.05
teacher effectiveness

higher-scoring schools

middle group

0.15
lower-scoring schools

Figure 9b
Estimated Probabilities of First-Year Middle School Math Teachers
Leaving the NYS System by Math Value-Added and School Grouping
0.28

transition probabilities

0.24
0.2
0.16
0.12
0.08
0.04
0
-0.15

-0.05

0.05

0.15

teacher effectiveness
higher-scoring schools

middle group

lower-scoring schools

30

Table 1
Estimates of Parameters Reflecting How Transition Probabilities
Vary with Teacher Effectiveness, Fixed-Effect Logit Models
NYC transfer

NYS transfer

Leave NYS system

β3
β2
Teachers in Grades 4-5
s.e.
s.e.
(N = 3192)
A: Model including measures of math and ELA effectiveness, 1st – 3rd year teachers
Math effectiveness
ELA effectiveness

-1.558*** (0.431)
-0.332 (0.604)

0.052
0.028

(0.677)
(0.889)

β4

s.e.

-1.073**
0.436

(0.424)
(0.592)

B: Model entering math effectiveness separately for 2nd and 3rd year teachers
Effectiveness - 1st year teachers
Effectiveness – 2nd & 3rd years teachers

-2.231*** (0.457)
-0.322 (0.599)

0.201
-0.085

(0.840)
(0.863)

-2.460*** (0.558)
0.273
(0.519)

C: Model for 1st year teachers with inter-actions for schools having lower and higher scoring students
Math effectiveness*low scoring school
Math effect. *middle group
Math effect. *high scoring school

-1.570** (0.761)
-2.615*** (0.664)
-2.839** (1.190)

-0.6940 (2.137)
0.944 (1.160)
-0.924 (2.051)

NYC transfer

NYS transfer

β3
β2
Math Teachers in Grades 6-8
s.e.
s.e.
(N = 1521)
D: Model entering math effectiveness separately for 2nd and 3rd year teachers
Math effectiveness - 1st year
Math effectiveness – 2nd & 3rd years

-0.595
-0.412

(0.709)
(0.964)

-0.844
-1.571

(1.930)
(1.841)

-3.823*** (1.031)
-1.778** (0.803)
-1.906
(1.601)

Leave NYS system

β4

s.e.

-3.814*** (1.007)
0.433
(0.974)

E: Model for 1st year teachers with interactions for schools having lower and higher scoring students
Math effectiveness*low scoring school
Math effect. *middle group
Math effect. *high scoring school

1.320
-2.211*
-6.556**

(0.958)
(1.148)
(3.120)

NYC transfer

-2.316
-0.387
12.047

(3.441)
(2.175)
(12.530)

NYS transfer

β3
β2
ELA Teachers in Grades 6-8
s.e.
s.e.
(N = 1743)
F: Model entering ELA effectiveness separately for 2nd and 3rd year teachers
Effectiveness in ELA - 1st year
Effectiveness in ELA - 2nd & 3rd years

-0.357
1.748

(0.871)
(1.089)

1.764
-0.743

(1964)
(2.272)

-6.401*** (1.631)
-2.399
(1.787)
-1.342
(3.373)

Leave NYS system

β4

s.e.

-1.437
0.221

(1.153)
(1.020)

G: Model for 1st year teachers with interactions for schools having lower and higher scoring students
ELA effectiveness*low scoring school
ELA effect. *middle group
ELA effect. *high scoring school

1.244
-2.032
-3.210

(1.185)
(1.405)
(3.404)

2.269
1.846
-4.035

(3.709)
(2.555)
(8.497)

-2.626
0.218
-7.337

(1.986)
(1.545)
(4.748)

31

Table 2
Average Within-School Differences in the Effectiveness of the Teachers
Making Transitions Compared to Those Remaining in the Same School and
Attrition Rates, First-Year Teachers in Grades 4-5
NYC Transfer

NYS Transfer

Leave NYS

-0.046***
(0.009)

-0.007
(0.015)

-0.044***
(0.009)

-0.039***
(0.014)

-0.006
(0.031)

-0.070***
(0.015)

Middle group of schools

-0.048***
(0.013)

-0.011
(-0.02)

-0.026**
(0.013)

Higher Scoring Schools

-0.059**
(0.023)

-0.003
(0.037)

-0.028
(0.032)

Relative Effectiveness in Math
All Teachers
Teachers in …
Lower Scoring Schools

Relative Effectiveness in English Language Arts (ELA)
All Teachers

-0.019***
(0.007)

-0.012
(0.012)

-0.015**
(0.007)

-0.01
(0.011)

-0.038
(0.024)

-0.028**
(0.011)

Middle group of schools

-0.018*
(0.009)

-0.001
(0.015)

-0.009
(-0.01)

Higher Scoring Schools

-0.037**
(0.019)

-0.013
(-0.03)

0.015
(0.026)

Teachers in …
Lower Scoring Schools

Table 3
Average Within-School Differences in the Effectiveness of the Teachers
Making Transitions Compared to Those Remaining in the Same School and
Attrition Rates, First-Year Math Teachers in Grades 6-8
NYC Transfer

NYS Transfer

Leave NYS

-0.011
(-0.008)

0.003
(-0.02)

-0.043***
(-0.01)

0.006
(-0.013)

0.000
(-0.045)

-0.062***
(-0.019)

Middle group of schools

-0.022**
(-0.011)

0.000
(-0.022)

-0.032**
(-0.013)

Higher Scoring Schools

-0.055**
(-0.026)

0.035
(-0.064)

-0.032
(-0.026)

Relative Effectiveness in Math
All Teachers
Teachers in …
Lower Scoring Schools

32

Table 4
Regression of Difference in School Attributes Between First and Second Year Teachers by
Teacher Effectiveness in Math, Controlling for Regression Toward the Mean, Grades 4-8
(1)
All
teachers

(2)
First-year
value
demeaned

(3)
More
Effective
Teachers

Middle
Group

School mean

0.065***

-0.540***

0.104***++

0.081***+

0.018

-0.509***

math score

(0.013)

(0.031)

(0.032)

(0.021)

(0.027)

(0.035)

-0.029***

-0.598***

-0.044***++

-0.032***+

-0.011

-0.556***

scoring in bottom quartile

(0.005)

(0.033)

(0.011)

(0.007)

(0.009)

(0.037)

Percent of students

0.017***

-0.526***

0.029**+

0.024***+

0.002

-0.510***

scoring in top quartile

(0.005)

(0.030)

(0.011)

(0.008)

(0.010)

(0.034)

Percent free-lunch

-0.015**

-0.521***

-0.018

-0.041***+++

0.007

-0.508***

eligible

(0.007)

(0.032)

(0.016)

(0.011)

(0.014)

(0.036)

Percent of students who

-0.017**

-0.397***

-0.021

-0.035***++

0.013

-0.387***

are Black or Hispanic

(0.008)

(0.030)

(0.019)

(0.013)

(0.016)

(0.033)

Change in…

Percent of students

(4)

(5)
(6)
Less
First-year
Effective
value
Teachers demeaned

Table 5
Average Within-School Differences in Teacher Effectiveness for the
Second Year of Teaching Comparing Teachers Who Transferred Within
NYC to Teachers in the Same Schools Who Did Not, Grades 4-8
Grades 4-5
Grades 6-8
Math
ELA
Math
ELA
All Teachers
Teachers in …
Lower Scoring Schools
Middle group of schools
Higher Scoring Schools

-0.035**

-0.034***

-0.058***

-0.019

(0.017)

(0.011)

(0.018)

(0.015)

-0.023**

-0.026

-0.043

-0.009

(0.024)

(0.017)

(0.029)

(0.022)

-0.049**

-0.037**

-0.069***

-0.005

(0.023)

(0.016)

(0.024)

(0.023)

-0.016

-0.049

-0.070

-0.061

(0.062)

(0.044)

(0.066)

(0.042)

33

References
Betts, J., K. Rueben and K. Danenberg (2000) “Equal Resources, Equal Outcomes? The
Distribution of School Resources and Student Achievement in California,” Public Policy
Institute of California.
Boyd, D., H. Lankford, S. Loeb, J. Rockoff and J. Wyckoff (2007) “The Narrowing Gap in New
York City Teacher Qualifications and Its Implications for Student Achievement in HighPoverty Schools,” working paper.
Boyd, D., H. Lankford, S. Loeb and J. Wyckoff (2006) “Analyzing the Determinants of the
Matching of Public School Teachers to Jobs: Estimating Compensating Differentials in
Imperfect Labor Markets,” working paper.
Boyd, D., H. Lankford, S. Loeb and J. Wyckoff (2005) “Explaining the Short Careers of HighAchieving Teachers in Schools with Low-Performing Students,” American Economic Review
Proceedings 95(2), 166-171. An expanded version of this paper is available at
www.teacherpolicyresearch.org .)
Boyd, D., H. Lankford, S. Loeb and J. Wyckoff (forthcoming) “Do High-Stakes Tests Affect
Teachers’ Exit and Transfer Decisions? The Case of the 4th Grade Test in New York State,”
forthcoming in Public Finance Review.
Chamberlain, G. (1980) “Analysis of Covariance with Qualitative Data,” Review of Economic
Studies 47, 225-238.
Clotfelter, C., H. Ladd, J. Vigdor and J. Wheeler (2006) “High Poverty Schools and the
Distribution of Teachers and Principals,” Duke University working paper.
Falch, T. and M Ronning (2005) “The Influence of Student Achievement on Teacher Turnover,”
CES-IFO Working Paper No. 1469.
Goldhaber, D., B. Gross and D. Player (2007) “Are Public Schools Really Losing Their “Best”?
Assessing the Career Transitions of Teachers and Their Implications for the Quality of the
Teacher Workforce,” working paper.
Hanushek, E., J. Kain, D. O’Brien and S. Rivkin (2005) “The Market for Teacher Quality,” NBER
working paper.
Hanushek, E., J. Kain and S. Rivkin (2004) “Why Public Schools Lose Teachers,” Journal of
Human Resources 39(2) 326-354.
Ingersoll, R. (2001) “Teacher Turnover and Teacher Shortages: An Organizational Analysis,”
American Educational Research Journal 38(3) 499-534.
Johnson, S (2004) “Finders and Keepers: Helping New Teachers Survive and Thrive in our
Schools, The Project on The Next Generation of Teachers, San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Ingersoll, R. (2004) Why do High Poverty Schools Have Difficulty Staffing Their Classrooms with
Qualified Teachers? Report for Renewing Our Schools, Securing Our Future.

34

Ingersoll , R. and Kralik J.M. (2004). The Impact of Mentoring on Teacher Retention: What the
Research Says. Research Review. Education Commission of the States.
Ingersoll, R. and T. Smith (2003). “The Wrong Solution to the Teacher Shortage.” Educational
Leadership, 60(8): 30-33.
Ingersoll, R. and T. Smith (2004) What are the Effects of Mentoring and Induction on Beginning
Teacher Turnover, American Education Research Journal 41(3) 681-714.
Jacob, Brian and Lars Lefgren (2005) “Principals as Agents: Subjective Performance
Measurement in Education”, working paper.
Kane, T., J. Rockoff and D. Staiger (2006) “What Does Certification Tell Us about Teacher
Effectiveness? Evidence from New York City” NBER Working Paper 12155, April 2006.
Kane, T., and D. Staiger (2002) “Volatility in School Test Scores: Implications for Test-Based
Accountability Systems,” in Ravitch, D. (ed.) Brookings Papers on Education Policy 2002,
Brookings Institution, Washington, D.C.
Lankford, H., S. Loeb and J. Wyckoff (2002) “Teacher Sorting and the Plight of Urban Schools:
A Descriptive Analysis,” Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 24(1), 38-62.
Loeb, S., L. Darling-Hammond, and J. Luczak (2005) “How Teaching Conditions Predict
Teacher Turnover in California Schools,” Peabody Journal of Education, 80(3) pp. 44-70
Morris, C. (1983) “Parametric Empirical Bayes Inference: Theory and Application,” Journal of
the American Statistical Association 78(381) 47-55.
Murnane, R., J. Willett, Y. Duhaldeborde, and J. Tyler (2000). "How Important Are the Cognitive
Skills of Teenagers in Predicting Subsequent Earnings?" Journal of Policy Analysis and
Management 19(4): 547-568.
Peske, H., and K. Haycock (2006) “Teaching Inequality,” The Education Trust.
Podgursky, M. R., Monroe and D. Watson (2004) “The Academic Quality of Public School
Teachers: An Analysis of Entry and Exit Behavior,” Economics of Education Review 23(5)
507-518.
Rivkin, S., E. Hanushek, and J. Kain (2005) “Teachers, Schools, and Academic Achievement”
Econometrica, 73(2), 417-458.
Rockoff, Jonah (2004). “The Impact of Individual Teachers on Student Achievement: Evidence
from Panel Data,” American Economic Review Proceedings 94 (2): 247-252.
Sanders, W.L. and Rivers, J.C. (1996). "Research Project Report: Cumulative and Residual
Effects of Teachers on Future Student Academic Achievement," University of Tennessee
Value-Added Research and Assessment Center.
U.S. Department of Education (2007). Teacher Attrition and Mobility: Results from the 2004–05
Teacher Follow-up Survey.

35

Appendix
Value-Added Analysis: Descriptive statistics for the variables included in the four
value-added models are reported in Table A1. Data for the same schools, teachers and
students are used to estimate the math and ELA value-added models for fourth- and fifth-grade
teachers shown as Models 1 and 2 in Table A2. However, the descriptive statistics for the
class-attribute variables differ very slightly because of differences in the compositions of the
classes taught by some of these teachers. Value-added Models 3 and 4 are for math and ELA
in grades six through eight. The two sets of estimates are based on the same sets of schools
and students, except for some missing data. However, the estimated models largely
correspond to two different sets of teachers as only five percent of all math and ELA middleschool teachers teach both subjects.

Estimation of Attrition Model: The approach we used to estimate the effectiveness
coefficients report in Table 1 warrants some explanation. Standard software packages such as
SAS and Stata do not include procedures that allow direct estimation of the fixed-effect
multinomial Logit model in (2). However, a work-around is possible since these packages can
be used to estimate binary logit models containing fixed effects. Starting with our model shown
in (2), consider the probability of making a particular transition, say leaving the NYS system
(h=4), conditional on the teacher either making that change or remaining in the same school.
This condition probability, shown below, is a simple binary logit probability that only depends
upon the effectiveness coefficient and fixed-effect associated with this transition. Thus,
exp(α s4 + β 4 E j )
P% j4 =
1 + exp(α s4 + β 4 E j )

standard fixed-effect binary Logit software and data for teachers who either remain in their
original school or leave the NYS system can be used to estimate β 4 . This is the method we
employed for each of the three transitions, yielding estimates of all the effectiveness
coefficients. The parameter estimates are consistent. However, there is some loss in efficiency
compared to the case where the fixed-effect multinomial model was directly estimated.

36

Table A1
Descriptive Statistics for Dependent and Explanatory Variables in Regression Models Used to Estimate Value-Added Measures for Teachers
Model 1
Math, Grades 4-5
Mean
Std. Dev.
Students’ own attributes
Math score (current year)
ElA score (current year)
Lagged ELA score
Lagged math score
School change during year
Female
Hispanic
Black
Asian
Other minority
Home Language English
Free-lunch eligible
Reduced-lunch eligible
Free or reduced lunch missing
ELL per IEP or lab exam
ELL per the school
IEP does not require bilingual services
Lagged absences
Lagged suspensions
Class attributes
Lagged ELA score - mean
Lagged ELA score - standard deviation
Lagged math score - mean
Lagged math score - standard deviation
Hispanic
Black
Asian
Other minority
Home language English
Free-lunch eligible
Reduce-lunch eligible
ELL per IPE or lab exam
Lagged absences
Lagged suspensions
Class-size
Grade 5
Grade 7
Grade 8

0.1049

Model 2
ELA, Grades 4-5
Mean
Std. Dev.

0.9529

0.0991
0.1362
0.1041
0.5109
0.3631
0.3524
0.1190
0.0048
0.6143
0.6656
0.0770
0.1130
0.0187
0.0001
0.0004
10.9681
0.0116

0.9342
0.9237
0.3054
0.4999
0.4809
0.4777
0.3238
0.0690
0.4867
0.4718
0.2667
0.3166
0.1355
0.0097
0.0193
10.0720
0.1263

0.0725
0.0991
0.1363
0.1041
0.5109
0.3631
0.3524
0.1190
0.0048
0.6144
0.6656
0.0770
0.1130
0.0187
0.0001
0.0004
10.9680
0.0116

0.0979
0.6879
0.1245
0.7052
0.3639
0.3493
0.1217
0.0050
0.6028
0.6639
0.0756
0.0440
11.2130
0.0123
26.3
0.5030

0.6201
0.2009
0.6015
0.1854
0.2850
0.3318
0.1837
0.0158
0.2791
0.2961
0.0812
0.0986
3.9005
0.0356
4.6
0.5000

0.0978
0.6879
0.1247
0.7050
0.3641
0.3493
0.1215
0.0050
0.6028
0.6646
0.0757
0.0440
11.2087
0.0123
26.2
0.5030

0.9746
0.9342
0.9236
0.3054
0.4999
0.4809
0.4777
0.3238
0.0690
0.4867
0.4718
0.2667
0.3166
0.1355
0.0097
0.0193
10.0719
0.1263
0.6202
0.2009
0.6015
0.1854
0.2851
0.3318
0.1836
0.0158
0.2792
0.2964
0.0813
0.0988
3.8983
0.0355
4.6
0.5000

Model 3
Math, Grades 6-8
Mean
Std. Dev.

Model 4
ELA, Grades 6-8
Mean
Std. Dev.

0.0733

0.9422

0.0511
0.0935
0.4085
0.5107
0.3492
0.3696
0.1196
0.0034
0.5884
0.6256
0.0828
0.1563
0.0341
0.0001
0.0003
12.0582
0.0257

0.9508
0.9249
0.4915
0.4999
0.4767
0.4827
0.3245
0.0579
0.4921
0.4840
0.2756
0.3632
0.1816
0.0097
0.0182
11.2498
0.1925

0.0433
0.0588
0.0994
0.4078
0.5106
0.3445
0.3721
0.1207
0.0034
0.5921
0.6235
0.0832
0.1568
0.0290
0.0001
0.0003
12.0512
0.0257

0.9698
0.9467
0.9230
0.4914
0.4999
0.4752
0.4834
0.3258
0.0579
0.4914
0.4845
0.2762
0.3636
0.1678
0.0094
0.0181
11.2492
0.1925

0.0500
0.6423
0.0893
0.6333
0.3459
0.3688
0.1222
0.0037
0.5849
0.6209
0.0819
0.0452
12.5491
0.0279
27.3

0.6875
0.2045
0.6667
0.2085
0.2754
0.3199
0.1729
0.0130
0.2612
0.2889
0.0822
0.1228
4.9198
0.0621
5.1

0.0577
0.6389
0.0955
0.6362
0.3414
0.3714
0.1231
0.0037
0.5887
0.6195
0.0824
0.0397
12.5417
0.0279
27.3

0.6847
0.2039
0.6616
0.2047
0.2723
0.3202
0.1730
0.0130
0.2585
0.2891
0.0823
0.1060
4.9287
0.0623
5.2

0.3477
0.3260

0.4763
0.4688

0.3482
0.3275

0.4764
0.4693

37

Table A2
Parameter Estimates for Regression Models Used to Estimate Value-Added Measures for Teachers
Dependent variable
Student’s own attributes
Lagged ELA Score
Lagged ELA Score squared
Lagged math Score
lagged math Score squared
School change during year
Female
Hispanic
Black
Asian
Other minority
Home Language English
Free-lunch eligible
Reduced-lunch eligible
Free or reduced lunch missing
ELL per IEP or lab exam
ELL per the school
IEP does not require bilingual services
Lagged absences
Lagged suspensions
Class attributes
Lagged ELA score - mean
Lagged ELA score - standard deviation
Lagged math score - mean
Lagged math score - standard deviation
Hispanic
Black
Asian
Other minority
Home language English
Free-lunch eligible
Reduce-lunch eligible
ELL per IPE or lab exam
Lagged absences
Lagged suspensions
Class-size
Grade 5
Grade 7
Grade 8

Math Score, Grades 4-5
Coefficients
Std. error

ELA Score, Grades 4-5
Coefficients Std. error

Math Score, Grades 6-8
Coefficients Std. error

ELA Score, Grades 6-8
Coefficients Std. error

0.1523***
0.0081***
0.6150***
-0.0415***
-0.0037
-0.0564***
-0.0611***
-0.0889***
0.1333***
-0.0581***
-0.0740***
-0.0482***
-0.0210***
-0.0357***
-0.0854***
-0.0219
-0.0565*
-0.0030***
-0.0165***

(0.0010)
(0.0004)
(0.0010)
(0.0004)
(0.0025)
(0.0012)
(0.0025)
(0.0027)
(0.0028)
(0.0093)
(0.0017)
(0.0023)
(0.0029)
(0.0036)
(0.0055)
(0.0652)
(0.0325)
(6.7103)
(0.0050)

0.4940***
-0.0131***
0.2610***
-0.0078***
0.0003
0.0669***
-0.0470***
-0.0497***
0.0138***
-0.0397***
-0.0118***
-0.0805***
-0.0517***
-0.0377***
-0.1559***
0.0933
-0.0105
-0.0006***
-0.0276***

(0.0011)
(0.0004)
(0.0012)
(0.0004)
(0.0027)
(0.0013)
(0.0028)
(0.0030)
(0.0031)
(0.0102)
(0.0019)
(0.0025)
(0.0032)
(0.0039)
(0.0060)
(0.0713)
(0.0356)
(0.0000)
(0.0055)

0.1256***
-0.0013***
0.5427***
0.0004
-0.0370***
-0.0234***
-0.0558***
-0.0636***
0.1120***
-0.0237**
-0.0578***
-0.0266***
-0.0061**
-0.0342***
-0.0908***
-0.0383
-0.1549***
-0.0040***
-0.0386***

(0.0010)
(0.0003)
(0.0010)
(0.0003)
(0.0027)
(0.0012)
(0.0025)
(0.0026)
(0.0028)
(0.0112)
(0.0017)
(0.0022)
(0.0029)
(0.0029)
(0.0045)
(0.0651)
(0.0344)
(0.0000)
(0.0034)

0.4753***
-0.0034***
0.1850***
0.0069***
-0.0438***
0.1038***
-0.0355***
-0.0456***
-0.0063**
-0.0494***
0.0013
-0.0603***
-0.0313***
-0.0404***
-0.1822***
0.0636
-0.1171***
-0.0007***
-0.0273***

(0.0011)
(0.0004)
(0.0011)
(0.0004)
(0.0031)
(0.0014)
(0.0028)
(0.0029)
(0.0031)
(0.0124)
(0.0019)
(0.0025)
(0.0032)
(0.0032)
(0.0051)
(0.0746)
(0.0386)
(0.0000)
(0.0038)

-0.0007
0.0223
-0.2044***
0.0607
-0.5853***
-0.7616***
-0.4151**
-1.7313***
0.2704**
-0.2335**
-0.1555
-0.2195
0.0031
0.0250
-0.0042*
0.0468***

(0.0396)
(0.0436)
(0.0374)
(0.0481)
(0.1325)
(0.1361)
(0.2063)
(0.5047)
(0.1110)
(0.1108)
(0.1745)
(0.1494)
(0.0036)
(0.2713)
(0.0025)
(0.0181)

-0.1386***
-0.0044
0.1465***
0.1113**
-0.2807*
-0.5061***
-0.0192
-1.6778***
0.3280***
-0.1182
-0.6203***
-0.7024***
-0.0063
0.1825
-0.0122***
0.2198***

(0.0436)
(0.0480)
(0.0412)
(0.0529)
(0.1452)
(0.1495)
(0.2266)
(0.5547)
(0.1211)
(0.1233)
(0.1938)
(0.1689)
(0.0039)
(0.2970)
(0.0027)
(0.0199)

0.0770***
0.0145***
0.1508***
0.0570***
-0.1078***
-0.0941***
0.0370**
-0.0387
-0.0338***
-0.0687***
-0.0102
0.0876***
-0.0056***
-0.1016***
0.0000

(0.0041)
(0.0048)
(0.0045)
(0.0046)
(0.0135)
(0.0133)
(0.0145)
(0.0682)
(0.0102)
(0.0094)
(0.0153)
(0.0119)
(0.0003)
(0.0180)
(0.0002)

0.1213***
0.0247***
0.1582***
0.0489***
-0.0636***
-0.0734***
0.0790***
-0.0664
0.0147
-0.0881***
-0.0725***
0.0645***
-0.0047***
-0.1139***
0.0012***

(0.0048)
(0.0056)
(0.0053)
(0.0054)
(0.0155)
(0.0154)
(0.0168)
(0.0795)
(0.0118)
(0.0108)
(0.0175)
(0.0148)
(0.0003)
(0.0208)
(0.0002)

0.0627***
0.0232***

(0.0049)
(0.0056)

0.0488***
0.0182***

(0.0060)
(0.0068)

38

