NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHO GENTRIFIES LOW-INCOME NEIGHBORHOODS?
Terra McKinnish
Randall Walsh
Kirk White
Working Paper 14036
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14036

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2008

The research in this paper was conducted while the first and second authors were Special Sworn Status
researchers of the U.S. Census Bureau at the Triangle Census Research Data Center and while the
third author was an employee of the Census Bureau. This work is unofficial and thus has not undergone
the review accorded to official Census Bureau publications. Research results and conclusions expressed
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Census Bureau. This paper has
been screened to ensure that no confidential data are revealed. This research was supported by Grant
Number R0HD053860 from the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development. Its contents
are solely the responsibility of the authors and do not necessarily represent the official views of the
National Institute of Child Health and Human Development or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
We also gratefully acknowledge a development grant from the University of Colorado Population
Center. Finally, our research has benefited from NSF-ITR grant #0427889 which has helped support
the Census Research Data Centers.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Terra McKinnish, Randall Walsh, and Kirk White. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Who Gentrifies Low-Income Neighborhoods?
Terra McKinnish, Randall Walsh, and Kirk White
NBER Working Paper No. 14036
May 2008
JEL No. J15,J60,R23
ABSTRACT
This paper uses confidential Census data, specifically the 1990 and 2000 Census Long Form data,
to study the demographic processes underlying the gentrification of low-income urban neighborhoods
during the 1990's. In contrast to previous studies, the analysis is conducted at the more refined census-tract
level with a narrower definition of gentrification and more closely matched comparison neighborhoods.
The analysis is also richly disaggregated by demographic characteristic, uncovering differential patterns
by race, education, age and family structure that would not have emerged in the more aggregate analysis
in previous studies. The results provide no evidence of displacement of low-income non-white households
in gentrifying neighborhoods. The bulk of the increase in average family income in gentrifying neighborhoods
is attributed to black high school graduates and white college graduates. The disproportionate retention
and income gains of the former and the disproportionate in-migration of the latter are distinguishing
characteristics of gentrifying U.S. urban neighborhoods in the 1990's.

Terra McKinnish
University of Colorado at Boulder
Terra.Mckinnish@colorado.edu
Randall Walsh
Department of Economics
University of Colorado at Boulder
256 UCB
Boulder, CO 80309
and NBER
walshr@colorado.edu

Kirk White
Department of Economics
Duke University
Durham, NC 27708
tkw2@econ.duke.edu

I. Introduction

“Concern, and anger, over gentrification has grown in communities across the country
as housing rental and sales prices have soared .… there are numerous reports of resident
displacement from neighborhoods long ignored that now attract higher-income
households.”1
-2006 Urban Institute Report

Over the past several decades, there has been substantial gentrification of low-income
neighborhoods in many U.S. urban areas. These neighborhoods typically experience large
increases in household income and housing prices. Some laud the revitalization of decayed
neighborhoods and others criticize the displacement of low-income, often minority, households.
The distribution of benefits from neighborhood change is a crucial policy issue. Since 1974 the
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) has allocated nearly $120 Billion
in Community Development Block Grants.2 These grants, that are intended to benefit low and
moderate-income individuals by eliminating slums or blight and addressing urgent community
development needs, have been allocated to more than 1000 U.S. cities. While public investment
in neighborhood revitalization is ubiquitous, the consequences of neighborhood gentrification for
low-income and minority individuals remain an open question.
Advocacy groups for low-income neighborhoods in cities across the U.S. have raised
concerns about a potential link between gentrification and the displacement of existing low
income and/or minority residents. In contrast, potential displacement from gentrifying

1

Levy et.al. 2006.
This figure understates the actual level of federal expenditures targeted to Urban Renewal. Community
Development Block Grant (CDBGs) comprise a relatively small portion of HUD’s budget (for FY 2008, CDBGs
represented $3.9 Billion of HUDs overall budget authority of $40.4 Billion). A significant portion of HUD’s
remaining budget is spent on programs that either directly or indirectly promote community development. Sources:.
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development Strategic Plan FY 2006 – FY 2011 and U.S. Department of
Housing and Urban Development FY09 Proposed Budget.

2

1

neighborhoods does not appear to be a major concern for HUD.3 Given the high levels of public
investment in improving neighborhood quality, it is important to understand which of these two
policy perspectives accurately reflects the impacts of neighborhood gentrification vis-à-vis
displacement of low-income households. Further, missing from this debate on displacement is
consideration of both the role of in-migrants and the impacts of gentrification on households that
remain in gentrifying neighborhoods.
Surprisingly, many questions regarding the distributional impacts of gentrification remain
unanswered. Some recent studies have examined the issue of displacement, and have found little
to suggest that low-income households exit gentrifying neighborhoods any faster than they exit
other neighborhoods. These studies, however, have been severely constrained by data
limitations. As a result they either define neighborhoods as rather large geographic areas
(regions on the order of 100,000+ in population), use overly broad definitions of gentrification,
and/or focus on a single location – raising issues about what broader inferences can be drawn
from their results.4 Even less is known about the role of in-migration in gentrification and the
impact of gentrification on residents who remain in neighborhoods that experience gentrification.
In this paper we take advantage of confidential Census data, specifically the 1990 and
2000 Census Long Form Data, to provide the richest study of gentrification to date. Overall, we
find that rather than dislocating non-white households, gentrification creates neighborhoods that
are attractive to middle-class minority households, particularly those with children or with

3

For example, while community development is a major focus of HUD’s current five year strategic plan, the 81 page
document doesn’t contain a single reference to the potential link between gentrification and displacement.
4
While no precise consensus definition exists, neighborhoods are typically described as gentrifying if they: (i) are
urban, (ii) were previously low-income, and (iii) experience large increases in household income and housing prices.
In this paper we will define a gentrifying neighborhood as an existing urban neighborhood that had relatively low
average income in 1990 and experienced large increases in average income over the 1990s. We will give a more
precise definition below, after we have defined our samples. For a descriptive analysis that documents the
significant scale of gentrification in the 1990s see Ellen and O’Regan (2008)

2

elderly householders. Furthermore, there is evidence that gentrification may even increases
incomes for these same households.
Our specific findings are: 1) In-migration of college graduates, particularly white college
graduates under 40 without children, is a key characteristic of a gentrifying neighborhood; 2)
The presence of children, an elderly householder or a householder with low educational
attainment dampens the likelihood that a white household moves into a gentrifying
neighborhood, but these same effects are not present, or even reversed, for black and Hispanic
households; 3) We finds no evidence of disproportionate exit of low-education or minority
householders, but do find evidence that gentrifying neighborhoods disproportionately retain
black householders with a high school degree; 4) Decomposition of the total income gains in
gentrifying neighborhoods attributes the bulk of the gains to two key groups: black high school
graduates (due to disproportionate retention and income gains) and white college graduates (due
to disproportionate in-migration and high incomes).
The strength of our analysis relative to previous work stems largely from the use of
confidential census data. We highlight four key benefits from the use of this data that allow us to
provide a much more detailed analysis of gentrifying neighborhoods than previous studies.
First, we have the refined geographic detail, geographic coverage, and sample size to better
define the set of gentrifying neighborhoods. Second, these same data characteristics allow us to
better define a set of comparison neighborhoods, specifically other neighborhoods within the
same CMSA that have comparable incomes in 1990 or 2000. Third, we are able to identify
movers and stayers using the more detailed information on length of residence provided in the
confidential census. Fourth, we disaggregate by demographic characteristic in much more detail
than previous analysis. This uncovers differential patterns by race, education, age and family
structure that would not have emerged in the more aggregate analysis in previous studies.

3

II. Literature Review
The literature most closely related to our current study is that on the link between
gentrification and out-migration in low-income neighborhoods. This literature investigates
whether there is empirical evidence to support the widely held belief that gentrification causes
the displacement of low-income minorities from their neighborhoods. The most recent studies,
although constrained by data limitations, find little evidence of displacement.
Vigdor (2002) studies gentrification in the Boston metro area using American Housing
Survey (AHS) data from 1974-93 which identify “zones” of 100,000 to 200,000 individuals (The
city of Boston contains 5 zones). He finds no evidence that low-income households are more
likely to exit the current housing unit if they are located in a gentrifying zone. Freeman and
Braconi (2004) conduct a similar study of gentrification in New York City in the 1990’s using
specialized data collected as part of the city’s rent regulation policy. The data identify 55
subborough areas of approximately 46,000 households and 131,000 persons each. Identifying
seven neighborhoods in Manhattan and Brooklyn that gentrified during the 90’s, they find that
low-income households in the gentrifying neighborhoods were less likely to move than lowincome households in non-gentrifying neighborhoods.
Freeman (2005) extends this work to a sample of U.S. neighborhoods using the geocoded
version of the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID), which identifies Census tract of
residence. A Census tract is a relatively permanent geographic unit designed to be as
homogenous as possible with respect to population characteristics, economic status, and living
conditions at the time it is established. Census tracts generally contain between 1,000 and 8,000
people, with an optimum size of 4,000 people. The PSID, therefore, allow Freeman to analyze a
much larger set of neighborhoods at a much more refined level of geographic detail. Sample size
constraints, however, require he take a rather broad definition of gentrification. It is probably a

4

result of this broad definition that his set of gentrifying neighborhoods actually experience a
$4,000 decrease in median household income during the 1990’s.5 He again finds little evidence
that gentrification is associated with displacement of low-income households.
The above discussion of these three recent studies highlights the data issues that plague
research on residential mobility and gentrification. Data constraints typically have restricted
analysis to individual cities and/or to studies in which the identified neighborhoods are
unsatisfactorily large in size. The exception, Freeman (2005), conducted with PSID data, has
insufficient sample size to restrict the sample to the relatively small set of census tracts that are
both initially low-income and experience large and rapid income growth in a given time period.
Our use of confidential Census Long Form data allows us to circumvent these data issues as we
have a very large, nationally representative sample that identifies census tract of residence.
Our analysis is related to the above three studies. However, rather than just focus on
households that exit gentrifying neighborhoods, we also investigate who moves into gentrifying
neighborhoods and what happens to the fortunes of households that remain in gentrifying
neighborhoods. While hampered by data limitations, the analysis to date suggests that
gentrification is not associated with unusual levels of out-migration of the existing low-income,
often non-white, residents. In other words, there is a high rate of residential mobility in the U.S.,
and there is little evidence that the rates are significantly higher in gentrifying neighborhoods.
These results suggest the characteristics of the in-migrants, and potentially the outcomes for
stayers, are critical components to understanding the process of gentrification. These two issues
5

Freeman’s most restrictive definition of gentrified neighborhood is one that meets 1) is a central city
neighborhood, with 2) median income in previous census below the metro area’s 40th percentile, 3)proportion
housing built in last 20 years in the previous census below the metro area’s 40th percentile, 4) above median growth
in educational attainment in the intercensal period, and 5) an increase in real housing prices in the intercensal period.
While the neighborhoods that are categorized as gentrifying in the 90’s have a decrease in median household income
between 1990 and 2000, the neighborhoods that are categorized as gentrifying in the 80’s do experience an increase
in median income between 1980 and 1990.

5

have received almost no attention in the academic literature. Freeman and Braconi (2004) and
Freeman (2005) provide descriptive statistics that indicate that in-movers to gentrifying
neighborhoods are more likely to be white, college-educated, and higher income than in-movers
to non-gentrifying neighborhoods, but no formal multivariate analysis is conducted. We are
aware of no research addressing the issue of the impact of gentrification on the fortunes of stayer
households.
Finally, there are two additional related literatures that warrant discussion, one on
mobility between high and low-income neighborhoods, and the other on how neighborhood
characteristics predict neighborhood change.
The literature that studies mobility between neighborhoods as a function of individual
and neighborhood characteristics is relatively large. Much of this research is conducted with the
geocoded PSID, which records census tract of residence. Sample size constraints are less
problematic in this literature, as there are far more observations of, for example, households
moving in and out of the entire set of low income neighborhoods than in and out of the subset of
gentrifying neighborhoods. Two of the most recent and relevant papers are Crowder and South
(2005) and South, Crowder and Chavez (2005). While the primary focus of these papers is the
migration of households from low-income to higher-income neighborhoods, they also examine
movement from higher-income to low-income neighborhoods. While both Crowder and South
(2005) and South, Crowder and Chavez (2005) find that white households are far less likely to
move from higher-income to low-income neighborhoods than black or Latino households,
Crowder and South (2005) document that the rate of movement from higher-income to lowincome neighborhoods increased disproportionately for white households during the 1980’s and
1990’s, particularly for high-income white households. They suggest this is related to the
gentrification of low-income neighborhoods that occurred during the same time period.

6

There is also a substantial literature on how current neighborhood characteristics predict
neighborhood change. One recent example is Card, Mas and Rothstein (Forthcoming), which
estimates racial “tipping points,” points at which the concentration of non-white households is
sufficiently high that the neighborhood will “tip,” generating an exodus of white households.
Two recent studies that specifically address neighborhood growth and renewal are Brueckner and
Rosenthal (Forthcoming) and Rosenthal (Forthcoming). Both papers argue that age of housing
stock is a key determinant of neighborhood growth. As a neighborhood’s housing stock ages,
richer households exit for neighborhoods with newer housing and are replaced by lower-income
households. Eventually, the housing stock ages to the point it is ripe for re-development, at
which the neighborhood gentrifies and rich households return. Both papers provide analysis to
suggest that aged housing stock is an important predictor of gentrification. An alternative view
provided by Coulson and Bond (1990) suggests that is square footage, not age of housing per se,
which predicts residential turnover.
III. Data
This section describes how the analysis sample and key variables are constructed using
1990 and 2000 Census data. The data are constructed in 2 stages. First, 1990 and 2000 Census
tracts are linked and a sample of urban census tracts are selected. Next, tract-level variables are
constructed. These tract-level characteristics are used to select the set of tracts in the analysis
sample and to identify tracts that gentrified between 1990 and 2000. In the second stage, the
sample of householders that reside in the tracts in the analysis sample is drawn from the 2000
data, and household-level variables are created.
A. Census Demographic Long Form Data
The analysis in this paper uses the 1990 and 2000 Decennial Census Long Form Data.
These are confidential data products of the U.S. Census Bureau that can only be accessed from a

7

Census Research Data Center (CRDC).6 The Long Form Data contain the population of
households that respond to the Long Form survey in the Decennial Census, which is
administered to a 1-in-6 sample of all households in the U.S. The samples include 14.3 million
households and 38.6 million individuals in the year 1990 and 16.6 million households and 43.5
million individuals in the year 2000.
The analysis in this paper would not be possible with publicly available data. The Public
Use Microdata Samples (PUMS) contain a random sample of household-level responses from the
Decennial Long Form surveys, but only identify geographic location down to the level of Public
Use Microdata Areas (PUMAs), which are areas of at least 100,000 people. In contrast, the
confidential Long Form data identify census tracts that, as described above, contain an average
of 4,000 individuals.7 There are also public Census data sets that report aggregate census tractlevel characteristics based on the Long Form data. These tabulated data, however, are not
sufficiently disaggregated for the purposes of our analysis. For example, they do not
disaggregate by the migration status of the household, which is a key variable in our analysis.
B. Census Geography and Sample Criteria
While census tracts are designed to be relatively permanent geographic units, they do
change over time as neighborhoods evolve and as tract populations increase or decrease.
Therefore, the census tracts must be linked between the 1990 and 2000 Censuses. Census Tract
Relationship Files from the U.S. Census Bureau show how 1990 census tracts relate to 2000
census tracts. Using this information, we developed a concordance file that creates

6

All analysis for this paper was conducted at the Triangle Census Research Data Center (TCRDC) at Duke
University.
7
The census block, an even smaller geographic unit, is also identified. Because, however, CRDC researchers are
not currently allowed to link census data over time at the block level, and because the tract more closely relates to
our concept of neighborhood, we conduct our analysis at the tract level. Using survey data, Lee and Campbell
(1990) find that self reported neighborhoods of residence on average cover 15 square blocks. This finding suggests
that census tracts offer a reasonable neighborhood definition for urban areas.

8

neighborhood definitions that are unique and consistent across the two census years. If, for
example, a 1990 tract split into two tracts in 2000, the two 2000 tracts were merged into a single
neighborhood that would be consistent with the original 1990 tract. There were some cases of
overlapping tract splits and merges, which required that we aggregate over several tracts to
obtain one consistent neighborhood.8 In this paper, the terms neighborhood and census tract will
refer to these census tract groupings that we have linked between 1990 and 2000.
We select our sample of census tracts for analysis by first focusing on Consolidated
Metropolitan Statistical Areas (CMSAs) as defined by the Census Bureau. We select only those
CMSAs in the continental U.S. with populations of at least 500,000 in 1990, producing a sample
of 72 CMSAs. Most CMSAs include some areas that are very rural and in which census tracts
cover very large geographic areas. For this reason, we further refine our sample. The Census
Bureau has compiled a list of incorporated places with populations of 100,000 or more in 1990.
We only include tracts from the 72 largest CMSAs that are within a 5km buffer of one of these
large incorporated places. This effectively selects off the more densely populated areas of the
CMSAs, and excludes some of the less-populous CMSAs that do not contain a single Census
place. Our final sample consists of 15,040 linked tracts from 64 CMSAs. A list of included
CMSAs appears in Appendix A
C. Definition of Gentrification and Comparison Groups
Table 1 provides some descriptive statistics on income and income change for our sample
of 15,040 urban area tracts, by quintile of average family income in 1990.9 The construction of
the family income variable is described below in section D. The most interesting result in
Table 1 is that the bottom quintile of neighborhoods has median income growth substantially
8

82% of the constructed time-consistent neighborhoods contain only one 2000 census tract, and 94% contain no
more than two 2000 census tracts.
9
All income figures are reported in year 2000 dollars.

9

above that experienced by neighborhoods in the four richer quintiles, and the 90th percentile of
income growth is only higher in the top quintile. This indicates that gentrification is an
important phenomenon among the lowest-income neighborhoods during this period.
To create our primary analysis sample, we first take the set of tracts that are in the bottom
quintile of average family income in 1990.10 These neighborhoods have average family income
less than $30,079 (in 2000 dollars) in 1990. We refer to this set of neighborhoods as the lowincome neighborhood sample. We take gentrifying neighborhoods to be those tracts in the low
income neighborhood sample that experience an increase in average family income between
1990 and 2000 of at least $10,000. 15.2% of tracts in the bottom quintile experience income
growth of this magnitude. Only 13.2% of tracts in the upper 4 quintiles experience growth of
this magnitude.
Most of our analysis compares gentrifying neighborhoods to non-gentrifying
neighborhoods in the low-income neighborhood sample. The fact that most gentrifying tracts
have exited the bottom quintile suggests another interesting comparison. Thus, we also take a
sample of middle-class neighborhoods in 2000 and distinguish those that were low-income
neighborhoods in 1990 from those that were not low-income in 1990. To be more specific, we
take as our middle-class neighborhood sample those tracts that have average family income in
2000 between $33,000 and $47,000. This sample is comprised of neighborhoods from the very
top of the first quintile through the middle of the 3rd quintile of average family income in 2000.
These cut-off points for the middle-class neighborhood sample are chosen to maximize the
concentration of gentrifying tracts. For analysis with the middle-class neighborhood sample,
gentrification is still defined as those neighborhoods in the sample that were originally in the

10

We also conducted alternative analysis in which we selected tracts from the bottom quintile of neighborhood
income, calculated within each CMSA, and found this had little effect on the results.

10

bottom quintile in 1990 and for whom average family income increased by at least $10,000
between 1990 and 2000. 5.8% of tracts in the middle-class sample are gentrifiers and 63.4% of
gentrifying tracts in the low-income neighborhood sample appear in the middle-class
neighborhood sample.
D. Measurement of Key Variables
Having identified two samples of urban neighborhoods, the low-income neighborhood
sample and the middle-class neighborhood sample, we then select the sample of all householders
in the 2000 Long Form Census data who reside in these tracts to create the data for our
analysis.11 Key variables in our analysis include family income of the householder and
migration status of the householder. To create the family income measure, we sum all forms of
income across all members of the householder’s family.12 Income from unmarried partners is
included in family income, but we exclude income from individuals in the household who are
otherwise not related to the householder (such as roommates or boarders).
We wish to distinguish those householders who moved into their current residence
between 1990 and 2000 from those who lived there prior to 1990. The PUMS data report, for
each household member, whether or not he or she lived in the same housing unit 5 years prior to
the survey. The confidential data, fortunately, provide even more detailed information on when
the householder moved into the housing unit, which allows us to exactly identify whether or not
the householder moved into the housing unit in the past 10 years. In this paper, householders
11

We define “household” and “householder” the same way the Census Bureau does: a household refers to the
people living in a housing unit, with the householder being the one in whose name the home is owned, being bought,
or rented, in any kind of housing unit.
12
The definition of family used by the Census Bureau is “two or more individuals related by birth, marriage, or
adoption who reside together.” Our definition of family income is similar to that used by the Census Bureau, the
largest difference being that householders who do not reside with any relative are still included in our analysis as a
family of size one. Unlike the definition of family income used by the Census Bureau, we include income from
individuals designated as the unmarried partner of the householder. Individuals who do not live alone, but are not
related to the householder, are not included in our analysis. Their income does not belong in the householder’s
family’s income, but we do not have the migration information to create separate observations for them.

11

who moved into their housing unit in the past 10 years are referred to as migrants.
Unfortunately, there is no way to identify whether migrant householders previously lived in
another housing unit in the same neighborhood or whether they moved in from another census
tract.
IV. Methods
A. Migrants to Gentrifying vs Non-Gentrifying Neighborhoods.
We investigate the differences in characteristics between householders who moved into
houses in neighborhoods that gentrified between 1990 and 2000 and those who moved into
houses in low-income neighborhoods that did not gentrify. We use our low-income
neighborhood sample, which, as described above, contains those census tracts in the bottom
quintile of average family income in 1990. Also as described above, tracts are considered to
gentrify if they are in the low-income neighborhood sample and experience an increase in
average family income between 1990 and 2000 of at least $10,000.

Restricting the analysis

sample to only those householders who moved into a housing unit in the low-income
neighborhood sample between 1990 and 2000, we estimate a logit model of the form:
(1)

35
64
⎛ Pr(Gi = 1) ⎞
β
β
D
X
γ
δ mCMSAim ,
log ⎜
=
+
+
+
⎟
∑
∑
o
j ij
i
j =1
m =1
⎝ Pr(Gi = 0) ⎠

where G is an indicator variable that equals 1 if householder i moved into a housing unit in a
gentrifying tract. The Dj’s are 35 demographic group indicator variables created by crossing 3
race/ethnicity categories (non-Hispanic white, non-Hispanic black, and Hispanic) with 3
education categories (less than a high school degree, high school degree, college degree) and 4
lifecycle stage categories (age less than 40 without children, age less than 40 with children, age
40-60, age greater than 60).13 We omit the indicator for white high school dropouts under 40
13

Children must be under 18 and living in the same household.

12

without children to create the reference category, leaving 35 demographic group indicators. X
contains controls for householder’s relationship status (married, cohabitating with unmarried
partner, or single) interacted with the 3 race/ethnicity indicators and the householder’s immigrant
status interacted with the 3 race/ethnicity indicators. X also contains a control for the average
1990 income of the current tract of residence. 14 The model also includes CMSA fixed-effects.15
Our choice of specification in equation (1) warrants further explanation. A more
complete specification would have interacted race/ethnicity with education with age with family
structure (marital status and presence of children) and with immigration status, rather than
simply including additional controls for marital status and immigration. Unfortunately, this
creates a very large number of demographic groups and therefore an unwieldy number of
coefficient estimates to report. This also generates quite a few small cells, resulting in many
imprecise estimates. Additionally, all empirical results generated using confidential Census data
must go through a review before they are publicly released, and these small cells present a
disclosure risk. 16 We therefore picked the demographic variables to include in our key set of
interactions by determining which variables were the most important determinants of gentrifying
mobility and which had the most interesting interactions with race and education. For example,
we chose to include the interaction of presence of children with the youngest age category, but
not with the 40-60 age category, because it was only for the younger householders that presence
of children was such an important predictor of location choice. We also initially interacted
14

We control for average 1990 income for the tract in which the householder is located in 2000. Suppose that 1990
tract income is correlated with gentrification status. Further suppose, for example, that white householders are more
likely to move into neighborhoods in the upper-end of the bottom quintile of 1990 income than the lower end.
Failure to control for 1990 income would wrongly attribute a tendency to locate in the higher-income neighborhoods
with a preference for gentrifying neighborhoods.
15
Some CMSAs contain multiple MSAs. We also tried a specification with MSA fixed effects, but the change did
not significantly affect the results.
16
It is because of this same concern with small cells that householders that report a race other than white or black
are not included in the analysis reported in Tables 4, 5 and 7. Once this “other race” category is sub-divided by age,
education and family structure, the cells become very small. “Other Race” householders are included in the
descriptive tables and in the decomposition in Table 8.

13

marital status with age, education and race, but found that presence of children, rather than
marriage or cohabitation, was the more important predictor and had more important interaction
effects with race and education.
In equation (1), βo measures the differential between the migration rate into the
gentrifying tracts and non-gentrifying tracts for the reference demographic group. A positive βj
therefore indicates that this differential is larger for demographic group j than for the reference
group. These estimates indicate which demographic groups act as gentrifiers, in other words,
which groups have disproportionately high rates of migration into gentrifying neighborhoods
relative to other low-income neighborhoods.
A related question is, conditional on demographic group, how do incomes of gentrifying
migrants compare to non-gentrifying migrants? For example, given a group of migrant
householders who are white, elderly and hold high school degrees, how does the income of those
moving into gentrifying low-income neighborhoods compare to the income of those moving into
non-gentrifying low-income neighborhoods? We estimate the following model on the same
sample of householders who have moved into a housing unit in the low-income neighborhood
sample:
(2)

35

36

64

j =1

j =1

m =1

log( Incomei ) = α 0 + ∑ α j Dij + ∑ β j ( Dij * Gi ) + X iγ + ∑ δ mCMSAim + ε i ,

where Income is the householder’s family income and all other variables are defined as they
were for equation (1). We are interested in the coefficients on the interactions of the
demographic group dummies with the gentrification dummy. A positive βj, for example,
indicates that, within demographic group j, migrants to the gentrifying neighborhoods have
higher incomes than migrants to the non-gentrifying neighborhoods.

14

Estimation of equations (1) and (2) using the low-income neighborhood sample allows us
to compare those moving into low-income neighborhoods that are gentrifying to those moving
into low-income neighborhoods that are not gentrifying. In additional analysis, we estimate
equations (1) and (2) on the sample of middle-class neighborhoods. This allows us to compare
those who moved into houses in recently-gentrified middle-class neighborhoods compared to
those who moved into houses in neighborhoods that were already middle-class in 1990. When
using our middle-class sample, the control for tract-level income in 1990 is replaced with a
control for tract-level income in 2000.17
B. Cohort Regression Analysis of Out-Migration and Stayer Outcomes
The final composition of the gentrifying tracts is determined not only by the
characteristics of those who exit, but also by the characteristics of those who move in and the
impacts on those who stay. The analysis described above in section A examines who moves into
gentrifying neighborhoods. We would also like to characterize the out-migration. We would, in
particular, like to determine if there is any evidence of displacement of low-income minorities in
gentrifying neighborhoods. The cross-sectional Census data cannot be used to create a sample
of individuals who used to live in the gentrifying neighborhoods. We still, however, can study
this issue by creating synthetic cohorts.
Consider all households in a single tract in 1990 with a householder who is age 20 to 29,
white, and has a high school degree. Suppose there are 500 such households. Now, take all
households in 2000 with a householder who is 30 to 39, white, has a high school degree, and has
lived in the same housing unit for at least 10 years. If there has been no out-migration, there
should be 500 such households. The observed changes in cohort size between 1990 and 2000
17

Using the same logic described in footnote 7, we do not want to wrongly attribute a tendency for a group to locate
in higher-income or lower-income middle-class neighborhoods with a preference for gentrifying neighborhoods.
Because the middle-class tracts are selected based on 2000 income, it is appropriate to control for average family
income in 2000, rather than 1990.

15

provide estimates of out-migration for different demographic groups in a neighborhood.
Comparing changes in a cohort’s size across neighborhoods produce estimates of relative outmigration from different types of neighborhoods for a particular demographic group.
We consider 4 cohorts:
Cohort 1:
Cohort 2:
Cohort 3:
Cohort 4:

1990
20-29
30-39
40-49
50-59

2000
30-39 and in housing unit for at least 10 years
40-49 and in housing unit for at least 10 years
50-59 and in housing unit for at least 10 years
60-69 and in housing unit for at least 10 years

We divide each cohort into our 3 race/ethnicity groups crossed with our 3 education groups. We
therefore use 4x3x3=36 cohorts in our analysis.
Our first cohort regression model is:
(3)

35

36

70

c =1

c =1

m =1

% ∆Popct = α o + ∑ α c Cct + ∑ β c (Cct * Gt ) + X t γ + ∑ δ mCMSAmt + ε .

For cohort c in tract t, the percent change in population is measured as:
% ∆Popct =

Pop 2000ct − Pop1990ct
,
Pop1990ct

and the Cc’s are indicator variables for each of the 36 cohorts. The coefficients on the interaction
of the cohort indicators with the gentrification dummy indicate whether the out-migration for
that particular demographic group is higher or lower in gentrifying tracts compared to nongentrifying tracts. A negative estimate for βc indicates that the population loss for cohort c was
on average greater in gentrifying tracts, which would be consistent with displacement.
It must be pointed out that in the 2000 Census, 67.3 % of householders in our sample of
urban tracts have changed houses in the past 10 years, and 68.8% of householders in the lowincome neighborhood sample have done so. The average %∆POP for cohorts in the estimation
sample is –66.3%, and reflects the natural mobility of households in the U.S. This exercise only

16

picks up differential mobility out of different types of neighborhoods for different demographic
groups.18
We also use synthetic cohorts to study changes in income among pre-existing residents
with the following model:
(4)

36

36

70

c =1

c =1

m =1

% ∆Incct = ∑ α c Cct + ∑ β c (Cct * Gt ) + X t γ + ∑ δ mCMSAmt + ε .

Where %∆Inc is the percent change in average family income for cohort c between 1990 and
2000. A positive coefficient for βc, for example, indicates that there was a greater increase in
average family income for cohort c in gentrifying neighborhoods than non-gentrifying
neighborhoods. A positive coefficient therefore indicates that average family income increased
for families that already lived in the neighborhood in 1990. Such a positive effect of
gentrification could result from two very different causes. One is that in gentrifying
neighborhoods, the households in a particular cohort that migrate out are disproportionately lowincome compared to those in the same cohort leaving non-gentrifying neighborhoods. This
would cause an increase in average family income due to a composition effect. The other
explanation is that gentrification causes an increase in family income in that demographic group,
for example by improving employment opportunities in the local area. Unfortunately, there is
no way to formally test between these two interpretations with the data at hand. However, as we
discuss below, the pattern of our results lead us to believe that the second interpretation is more
credible than the first.

18

The change in cohort population will be measured with error, because cohorts are based on a random sample,
different individuals in the household could list themselves as the householder in successive censuses, and
individuals could change or misreport their age, education or race/ethnicity in successive censuses. This can
generate some attenuation bias in our estimates, but there is no reason to believe that the measurement error is
systematically correlated with gentrification status.

17

V. Results
Table 2 provides a preliminary description of the differences between the gentrifying and
non-gentrifying tracts in our low-income neighborhood sample. The first two columns report
average tract-level characteristics in 1990 by gentrification status. Interestingly, the low-income
neighborhoods that gentrify between 1990 and 2000 have lower average income and a smaller
proportion of white households in 1990 than those low-income neighborhoods that do not
gentrify, although the proportion of householders with a college degree is marginally higher. It
is also noteworthy that the average income of householders that moved into the gentrifying
neighborhoods between 1980 and 1990 is lower than for those who moved into the nongentrifying neighborhoods. By most measures, the low-income neighborhoods that gentrified
during the 1990’s were worse off in 1990 than those that did not gentrify during the 90’s. There
is little evidence of “lead” indicators, or, put another way, little evidence that the gentrifying
neighborhoods were already improving prior to 1990.
The remaining two columns report average tract-level characteristics in 2000 by
gentrification status.

By definition, the gentrifying tracts have much higher average income in

2000. The most striking features is the growth in the fraction of householders with a college
degree, increasing from 9.0 to 15.8 percent, compared to an increase from 8.2 to 10.1 percent for
non-gentrifying neighborhoods. The gentrifying neighborhoods also experience a moderate
increase in the proportion of householders who are white. The final rows of the table indicate
that the average incomes of both migrants and non-migrants increase in gentrifying tracts.
A. Migration Logit and Income Regression Results, Low-Income Neighborhood Sample
Table 3 provides descriptive statistics for the sample of householders who moved into a
housing unit in the low-income neighborhood sample in the 1990’s. The two columns report
means separately for the householders who have moved into a housing unit in gentrifying tracts

18

vs non-gentrifying tracts. Not surprisingly, the gentrifying migrants are higher-income, highereducation, more likely to be white and less likely to be Hispanic than non-gentrifying migrants.
They are also, however, more likely to be black than non-gentrifying migrants. At the bottom of
the table, we see that gentrifying migrants are also a little younger, less likely to have children
and less likely to be immigrants than non-gentrifying migrants.
In Table 4 we present the results from estimating equations (1) and (2) on the low-income
neighborhood sample. Column 1 reports the logit coefficient estimates of the β j ’s from
equation (1). To better illustrate the magnitudes of the effects, we also report the predicted
probability that a migrant has located in a gentrifying neighborhood (P(Gentrify)) for all 36
demographic groups in column 3. As a point of comparison, 11.2% of the migrants in the
estimation sample used in Table 4 locate in a gentrifying tract. Therefore demographic groups
with predicted probabilities above 0.112 have above average rates of gentrification. The most
obvious finding in Table 4 is the high gentrification rate of college-educated householders,
particularly white householders with college degrees. The gentrification rates of householders in
all race/ethnicity groups with less than a college degree are remarkably similar and typically
range from 10 to 11 percent.19
The estimates in column 1 of Table 4 do not indicate which groups are most likely to live
in a gentrifying neighborhood. They tell us which householders are more likely to move into a
gentrifying neighborhood conditional on the fact they have chosen to move into a neighborhood
that was low-income in 1990. For example, statistics reported later in Table 8 of this paper will
show that a 2000 householder in a gentrifying neighborhood is much more likely to be a black

19

The estimates for marital status and immigration status, which are not reported in Table 4, indicate that married or
cohabitating householders have higher gentrification rates than single householders. The effect of partnership is
strongest for white householders and weakest for Hispanic householders. Among white householders, immigrants
have lower gentrification rates, but there is no effect of immigration status for non-white householders.

19

high school dropout than a white college graduate. This is because black high school dropouts
are overall much more likely to move into neighborhoods that were low income in 1990 than
white college graduates. The black high school dropouts are more likely than average to move
into a non-gentrifying low-income neighborhood than a gentrifying low-income neighborhood,
so their choice to locate in a neighborhood cannot be seen as a sign of gentrification. In contrast,
if a white college graduate moves into a neighborhood that was low income in 1990, it is much
more likely than average that it is a gentrifying neighborhood. The influx of white college
graduates is a feature that distinguishes the gentrifying neighborhoods from other low-income
neighborhoods.
The final two columns of Table 4 present the results from estimating equation (2). It is
not very surprising that, within each demographic group, the incomes of those migrating to the
gentrifying areas are higher than those migrating to non-gentrifying areas. This differential in
income is particularly large for the college-educated householders, particularly white
householders with college degrees.
B. Migration Logit and Income Regression Results, Middle-Class Neighborhood Sample
The first 3 columns of Table 5 report the results obtained estimating equation (1) on the
middle-class neighborhood sample. The gentrification rate in the estimation sample used in
Table 5 is 4.2%, so any group with a value above 0.042 in column 3 has a higher than average
predicted gentrification rate.

When the sample is limited to those householders who have

moved into a housing unit in a middle-class neighborhood in the past 10 years, it is not surprising
that black and Hispanic householders with less than a college degree are disproportionately
likely to have moved into the recently-gentrified, rather than established, middle-class
neighborhood. It is also not surprising that white householders typically have lower than average

20

gentrification rate, but it is quite striking that the one exception is for white college-educated
householders who are under 40 without children.
Among white householders, having less than a college degree, the presence of children,
or elderly status all substantially diminish the probability the householder will choose a
gentrifying neighborhood over an established middle-class neighborhood. These same patterns
are substantially diminished, or even reversed, for most of the black and Hispanic demographic
groups. Elderly status, lower education and presence of children are often associated with
higher gentrification rates for non-white householders.20

This pattern is not inconsistent with

the results for the low-income neighborhood sample in Table 4, though the differential effects of
elderly status and presence of children are rather subtle in that table.
The income results from estimating equation (2) on the middle class sample are reported
in the last two columns of Table 5. For most demographic groups, among those who moved into
houses in the middle-class sample of tracts, the incomes of those who are in recently-gentrified
tracts are typically below those in the established middle-class tracts. The only statistically
significant exceptions are for white householders with college degrees, in which case the
incomes of the gentrifiers exceed the incomes of those moving to established middle-class
neighborhoods.
The results in Tables 4 and 5 point to in-migration of young, college-educated white
householders without children as a particular hallmark of gentrifying neighborhoods. The results
also indicate that among white householders, presence of children, age and education play a

20

Estimates for marital status and immigration status, which are not reported in Table 5, indicate that for all
racial/ethnic groups, married couples are more likely than average to move to an established middle-class
neighborhood than a gentrifying neighborhood. Black immigrants living in middle-class neighborhoods are less
likely than average to have moved into a gentrifying neighborhood, but Hispanic immigrants are more likely than
average to have chosen the gentrified middle-class neighborhood.

21

different role in determining the choice to locate in a gentrifying neighborhood than they do for
black and Hispanic householders.
C. Cohort Regression Results
Table 6 provides some preliminary evidence regarding who exits gentrifying
neighborhoods relative to non-gentrifying neighborhoods. Table 6 reports descriptive statistics
for the sample of non-migrants, householders who have lived in their housing unit for at least 10
years, in the low-income neighborhood sample in 2000. Columns 1 and 3 report average 1990
tract-level characteristics of non-migrants for gentrifying and non-gentrifying neighborhoods,
respectively. Columns 2 and 4 report average householder characteristics for non-migrants in
2000. If gentrification is associated with widespread displacement, we should see a differential
change between columns 1 and 2 compared to columns 3 and 4. For the racial/ethnic and
educational composition variables, there is little evidence to suggest that black or Hispanic
householders are disproportionately exiting the gentrifying neighborhoods. There is, however,
modestly higher exit of low-education households and retention of high-education households in
the gentrifying neighborhoods. There is also a much bigger increase in average income between
columns 1 and 2, compared to columns 3 and 4, suggesting that the “stayers” in gentrifying
neighborhoods either experience disproportionate income gains or are disproportionately
selected from the higher income households within each demographic group.
The results from the cohort regression in equation (3) are reported in the first two
columns of Table 7. This analysis is conducted on the low-income neighborhood sample. Recall
that a large, negative and significant coefficient is evidence that a particular cohort lost more
population in gentrifying areas than non-gentrifying low income neighborhoods, and is therefore
consistent with displacement.

The results in Table 7 provide little evidence of displacement.

Most of the coefficients are statistically insignificant, very small in magnitude, and equally likely

22

to be negative or positive. The one statistically significant coefficient suggests disproportionate
retention of prime-aged black householders with a high school degree.
The remaining two columns report the results for the income change regression described
in equation (4).21 These results combined with those in the first column suggest that black
householders with a high school degree benefit from gentrification. The first column provides
some indication that gentrifying neighborhoods disproportionately retain black householders
with a high school degree. The third column estimates indicate that average incomes in cohorts
of black householders with high school degrees increase roughly 20% more in gentrifying than
non-gentrifying neighborhoods. We cannot formally test whether this is because gentrification
improves the earnings of these householders, or disproportionately reduces exit of the highest
earning householders in these cohorts. Given, however, that we do not see any evidence of
displacement of lower-income cohorts in Table7, it is hard to believe that this result is driven by
displacement of lower-income households within cohort. We consider the more reasonable
interpretation to be that this cohort did experience income gains.
The estimates in Table 7 demonstrate that it is useful to disaggregate the analysis by
detailed demographic group. Specifications that control linearly for race and education or
poverty, as most previous studies have done, would not show that the effects for black high
school graduates are quite different from those for black high school dropouts, as well as from
those for white high school graduates.

21

The sample of cohorts used to estimate this regression is smaller than that used in column 1 for two reasons. First,
because many of these tract-level cohorts are relatively small in population in 1990, and because the average
mobility rate is quite high, almost 40% of the tract-level cohorts have zero population in 2000. Because these
cohorts with zero population in 2000 have no 2000 income information, they are dropped from the analysis. In
addition, for some of the smaller cohorts that have non-zero population in 2000, the income change is calculated on
such a small number of observations that the percentage change in income can be quite dramatic. For this reason,
we trim another 3% of the sample that has greater than 400% change in average income.

23

D. Decompositions
The previous results describe who is moving in and out of gentrifying neighborhoods.
We would like to summarize our results in a way that indicates how much of the gentrification is
due to each demographic group. In other words, how much of the increase in average family
income in gentrifying neighborhoods is generated by each demographic group?
To answer this question, we make use of the following expression:
36

(5)

∆I = I 00 − I 90 = ∑ ( Pj00 I j00 − Pj90 I j90 )
j =1

where ∆I is the change in average family income from 1990 to 2000 for the group of low
income neighborhoods that gentrify, I j is the average family income for demographic group j in
the gentrifying neighborhoods, and Pj is the fraction of householders in the gentrifying
neighborhoods that belong to demographic group j. Using equation (5), we decompose the total
amount of gentrification into the part due to each individual demographic group.
We make two adjustments to our demographic categories from those used in tables 4, 5
and 7. First, in order to avoid a small cell that would not meet Census Bureau confidentiality
guidelines, we combine the two oldest age groups for Hispanic householders with a college
degree. Second, we include a single “Non-Hispanic Other Race” category. While we excluded
other race householders from the analysis in tables 4, 5 and 7, and we cannot disaggregate the
contribution of other race householders by age or education, we can report an aggregate income
contribution for all other race householders.
The decomposition results are reported in Table 8 using the sample of gentrifying lowincome neighborhoods. Columns 4 and 5 report the main decomposition results, with column 4
reporting the income change contributed by each of the 36 demographic groups using equation
(5). Column 5 simply reports the income change in column 4 divided by the total average
24

income change of $16,901. The first 3 columns of Table 8 report several of the component parts
of the decomposition. An individual demographic group can have a large contribution to total
income change either due to being a large fraction of the population in gentrifying
neighborhoods, having a large intercensal average income change, or both. Reporting the
population proportions for 1990 and 2000 and the average intercensal income change for each
demographic group allows us to distinguish these cases.
The results in Table 8 indicate that a substantial 33% of the total income gain in
gentrifying tracts is contributed by black householders with a high school degree. This sizeable
contribution results from the fact that black householders are a large fraction of the population in
gentrifying tracts in 1990, increase as a fraction of the population in the 90’s, and display
particularly large increases in average income. This creates an interesting contrast with black
householders with less than a high school degree, who are also a sizeable fraction of the
population in gentrifying low-income neighborhoods in 1990. These households, however, fall
as a fraction of the population in gentrifying neighborhoods and experience much smaller
changes in average income, resulting in a contribution of only 7% of the total income gain.
The second largest contribution to the total income gain is by white householders with a
college degree, who contribute 20% of the total gain, with over half of this gain coming from
young householders without children. This is in direct contrast to the minute contribution of less
than 3% by white householders with less than a college degree.
VI. Conclusions
The key findings of our analysis of gentrifying urban neighborhoods in the 1990’s are:
1) The analysis points to the in-migration of white college graduates, particularly those under 40
without children, as a key hallmark of gentrifying neighborhoods. 2) The presence of children,
having less than a college degree, or elderly status dampens the likelihood that a white household

25

moves into a gentrifying neighborhood, but these same effects are much diminished, or even
reversed, for black and Hispanic householders; 3) Synthetic cohort analysis of out-migration
finds no evidence of displacement of non-white households, but does find evidence of
disproportionate retention of black householders with a high school degree; 4) A decomposition
of the total income gains in a gentrifying neighborhood attribute the bulk of the gains to two key
groups: black high school graduates (due to disproportionate retention and income gains) and
white college graduates (due to disproportionate in-migration and high incomes).
The findings suggest that rather than dislocating non-white households, gentrification
creates neighborhoods that are attractive to middle-class minority households, particularly those
with children or with elderly householders. One reasonable interpretation is that because these
neighborhoods are experiencing income gains, but also more diverse with regards to
race/ethnicity and income than established middle-class neighborhoods, they are desirable
locations for non-white middle-class households.
Our findings highlight the benefits of richly disaggregating by demographic characteristic
in studies of neighborhood choice and mobility. Specifications with basic controls for race,
education, age and family structure, but without interactions, would not have uncovered many of
the interesting findings of this paper. The divergent experience of black householders with and
without high school degrees, for example, would be unlikely to emerge. Our analysis also
demonstrates the benefits of studying not only out-migration but also in-migration and outcomes
for stayers. Finally, this study benefited enormously from data that allowed careful comparisons
of neighborhoods at the census tract level.

26

References
Brueckner, Jan and Stuart Rosenthal. 2008. “Gentrification and Neighborhood Housing Cycles:
Will America’s Future Downtowns be Rich?” The Review of Economics and Statistics,
Forthcoming
Card, David, Alexandre Mas and Jesse Rothstein. 2008. “Tipping and the Dynamics of
Segregation.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Forthcoming.
Coulson, N. Edward and Eric Bond. 1990. “A Hedonic Approach to Residential Succession.”
The Review of Economics and Statistics 72(3): 433-444.
Crowder, Kyle and Scott South. 2005. “Race, Class and Changing Patterns of Migration
between Poor and Non-Poor Neighborhoods.” American Journal of Sociology
110(6):1715-63.
Ellen, Ingrid and Katherine O’Regan. 2008. “Reversal of Fortunes? Lower-income Urban
Neighbourhoods in the US in the 1990s,” Urban Studies 45 (4): 845-869.
Freeman, Lance. 2005. “Displacement or Succession? Residential Mobility in Gentrifying
Neighborhoods.” Urban Affairs Review 40(4):463-491.
Freeman, Lance and Frank Braconi. 2004. “Gentrification and Displacement: New York City in
the 1990’s.” Journal of the American Planning Association 70(1):39-52.
Lee, B. and K. Campbell. 1990. “Common Ground? Urban Neighborhoods as Survey
Respondents See Them,” Unpublished Manuscript.
Levy, Diane, Jeniffer Comey and Sandra Padilla. 2006. “In the Face of Gentrification: Case
Studies of Local Efforts to Mitigate Displacement.” Urban Institute, Washington DC.
Rosenthal, Stuart. Forthcoming. “Old Homes, Externalities and Poor Neighborhoods: A Model
of Urban Decline and Renewal.” Journal of Urban Economics.
South, Scott, Kyle Crowder, and Erick Chavez. 2005. “Exiting and Entering High-Poverty

27

Neighborhoods: Latinos, Blacks and Anglos Compared.” Social Forces 84(2): 873-900.
Vigdor, Jacob. 2002. “Does Gentrification Harm the Poor?” Brookings-Wharton Papers on
Urban Affairs 133-1715.

28

Appendix A. MSA/CMSAs used in the urban neighborhoods sample (table 1)
Code
0200
0240
0520
0640
0680
0760
1000
1122
1280

MSA/CMSA Name
Albuquerque, NM
Allentown-Bethlehem-Easton, PA
Atlanta, GA
Austin-San Marcos, TX
Bakersfield, CA
Baton Rouge, LA
Birmingham, AL
Boston-Worcester-Lawrence, MA--NH--ME--CT
Buffalo-Niagara Falls, NY

1520
1602
1642
1692
1840
1922
2000
2082
2162
2320
2840
3000
3120
3280
3362
3480
3760
3840
4120
4400
4472

Charlotte-Gastonia-Rock Hill, NC-SC
Chicago-Gary-Kenosha, IL-IN-WI
Cincinnati-Hamilton, OH-KY-IN
Cleveland-Akron, OH
Columbus, OH
Dallas-Fort Worth, TX
Dayton-Springfield, OH
Denver-Boulder-Greeley, CO
Detroit-Ann Arbor-Flint, MI
El Paso, TX
Fresno, CA
Grand Rapids-Muskegon-Holland, MI
Greensboro--Winston-Salem--High Point, NC
San Diego, CA
Houston-Galveston-Brazoria, TX
Indianapolis, IN
Kansas City, MO
Knoxville, TN
Las Vegas, NV
Little Rock-North Little Rock, AR
Los Angeles-Riverside-Orange County, CA

4520
4920
4992

Louisville, KY-IN
Memphis, TN-AR-MS
Miami-Ft. Lauderdale, FL

29

5082
5120
5360
5560
5602
5720
5880
5920
5960
6162
6200
6280

Milwaukee-Racine, WI
Minneapolis-St. Paul, MN-WI
Nashville, TN
New Orleans, LA
New York-Northern New Jersey-Long Island, NY--NJ--CT--PA
Norfolk--Virginia Beach--Newport News, VA--NC
Oklahoma City, OK
Omaha, NE--IA
Orlando, FL
Philadelphia--Wilmington--Atlantic City, PA--NJ--DE--MD
Phoenix--Mesa, AZ
Pittsburgh, PA

6442
6480
6640
6760
6840
6922
7040
7160
7240
7320
7362
7602
8000
8160
8280
8400
8520
8560
8872

Portland--Salem, OR--WA
Providence--Fall River--Warwick, RI--MA
Raleigh--Durham--Chapel Hill, NC
Richmond--Petersburg, VA
Rochester, NY
Sacramento--Yolo, CA
St. Louis, MO--IL
Salt Lake City--Ogden, UT
San Antonio, TX
San Diego, CA
San Francisco--Oakland--San Jose, CA
Seattle--Tacoma--Bremerton, WA
Springfield, MA
Syracuse, NY
Tampa--St. Petersburg--Clearwater, FL
Toledo, OH
Tucson, AZ
Tulsa, OK
Washington--Baltimore, DC--MD--VA--WV

30

Table 1: Census Tract-Level Income and Income Change, by Quintile of 1990 Income

1 Quintile

1990 Average Family Income
2 Quintile 3rd Quintile
4th Quintile

1990 Income:
Min
Average
Max

2,679
23,434
30,079

30,079
34,766
39,221

39,227
43,628
48,134

48,140
54,043
61,112

61,115
85,287
370,891

Income Change
1990 to 2000:
10th Percentile
Median
90th Percentile

-1,857
3,725
11,908

-3,943
1,739
9,568

-5,615
829
9,607

-7,580
234
10,634

-13,406
468
20,870

st

nd

5th Quintile

Notes: Table divides sample of 15,040 urban linked tracts into 5 quintiles based on 1990 average
family income. All income numbers reported in 2000 dollars.

31

Table 2: Tract-Level Characteristics by Gentrification Status, Low-Income Neighborhood
Sample, 1990 and 2000 Census
1990 Tract Characteristics

2000 Tract Characteristics

Gentrifying
Tracts

Non-Gentrifying
Tracts

Gentrifying
Tracts

Non-Gentrifying
Tracts

Mean Family
Income

21,738
(5,477)

23,734
(4,889)

38,294
(10,399)

26,408
(5,824)

% White
% Black
% Hispanic

0.240
0.574
0.156

0.283
0.504
0.182

0.229
0.553
0.179

0.221
0.515
0.219

% No H.S. Degree
% H.S Degree
% College Degree

0.499
0.412
0.090

0.485
0.433
0.082

0.366
0.476
0.158

0.415
0.485
0.101

% Age<40
% Age 40-60
% Age 60+

0.414
0.301
0.285

0.416
0.305
0.279

0.412
0.361
0.227

0.403
0.354
0.243

Migration Rate

0.667

0.661

0.694

0.685

Mean Family Income
of Migrants

20,133
(6,105)

21,756
(5,314)

36,547
(14,236)

24,680
(6,046)

Mean Family Income
of Non-Migrants

24,718
(10,187)

27,740
(8,437)

38,993
(20,399)

30,289
(9,699)

N
458
2,550
458
2,550
Notes: Low-income neighborhood sample consists of urban tracts in bottom quintile of 1990
average family income. Gentrifying neighborhoods are those who experience at least a $10,000
increase in average family income between 1990 and 2000. Migrant is defined as a householder
who did not live in the current residence 10 years ago. All income figures reported in 2000
dollars. Standard deviations are in parentheses.

32

Table 3: Characteristics of In-Migrants by Gentrification-Status of Tract, Low-Income
Neighborhood Sample, 2000 Census

Mean Family Income
% White
% Black
% Hispanic
% No H.S. Degree
% H.S. Degree
% College Degree
% Age<40
% Age 40-60
% Age 60+
% with Children in
Household
% Married
% Cohabitating
% Immigrant
N

Migrants to Gentrifying
Tracts

Migrants to NonGentrifying Tracts

36,524
(71,664)

25,835
(38,269)

0.289
0.429
0.230

0.251
0.411
0.278

0.339
0.464
0.197

0.384
0.494
0.122

0.578
0.305
0.117

0.562
0.307
0.132

0.371

0.407

0.292
0.084
0.235

0.295
0.079
0.288

38,308

316,355

Notes: Sample of migrant householders in the low-income neighborhood sample. Low-income
neighborhood sample, gentrifying tract, and migrant householder are defined in notes to Table 2.
All income figures reported in 2000 dollars. Standard deviations are in parentheses.

33

Table 4: Logit and OLS results, Migrants to Gentrifying vs Non-Gentrifying Neighborhoods,
Low-Income Neighborhood Sample, 2000 Census
β
(1)
White
No H.S. 20-40 No Child
20-40 Child
40-60
60+
H.S.
20-40 No Child
20-40 Child
40-60
60+
College 20-40 No Child
20-40 Child
40-60
60+
Black
No H.S. 20-40 No Child
20-40 Child
40-60
60+
H.S.
20-40 No Child
20-40 Child
40-60
60+
College 20-40 No Child
20-40 Child
40-60
60+
Hispanic
No H.S. 20-40 No Child
20-40 Child
40-60
60+
H.S.
20-40 No Child
20-40 Child
40-60
60+
College 20-40 No Child
20-40 Child
40-60
60+
N

Destination
(s.e.)
P(Gentrify)
(2)
(3)

-0.024
-0.003
-0.035
-0.019
-0.182*
0.092
-0.131
0.750***
0.492***
0.642***
0.145

(0.091)
(0.084)
(0.084)
(0.070)
(0.080)
(0.072)
(0.082)
(0.069)
(0.098)
(0.075)
(0.100)

0.101
0.099
0.101
0.098
0.100
0.087
0.109
0.091
0.182
0.150
0.168
0.114

0.014
-0.085
-0.005
0.067
0.050
0.042
0.100
0.078
0.430***
0.303***
0.370***
0.220

(0.080)
(0.073)
(0.072)
(0.073)
(0.072)
(0.070)
(0.070)
(0.078)
(0.083)
(0.095)
(0.082)
(0.129)

0.102
0.094
0.101
0.107
0.106
0.105
0.110
0.108
0.143
0.129
0.136
0.121

0.061
0.147*
0.198**
0.038
0.060
0.049
0.098
0.136
0.408***
0.092
0.424***
-0.453

0.107
(0.080)
0.112
(0.076)
0.117
(0.077)
0.106
(0.086)
0.108
(0.079)
0.100
(0.077)
0.111
(0.081)
0.125
(0.126)
0.173
(0.097)
0.107
(0.124)
0.147
(0.115)
0.076
(0.323)
323,693

34

Income
β
(s.e.)
(4)
(5)
0.118
0.061
-0.010
0.016
0.235***
0.157***
0.171***
0.009
0.356***
0.416***
0.381***
0.261***

(0.066)
(0.062)
(0.051)
(0.052)
(0.023)
(0.044)
(0.028)
(0.048)
(0.020)
(0.067)
(0.034)
(0.073)

0.164***
0.175***
0.179***
0.078**
0.128***
0.136***
0.141***
0.210***
0.331***
0.130*
0.252***
0.092

(0.045)
(0.028)
(0.026)
(0.028)
(0.026)
(0.018)
(0.019)
(0.039)
(0.048)
(0.064)
(0.046)
(0.108)

(0.038)
0.147***
(0.022)
0.115***
(0.026)
0.189***
(0.048)
0.189***
(0.039)
0.121**
(0.030)
0.088**
(0.041)
0.114***
(0.103)
0.172
(0.067)
0.149*
(0.099)
0.250*
(0.088)
0.302***
(0.310)
0.321
317,997

Notes: Column 1 reports estimates of β j ’s from estimating the logit model in equation (1) on the
sample of migrant householders in the low-income neighborhood sample. Column 3 reports the
predicted value of the probability a migrant in the low-income neighborhood sample locates in a
gentrifying neighborhood. Column 4 reports estimates of β j ’s from estimating the income
model in equation (2) on the same sample. * p-value<0.05 ** p-value<0.01 *** p-value<0.001

35

Table 5: Logit and OLS results, Migrants to Gentrifying vs Non-Gentrifying Neighborhoods,
Middle-Class Neighborhood Sample, 2000 Census
Destination
Income
β
(s.e.)
P(Gentrify)
β
(s.e.)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
White
(0.063)
-0.047
0.032
No H.S. 20-40 No Child
-0.213*** (0.058)
0.029
(0.099)
-0.088
20-40 Child
-0.304*** (0.051)
0.029
(0.094)
-0.088
40-60
(0.049)
-0.097*
0.027
(0.092)
-0.156
60+
-0.156*** (0.022)
0.030
(0.077)
H.S.
20-40 No Child -0.042
(0.041)
-0.119**
0.015
-0.771*** (0.087)
20-40 Child
-0.131*** (0.027)
0.022
-0.401*** (0.079)
40-60
-0.175*** (0.045)
0.019
-0.528*** (0.089)
60+
(0.020)
0.068***
0.051
College 20-40 No Child 0.532*** (0.076)
(0.063)
0.076
0.028
(0.105)
-0.142
20-41 Child
(0.032)
0.068*
0.034
(0.082)
0.072
40-60
(0.071)
0.007
0.024
(0.111)
-0.298**
60+
Black
(0.048)
-0.049
0.080
(0.092)
No H.S. 20-40 No Child 1.04***
(0.030)
-0.080**
0.083
(0.082)
1.08***
20-40 Child
-0.130*** (0.029)
0.086
(0.081)
1.13***
40-60
-0.104*** (0.031)
0.101
(0.083)
1.33***
60+
-0.152*** (0.027)
0.052
H.S.
20-40 No Child 0.553*** (0.080)
-0.130*** (0.019)
0.058
0.664*** (0.077)
20-40 Child
-0.193*** (0.020)
0.060
0.713*** (0.077)
40-60
(0.042)
-0.034
0.077
0.999*** (0.089)
60+
(0.051)
0.078
0.045
College 20-40 No Child 0.386*** (0.095)
(0.066)
-0.101
0.044
0.375*** (0.108)
20-40 Child
(0.048)
-0.043
0.050
0.509*** (0.094)
40-60
(0.110)
-0.143
0.061
0.736*** (0.151)
60+
Hispanic
(0.038)
-0.063
0.046
No H.S. 20-40 No Child 0.418*** (0.090)
-0.124*** (0.021)
0.053
0.576*** (0.084)
20-40 Child
-0.090*** (0.026)
0.055
0.609*** (0.085)
40-60
(0.051)
-0.021
0.051
0.518*** (0.098)
60+
-0.141*** (0.039)
0.036
(0.088)
H.S.
20-40 No Child 0.158
-0.126*** (0.030)
0.037
(0.085)
0.182*
20-40 Child
-0.178*** (0.041)
0.034
(0.090)
0.097
40-60
(0.108)
-0.141
0.037
(0.146)
0.164
60+
(0.065)
-0.052
0.045
College 20-40 No Child 0.382*** (0.107)
(0.098)
-0.086
0.035
(0.140)
0.108
20-40 Child
(0.086)
0.096
0.037
(0.128)
0.177
40-60
(0.326)
0.280
0.019
(0.394)
-0.535
60+
N
557,673
592,982

36

Notes: Column 1 reports estimates of β j ’s from estimating the logit model in equation (1) on the
sample of migrant householders in the middle-class neighborhood sample. Column 3 reports the
predicted value of the probability a migrant in the middle-class neighborhood sample locates in a
gentrifying neighborhood. Column 4 reports estimates of β j ’s from estimating the income
model in equation (2) on the same sample. *p-value<0.05 **p-value<0.01 *** p-value<0.001

37

Table 6: Comparing 1990 Tract Characteristics to 2000 non-Migrant Characteristics, by
Gentrification Status of Tract, Low-income Neighborhood Sample, 1990 and 2000 Census
Gentrifying Tracts
(2)
(1)
2000
1990 Tract
Characteristics Non-Migrants

Non-Gentrifying Tracts
(4)
(3)
2000
1990 Tract
Characteristics Non-Migrants

Mean Family Income

23,520
(4,488)

40,730
(82,374)

24,840
(4,070)

31,643
(46,321)

%White
%Black
%Hispanic

0.214
0.600
0.163

0.200
0.605
0.170

0.250
0.514
0.211

0.238
0.520
0.213

% No H.S. Degree
% H.S Degree
%College Degree

0.498
0.426
0.076

0.438
0.463
0.098

0.499
0.431
0.070

0.466
0.453
0.081

%Age<40
%Age 40-60
%Age 60+

0.393
0.307
0.300

0.112
0.385
0.502

0.384
0.321
0.295

0.115
0.377
0.508

N
16,927
144,034
Notes: Sample of non-migrant householders in the low-income neighborhood sample. Lowincome neighborhood sample, gentrifying tract, and migrant householder are defined in notes to
Table 2. Columns 1 and 3 report tract-level characteristics, averaged over sample of non-migrant
householders. Columns 2 and 4 report householder-level characteristics, averaged over sample
of non-migrant householders. All income figures reported in 2000 dollars.

38

Table 7: Cohort Regression Results, Low-Income Neighborhood Sample, 1990 and 2000 Census
% Change in Population
(1)
(2)
β
(s.e.)
White
No H.S. Cohort 1
Cohort 2
Cohort 3
Cohort 4
H.S.
Cohort 1
Cohort 2
Cohort 3
Cohort 4
College Cohort 1
Cohort 2
Cohort 3
Cohort 4
Black
No H.S. Cohort 1
Cohort 2
Cohort 3
Cohort 4
H.S.
Cohort 1
Cohort 2
Cohort 3
Cohort 4
College Cohort 1
Cohort 2
Cohort 3
Cohort 4
Hispanic
No H.S. Cohort 1
Cohort 2
Cohort 3
Cohort 4
H.S.
Cohort 1
Cohort 2
Cohort 3
Cohort 4
College Cohort 1
Cohort 2
Cohort 3
Cohort 4
N

%Change in Income
(3)
(4)
β
(s.e.)

-0.028
0.012
0.009
0.002
0.025
-0.009
-0.031
0.038
0.034
0.049
0.032
0.012

(0.044)
(0.042)
(0.042)
(0.040)
(0.037)
(0.036)
(0.038)
(0.039)
(0.044)
(0.042)
(0.045)
(0.051)

0.054
-0.021
0.096
0.003
0.011
0.174
0.158
0.060
-0.067
0.254*
0.367***
0.209

(0.237)
(0.143)
(0.128)
(0.108)
(0.110)
(0.090)
(0.095)
(0.097)
(0.194)
(0.113)
(0.116)
(0.161)

0.019
-0.008
-0.025
0.006
-0.027
0.008
0.056*
0.013
-0.015
0.012
0.060
-0.062

(0.030)
(0.029)
(0.030)
(0.029)
(0.028)
(0.028)
(0.029)
(0.030)
(0.053)
(0.037)
(0.041)
(0.049)

-0.371***
0.103
0.028
0.309***
0.203**
0.237***
0.237***
0.198**
0.084
0.035
-0.216
-0.067

(0.108)
(0.080)
(0.073)
(0.065)
(0.073)
(0.062)
(0.063)
(0.069)
(0.242)
(0.113)
(0.114)
(0.150)

-0.008
0.056
-0.041
-0.040
-0.009
0.066
0.047
-0.037
0.080
-0.037
-0.057
-0.005

(0.041)
(0.039)
(0.041)
(0.043)
(0.040)
(0.040)
(0.045)
(0.052)
(0.079)
(0.064)
(0.071)
(0.122)
50,983

39

0.212
0.096
0.055
0.072
-0.116
0.201
0.213
0.107
-0.401
0.292
-0.084
0.437

(0.114)
(0.101)
(0.101)
(0.102)
(0.124)
(0.103)
(0.118)
(0.143)
(0.477)
(0.237)
(0.290)
(0.928)
27,219

Notes: Column 1 reports estimates of β c ’s from estimation of equation (3) on the low-income
neighborhood sample. Column 1 reports estimates of β c ’s from estimation of equation (4) on
the low-income neighborhood sample. Unit of observation is a synthetic cohort in a census tract.
Cohort 1 consists of householders ages 20-29 in 1990, Cohort 2 of householders ages 30-39 in
1990, Cohort 3 of householders ages 40-49 in 1990, and Cohort 4 of householders ages 50-59 in
1990. See section IV.B of text for further details. *p-value<0.05 **p-value<0.01
***p-value<0.001

40

Table 8: Decomposition of Total Income Change, Gentrifying Tracts in Low-Income
Neighborhood Sample, 1990 and 2000 Census
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)

White
No H.S. 20-40 No Child
20-40 Child
40-60
60+
H.S.
20-40 No Child
20-40 Child
40-60
60+
College 20-40 No Child
20-40 Child
40-60
60+
Black
No H.S. 20-40 No Child
20-40 Child
40-60
60+
H.S.
20-40 No Child
20-40 Child
40-60
60+
College 20-40 No Child
20-40 Child
40-60
60+
Hispanic
No H.S. 20-40 No Child
20-40 Child
40-60
60+
H.S.
20-40 No Child
20-40 Child
40-60
60+
College 20-40 No Child
20-40 Child
40+
Other Race
Total

(5)

P90

P 00

I 00 − I 90

P 00 I 00 − P 90 I 90

Fraction
of Total

0.006
0.011
0.018
0.049
0.031
0.017
0.027
0.030
0.027
0.005
0.011
0.004

0.004
0.005
0.012
0.022
0.031
0.010
0.037
0.020
0.052
0.004
0.024
0.006

1056
2399
1815
3626
3850
1383
9331
6744
10620
7535
18156
9109

-23
-10
-68
-263
308
-120
743
24
2178
157
1459
207

-0.002
-0.002
-0.007
-0.018
0.013
-0.010
0.051
0.002
0.109
0.007
0.077
0.011

0.021
0.056
0.081
0.140
0.036
0.088
0.083
0.044
0.006
0.006
0.010
0.006

0.015
0.036
0.060
0.097
0.039
0.081
0.122
0.056
0.015
0.007
0.021
0.007

6139
6085
8776
10819
8748
7210
13311
17060
9273
5383
15880
12284

68
127
315
845
379
657
2635
1329
494
124
753
256

0.004
0.010
0.014
0.043
0.027
0.045
0.165
0.092
0.025
0.006
0.046
0.018

0.009
0.038
0.037
0.022
0.008
0.021
0.013
0.003
0.002
0.002
0.002

0.010
0.038
0.038
0.020
0.012
0.022
0.022
0.006
0.004
0.003
0.005

6755
5425
7926
4467
7158
5398
7008
5372
8111
4701
12889

160
565
733
196
228
301
631
120
133
67
247

0.013
0.043
0.051
0.016
0.017
0.022
0.037
0.008
0.009
0.005
0.015

0.030
1.00

0.039
1.00

16029

944
16,901

0.060
1.00

41

Notes: Table reports results of decomposition described in equation (5) on the sample of
gentrifying low-income neighborhoods. Columns 1-3 report individual components of the
expression in equation (5). Column 4 reports each demographic groups total contribution to the
average income growth of $16,901 in the gentrifying neighborhoods using the expression in
equation (5). Column 5 divides Column 4 by 16,901. All income figures reported in 2000
dollars.

42

