                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         UNDER THE WEATHER:
HEALTH, SCHOOLING, AND ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES OF EARLY-LIFE RAINFALL

                                          Sharon L. Maccini
                                             Dean Yang

                                        Working Paper 14031
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14031


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2008




HwaJung Choi provided excellent research assistance. We have valued feedback and suggestions from
Anna Aizer, David Bloom, John Bound, Anne Case, Kerwin Charles, David Cutler, Lucas Davis, John
DiNardo, Marcel Fafchamps, Juan Carlos Hallak, Caroline Hoxby, Larry Katz, David I. Levine, Jim
Levinsohn, Louis Maccini, Justin McCrary, David Newhouse, Joe Newhouse, Ben Olken, Chris Paxson,
Heather Royer, Dan Silverman, Gary Solon, John Strauss, and seminar participants at University of
Illinois (Urbana-Champaign), Johns Hopkins, McGill, University of Michigan, Oxford, Rutgers, University
of Washington (Seattle), and the NEUDC 2005 conference at Brown University. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Sharon L. Maccini and Dean Yang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Under the Weather: Health, Schooling, and Economic Consequences of Early-Life Rainfall
Sharon L. Maccini and Dean Yang
NBER Working Paper No. 14031
May 2008
JEL No. I1,I2,I3,O1,O15,Q5

                                               ABSTRACT

How sensitive is long-run individual well-being to environmental conditions early in life? This paper
examines the effect of weather conditions around the time of birth on the health, education, and socioeconomic
outcomes of Indonesian adults born between 1953 and 1974. We link historical rainfall for each individual's
birth-year and birth-location with current adult outcomes from the 2000 wave of the Indonesia Family
Life Survey. Higher early-life rainfall has large positive effects on the adult outcomes of women, but
not of men. Women with 20% higher rainfall (relative to normal local rainfall) in their year and location
of birth are 3.8 percentage points less likely to self-report poor or very poor health, attain 0.57 centimeters
greater height, complete 0.22 more grades of schooling, and live in households that score 0.12 standard
deviations higher on an asset index. These patterns most plausibly reflect a positive impact of rainfall
on agricultural output, leading to higher household incomes and food availability and better health
for infant girls. We present suggestive evidence that eventual benefits for adult women's socioeconomic
status are most strongly mediated by improved schooling attainment, which in turn improves socioeconomic
status in adulthood.


Sharon L. Maccini
University of Michigan
735 S. State St.
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
smaccini@umich.edu

Dean Yang
University of Michigan
Gerald R. Ford School of Public Policy
466 Lorch Hall
611 Tappan Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
and NBER
deanyang@umich.edu
1     Introduction
Life in rural areas of developing countries is prone to many kinds of risk, such as illness or
mortality of household members, crop or other income loss due to natural phenomena (weather,
insect infestations, or fire, for example), and civil conflict. In addition to their contemporaneous
eﬀects, the eﬀects of certain types of shocks may still be felt many years or even decades later.
From a public policy standpoint, it is particularly important to identify shocks that have large
long-run eﬀects. Moreover, the mechanics underlying shocks’ persistence may be of considerable
interest. For example, a health shock may have a long-run eﬀect simply because the health
shock itself persists over time. Alternately, the health shock may not directly aﬀect long-run
outcomes, but it could in turn aﬀect some other outcome–such as educational attainment–that
helps determine long-run well-being.
    In this paper, we focus on shocks that occur at the very beginning of life. We ask how
sensitive long-run individual well-being is to environmental conditions around the time of birth.
In particular, we examine the eﬀect of weather shocks around the time of birth on the adult
health, education, and socioeconomic outcomes of Indonesian women and men born between
1953 and 1974. In addition, we attempt to shed light on the intervening pathways connecting
early-life rainfall to adult outcomes, illuminating the roles of health and educational attainment
in determining adult socioeconomic status.
    This investigation has considerable data requirements. It necessitates information on weather
shocks experienced by individuals several decades before, as well as detailed current information
on adult outcomes. We use information in the Indonesia Family Life Survey on an individual’s
year and location of birth, and link each individual in that survey to locality-specific rainfall data
for their birth year. For individuals born in rural areas (on whom we focus), rainfall variation
across space and time should generate corresponding variation in agricultural output and thus
household income. To deal with measurement error in the rainfall data, we run instrumental
variables regressions where variables for rainfall measured at slightly more distant rainfall stations
serve as instruments for rainfall in the individual’s birthplace and birth year.
    We examine the impact of early-life rainfall on a range of adult outcomes observed in 2000.
We find that higher early-life rainfall leads to improved health, schooling, and socioeconomic
status for women. Women with 20% higher rainfall (relative to normal local rainfall) in their year
and location of birth are 3.8 percentage points less likely to self-report poor or very poor health,
attain 0.57 centimeters greater height, attain 0.22 more completed grades of schooling, and live


                                                  1
in households that score 0.12 standard deviations higher on an asset index. By contrast, we do
not find relationships between early-life rainfall and adult men’s outcomes.
       We provide suggestive evidence on the intermediate pathways connecting early-life rainfall to
adult socioeconomic status. Compared with rainfall in the birth year itself, rainfall in the years
after the birth year has no statistically significant relationship with adult outcomes. So it is most
plausible that the initial, direct eﬀect of rainfall is on girls’ health in the very earliest years after
birth (rather than a lagged eﬀect on, say, school entry). The strong relationship we find between
birth year rainfall and adult height also suggests that nutrition in infancy varies with early-life
rainfall. Our results suggest that rainfall’s eﬀects on crop output–and thus household income
and food availability–lead to variations in parents’ abilities to purchase nutrition, medical inputs,
and generally more nurturing environments for infant girls.
       We find no eﬀect of rainfall in the years prior to the birthyear, so there is no indication that
shocks in utero are importantly influencing our results, in comparison to shocks experienced in
infancy. While these results confirm that a rainfall shock during the first year of life has the most
important influence on women’s long-run outcomes, it may be that the nutritional deprivation
that follows may be in the period after weaning from breastmilk. So our results could well be
consistent with the importance placed on the post-weaning period in the existing literature (e.g.,
Glewwe and King 2001), if drought-associated malnutrition in Indonesia occurs with some lag.
       We also provide other regression-based evidence that helps compare the importance of various
subsequent pathways (health and education) leading to adult socioeconomic status. Our evidence
suggests a chain of causation that runs from early-life rainfall to infant health, to educational
attainment, and finally to adult socioeconomic status. We do not find evidence that adult women’s
health status is an important mediator between early-life rainfall shocks and adult socioeconomic
status.
       This paper is broadly related to a body of research in economics on the relationship between
conditions in early life and outcomes in later life.1 In particular, this paper shares with a smaller
set of other papers a strong concern with establishing causality, by focusing on the impact of
exogenous conditions or "shocks" in early life on adult outcomes. These related papers examine
more extreme or unusual early-life conditions, such as pandemics (Almond 2006), twin births
   1
    Elo and Preston (1992) review the epidemiological and demographic evidence on potential mechanisms linking
childhood health to adult health (mortality) worldwide. More recent research using data from developing countries
includes Glewwe and King (2001), Glewwe, King and Jacoby (2001), Alderman et al (2001), Behrman et al (2006)
and Maluccio et al (2007). Research on developed countries includes Case, Lubotsky and Paxson (2002), Currie
and Hyson (2003), Case, Fertig and Paxson (2004), Johnson and Schoeni (2007), Currie and Moretti (2005), and
Banerjee, Duflo, Postel-Vinay, and Watts (2007).


                                                       2
(Berhman and Rosenzweig 2004, Royer 2005), or extreme drought and civil war (Alderman, et
al. 2006) and therefore raise concerns about generalizability.2 In comparison with this research,
our paper examines a category of early-life shocks (rainfall shocks) that is highly relevant to the
lives of rural populations in developing countries. It is important to establish (as we do), across a
large number of cohorts and in a (relatively) representative sample of a national population, that
more "typical" variation in early-life environmental conditions can also have substantial long-run
eﬀects on individuals. Among other things, these findings help justify public policies that help
households cope with more typical year-to-year variation in their economic conditions, as opposed
to policies that respond only to extreme events.
       Several other additional features help distinguish this paper from existing research. First,
the paper examines exogenous shocks in several periods before and after birth to help pinpoint
the most sensitive or critical periods. Among previous papers mentioned, only Almond (2006)
conducts such an examination. Second, we focus on outcomes in individuals’ adult prime-age
years (as opposed to the teenage years as in Alderman, et al. 2006). Finally, we are able to
examine a wide range of diverse outcomes in a high-quality general-purpose household survey
dataset, the Indonesia Family Life Survey. By contrast, existing work must make the best of
datasets that have a much more restricted set of outcome variables available, such as census data
(Almond 2006), vital statistics records (Royer 2005), or smaller-scale special-purpose datasets
(Behrman and Rosenzweig 2004; Alderman, et al. 2006).
       This paper also speaks to the literature on gender bias. Our finding of significant impacts for
women and not for men is consistent with gender bias in the allocation of nutrition and other
resources, particularly in times of unusual hardship. The gender bias interpretation is supported
by the finding that only in the first year of life are the rainfall shocks associated with long-run
outcomes, as opposed to shocks experienced in utero (before the gender of the child is known).
Our paper adds to the existing literature by documenting that the impact of gender bias in early
life has a very long temporal reach, and continues to be felt decades later.
       The related literature on gender bias in developing countries for the most part examines gender
imbalance in the short-term impact of negative shocks, rather than the long-term impacts on which
we focus. While the evidence is somewhat mixed, other studies in Indonesia and elsewhere have
found that the short-term negative impacts of shocks are greater for girls than for boys. Dreze
and Sen (1989) cite several studies that find that households often prioritize boys’ welfare over
   2
   Another related paper is Lindeboom, Van den Berg, and Portrait (2005), who examine the impact of early-life
macroeconomic conditions on longevity in the Netherlands.


                                                      3
girls’ in lean times. Das Gupta (1987) finds that girls in rural India have twice the mortality rate
as boys, arguing that the diﬀerential is due to diﬀerences in medical care, nutrition and clothing.
Behrman (1988) and Behrman and Deolalikar (1990) document biases favoring boys in nutrient
allocation in Indian households during diﬃcult times. Rose (1999) finds that the gender bias in
infant mortality in India (that typically favors boys) narrows when districts experience higher
rainfall. Alderman and Gertler (1997) find that demand for girls’ medical care is more income-
and price-elastic than demand for boys’ medical care in rural Pakistani households. Cameron
and Worswick (2001) find that, in response to crop loss, Indonesian families with girls are more
likely to reduce educational expenditures than are families with boys. Jayachandran (2006) finds
that negative shocks to air quality in Indonesia aﬀect female more than male infant mortality.
Thomas et al (2004) show that the 1998 Indonesian economic crisis had similar eﬀects on boys’
and girls enrollment rates, but at the same time education budget shares rose more from before
to after the crisis in households with more older boys (compared to those with older girls). One
notable exception is Levine and Ames (2003), who find that the 1998 Indonesian crisis aﬀected
boys and girls similarly.
    Section 2 discusses conceptual issues, and section 3 reviews the evidence on the impact of
rainfall on Indonesian agricultural output. Section 4 describes the datasets we use and provides
some descriptive statistics. Section 5 presents the main empirical results, while Section 6 conducts
a variety of supplementary analyses. Section 7 concludes.



2     Conceptual issues
Starting with Grossman (1972), health production functions typically consider individual health
at time t, Ht to be a function of an initial health endowment H0 as well as the history of health
inputs N1 ,..., Nt . Other health determinants of importance include time-invariant demographic
variables X (such as gender and age), and the time histories of community infrastructure C0 ,
C1 ,..., Ct and the disease environment D0 , D1 ,..., Dt .


                       Ht = h (H0 , N1 , ..., Nt , X, C0 , C1 , ..., Ct , D0 , D1 , ..., Dt )


    The initial health endowment H0 is in part determined by genetic characteristics determined
at conception G, but in addition environmental conditions experienced in early life R0 as well as
early-life community infrastructure and disease environment may also have persistent eﬀects on


                                                         4
health.
                                       H0 = k (G, R0 , C0 , D0 )

   The idea that environmental conditions in a certain sensitive period of life may have long-run,
irreversible eﬀects is known as "critical-period programming." The term "fetal origins hypothesis"
has been used to refer to programming caused by conditions experienced in the fetal stage (e.g.,
Barker 1998), but in practice the term is often taken to include eﬀects of conditions experienced
in infancy and early childhood. The nutrition literature suggests that the potential for individuals
stunted in the first couple of years of life to "catch up" is limited, making height at age three a
strong predictor of adult height (Martorell 1995 and 1997; Martorell et al. 1994).
   Our focus in this paper is on the component of individuals’ initial health endowment that
is determined by environmental conditions in early life. In particular, our results identify the
reduced-form relationship between early-life rainfall shocks and later-life health and socioeconomic
outcomes.
   A brief word is also in order regarding the likely direction of selection bias in this context. We
review in the next section the evidence that higher rainfall should be interpreted as a positive
shock to an Indonesian locality, leading to higher local-level crop output. An individual can only
be included in the data for analysis if they are still living in 2000. A worry would be that early-life
rainfall could aﬀect the likelihood of survival through 2000, and that, in addition, those whose
survival was induced by rainfall could be drawn from the lower end of the distribution of infant
health. If individuals with worse infant health also have worse health as adults, such a selection
eﬀect would bias our results in a negative direction, so that any positive long-run eﬀects of rainfall
on adult outcomes would be lower bounds of the true eﬀects.
   As it turns out, however, we find no evidence that survival until inclusion in the IFLS 3 sample
(2000) is statistically significantly associated with rainfall shocks in the birth place and birth year.
Specifically, we test whether rainfall shocks aﬀect the size of female and male birth cohorts who
appear in our samples at the district-birthyear-season level. We regress the number of individuals
appearing in our IFLS sample at the birthdistrict-birthyear-season level on the birthyear rainfall
variable, separately for women and men. Regressions include birthyear-season and district-season
fixed eﬀects, as well as district-season-specific linear time trends. The results provide no indication
that birthyear rainfall aﬀects the likelihood of inclusion in our sample: coeﬃcients on birthyear
rainfall for both women and men are not statistically significantly diﬀerent from zero. (For details
and regression results, see the online appendix.)


                                                   5
3     Rainfall and agricultural output in Indonesia
Rainfall is the most important dimension of weather variation in Indonesia. Because of its equa-
torial location, temperature shows very little variation in Indonesia, either within years or across
them. In any particular year, the length of the wet season and the intensity of drought during the
dry season vary markedly across Indonesia’s 5,100-kilometer east-west span. The specific trajec-
tories of the monsoons vary from one year to the next, and lead to wide variation in precipitation
across the archipelago both within year and across years (Library of Congress 2003).
    Indonesia’s climate typically consists simply of one wet season and one dry season each year.
The distinguishing feature of the wet season is that at least 200 mm of rain falls per month. This
definition is based on the minimum threshold necessary for rice production and takes into account
evaporation and seepage through the soil (Kishore et al 2000). The specific months of the wet
and dry season vary across Indonesian provinces.
    Levine and Yang (2006) find that deviations of rainfall from the district-level mean are pos-
itively associated with deviations of rice output from the district-level mean in Indonesian non-
urban districts in the 1990s (years in which rainfall is unusually high have unusually high rice
output, and years in which rainfall is unusually low have unusually low rice output). Secondary
reports also indicate that higher rainfall raises agricultural productivity in Indonesia (Kishore
et al 2000). Rice production in both the wet and dry seasons is particularly dependent on the
timing of the monsoon. On an unpredictable basis, there is a pronounced drought in the dry
season driven by the El Niño weather phenomenon. For example, there were 10 long or short
droughts (large-scale crop failure) between 1921 and 1954. The timing of planting during the
primary (wet) season is based on reaching a threshold of accumulated rainfall. Generally, when
planting is delayed, the season’s crop yields are reduced. Delays in the onset of the monsoons
in the wet season, as well as ongoing dry spells during that season lead to reduced wet season
harvests. Secondary crop harvests may be reduced as well during the following dry season because
of the delay in harvesting in the previous wet season (e.g. the 1997-1998 El Niño event). On the
other hand, in La Niña years (when rainfall is unusually high), the planting season may begin
early and yield above average harvests.
    Because of the importance of the seasonal cycle of rain, food security also tends to vary
seasonally. Food insecurity tends to the highest at the end of the dry season and beginning of
the following wet season when stocks of food from the previous wet season are low and physical
demands are high with the initiation of planting (Herdt 1989). Accordingly, dry season droughts


                                                 6
amplify food scarcity.
        In contrast to the emphasis on droughts, there is scant mention in the agroclimatological
literature on Indonesia that floods (very high rainfall) are important causes of declines in crop
production. In addition, nonparametric estimates in Figure 1 (described below) provide no in-
dication that the benefits of rainfall diminish at very high levels of rainfall–the 95% confidence
intervals admit a linear relationship throughout the range of rainfall variation observed.
        Aside from agricultural production and household income, there may be other channels linking
rainfall to child nutrition and health. The allotment of parents’ time–between agricultural work
and child-rearing, for example–may also be a function of precipitation. Or unusual rainfall might
alter the disease environment, and disease directly aﬀects the absorption of nutrition particularly
in the vulnerable early years of rapid growth. Fluctuations in precipitation may influence other
environmental conditions correlated with economic activity and public health, such as the extent
of forest fires, floods and landslides, the availability of potable water, and agricultural pest control.
Indeed, some of these channels may imply a negative impact of rainfall that would somewhat oﬀset
positive eﬀects via improved crop output.



4         Data sources and sample composition

4.1         IFLS data

The sample consists of 4,615 women and 4,277 men born outside of urban areas between 1953 and
1974 from the third wave of the Indonesia Family Life Survey (IFLS3), which was fielded in 2000.
We restrict the sample to those born outside of urban areas because our causal factor of interest,
rainfall, should mainly have an eﬀect in agricultural areas. To ensure that the definition of urban
areas is not endogenous to realized rainfall shocks in the years our sample was born, we define
an urban area as a city that had 50,000 or more inhabitants according to the 1930 Indonesian
census (tabulated by Rutz 1985). Slightly more than three-quarters of women and men in the
IFLS3 report being born in a district that is not an urban area.
        The IFLS3 includes information on district (kabupaten) of birth, to which we link historical
rainfall data. Sample individuals were born in 166 diﬀerent districts. We use of information on
month of birth to more precisely identify rainfall in the climatic season during which the person
was born.3 The IFLS3 includes a variety of health variables, ranging from clinical measures
    3
        The IFLS includes a "best guess" date of birth based on information across related questions within wave and



                                                           7
to more subjective self-reported measures. Trained nurses collected lung capacity readings and
anthropometric measures. Table 1 reports summary statistics.


4.2     Rainfall data

We obtain historical rainfall data for weather stations across Indonesia from the Global Histori-
cal Climatology Network (GHCN) Precipitation and Temperature Data (Version 2).4 The data
include monthly records for each station as well as its latitude and longitude. For each month
between 1953 and 1974, we use the station location information to match each birth district
represented in the IFLS to the closest weather station. We matched a total of 378 stations with
IFLS birth districts. Because the number of rainfall stations varies over time, data from diﬀerent
stations may be linked to the same district over time.
   Although the IFLS includes Indonesians born across the 20th century, we limit our sample to
the 1953-1974 birth cohort. We choose 1953 as the first cohort for data quality reasons: while the
quality of the rainfall data appears acceptable in the 1920s and 1930s (in that birth districts in the
IFLS sample are rarely very far away from the nearest rainfall station), the mean distance from
districts to the closest rainfall station rises substantially for about a decade after 1941, presumably
reflecting upheaval during and after World War II. We therefore focus on the subsamples born in
the following two decades.5 (Unfortunately, analysis of the 1920-1940 cohort is limited by very
small samples.) The 1974 birth cohort is the last cohort in our analysis, so that the youngest
women in the sample are 25 or 26 upon being observed in 2000. This is an appropriate end cohort,
as most Indonesians have completed their schooling by their mid-20s.
   In calculating "rainfall in one’s year of birth", we focus on rainfall in complete wet and dry
seasons (rather than in calendar years), as these should be most closely related to agricultural
cycles. We identify the "birth season" for each individual in the dataset, based on their reported
birth month and birth province. We then define "rainfall in one’s year of birth" to be the sum
of rainfall in one’s birth season and in the following season (total rainfall in the 12 consecutive
months of an individual’s first wet and dry seasons).6 In analyses of the impact of birthyear
rainfall on adult outcomes, we focus on the deviation of birthyear rainfall from the norm for
across waves. The IFLS was eventually able to collect month of birth for the vast majority of respondents.
   4
     These data are available at http://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/oa/climate/research/ghcn/ghcn.html.
   5
     Across observations born between 1953 and 1974, the median distance between the district of birth and the
rainfall station during the year of birth is only 14 km., and the 95th percentile is only 70 km. The maximum is
about 230 km.
   6
     For complete details, see the online appendix.



                                                      8
one’s birth district. Specifically, the variable is the natural log of birthyear rainfall minus the
natural log of mean annual rainfall in the given district. Mean district rainfall for a particular
individual is calculated over 1953-1999, and excludes rainfall in the individual’s birthyear. The
rainfall variable should be interpreted (roughly speaking) as the percentage deviation from mean
rainfall (e.g., a value of 0.05 means rainfall was approximately 5 percent higher than normal).



5     Main empirical results
In examining the relationship between early-life rainfall and one’s adult outcomes, we seek to
isolate deviation of one’s adult outcomes from the mean outcomes in one’s birth locale, as well
as the mean outcomes of one’s national birth cohort. Because particular localities in Indonesia
may be subject to long-running changes over extended periods of time (reflecting, for example,
diﬀerent rates of economic development), it will also be useful to isolate variation in a person’s
outcomes that diverges from long-running trends in one’s birth district.
    A central challenge is that rainfall is measured with error. Rainfall is measured at the closest
rainfall station to the birth district in the birthyear, but this measurement is only imperfectly
correlated with actual rainfall in the individual’s narrowly-defined birth locality. Classical mea-
surement error in the early-life rainfall variable will lead to attenuated coeﬃcient estimates. A
solution to this problem is to instrument for early-life rainfall with alternative measures of the
same variable whose errors are likely to be orthogonal to the original, instrumented variable.
    Our main specification is therefore an instrumental variables regression where early-life rainfall
(measured at the closest rainfall station to one’s birth district in one’s birthyear) is instrumented
with four analogous rainfall variables measured in the same birth year but in the 2nd- through
5th-closest rainfall stations. Note that there will still be measurement error to the extent that
there is misreporting of the birth month, so that the instrumented estimates are still likely to
understate the true empirical relationship.
    We estimate the following reduced-form linear relationship between adult outcome Yijst of
adult i born in district j, in season s and in year t:


                           Yijst = βRjt + μjs + γ js T REND + δ st + εijst                        (1)


    The coeﬃcient of interest is β, the impact of (instrumented) birthyear rainfall Rjt on the adult
outcome. Because parents may time children to be born in particular seasons, and parents who


                                                  9
time births in such a way may be diﬀerent from those who do not,7 we estimate separate fixed
eﬀects for individuals born in the wet and dry season of each district: μjs is a fixed eﬀect for
individuals born in district j and season s (e.g., born in district A in wet season, born in district A
in dry season, etc.) Similarly, we allow the cohort eﬀects to diﬀer across wet and dry seasons: δ st
is a fixed eﬀect for the birthyear-season combination. γ js T REND is a linear time trend specific
to the district-season, which absorbs long-running linear trends in the outcome that may vary
depending on the district-season (T REND is a linear time trend, and the coeﬃcient γ js allows
the time trend to vary across district-seasons). εijst is a mean-zero error term. Due to serial
and spatial correlation in error terms, standard errors allow for an arbitrary variance-covariance
structure within birth provinces (clustering by birth province).
       Inclusion of district-season fixed eﬀects controls for persistent eﬀects of rainfall on the localities
(and households) in which children are born. Eﬀects of rainfall shocks on long-run income of
households should be common to all individuals born in the same area and so should be absorbed
by the district-season fixed eﬀects.
       Rainfall in one’s birthyear and birth district has a positive relationship with health, educa-
tional, and socioeconomic status outcomes in adulthood. A graphical view of some of the key
relationships is presented in the form of nonparametric Fan regression plots in Figure 1. Panel A
examines the nonparametric relationship between early-life rainfall (on the horizontal axis) and
adult height (on the vertical axis). Panels B, C, and D are similar except that the variables on
the vertical axes are self-reported poor/very poor health status, completed grades of schooling
and the household asset index, respectively.8 In each figure, the positive relationship between
early-life rainfall and the adult outcome is quite apparent.
       When discussing magnitudes of the estimated eﬀects, we focus on the impact of a 0.2 log point
change in the rainfall variable (deviation of log rainfall from the log of district mean rainfall).
0.2 is the standard deviation of the residual when the rainfall variable is regressed on the full
set of fixed eﬀects and district-season linear time trends in equation 1, and is smaller than the
standard deviation of the unadjusted rainfall variable reported in Table 1 because it is purged of
cross-district variation, over-time variation, and district-season-specific linear trends.
       First stage regressions predicting birthyear/birthdistrict rainfall are reported in the online
   7
     Using African data, Artadi (2005) finds that parents time births across seasons in response to seasonality in
economic conditions and disease prevalence.
   8
     Variables on the vertical and horizontal axes are partialled-out (residuals) with respect to the full set of fixed
eﬀects and time trends in equation 1. The graphs use a nonparametric Fan local regression method with a quartic
(biweight) kernel and a bandwidth of 0.5. Dashed lines depict bootstrapped 95% confidence intervals.



                                                          10
appendix, and indicate as expected that there is a positive and statistically significant relationship
between each of the instruments (rainfall in the 2nd- to 5th-closest districts) and rainfall in the
closest district. The instruments are strong vis-a-vis conventional thresholds used in instrumental
variables estimation (Bound et al 1994, Stock and Yogo 2005): in the first stage regression for
women, the the test of the joint significance of the instruments yields an F-statistic of 31.61, and
for men the corresponding statistic is 28.80.
   The instrumental variables results from estimation of equation 1 are presented in Table 2. For
each outcome, the coeﬃcient on (instrumented) birthyear rainfall is presented for women (first
column) and men (second column). Standard errors are presented in parentheses, and the sample
size of the regression is in brackets. Coeﬃcients for the many fixed eﬀects and district-season
linear time trends are not shown.
   In the female sample, birthyear rainfall has a positive impact on health, education, and so-
cioeconomic status. Higher birthyear rainfall leads to a higher propensity to report "very good"
health status, a lower propensity to report "poor" or "very poor" health status, greater height in
centimeters, and fewer days absent due to illness. Coeﬃcients in three of the five health regres-
sions (height as well as both indicators for self-reported health status) are statistically significantly
diﬀerent from zero at conventional levels. The coeﬃcient in the log lung capacity regression is
negative but is small in magnitude and is not statistically significantly diﬀerent from zero.
   The coeﬃcient on birthyear rainfall in the regression for completed grades of schooling is
positive and statistically significant at the 5% level. Birthyear rainfall also aﬀects women’s adult
socioeconomic status: it has a positive relationship with natural log household expenditures per
capita, an asset index, and natural log annual earnings. The coeﬃcient in the regression for the
asset index is statistically significantly diﬀerent from zero at the 5% level. The coeﬃcients on
birthyear rainfall across the nine separate regressions are also jointly statistically significantly
diﬀerent from zero; a test for joint significance across the regressions has an F-statistic of 4.93
(p-value 0.000).9
   Corresponding results for Indonesian men born in the same time span are presented in the
second column. In stark contrast, there is little indication that the adult health, education, or
socioeconomic status of males are aﬀected by birthyear rainfall. Most coeﬃcients on the rainfall
variables in all regressions are smaller in magnitude than the corresponding coeﬃcients in the
female regressions, and none are statistically significantly diﬀerent from zero. Neither are the
   9
     Appendix Table 2 in the online appendix reports OLS estimates that correspond to Table 2’s results, and the
patterns are very similar although (as expected) the OLS coeﬃcients are attenuated towards zero.


                                                      11
coeﬃcients jointly statistically significant: a test for joint significance across the regressions has
an F-statistic of 0.68 (p-value 0.731).
       How large are these eﬀects? A 0.2 log point increase in birthyear rainfall leads women to be
3.8 percentage points less likely to report poor or very poor health status (compared to the base
reporting propensity of 12 percent). Such an increase in birthyear rainfall also leads women to
have 0.57 centimeters greater height, to have attained 0.22 more completed grades of schooling,
and to live in households that score 0.175 higher (0.12 standard deviation) on the asset index.



6        Discussion and additional results
Here we extend the previous analysis to examine the relationship between rainfall in other years
(before and after the birthyear) and long-run outcomes. In addition, we refer to previous results
and conduct additional regression analyses to provide suggestive evidence on the likely pathways
through which early-life rainfall aﬀects adult socioeconomic status.


6.1       Eﬀects of shocks before and after the birthyear

The regression results so far have focused on the relationship between rainfall in the birthyear
and adult outcomes. Teasing out the causal impacts of nutritional shocks at diﬀerent points in
the lifecycle is diﬃcult given the strong correlation of deprivation across the vulnerable periods in
the lifecycle (Glewwe and King 2001). In research on child nutrition, the idea that environmental
conditions in a certain sensitive period of life may have long-run, irreversible eﬀects is known as
"critical-period programming." The "fetal origins hypothesis" stresses that nutritional deprivation
in-utero permanently reduces body size in adulthood, while the eﬀect of nutritional deprivation
in later periods is more muted (Barker 1998, including citations on other related papers).10 More
recent studies have argued that the period after weaning from breastmilk until age 24-36 months
may also be "critical," as protection from the mother during pregnancy and breast-feeding ends.
Glewwe and King (2001) document that malnutrition between 1 and 2 years (versus the first year
of life) has a stronger relationship with cognitive development in the Philippines. Hoddinott and
Kinsey (2001) also find that physical growth falters between one and two years of age for cohorts
born during a drought in rural Zimbabwe but not for cohorts who were between two and five
years old at the time (they do not examine the fetal stage and the first year of life). The potential
  10
    Economic studies highlighting the long-run impact of conditions in utero include Almond (2006) and Behrman
and Rosenzweig (2004).


                                                     12
for an individual stunted in the first few years of life to "catch up" is limited (Martorell 1995).
   In this paper, we are able to estimate the impact of exogenous shocks at various points in
early life to compare their impacts on outcomes in adulthood. Given the findings in previous
studies, the results in Table 2 leave open the possibility that it is not rainfall in the birthyear per
se that matters for adult outcomes. If rainfall is serially correlated over time, then it could be
that rainfall in some year before or after the birthyear has the actual impact on adult outcomes.
If so, the coeﬃcients on birthyear rainfall regressions in Table 2 might simply reflect the fact that
other years’ rainfall were not included in the regressions (an omitted variable problem).
   Therefore, we report regression results in Table 3 where each regression includes annual rainfall
variables from years -3 (three years prior to the birthyear) to 3 (three years after the birthyear),
including birthyear rainfall (year 0). These variables are defined analogously to the birthyear rain-
fall variable as 12-month rainfall during complete wet and dry seasons. The dependent variables
are for several key outcomes from previous tables: both self-reported health status indicators,
height, completed grades of schooling, and the asset index.
   Two facts stand out in these regression results. First, coeﬃcients on birthyear rainfall (year
0) are not substantially diﬀerent from the corresponding coeﬃcients in Table 2. The coeﬃcients
in the regressions for height and schooling have become slightly larger in magnitude, while in the
other regressions the coeﬃcients are only slightly smaller. Standard errors have risen somewhat,
so levels of statistical significance are somewhat lower (the coeﬃcient in the self-reported very
good health status regression is no longer statistically significant at conventional levels, while the
one in the self-reported poor health status regression is now significant at just the 10% level). The
fact that coeﬃcients on birthyear rainfall are largely unchanged after inclusion in the regressions
of rainfall in adjacent years indicates that birthyear rainfall matters in and of itself, and not
simply because it may be correlated with other years’ rainfall.
   Second, in each regression, the coeﬃcients on rainfall in adjacent years are all smaller in mag-
nitude than the coeﬃcient on birthyear rainfall, and in most cases substantially smaller. Across
regressions, not one of the 30 coeﬃcients on rainfall in adjacent years is statistically significantly
diﬀerent from zero. For all the regressions of Table 3, tests of the joint significance of rainfall in
the years -1, -2, and -3 together, and in years 1, 2, and 3 together do not reject the hypothesis that
the coeﬃcients on early-life rainfall in those groups of years are jointly insignificantly diﬀerent
from zero at conventional levels.
   The lack of an eﬀect of rainfall in the years prior to the birthyear provides no indication that
shocks in utero are importantly influencing our results, in comparison to shocks experienced in

                                                  13
infancy. The variable for birthyear rainfall is defined to potentially include a few months of rainfall
prior to birth (as far back as the start of one’s birth season), but because harvests typically occur
at the end of seasons, birthyear rainfall is best thought of as aﬀecting post-birth household income.
This finding may be taken as supporting evidence for the hypothesis that gender bias in household
resource allocation explains why only girls’ long-run outcomes are aﬀected by birthyear rainfall.
In the absence of technologies for determining a child’s gender in the womb, discrimination cannot
take place until after birth and the gender of the child is revealed.
   While these results confirm that a rainfall shock during the first year of life has the most
important influence on women’s long-run outcomes, it may be that the nutritional deprivation
that follows may be in the post-weaning period (roughly the second year of life). This is because
there is likely to be a lag between negative rainfall shocks and the resulting nutritional deprivation,
for several reasons. First, the declines in crop output due to a drought will only occur at harvest
time, some months later. Second, food scarcity after a drought tends to peak just before the
harvest that follows the drought-diminished harvest. Third, households may have stores of food,
and so may have some ability to delay the period of diminishing nutrition following a drought-
related fall in farm output. So our results could very well be consistent with the importance placed
on the post-weaning period in the existing literature, if indeed drought-associated malnutrition
in Indonesia occurs with a lag of a year or so.


6.2    The initial eﬀect of early-life rainfall

It is most plausible that the initial direct eﬀect of birthyear rainfall is on the health of infant
girls. For early-life shocks to have long-run eﬀects on individuals, they must aﬀect some charac-
teristic of individuals that persists over time. The results in Table 3 indicate that the eﬀect of
birthyear rainfall on adult female outcomes is essentially unchanged when controlling for rainfall
in subsequent years, and rainfall variables in subsequent years have little or no relationship with
adult female outcomes. The only persistent characteristics of individuals that could plausibly
be thought to be determined in the birthyear are those having to do with their health human
capital: crucial stages in physical development occur in infancy that can have long-lasting health
consequences (critical-period programming).
   The strong relationship that we document between birthyear rainfall and various adult health
outcomes supports the notion that health investments in infancy vary with early-life rainfall.
In particular, the impact of birthyear rainfall on adult height is telling. It is well known that


                                                  14
nutritional deprivation in early life can result in stunting that persists into adulthood. Indeed,
adult height has been taken to reflect early-life resource availability in numerous economic studies
at the micro and macro levels, as in, for example, Strauss and Thomas (1998), Steckel (1995),
Fogel (1994), and Schultz (2002 and 2005).
   By contrast, it is implausible to think that the initial direct eﬀect of birthyear rainfall is on
some non-health-related aspect of human capital, such as schooling. School entry does not start
until several years after birth, so one would have to imagine that rainfall was highly serially
correlated and that the coeﬃcient on birthyear rainfall was picking up the eﬀect of rainfall nearer
the year of school entry. But if this hypothesis were true, then the coeﬃcient on birthyear rainfall
in the completed grades of schooling regression should decline in magnitude when rainfall in
subsequent years is included in the regression, and coeﬃcients on rainfall in subsequent years
should be positive and statistically significantly diﬀerent from zero. In fact, Table 3 shows that
the opposite is true: the coeﬃcient on birthyear rainfall changes little (compared to Table 2)
when controlling for rainfall in subsequent years, and rainfall variables in subsequent years have
no statistically significant eﬀects on completed grades of schooling. Therefore, the reduced-form
eﬀect that we find of birthyear rainfall on completed grades of schooling is most likely mediated
by birthyear rainfall’s eﬀects on infant health that persist until one’s school years.


6.3    Subsequent pathways to adult socioeconomic status

If the initial direct impact of early-life rainfall is on the health of infant girls, how do these infant
health impacts eventually aﬀect adult women’s socioeconomic status? We provide suggestive
regression-based evidence here on subsequent pathways, focusing on the roles of adult health and
education in influencing eventual adult socioeconomic status (as measured by the asset index).
In principle, early-life rainfall aﬀects infant health, which in turn aﬀects educational achievement
and adult health. Adult health and educational achievement can then have direct eﬀects on adult
socioeconomic status.
   The approach we use involves regressing the asset index on birthyear rainfall for the female
sample, and then successively including as controls key variables representing adult health and
educational human capital. We then compare results across specifications to gain insight on the
intermediate pathways that are operative. If inclusion of a set of variables X leads to declines
in the coeﬃcient on birthyear rainfall and substantial increases in R-squared, this would suggest
that the variables in X represent an important pathway toward adult socioeconomic status. In


                                                   15
addition, if inclusion of a set of control variables X causes coeﬃcients on other control variables
Y to decline in magnitude and statistical significance, this would suggest that some part of Y ’s
eﬀects on adult socioeconomic status may be occurring via Y ’s eﬀects on X. Without question,
these regressions are open to potential concerns about omitted variables, data quality, and reverse
causality. The results should therefore only be taken as suggestive.
   Regression estimates are presented in Table 4. In all regressions, we include only observations
with complete data on all control variables. We first present the baseline regression without
controls in the first column. As in Table 2, the coeﬃcient on birthyear rainfall, 0.762, is positive
and statistically significant at the 5% level.
   In columns 2 and 3, the control variables for health and education (respectively) are included
in the regression. Some subset of these variables enters significantly into the regressions, and with
the expected signs. But the eﬀects of these diﬀerent variable groups on the coeﬃcient on birthyear
rainfall and on R-squared diﬀer. The largest eﬀects come from inclusion of the completed years of
education variable in column 3. Its inclusion leads the coeﬃcient on birthyear rainfall to decline
in magnitude by roughly one-quarter (to 0.566), while R-squared rises from 0.33 to 0.48. Inclusion
of the health variables by themselves (column 2) lead to a smaller decline in the magnitude of
the birthyear rainfall coeﬃcient, to 0.660, and a negligible increase in R-squared to 0.34.
   In column 4, both types of control variables are included in the regression. Unsurprisingly,
coeﬃcient estimates on all the control variables become smaller in magnitude and generally see
declines in their levels of statistical significance. The largest eﬀect is on the health variables: two
coeﬃcients that were previously (in column 2) large in magnitude and statistically significant
(on lung capacity and height) have become much closer to zero, and one coeﬃcient (on lung
capacity) is no longer statistically significant in column 4. The health coeﬃcient that remains
statistically significant in column 4, that on height, has declined in magnitude by more than
two-fifths (from 0.028 to 0.016). By contrast, the statistically significant coeﬃcient on completed
grades of schooling in column 3 is essentially unchanged (declining only marginally from 0.173
to 0.170) in column 4 and remains statistically significant at the 1% level. It is also telling that
between columns 3 and 4, the coeﬃcient on birthyear rainfall does not decline much further (only
from 0.566 to 0.505), and R-squared remains stable at 0.48. All told, these results provide sug-
gestive evidence that educational attainment is the more important intervening pathway between
birthyear rainfall and adult socioeconomic status.




                                                  16
6.4       Additional analyses and robustness checks

Supplementary analyses available in the online appendix help confirm the robustness of the em-
pirical results. First of all, the OLS version of Table 2’s IV results shows very similar patterns
(Appendix Table 2). Coeﬃcients on birthyear rainfall in the IV regressions are also statistically
significantly diﬀerent from zero in OLS. In addition, in the OLS results birthyear rainfall also
enters statistically significantly in the regressions for self-reported very good health status and
for log expenditures per capita in the household. The main diﬀerence is that OLS coeﬃcient
estimates are mostly attenuated towards zero compared to the IV estimates.
       It is important to consider whether selection into our sample might confound the results. To
help rule out selection concerns, we show that rainfall shocks have no statistically significant
relationship with the size of birthdistrict-birthyear-season cohorts in the IFLS (Appendix Table
3).11 While it may seem surprising that we do not find that birthyear rainfall aﬀects the cohort
sizes in the data (given the eﬀects on adult health and other outcomes documented above),
this result is consistent with other studies that examine population gender ratios and find little
evidence of "missing girls" in Indonesia either today or in past decades (Kevane and Levine 2001,
United Nations 2001). Gender bias in the allocation of household resources may simply not be
extreme enough in Indonesia for fluctuations in girls’ nutrition to lead to diﬀerential mortality in
drought years.
       In addition, to alleviate concern over positive selection of parents of sample individuals who are
born in good rainfall years, we show that there is no statistically significant relationship between
a person’s birthyear rainfall and the characteristics of his or her parents (Appendix Table 4).
       Finally, as a robustness check we run regressions analogous to those in Table 2, but this time
for the sample of individuals born in urban areas (areas with greater than 50,000 population in
the 1930 census). Results are in Appendix Table 5. For those born in more urban areas, the
results reveal little relationship between early-life rainfall and adult outcomes (and if anything a
negative relationship for some outcomes). The two regressions that yield statistically significant
coeﬃcients on birthyear rainfall are the regression for ln(lung capacity) for women and days absent
due to illness for men, where coeﬃcients are significant at the 10% level and with signs implying
negative eﬀects of birthyear rainfall (higher birthyear rainfall leads to lower lung capacity for
women and more days absent due to illness for men). The urban results may reflect that rainfall
  11
    Consistent with these results, we also find that subsequent migration out of one’s birth province has no
statistically significant relationship with the individual’s birthyear rainfall, either for women or men (results
available from authors on request).



                                                       17
has a negative impact on early-life environmental conditions in urban areas, perhaps via increases
in water-borne diseases or in those carried by mosquitoes. It is possible that such negative health
eﬀects also occur among individuals born in the rural areas (those analyzed in the main paper),
but that these negative impacts are more than oﬀset by the positive impact of rainfall on rural
household incomes. Of course, this interpretation needs to be made with caution, because only
two out of 18 coeﬃcients are statistically significantly diﬀerent from zero and thus the results
could simply be due to sampling variation.


6.5    Magnitude of the eﬀects

One way to put our results in context is to compare the estimated impact of a moderate positive
rainfall shock on adult outcomes with the impact of specific development interventions. In terms
of impacts on schooling, the benefits of higher rainfall are on par with the eﬀects of direct edu-
cational interventions. Perhaps most relevant for this paper, Duflo (2001) documents the impact
of building 61,000 primary schools in Indonesia between 1974-78, around the time the youngest
women in our IFLS sample were born. Each new primary school built per 1,000 children increased
years of schooling by 0.12-0.19 on average. Outside of the Indonesian context, Miller (2006) finds
that a family planning program in Colombia raised women’s education by 0.15 years by delaying
age at first birth.
   These schooling impacts are similar in magnitude to the impact of 20% higher rainfall in the
year and location of birth, which we estimate in this paper to be 0.22 years. Of course, the total
welfare impact of higher birthyear rainfall on Indonesian women would also include direct eﬀects
on other outcomes, such as adult health.
   The estimate of rainfall’s eﬀects can also be used to estimate the net present value of the
future costs to Indonesia of having a unusually dry rainy season. These calculations require a
number of assumptions and so should be interpreted with considerable caution. Nonetheless, it
is useful to gauge the magnitude of the consequences of a year of poor rainfall.
   For the purpose of this calculation we focus on the impact on schooling and assume that it
generates increases in earnings as estimated in other work on the impact of schooling on wages
in Indonesia (Duflo 2001), ignoring the other channels (e.g., adult health) through which rainfall
has long run eﬀects (so this will underestimate the total eﬀect). For concreteness, we consider
the cohort at the midpoint of our sample of birthyears, the 1963 cohort. We discount the future
costs back to 1963 in order to compare the figure with Indonesia’s GDP in that year.


                                                18
   Detailed assumptions and a description of the calculation are provided in the online appendix,
but we provide an outline here. To calculate the net present value (in 1963) of a year of poor
rainfall for the cohort born in that year, we start with the number of women born in 1963 who
are living in rural areas in the 1971 Indonesian census (about 1.6 million). Our goal is to track
this cohort’s earnings over time, and calculate the net present value of the decline in earnings
associated with 0.2 lower log rainfall. We assume that the women work from age 16 to 65 (years
1979 to 2028). Some of these women will migrate to urban areas, and so we allow earnings to
vary across rural and urban areas and over time.
   We use actual census data on rural women born in 1963 in a series of Indonesian censuses,
alongside calculations and assumptions regarding female mortality rates over time to estimate the
number still living in each year and their apportionment across rural and urban areas. We then
assign individual earnings levels for women in this rural 1963 birth cohort in each year from 1979
to 2028, allowing annual earnings to vary across rural and urban areas by making assumptions
as to the labor share of GDP, its apportionment across rural and urban areas, and rural vs.
urban population trends. Combined with estimates of the cohort’s size in rural and urban areas,
this allows us to calculate total earnings for the 1963 rural female birth cohort over their entire
assumed working lives, 1979-2028.
   We then consider the impact of 0.2 lower log rainfall in the birthyear for this cohort. Our
estimates indicate that rainfall lower by this amount leads to 0.22 fewer years of schooling. Duflo’s
(2001) midpoint estimate is that each year of schooling raises wages by 8.7%, so 0.22 fewer years
of schooling would lower wages by 1.9%. We therefore multiply total earnings in each year by
1.9% to get total lost earnings associated with 0.2 lower birthyear rainfall, and discount each
amount back to 1963 (using a 5% discount rate). The sum of these figures across years is the net
present value of lost future wages due to 0.2 lower log rainfall in the birthyear.
   The net present value in 1963 is $77.3 million (in 2000 US dollars). This amount equals 0.4%
of Indonesia’s GDP in 1963. This number suggests that if some way could have been found
to shield female infants born in that year from suﬀering the nutritional deprivation and other
negative eﬀects of low rainfall, it would have been worth spending 0.4% of Indonesian GDP at
that time to do so.
   An additional use of this $77.3 million estimate is to divide it by the number of infants born
in 1963. It is not known how many infants were born in 1963, but we can start with the 1,581,963
rural females reported in the 1971 census and backcast using relevant infant and child mortality
rates to estimate the initial 1963 birth cohort size. We estimate that 1,817,350 rural female

                                                 19
infants were born in 1963. Dividing the $77.3 million cost estimate by this number obtains a
figure of $43 per female infant born in rural Indonesia in 1963. This number represents the
highest amount it would have been cost-eﬀective to spend on each female infant born in rural
areas on an intervention that shielded them from the impacts of log rainfall 0.2 lower than the
norm. This amount is non-trivial, amounting to 21.8% of Indonesian per capita GDP in 1963.



7        Conclusion
This paper finds that the long-run well-being of Indonesian women is highly sensitive to the
environmental conditions they experienced early in life. We examine the eﬀect of rainfall variation
around the time of birth on the health, education, and socioeconomic outcomes of Indonesian
adults born between 1953 and 1974. Higher early-life rainfall has positive eﬀects on the adult
outcomes of women, but not of men, which may reflect gender biases in household resource
allocation. Women with 20% higher rainfall in their year and location of birth are 3.8 percentage
points less likely to self-report poor or very poor health, attain 0.57 centimeters greater height,
attain 0.22 more completed grades of schooling, and live in households that score 0.12 standard
deviations higher on an asset index.
       The most plausible explanation for these results, suggested by the patterns in our data, is that
rainfall has a positive impact on agricultural output, and leads to higher household incomes and
therefore better health for infant girls. Eventual benefits for adult women’s socioeconomic status
appear to be mediated more strongly by improved schooling attainment, and not as importantly
by women’s adult health.
       These results also relate to a substantial literature in development economics that documents
household eﬀorts to smooth consumption in the face of idiosyncratic shocks via transfers among
geographically-dispersed kin networks (Rosenzweig 1993, Rosenzweig and Stark 1989) or via asset
accumulation and drawdown over time (Rosenzweig and Wolpin 1993). The evidence in this
paper of long-term eﬀects of local weather shocks should not be taken to imply that consumption
smoothing mechanisms were not operative in rural areas in Indonesia during the time our study
population was born. Rather, this paper’s results suggest that any consumption smoothing
mechanisms were only partial, and not complete: they were not able to completely shield female
infants from the impacts of weather shocks on average.12
  12
    Existing research provides evidence of incomplete consumption smoothing in Indonesia. Gertler and Gruber
(2002) find that families are not able to fully insure consumption over periods of major illness, while Newhouse
(2005) documents the persistence of transient income shocks.


                                                      20
    These results have important implications for policy. Our findings point to a group–infant
girls–that is particularly vulnerable to fluctuations in economic and environmental conditions.
The long-run eﬀects of early-life conditions on health, schooling, and socioeconomic outcomes
several decades later should be factored into cost-benefit analyses of programs targeting this
subpopulation. As such, our findings provide additional justification for interventions–such
as weather insurance, social insurance schemes, public health investments, or policies ensuring
food security–that shield infants from the health consequences of temporary environmental and
economic shocks.



8      References
Adair, L.S. and D.K. Guilkey (1997). "Age-specific Determinants of Stunting in Filipino Chil-
dren." The Journal of Nutrition: 127 (2), February, 314-320
    Alderman, H. and P. Gertler (1997). "Family Resources and Gender Diﬀerences in Human
Capital Investments: The Demand for Children’s Medical Care in Pakistan." In L. Haddad, J.
Hoddinott, and H. Alderman, eds., Intrahousehold Resource Allocation in Developing Countries:
Models, Methods, and Policy. Baltimore and London: Johns Hopkins University Press.
    Alderman, H., J.R. Behrman, V. Lavy, and R. Menon (2001). "Child Health and School
Enrollment: A Longitudinal Analysis." Journal of Human Resources: 36 (1), 185-205.
    Alderman, H., J. Hoddinott, and B. Kinsey (2006). "Long Term Consequences of Early
Childhood Malnutrition," Oxford Economic Papers: 58 (3), 450-474.
    Almond, D. (2006). "Is the 1918 Influenza Pandemic Over? Long-term Eﬀects of In Utero
Influenza Exposure in the Post-1940 U.S. Population." Journal of Political Economy: 114, 672—
712.
    Artadi, E. (2005). "Going into Labor: Earnings vs. Infant Survival in Rural Africa." Mimeo,
Harvard University.
    Barker, D. J. P. (1998). Mothers, Babies, and Health in Later Life. Edinburgh, U.K.: Churchill
Livingstone.
    Behrman, J. (1988). "Intrahousehold Allocations of Nutrients in Rural India: our boys fa-
vored? Do parents exhibit inequality aversion?" Oxford Economic Papers: 40 (1): 32-54.
    Behrman, J.R. and A. Deolalikar (1990). “The Intrahousehold Demand for Nutrients in Rural
South India: Individual Estimates, Fixed Eﬀects, and Permanent Income.” Journal of Human
Resources: 25 (4), Fall, 665-96.

                                                21
   Behrman, J.R., J. Hoddinott, J.A. Maluccio, E. Soler-Hampejsek, E.L. Behrman, R. Martorell,
M. Ramirez, and A.D. Stein (2006). "What Determines Adult Skills? Impact of Pre-School,
School-Years and Post-School Experiences in Guatemala." Mimeo, University of Pennsylvania.
   Behrman, J.R. and M. Rosenzweig (2004). "Returns to Birthweight." Review of Economics
and Statistics: 86 (2), 586-601.
   Bound, J., D. Jaeger, and R. Baker (1995). "Problems with Instrumental Variables Estimation
when the Correlation Between the Instruments and the Endogenous Explanatory Variables is
Weak." Journal of the American Statistical Association: 90 (430), 443-450.
   Cameron, L. and C. Worswick (2001). "Education Expenditure Responses to Crop Loss
in Indonesia: A Gender Bias." Economic Development and Cultural Change, Vol. 49, NO. 2,
January, 351-63.
   Case, A., A. Fertig and C. Paxson (2005). "The Lasting Impact of Childhood Health and
Circumstance." Journal of Health Economics, March.
   Case, A., D. Lubotsky and C. Paxson (2002). "Economic Status and Health in Childhood:
The Origins of the Gradient." American Economic Review: 92 (5), 1308-1334.
   Currie, J. and R. Hyson (1999). “Is the Impact of Health Shocks Cushioned by Socioeconomic
Status? The Case of Low Birthweight.” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings: 89
(2), 246-250.
   Currie, J. and E. Moretti (2005). "Biology as Destiny? Short and Long-Run Determinants of
Intergenerational Transmission of Birthweight." NBER Working Paper 11567.
   Das Gupta, M. (1987). “Selective Discrimination Against Female Children in Rural Punjab,
India.” Population and Development Review: 13 (1), 77-100.
   Dreze, J. and A. Sen (1989). Hunger and Public Action. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
   Duflo, E. (2001). "Schooling and Labor Market Consequences of School Construction in
Indonesia." American Economic Review: 91(4), 795-813.
   Banerjee, A., E. Duflo, G. Postel-Vinay, and T. Watts (2007). "Long Run Health Impacts
of Income Shocks: Wine and Phylloxera in 19th Century France." NBER Working Paper No.
12895, January.
   Elo, I. T. and S. H. Preston (1992). "Eﬀects of Early-Life Conditions on Adult Mortality: A
Review." Population and Development Review: 13 (1), 77-100.
   Fogel, R. (1994). "Economic Growth, Population Theory, and Physiology: The Bearing of
Long-term Processes on the Making of Economic Policy," American Economic Review: 84 (3),
June, 369-395.

                                              22
   Frankenberg, E., J.P. Smith, and D. Thomas (2003). "Economic Shocks, Wealth, and Wel-
fare." Journal of Human Resources: 38(2), 280-321.
   Gertler, Paul and Jonathan Gruber (2002). "Insuring Consumption Against Illness." Ameri-
can Economic Review: 92(1), 51-70.
   Glewwe, P., and E. King (2001). "The Impact of Early Childhood Nutrition and Academic
Achievement: Does the Timing of Malnutrition Matter?" World Bank Economic Review: 15 (1),
81-114.
   Glewwe, P., H. Jacoby, and E. King (2001). “Early Childhood Nutrition and Academic
Achievement: A Longitudinal Analysis.” Journal of Public Economics: 81 (3), 345-368.
   Grossman, M. (1972). "On the Concept of Health Capital and the Demand for Health."
Journal of Political Economy: 80 (2), 223-255.
   Herdt, R.W. (1989). "The Impact of Technology and Policy on Seasonal Household Food
Security in Asia," in David E. Sahn, ed., Seasonal Variability in Third World Agriculture: The
Consequences for Food Security. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
   Hoddinott, J. and B. Kinsey (2001). "Child Growth in the Time of Drought." Oxford Bulletin
of Economics and Statistics: 63 (4), 409-436.
   Jayachandran, S. (2005). "Air Quality and Early-Life Mortality: Evidence from Indonesia’s
Wildfires." Mimeo, Stanford University.
   Johnson, R. and R. Schoeni (2007). "Early-Life Origins of Adult Disease: The Significance of
Poor Infant Health and Childhood Poverty." Mimeo, Goldman School of Public Policy, University
of California, Berkeley.
   Kevane, M., and D.I. Levine (2001). “The Changing Status of Daughters in Indonesia.”
Mimeo, University of California, Berkeley.
   Kishore, K., A.R. Subbiah, T. Sribimawati, S. Diharto, S. Alimoeso, P. Rogers, A. Setiana
(2000). "Indonesia Country Study." Asian Disaster Preparedness Center.
   Levine, D.I. and M. Ames (2003). "Gender Bias and The Indonesian Financial Crisis: Were
Girls Hit Hardest?" Center for International and Development Economics Research Paper C03-
130, University of California (Berkeley).
   Levine, D.I. and D. Yang (2006). "The Impact of Rainfall on Rice Output in Indonesian
Districts." Mimeo, University of California, Berkeley and University of Michigan.
   Library of Congress (2003). Indonesia. Country Studies/Area Handbook Series: Federal
Research Division.
   Lindeboom, M., G.J. Van den Berg, and F. Portrait (2005). "Economic Conditions Early in

                                                 23
Life and Individual Mortality." American Economic Review, forthcoming.
   Maluccio, J.A., J. Hoddinott, J.R. Behrman, A. Quisumbing, R. Martorell and A. D. Stein
(2007). "The Impact of Nutrition During Early Childhood on Education Among Guatemalan
Adults." Mimeo, University of Pennsylvania, IFPRI, and Emory University.
   Martorell, R. (1995). "Results and Implications of the INCAP Follow-Up Study." Journal of
Nutrition: 125: 1127S-1138S.
   Martorell, R. (1997). "Undernutrition During Pregnancy and Early Childhood and its Con-
sequences for Cognitive and Behavioral Development." In M.E. Young (ed.), Early Child Devel-
opment: Investing in Our Children’s Future. Amsterdam: Elsevier, 39-83.
   Martorell, R., K.L. Khan and D.G. Schroeder (1994). "Reverse Ability of Stunting: Epidemio-
logical Findings in Children from Developing Countries." European Journal of Clinical Nutrition:
48, 45S- 57S.
   Miller, G. (2005). "Contraception as Development? New Evidence from Family Planning in
Colombia." NBER Working Paper 11704.
   National Center for Health Statistics (2004). Health: United States, 2004, with Chartbook on
Trends in the Health of Americans. Hyattsville, MD.
   Newhouse, D. (2005). "The Persistence of Income Shocks: Evidence from Rural Indonesia."
Review of Development Economics: 9(3): 415-433.
   Rose, E. (1999). "Consumption Smoothing and Excess Female Mortality in Rural India."
Review of Economics and Statistics: 81 (1), February, 41-49.
   Rosenzweig, M. (1993). "Women, Insurance Capital, and Economic Development in Rural
India." Journal of Human Resources: 28 (4), Fall, 735-758.
   Rosenzweig, M. and O. Stark (1989). "Consumption Smoothing, Migration, and Marriage:
Evidence from Rural India." Journal of Political Economy: 97 (4), 905-926.
   Rosenzweig, M. and K. Wolpin (1993). "Credit Market Constraints, Consumption Smoothing
and the Accumulation of Durable Production Assets in Low-Income Countries: Investments in
Bullocks in India." Journal of Political Economy: 101, 223-244.
   Royer, H. (2005). "Separated at Girth: Estimating the Long-Run and Intergenerational
Eﬀects of Birthweight Using Twins." Mimeo, University of Michigan.
   Rutz, W. (1985). Die Stadte Indonesiens: Stadte und andere nicht-landwirtschaftliche Siedlun-
gen, ihre Entwicklung und gegenwartige Stellung in Verwaltung und Wirtschaft. Berlin: Gebruder
Borntraeger.
   Schultz, T.P. (2002). "Wage Gains Associated with Height as a Form of Health Human

                                              24
Capital." AEA Papers and Proceedings: 92 (2), 349-353.
   Schultz, T.P. (2005). "Productive Benefits of Health: Evidence from Low Income Countries."
Yale University Economic Growth Center Discussion Paper #903.
   Steckel, R.H. (1995). "Stature and the Standard of Living." Journal of Economic Literature:
33 (December), 1903-40.
   Stock, J.H. and M. Yogo (2005). "Testing for Weak Instruments in Linear IV Regression."
Mimeo, Harvard University.
   Strauss, J. and D. Thomas (1998). "Health, Nutrition, and Economic Development." Journal
of Economic Literature: 36 (2): 766-817.
   Thomas, D., K. Beegle, E. Frankenberg, B. Sikoki, J. Strauss and G. Teruel (2004). "Education
in a crisis." Journal of Development Economics: 74 (1), 53-85.
   United Nations (2001). Population, Gender and Development: A Concise Report. New York:
United Nations Publications.




                                              25
Table 1: Summary statistics, women and men born 1953-1974
                                                                            Women                                                                   Men
Variables                                            Mean Std. Dev.       Min  Median          Max    Num. Obs.        Mean Std. Dev.        Min      Median     Max     Num. Obs.

Self-rep. health status very good (indic.)            0.08                                               4,613          0.09                                               4,270
Self-rep. health status poor/very poor (indic.)       0.12                                               4,613          0.09                                               4,270
Ln (lung capacity)                                    5.6       0.2       4.2        5.6       6.4       4,454          6.0        0.2       4.7       6.0        6.7      3,907
Height (cm)                                          150.5      5.4      110.6      150.5     171.2      4,495         162.0       6.0      130.0     162.0      183.4     3,924
Days absent due to illness (last 4 weeks)             1.2       3.2       0.0        0.0       28.0      4,611          1.0        3.2       0.0       0.0        30.0     4,267

Years of schooling                                    6.4       4.4        0.0       6.0       16.0      4,598          7.8        4.4       0.0        7.0      16.0      4,259

Ln (expenditures per cap. in hh)                     12.6       1.0       0.0       12.5       17.6      4,615          12.6      0.9        7.6       12.6      17.6      4,277
Asset index                                          0.0        -1.5      -5.3      0.0        3.1       4,613          0.0       -1.5       -5.2      0.0       3.0       4,276
Ln (total assets per cap. in hh)                     14.5       1.9       0.0       14.7       19.6      4,615          14.5      1.9        0.0       14.7      19.4      4,277
Owns television (indicator)                          0.62                                                4,614          0.61                                               4,277
Owns refrigerator (indicator)                        0.28                                                4,613          0.27                                               4,276
Owns private toilet w/ septic tank (indicator)       0.44                                                4,614          0.44                                               4,277
Owns stove (indicator)                               0.62                                                4,614          0.62                                               4,277

Deviation of log rainfall from norm, year of birth   -0.03      0.30      -1.50     -0.02     0.99       4,615         -0.02      0.30      -1.62      0.00      0.99      4,277
Age                                                   35.6      6.2        26.0      35.0     47.0       4,615          35.5      6.2        26.0      35.0      47.0      4,277
Expenditures per cap. in hh (US$, monthly)            64.4     160.8       0.2       32.7    5421.6      4,614          65.3     158.2       0.2       34.5     5421.6     4,277
Total assets per cap. in hh (US$)                     742      1,652        0        282     39,065      4,593          702      1,454        0        279      31,757     4,255
Ln (annual earnings)                                  14.1      1.4        8.0       14.2     19.9       2,332          14.8      1.2        9.0       14.9      19.9      3,963

NOTES-- Sample is individuals born outside of urban areas between 1953 and 1974 inclusive. "Urban areas" are cities with 50,000 or more inhabitants in 1930. Age is
based on reported year and month of birth. Asset index is first principal component of five asset variables (log total value of household assets and indicators for
ownership of television, refrigerator, private toilet, and stove). Rainfall is at the birth district (kabupaten) level, in year of birth. Deviation of log rainfall from norm is log
rainfall in year of birth minus log of district rainfall norm. Rainfall norm is birth district-specific mean from 1953-1999, where mean excludes current observation's
birthyear. Total household expenditures include food and nonfood items reported by the woman in charge of food preparation. Total assets include the household head's
report of assets not used mainly for business. US dollar figures converted from rupiah at year 2000 (annual average) rate of 8,422 rupiah per US$.
Table 2: Effect of birthyear rainfall on adult outcomes, individuals born 1953-1974
Instrumental variables estimates. Coefficients (std. errors) in regression of outcome on rainfall in individual's birthyear and
birth district. Instrumental variables for birthyear/birthdistrict rainfall are rainfall measured at 2nd- through 5th-closest rainfall
stations to respondent's birth district.

                                                                  Women                             Men
Self-rep. health status very good (indic.)                          0.101                          -0.029
                                                                  (0.058)*                         (0.072)
                                                                   [4,613]                         [4,270]
Self-rep. health status poor/very poor (indic.)                   -0.192                           -0.100
                                                                 (0.082)**                         (0.098)
                                                                  [4,613]                          [4,270]
Ln (lung capacity)                                                -0.044                           -0.073
                                                                  (0.049)                          (0.062)
                                                                  [4,454]                          [3,907]
Height (cm.)                                                        2.832                           0.998
                                                                 (0.821)***                        (1.795)
                                                                   [4,495]                         [3,924]
Days absent due to illness (last 4 weeks)                         -1.175                            0.515
                                                                  (0.831)                          (0.779)
                                                                  [4,611]                          [4,267]
Completed grades of schooling                                      1.086                           -0.474
                                                                 (0.453)**                         (1.490)
                                                                  [4,598]                          [4,259]
Ln (expenditures per cap. in hh)                                   0.095                           -0.274
                                                                  (0.204)                          (0.301)
                                                                  [4,615]                          [4,277]
Asset index                                                        0.876                            -0.279
                                                                 (0.324)**                         (0.507)
                                                                  [4,613]                          [4,276]
Ln (annual earnings)                                               0.065                           -0.202
                                                                  (0.988)                          (0.350)
                                                                  [2,332]                          [3,963]
Number of observations in brackets. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
NOTES-- Sample is individuals born outside of urban areas between 1953 and 1974 inclusive, observed in year 2000.
"Urban areas" are cities with 50,000 or more inhabitants in 1930. Each coefficient (standard error) is from a separate
regression of the dependent variable on birthyear rainfall (deviation of log rainfall in birth district from log of 1953-1999
district mean rainfall). Standard errors clustered by province of birth. All regressions include fixed effects for birthyear-
season, birthdistrict-season, and birthdistrict-season-specific linear time trends. Asset index is first principal component of
five asset variables (log total value of household assets and indicators for ownership of television, refrigerator, private toilet,
and stove).
Table 3: Effect of rainfall in years before and after birth, women born 1953-1974

Instrumental variables estimates. Rainfall in individual's birthyear and birth district instrumented with rainfall measured at 2nd- through 5th-closest
rainfall stations to respondent's birth district.

       Dependent variable:        Self-rep. health        Self-rep. health           Height (cm.)           Completed grades of             Asset index
                                 status very good      status poor/very poor                                    schooling
                                      (indic.)                (indic.)

Coefficient on rainfall in:
      Year -3                          0.025                   -0.114                    1.505                      -0.065                      0.003
                                      (0.084)                 (0.120)                   (1.572)                    (0.992)                     (0.424)
      Year -2                          -0.037                  -0.013                    0.854                      -0.852                      -0.426
                                      (0.103)                 (0.075)                   (1.813)                    (1.670)                     (0.721)
      Year -1                          -0.080                  -0.045                    3.338                      0.104                       -0.380
                                      (0.123)                 (0.088)                   (2.155)                    (1.332)                     (0.530)
      Year 0                           0.090                   -0.179                    3.833                      1.598                      0.750
                                      (0.067)                 (0.093)*                 (1.420)**                  (0.675)**                   (0.399)*
      Year 1                           -0.008                  -0.096                    0.676                      1.083                       0.203
                                      (0.053)                 (0.067)                   (1.592)                    (0.769)                     (0.272)
      Year 2                           -0.041                  -0.015                    1.666                      0.117                       -0.229
                                      (0.043)                 (0.068)                   (0.984)                    (0.840)                     (0.452)
      Year 3                           -0.020                  -0.104                    1.996                      -0.135                      0.088
                                      (0.116)                 (0.067)                   (1.774)                    (0.802)                     (0.232)

Num. of obs.                          4,613                    4,613                    4,495                       4,598                      4,613

* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
NOTES-- Each column presents coefficients (standard errors) from a separate regression of the dependent variable on various years' rainfall
(deviation of log rainfall from log of 1953-1999 district mean rainfall). Year 0 is birth year, year -1 is year prior to birth year, year 1 is year after birth
year, etc. All regressions include fixed effects for birthyear-season, birthdistrict-season, and birthdistrict-season-specific linear time trends. See Table
2 for notes on sample composition and variable definitions.
Table 4: Controlling for channels linking early-life rainfall to women's adult outcomes

Instrumental variables estimates. Rainfall in individual's birthyear and birth district instrumented with
rainfall measured at 2nd- through 5th-closest rainfall stations to respondent's birth district.

                                   Dependent variable: Asset index Asset index Asset index Asset index


Deviation of log rainfall from norm, year of birth            0.762        0.660        0.566         0.505
                                                            (0.331)**    (0.313)**     (0.303)*      (0.293)*
Self-rep. health status very good (indic.)                                 0.018                       0.037
                                                                          (0.085)                     (0.096)
Self-rep. health status poor/very poor (indic.)                           -0.084                      -0.018
                                                                          (0.065)                     (0.063)
Log lung capacity                                                          0.365                       0.015
                                                                         (0.122)***                   (0.104)
Height (cm.)                                                               0.028                      0.016
                                                                         (0.006)***                 (0.004)***
Days absent due to illness (last 4 weeks)                                 -0.008                      -0.006
                                                                          (0.009)                     (0.009)
Completed grades of schooling                                                            0.173        0.170
                                                                                       (0.007)***   (0.006)***

Observations                                                 4,436         4,436        4,436         4,436
R-squared                                                     0.33          0.34         0.48          0.48

* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
NOTES-- Each column presents coefficients (standard errors) from a separate regression. See Table 2 for
notes on sample composition and variable definitions.
Figure 1: Adult outcomes on rainfall in birthdistrict and birthyear
Nonparametric Fan regressions (biweight kernel, bandwidth = 0.5), conditional on birthdistrict-season
fixed effects, birthyear-season fixed effects, and birthdistrict-season-specific linear time trends. Solid line
i nonparametric
is            t i regression
                          i estimate.
                               ti t Dashed
                                       D h d lines
                                                li    bound
                                                      b    d 95% bootstrapped
                                                                   b tt       d confidence
                                                                                     fid     intervals.
                                                                                             i t    l


                A. Height (cm.)                                  B. Self-reported health status poor/very poor




      C. Completed grades of schooling                                            D. Asset Index
