NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHEN DOES POLICY REFORM WORK? THE CASE OF CENTRAL BANK INDEPENDENCE
Daron Acemoglu
Simon Johnson
Pablo Querubin
James A. Robinson
Working Paper 14033
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14033

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2008

Prepared for the Brookings Papers on Economic Activity. We are grateful to Ioannis Tokatlidis for
help in constructing the data, to Marco Arnone for sending us his data, and to Alberto Alesina, David
Romer and Larry Summers for detailed comments. We are also grateful to seminar participants at
the CIFAR, the MIT Macro Lunch and in the Brookings conference and to Marios Angeletos, Olivier
Blanchard, Timothy Besley, Torsten Persson, and Guido Tabellini for comments and suggestions.
Finally we thank Jeffrey Frieden for several very helpful converstaions and Lawrence Broz for guidance
to the literature. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Daron Acemoglu, Simon Johnson, Pablo Querubin, and James A. Robinson. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

When Does Policy Reform Work? The Case of Central Bank Independence
Daron Acemoglu, Simon Johnson, Pablo Querubin, and James A. Robinson
NBER Working Paper No. 14033
May 2008
JEL No. E31,P16
ABSTRACT
We argue that the question of whether and when policy reform works should be investigated together
with the political economy factors responsible for distortionary policies in the first place. These not
only determine the initial distortions, but also often shape policy in the post-reform environment.
Distortionary policies are more likely to be adopted when politicians are unconstrained and unaccountable
to citizens. This reasoning implies that policy reform should have modest effects in societies where
the political system already places constraints on politicians. It also implies, however, that in societies
with weak political constraints, which are often those adopting the most distortionary policies, policy
reforms may be ineffective because the underlying political economy problems are not typically altered
by these reforms. Policy reform should therefore have its largest effect in societies with intermediate
levels of constraints. In addition, when policy reform is (partly) effective, it may lead to a deterioration
in other (unreformed) components of policy in order to satisfy the underlying demands on politicians
– a phenomenon we call the seesaw effect. We provide reduced-form evidence consistent with these
ideas by looking at the effect of central bank independence on inflation. The evidence is consistent
with the notion that central bank reforms have reduced inflation in societies with intermediate constraints
and have had no or little effects in countries with the high and low levels of constraints. We also present
some evidence suggesting that, consistent with the seesaw effect, in countries where central bank reforms
reduce inflation, government expenditure tends to increase.

Daron Acemoglu
Department of Economics
MIT, E52-380B
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
daron@mit.edu
Simon Johnson
IMF
700 19th Street, N.W.,
Washington, DC 20431
and NBER
SJohnson@imf.org

Pablo Querubin
MIT Department of Economics
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
querubin@mit.edu
James A. Robinson
Harvard University
Department of Government
N309, 1737 Cambridge Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
jrobinson@gov.harvard.edu

1

Introduction

Institutional and policy reforms are often promoted as a way to improve economic performance and
growth in poor countries. Reforms that have received substantial attention over the past decade or
so include trade opening, nancial liberalization, judicial reform, privatization, reduction of entry
barriers, tax reform, removal of targeted industrial subsidies, and central bank independence, a
list that includes not just the original \Washington consensus," but also a range of other reforms.
Although there are sound economic theories suggesting why these reforms might be important
in improving economic performance, the experience of the last decade shows that these reforms
rarely seem to have the e ects anticipated by their proponents. van de Walle (2001), for instance,
summarizes the ine ectiveness of two decades of reforms in Sub-Saharan Africa by noting that
\At the dawn of the twenty- rst century, most of sub-Saharan Africa remains mired
in economic crisis despite two decades of donor-sponsored reform e orts ... many if
not most African countries are poorer today than they were twenty years ago." (pp.
3-4)
Similarly, Velasco (2005), the current Chilean

nance minister, articulates the widespread

disillusion of the impact of reforms in Latin America. He argues:
\Reformers argued, persuasively, that growth was being held back by distortions.
Many of the distortions were government induced, the result of poorly conceived policies. Change policy and the economy will ful ll its potential ... A decade later the
view is less sanguine: with fewer bad-policy distortions, the Latin American economies
grew in the 1990s at half the rate attained during precisely those decades when the
allegedly distorting policies of import substitution reached their peak: the 1960s and
1970s." (p. 2)
Why do seemingly-sensible reforms fail to generate the bene ts that they promise? The critics
of reform emphasize, among other things, the potential negative e ects that international trade
might create for infant industries, the instabilities that might be induced by nancial liberalization,
or the usefulness of a variety of regulations, government ownership and industrial policy in lessdeveloped economies (see Rodrik, 2005). Stiglitz, for example argues (2002, p. 16) that in many
cases

1

\...the economic policies that evolved into the Washington Consensus and were
introduced into developing countries were not appropriate for countries in the earlier
stages of development or ... transition."
This is not the only way to interpret the apparent failure of reforms, however.
In this paper, we emphasize that to understand why reforms do or do not work, it is necessary
to investigate the political economy of distortionary policies. Our general argument is that the
analysis of whether, and which, reforms will lead to improved economic performance should start
with an understanding of why distortionary policies were in place to start with. We illustrate that
this perspective leads to some simple, and testable, ideas on when policy reform will be more
e ective, and we provide preliminary evidence consistent with these ideas.1
Much of the economic literature on policy reform and most of the advice given by international
institutions implicitly or explicitly assume that distortionary policies were used by \accident". Either these policies were in place and remained there as a historical legacy, or they are the outcome
of some mistaken economic theory or shortsightedness on the part of policymakers. Though one
can undoubtedly nd instances where mistaken economic theories led to disastrous policies, few
policymakers create hyperin ations or large budget de cits because they think that this is good
for the economy. Instead, the political economy constraints and the incentives facing politicians in
many societies with weak checks and balances or poor accountability make it bene cial or convenient for them to pursue a range of distortionary policies in order to satisfy powerful constituencies
or to enrich themselves.
What might explain the presence of bad policies? The literature on political economy suggests that bad policies arise because the preferences of politicians or those with power are not
aligned with those of the rest of the society. The politically powerful may have an incentive to
distort policies or institutions so as to redistribute income or power to themselves (e.g., Acemoglu,
2006). Their ability to do so will depend on the constraints they face, and more generally, on the
structure of political institutions. A potent source of policy failure is the absence of constraints
on political o ceholders (e.g., North and Weingast, 1989, Persson, Roland and Tabellini, 1997,
Henisz, 2000, Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson, 2005). This perspective emphasizes that policy
reform takes place in an environment where initial policies served political purposes|for example, redistributing resources to groups with power and in uence. This implies that those who
expect to see their rents or privileges disappear as a result of policy reform are likely to use their
1
An alternative and complementary perspective is that reformers, who are aware of the political constraints
underlying policy decisions, may push for reforms and emphasize their economic costs as part of a bargaining
process among political groups and policymakers. This perspective, though plausible, has not been developed in
the literature and must also ultimately model the political economy of reform.

2

political power to prevent the e ective implementation of the reforms. Alternatively, the political
realities may make it impossible or impractical for those entrusted with the implementation of
reforms to carry them out. This implies that there may be a big gap between reforms de jure
and de facto. In particular, only policy reforms that the groups with political power that were
previously bene ting from distortionary policies cannot easily over-ride, circumvent or ignore can
achieve their objectives. Whether or not these groups can thwart reforms in turn depends on the
constraints on politicians and on the process of policymaking. This argument suggests that in
societies such as many in Sub-Saharan Africa, where there are only few constraints and checks
on politicians and on politically powerful groups, policy reform is unlikely to be very e ective.
This is consistent with the case study evidence and argument in van de Walle (1993, 2001). He
illustrates that for African politicians
\restoring economic stability and growth has often taken a back seat in government
motivations to preserving political power."
In the context of structural adjustment he argues (2001, p. 76)
\Often, the policies have changed on paper, but in practice, something resembling
the status quo ante continues to prevail. In some cases, the old policies were reinstated
under a new name or with some new policy objective ... In other cases, governments
ignore the spirit of their own liberalization e orts by continuing to interfere in o cially
deregulated markets."
This ine ectiveness of reform is not surprising; few people would expect privatization, nancial
liberalization or central bank independence (henceforth CBI) to have fundamental e ects in Zimbabwe as long as Robert Mugabe is in power or in Sudan as long as Omar al-Bashir's kleptocratic
and genocidal regime remains in place. As an illustration of this Figure 1 plots the in ation rate in
Zimbabwe with a vertical line in 1995 when the Central Bank Act was modi ed in order to grant
the Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe greater independence.2 Clearly, however, increased independence
of the Central Bank in Zimbabwe did little to restraint the subsequent monetary policy of the
government. This somewhat extreme example therefore illustrates that a major reason why policy
reform will often fail is because of the absence of a functioning accountability system and lack of
constraints and checks on politicians.3
2

The 1995 Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe Act legislated a greater degree of autonomy for the central bank. After
1995, the bank had its own budget and could decide on its own nances. The Act also legislated the control of
in ation as the unique objective of monetary policy.
3
This example and our results below raise the question of why potentially ine ective reforms are implemented in

3

Does this imply that better political institutions and transparency always increase the impact
of reforms? Not necessarily. Policy reform will have its greatest e ect when the pre-reform
policies are highly distortionary. However, we would not expect societies with a functioning system
of accountability and with checks on politicians to be those pursuing such highly distortionary
policies. For example, in ation was already low in the United Kingdom in the 1990s, before the
Bank of England became independent in 1998.4 Thus the room for a large e ect from CBI reform
was limited. Instead, high in ation or even hyperin ation are much more likely in societies with
weak institutions than those where politicians are accountable, via elections or other means, to
the population at large.
The arguments in the previous two paragraphs suggest that once we take a political economy
perspective, policy reform should not be expected to be (equally) e ective in every society and that
the functioning and success of policy reform should depend on political institutions and political
constraints. More speci cally, these arguments suggest that there should be a potentially nonmonotonic relationship between the extent of constraints on politicians and the e ectiveness of
policy reform. The importance of political economy factors in understanding and evaluating the
success of policy reform is our main message in this paper.
We develop this perspective by investigating the interplay between policy reform and institutional constraints on politicians both theoretically and empirically. We rst highlight the main
issues using a simple theoretical model. The model illustrates the non-monotonic relationship between constraints on power and the impact of reforms. It also highlights how e ective reform may
sometimes lead to the deterioration of other (unreformed) policies a phenomenon which in previous work we called the seesaw e ect (see also Acemoglu, Johnson, Robinson and Thaicharoen,
2003).
We then investigate the validity of these ideas by focusing on reforms related to central bank
independence. CBI is a natural type of reform for us to study. Most other reforms, such as nancial
liberalization, judicial reform, or removal of targeted subsidies, have relatively broad-mandates
and try to improve, among other things, the overall functioning of the economy, investment and
growth. Instead, CBI has a much more clearly delineated target|in ation. We can thus judge
the success of CBI by investigating whether or not it has reduced in ation. Nevertheless, even
the rst place. One obvious answer is that they are partly a response to external pressures. For example, Jacome
(2001) documents an IMF Technical Assistance mission to Zimbabwe on the reform of central bank laws in 1995.
This perspective suggests that externally-imposed policy reforms might be less successful and e ective than those
generated by internal dynamics.
4
In ation increased in the UK in the 1970s and early 1980s, though never to hyperin ationary levels. The desire
to avoid the return of such episodes, as well as other bene ts of CBI, for example, those related to credibility and
transparency, might be some of the reasons why countries with relatively good policies still prefer to implement
central bank reforms.

4

this investigation is complicated by the fact that countries often introduce CBI not as a standalone policy reform, but as part of a broader anti-in ation package.5 Throughout, we therefore
interpret the regression evidence on the implications of CBI as corresponding to the e ects of this
broad anti-in ation package that may include other reforms as well as CBI.
Our main empirical results are consistent with the hypothesis that there is a non-monotonic
relationship between political constraints and the e ectiveness of policy reform. We create an
index of the quality of general institutions by using constraints on the executive from Polity IV
data. Although the highly serially-correlated nature of data on in ation makes statistical inference di cult, the evidence is broadly consistent with a pattern in which CBI reduced in ation in
countries with intermediate levels of constraints on the executive, while it appears to have had
no e ect in societies with the strongest institutions. For countries with the weakest institutions
the general pattern is that there is no e ect of CBI, though some speci cations show a statistically signi cant, but generally non-robust, negative e ect. Our empirical results rejected the
hypothesis that the e ect of CBI is the same between high and medium-constraint countries, but
we are generally unable to reject the hypothesis that they are the same between medium and
low-constraint countries.
Overall, our approach and empirical results suggest that reforming economic institutions will
only be e ective if the political context is right. If the context provides political constraints and
accountability mechanisms so that there is a strong tendency to adopt good policies, there is
little room for reforms to have major e ects. If the context is bad, so that politics and policy
making are highly nonrepresentative, reforms are likely to be irrelevant because they can easily
be undermined. It is in intermediate situations that reforms may have some bite: constraints are
weak enough to generate bad policy, but not so weak that all reforms can be undermined.
In this light, our ndings provide a di erent interpretation to the apparent failure of various
reforms implemented throughout the 1990s and early 2000s than those argued by both the skeptics
and the advocates of reform. Firstly, contrary to those who oppose reforms, it is not true that all
reforms have failed. In the case of CBI, which is our empirical focus in this paper, it appears that
policy reform is associated with a signi cant decline in in ation in societies with intermediate (and
sometimes low) levels of checks and constraints on politicians. Secondly, our results suggest that
even in places where reforms have failed, they have not done so because they are inappropriate from
an economic point of view. Rather, potentially sound economic reforms may often be politically
non-viable in certain societies, at least if they do not take into account the political context.
5

A clear example of this is the Argentinean case, where shortly before the introduction of CBI in 1992, a currency
board pegged the exchange rate to the dollar. Figure 5 below also shows that in a number of countries in ation
starts declining a few years before the introduction of CBI.

5

Nevertheless, it should be emphasized that all of the evidence provided in this paper corresponds to the conditional correlations in the data consistent with declines in in ation at the same
time as or following central banking reforms. As we emphasize further below, policy reform in
general and central bank reform in particular are endogenous and are also determined as part of
the political economy equilibrium in the society. Consequently, one should be cautious in reaching
strong conclusions on the basis of such evidence. Having said that, the fact that CBI is correlated
with contemporaneous and future declines in in ation mostly in societies with intermediate levels
of constraints on politicians is intriguing and, at the very least, requires further investigation.
Following these basic ndings we then investigate whether or not there is any evidence of a
seesaw e ect following CBI. The seesaw e ect suggests that when successful policy reform takes
place in one dimension and the political equilibrium remains largely unchanged, politicians may
try to use a di erent instrument to attain the goal which was previously being targeted with
the reformed instrument. In general, the seesaw e ect implies that as policy gets better in one
dimension, it may get worse in another. A natural candidate for the seesaw e ect in the context of
CBI is scal policy. We therefore investigate whether or not scal policy changes signi cantly after
CBI is introduced. We provide some evidence that CBI is associated with greater government
expenditure as a percent of GDP in countries with intermediate constraints, while it is unrelated
to government expenditure in countries with low or high constraints. This evidence is consistent
with some worsening in other dimensions of policy in countries where CBI reform was e ective
in reducing in ation, though the e ect of CBI on government expenditure is less robust than its
impact on in ation.
The recent economic history of Colombia and Argentina, depicted in Figure 2, illustrate the
seesaw e ect. In both countries the introduction of CBI in 1991 was followed both by signi cant
falls in in ation and increases in government expenditures as a percent of GDP. In the Argentinean
case, as in many other countries in our sample, in ation starts decreasing before central bank
reform, which, as mentioned above, suggests that CBI is part of a broader package of reforms
aimed at controlling and stabilizing in ation.
The pattern observed in Colombia has been linked to the political economy of redistribution
by scholars. Jaramillo, Steiner and Salazar (1999) and Carrasquilla (1999) noted that the increase
in in ation in the early 1970s followed the contested presidential election of 1970 where it is widely
believed that the dominant Liberal and Conservative parties, then operating the so-called `national front' and alternating in power, xed the results to defraud the true winner Gustavo Rojas
Pinilla, leader of the ANAPO party. Jaramillo, Steiner and Salazar (1997) claim that \seeking
for a broader base of supporters, the new government increased government expenditure.... As

6

aggregate demand kept increasing ... in ation, that had remained in one digit gures for decades,
accelerated" (p. 147). Clientelism during this period took the form not only of increased government expenditure nanced with seigniorage, but also involved the provision of cheap credit from
the central bank to various rms and sectors (Cabrera and Ocampo, 1980, p. 136).
In the post-CBI period, 1994 saw a political situation resembling the suspicions of fraud in
1970. It was discovered that the political campaign of the Liberal candidate Ernesto Samper,
who won the presidential election, had received large amounts of money from members of the Cali
drug cartel. A much discussed hypothesis is that in order to avoid impeachment by Congress,
president Samper had to engage in intensive clientelism. Though he may have done this in
di erent ways, he was unable to use the same instruments as President Pastrana did in the
1970s since the central bank had become independent. As Reyes et. al. (1998, p. 11) point
out \during 1995-96, under the new government of President Samper, instruments of monetary
and scal policy were in opposite directions, partly as a re ection of the con ict between the
Central Bank and the government: monetary policy becomes strongly contractionist... and scal
policy becomes expansionist". Several commentators at the time claimed that the increase in
government expenditure could be explained by the desire of Samper to remain in power (see, e.g.,
Sierra, 2004). This took the form of substantial wage increases to public employees (in particular
teachers, organized in a politically powerful union) between 1995 and 1998 (Echeverry, 2002).
Similarly, Davila Ladron de Guevara et. al. (2000) claim that military expenditure was more
than doubled by Samper to gain the support of the army.6
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The next section discusses the related literature
on the political economy of reform, on the role of CBI in combating in ation, and on possible
interactions between institutional factors and the e ectiveness of policies. Section 3 presents a
simple model illustrating why policy reform may be most in uential in societies with intermediate
levels of political constraints. We also use this model to show how policy reform in one sphere can
lead to a deterioration of other dimensions of policy, creating a seesaw e ect. Section 4 discusses
our data sources and the construction of the CBI variable. Section 5 presents our main empirical
results. These results suggest that, consistent with our theoretical expectations, CBI has little
e ect on in ation in societies with the highest and the lowest constraints on politicians, but tends
to reduce in ation in countries with intermediate levels of constraints. Section 6 investigates the
seesaw e ect, to see whether in societies where CBI reduces in ation, there is any evidence of
6
The introduction of CBI coincided with the enactment of a new Constitution that mandated, among other
things, larger transfers to the regions. Nevertheless, it seems unlikely that the new Constitution is responsible for
the entire run-up in government expenditures. For example, Echeverry (2002) estimates that the spending items
mandated by the Constitution could have explained at most 1/5 of the 20 percentage points increase in government
expenditure share of GDP shown in Figure 2.

7

deterioration in other policies. Section 7 concludes.

2

Related Literature

Our paper is related to two broad areas of research, one on the political economy of reform in
general and the other on the consequences of central bank independence. We now give a brief
overview of these literatures and how our ndings add to them.

2.1

Political Economy of Reform

There is a great deal of theoretical and case study work on the political economy of reform (see
Rodrik, 1996, and Drazen, 2000, for overviews). Most of the theoretical research, for example,
Alesina and Drazen (1991) and Fernandez and Rodrik (1991), focuses on developing explanations
for why socially bene cial reforms do not occur or are delayed, though Mukand and Rodrik
(2005) develop a model where policymakers adopt reforms they know to be ine cient to avoid
being thought corrupt. Other work, taking political impediments to reform as given, discusses
the implications of these for the sequencing of reforms, whether or not gradual or radical reform
is desirable and whether or not reform can be sustained (for example Dewatripont and Roland,
1997). Most closely related to our paper are those by Shleifer and Vishny (1994) and Boycko,
Shleifer and Vishny (1996) who examine the circumstances when privatization increases e ciency.
In their model politicians derive political bene ts from high employment levels and even though
the managers of a privatized rm may maximize pro ts with less employment, politicians can bribe
them to employ more people. They study the circumstances under which employment falls after
privatization. Coate and Morris (2005), formalizing an intuition of Stigler (1971, 1972), develop
a model where policy reform can reduce e ciency when politicians are initially using policy
instruments to redistribute income in an optimal way. A key di erence between our approach and
Coate and Morris's is our emphasis on the role of political institutions. More generally, none of
the papers mentioned above derive the non-monotonic relationship between reform and outcomes
which is at the heart of our model.
At a general level, the entire empirical literature on the impact of policy and policy reforms on
economic variables|for example, on economic growth|provides relevant and useful background
to our work. The idea that policy reform might be desirable is implied from regressions showing
that variation in policies account for comparative growth. Though there certainly are papers
arguing this, the cross-country literature is far from a consensus (see Easterly, 2005, for a review).
For instance, because policy variables exhibit multicollinearity, it is generally di cult to

nd

robust relationships between particular policy measures and growth. Moreover, the empirical
8

analysis in most of these papers is based on cross-section regressions and hence omitted variable
bias may be a signi cant concern.7
Most of the empirical work on reform focuses on speci c instances of failed or successful reforms
(for example, Bates and Krueger, 1993). In terms of cross-national empirical work, Dollar and
Svensson (2000) show that political factors, particularly whether or not a country has a democratic
government and how long the government has been in power, are important for the success of
World Bank programs. In the related context of the e ectiveness of international aid, Burnside
and Dollar (2000) argued that aid increased growth when combined with good institutions and
policies, though Easterly, Levine, and Roodman (2004) show that their results may not be robust.
The idea that the implications of policies or shocks depend on the institutional environment has
also appeared in other empirical papers. For instance, Bekaert, Harvey and Lundblad (2005)
and Moene, Mehlum and Torvik (2006) show that the e ect of natural resource abundance on
economic growth depends on the quality of the general institutions in the society.
Our research is also related to the case study literature on Latin American politics which
has argued that the appearance and reality of policy reform in Latin America may be very
di erent. Several scholars, notably Roberts (1995, 2008), Gibson (1997) and Levitsky (2003) have
argued that the adoption of Washington consensus type reforms in Latin America went alongside
the continuation of populist policies and \politics as usual." The adoption of these reforms did
constrain which policies could be used, but politicians such as Menem in Argentina and Fujimori
in Peru realized that even policy reform could be adjusted to t with the demands of clientelism|
for example, government owned rms could be privatized, but sold relatively cheaply to those with
political connections. Populism and clientelism persisted even though the instruments that they
used changed, an argument clearly related to those we make in this paper.

2.2

Central Bank Independence and In ation

One of the most studied instances of policy reform is the introduction of CBI. Theoretical work in
the early 1980s, most notably Barro and Gordon (1983), argued that when unanticipated monetary
policy can reduce the rate of unemployment, the government would be unable to commit to low
in ation and consequently in ation would be sub-optimally high. Rogo (1985) proposed that a
solution to this problem was to delegate monetary policy to a \conservative central banker" and
thus established a theoretical rationale for creating independent central banks.
There have been a large number of empirical studies over the past 15 years examining the
7

There is also convincing microeconomic evidence that some speci c types of reforms, like privatization, can
have large bene cial e ects. See, for example, La Porta and Lopez-de-Silanes (1999) and Galiani, Gertler and
Schargrodsky (2005).

9

impact of central bank independence on in ation, economic growth and a variety of other variables
(see Eij nger and de Haan, 1996 for an overview). Early studies by Alesina (1988), Grilli,
Masciandaro and Tabellini (1991) and Alesina and Summers (1993) used a measure of \de jure"
CBI (we describe the construction of the various measures of CBI in Section 4 below) and exploited
cross-sectional variation within OECD countries. Alesina and Summers report
\a near perfect negative correlation between in ation and central bank independence"
(p. 154).
This de jure index of CBI was further developed by Cukierman, Webb and Neyapti (1992)
and extended to 72 countries over the period 1950-1989 where possible (i.e. if the country is independent). Using de jure indices and pooled time-series and cross-sectional regressions, Cukierman
et al. (1992) and Cukierman (1992) showed that the negative correlation between de jure CBI
and in ation did not hold for a cross section of developing countries, though they con rmed the
earlier negative correlation for developed countries. They also showed that their de facto index
of CBI (based on the turnover of governors) was positively correlated with in ation in developing
countries, but not signi cantly correlated with in ation in developed countries. Various other
papers, such as Gutierrez (2003) and Arnone, Laurens, Segalotto and Sommer (2007), report
similar results.
Nevertheless, other studies nd very di erent results. Using updated data, Crowe and Meade
(2007) do not nd the same correlations. Campillo and Miron (1997) and Oatley (1999) argue
that the correlation between de jure CBI and in ation is not robust to the inclusion of various
covariates, such as measures of openness or the government de cit. Oatley (1999), Mangano
(1998), Forder (1998) and Banaian, Burdekin and Willett (1998) also document that the results
depend on the subjectively coded details of CBI measures and are not generally robust.
Keefer and Stasavage (2002, 2003), in a work related to our paper, argue that CBI will only
be e ective if it cannot be reversed and this will only happen if there are checks and balances.
In their empirical work they interact a measure of checks and balances from Beck, Clarke, Gro ,
Keefer and Walsh (2001) with CBI and nd that introducing CBI increases in ation unless checks
and balances are su ciently high. Their work, like much of the rest of this literature, only exploits
cross-sectional variation. This strategy makes potential omitted variable bias quite severe, since
countries that have introduced CBI typically have di erent macroeconomic equilibria than the
rest.
In contrast to almost all of this literature, we focus on within-country variation. Though not a
panacea against omitted variable biases, xed-e ects panel data regressions provide more convinc10

ing and more relevant conditional correlations, focusing on whether in ation declines following
the introduction of CBI. Using such panel data regressions, we will show that the introduction
of CBI appears to be associated with declines in in ation in countries with intermediate political
constraints. The bene ts of CBI in more developed economies appear to be more limited.8

3

Motivating Theory

In this section, we use a simple model to clarify our approach to the political economy of reform
and derive the hypotheses concerning the circumstances under which CBI should have a signi cant
impact on in ation. Our purpose is not to make a contribution to the theoretical literature on the
political economy of reform, but to highlight why speci c institutional reforms might have di erent
e ects depending on the constraints facing politicians. For this purpose, we choose the simplest
model to communicate the major forces rather than strive for generality. Our model is a simpli ed
version of|and a slight variant on|Grossman and Helpman's (1994) model of lobbying. A single
organized lobby will try to convince a politician to choose distortionary policies. Underlying
constraints and reform of speci c institutions relating to this policy (\policy reform") might place
limits on the in uence of the lobby on the politician and on policy choices. We rst use this model
to highlight the interactions between policy reform and constraints on politicians. We then use a
simple extension of the model to show how successful policy reform in one sphere can lead to a
deterioration of other dimensions of policy (the \seesaw e ect").
Our framework is chosen both for its simplicity and to emphasize the commonalities between
CBI and other types of policy reform and does not do justice to some aspects of the macroeconomic
equilibrium leading to high in ation. For example, the time-inconsistency problems emphasized
by Barro and Gordon (1983) and Rogo

(1985) are absent. We provide some justi cation for

why we think these time-inconsistency problems are not rst-order in the context of high in ation
in developing countries. Moreover, the war-of-attrition aspect of the con ict over policy reform
emphasized by Alesina and Drazen (1991) is also absent in our setup. Although one could develop
the same general insights using a war-of-attrition model, we prefer to use the simplest model to
highlight the basic political economy factors a ecting the e ectiveness of policy reforms.
8
This does not imply that CBI has no bene t in relatively developed countries. Given the lower levels of in ation
in OECD economies, the e ect of CBI will be harder to detect, particularly if it is small. Moreover, CBI might create
other bene ts by introducing transparency and creating insurance against possible future relaxations of monetary
policy.

11

3.1

Model and Main Result

The economy consists of three actors, a politician, citizens and an organized group. There is a
single policy variable

2 R+ . This policy can be thought of as in ation to make the transition

to the empirical work easier, though nothing in this section depends on this interpretation. In
addition to policy

, the variable

2 f0;

R g,

with

R

> 0, denotes whether or not there has

been policy reform and also parameterizes the intensity of reform (see below). A large group of
citizens has preferences given by
u( ) =
where

;

(1)

is a strictly positive constant. These preferences imply that the \political bliss point"

of the citizens (i.e., their most preferred policy) is
increase in

= 0 (since

0 by assumption), and any

away from 0 reduces citizens' welfare. Thus throughout

should be thought of as a

\distortionary policy". We could also make u directly depend on whether there has been policy
reform, that is, on . This has no e ects on the major results we would like to emphasize. In
addition, the linearity of u in

is only to simplify the exposition.

The second actor, the politician, has a utility function given by
v ( ; ; t) = u ( ) + (1

)t

:

(2)

Here t 2 R+ denotes a transfer from the lobby, which might correspond to explicit bribes or
to campaign contributions.

2 [0; 1] captures how much weight the politician's utility function

places on the welfare of the citizens. We think of

as a measure of general institutional con-

straints on the politician (such as those measured by \constraints on the executive" or \control
of corruption" in our empirical work).9 When

= 1, the politician must act as a perfect agent

of the citizens, for example, because any deviation from the policies preferred by the citizens will
be punished by quick replacement. In contrast, when

is close to 0, there are few constraints on

the politician's behavior, for example, because he is not accountable to the citizens or because
he is di cult to replace using elections or other means. In this case, he can pursue policies that
increase the transfers he receives with impunity. The other important feature of the preferences
in (2) is the dependence on

. This captures the feature that policy reform makes distortionary

policies more costly for the politician (for example, providing credit to favored rms or groups,
or in ationary policies to gain support become more di cult and costly). All else equal, this will
discourage the use of distortionary policies by the politician. Making the use of such policies more
9

In a richer model, it is possible that high constraints might make lobbies more powerful, because a \wellmeaning" politician may be unable to act decisively to reduce in ation. Though possible, we believe that this
consideration is second-order since well-meaning politicians are relatively rare.

12

costly for the politician is not the only way to model the e ects of policy reform.10 An alternative
would be to model policy reform as introducing a hard constraint, for example, as imposing that
for some upper bound on policy . This is not a useful modeling strategy for understanding
policy reform in societies with weak institutions, because, with such hard constraints, there would
be no room for pursuing distortionary policies after the reform, whereas our focus is on whether
reform will prevent the implementation of distortionary policies.
The third actor is an organized lobby, which bene ts from . Suppose that the utility of the
lobby is given by
2

w ( ; t) =
where

and

2

t;

(3)

are strictly positive constants. The quadratic form is again assumed for conve-

nience, and the fact that these preferences do not directly depend on

is also for simplicity. These

assumptions also have no e ect on the qualitative results. These preferences immediately imply
that the lobby's political bliss point is
> 0;
thus the lobby will try to shift policy towards higher levels of

than those preferred by the

citizens. The only instrument that the lobby has available for this purpose is the transfer to
the politician, t. Examples of policies for which citizens and lobbies have con icting preferences
include industrial policy, tari s and agricultural subsidies. In ation is another potential example,
since it is often used as a means of generating funds (e.g., through the in ation tax) for redistributing to politically-powerful groups, such as public-sector employees or companies receiving
procurements or industrial subsidies, at the expense of the citizens at large, or results from the
use of government credits for favored rms.
Although there are three actors, citizens are passive and the main interactions are between
the lobby and the politician. We model this game as follows:
The parameter

and the reform variable

are given.

The lobby makes an o er ^ ; t^ to the politician. As in Grossman and Helpman's (1994)
model, this implies that if the politician accepts the transfer t^, he has to implement policy
10

Yet another alternative, which in fact gives even more stark results, is to assume that these reforms act as
costly commitment devices, and thus assume that they make distortionary policies more costly for the citizens. In
this case, policy reform would discourage distortionary policies by increasing the costs that these policies impose
on the society, and indirectly on the politician. In the context of CBI, for example, high in ation becomes both
more costly to society and also potentially more costly to implement for the government (both because it will
destroy the bene cial reputation that monetary policy may have established and also because workers' and rms'
behavior would have been shaped by expectations of low in ation). The assumption used in the text may have
wider applicability, motivating our choice here.

13

^ . This is presumably supported by a continuation game in which there are repeated
interactions, but as in much of the literature, we do not model these to simplify the analysis.
The politician chooses policy ~ . If ~ = ^ , then the politician also receives transfer t^.
Otherwise, he receives t = 0.
This is a simple game and we characterize its subgame perfect equilibrium (SPE). As usual,
this is done by backward induction. In the last stage of the game, the politician will choose
whichever policy maximizes his utility. Clearly, this will be either ~ = ^ , so that he can receive
the transfer t^, obtaining a utility of u (^ ) + (1

) t^

^ , or ~ = 0, in which case he will receive

zero transfers and a utility level of u (0).
Therefore we can summarize the best response of the politician as follows:11
~=

0 if u (^ ) + (1
^
u (^ ) + (1

) t^
^ < u (0)
) t^
^
u (0) :

(4)

If the lobby wishes to implement its own policy preferences, then it must satisfy this incentive
compatibility constraint (or respect the fact that the politician will play a best response in the last
stage). This implies that when the lobby wishes to implement a policy close to its own preferences,
it must choose ^ ; t^ as a solution to the following program:
max w ^ ; t^

^ 0;t^ 0

(5)

subject to (4):
Let the solution to this maximization problem give the lobby utility w.
^ Since ^ = 0; t^ = 0 is a
feasible strategy, we must have w
^

0. Moreover, it is also evident that this problem will lead to

a solution with w
^ > 0, when ^ > 0, and also t^ > 0 will be chosen if and only if the solution to (5)
also involves ^ > 0.
We next characterize the solution to this problem. The incentive compatibility constraint of
the politician, (4), requires that if ^ > 0, then
t^ =

+
1

^:

Substituting this into the objective function of the lobby, (3), we have the problem of the lobby
as
+
^2
^;
(6)
2
1
whenever it wants to implement the policy ^ > 0. Inspection of this maximization problem
max ^
^ 0

establishes our rst result:
11

To simplify the notation, this expression already imposes the choice that will prevail in equilibrium when the
politician is indi erent.

14

Result 1 If

= ( + ), then the lobby prefers not to have an in uence on policy

regardless of whether

= 0 or

=

R.

This result follows immediately, since when
is to choose ^ = 0. Since

, the utility-maximizing policy for the lobby

corresponds to a measure of the quality of checks on the politician, this

result suggests that when these checks are su ciently strong, the political system will generate
a policy choice that is not distortionary, regardless of whether there has been reform or not. In
terms of our empirical work below, this result suggests that in societies where there are signi cant
constraints on politicians, reforms should have relatively small e ects. This can be understood
by considering the example of in ation. Consequently, though CBI might limit in ation in wellgoverned societies, we would not expect a very large decline in in ation as a result of central bank
reform, since these societies would not have chosen highly distortionary policies to start with.
More generally, the solution to the lobby's maximization problem in (6), and thus the (subgame
perfect) equilibrium level of policy, is given by:
~ = max

1

+
1

;0 :

(7)

This equation shows that the sensitivity of equilibrium policy ~ to
limited when

(policy reform) will be

is low. Intuitively, when there are no checks on the politician in power, he will

do whatever maximizes his utility, and this will involve maximizing the transfers he receives.
Consequently, transfers can outweigh the costs that policy reform imposes on the politician's use
of distortionary policies. In terms of the in ation example, the politician in power can put pressure
or use other means to force the central bank to increase the money supply and in ation, even
if choosing high in ation might have become more di cult or costly.12 Interpreted di erently,
equation (7) suggests that in societies with low , de jure reform may not translate into de facto
reform, because despite the greater cost of

to the politician, the political equilibrium will induce

him to choose policies not so di erent from the pre-reform era.
The following result now readily follows from (7):
Result 2 Suppose that
Moreover, for

2

<
0;

. Then, a reform that increases
R

+

from 0 to

R

will reduce ~ .

, the greater is , the greater is the decline following policy

reform.
12
This will also be true when in ation or other distortionary policies also become more costly for the society as a
whole after reform. For example, in ation might be disastrous for the future of the economy and ruin the potential
bene ts that might have resulted from credibly establishing the independence of the central bank (and this can
be incorporated by including
in the utility function of the citizens), but when is low, this will still not deter
politicians from using distortionary policies.

15

This result therefore implies that when constraints are not so high as to have avoided the use
of distortionary policies in the rst place, policy reform might be e ective. However, how e ective
it will be is a function of the constraints on the politician. The greater is , the more transfers
are necessary for the politician to adopt the distortionary policy after reform and thus the lower
will be the equilibrium distortionary policies following reform.
Putting these two results together, we conclude:
Result 3 Policy reform will have the largest e ect on distortionary policies in societies with
intermediate levels of constraints on politicians, and it will have no e ect or only limited
e ects in societies with the highest and the lowest levels of constraints.
In the empirical work that follows, we investigate whether the e ects of CBI reforms on
in ation are consistent with the predictions in Result 3.

3.2

The Seesaw E ect

We now use the model from the previous subsection to illustrate the \seesaw e ect," whereby
successful policy reform might lead to a deterioration in other dimensions of policy. To do this,
let us augment the previous model with another policy dimension, denoted by

2 R+ , and modify

citizen preferences to
0

u( ; ) =
where

0

;

is also a strictly positive constant. This implies that

is another distortionary policy

and thus the political bliss point of the citizens now corresponds to ( ; ) = (0; 0). It is important
to note that, in this instance, policy reform is narrowly targeted at
policy

, and thus only makes

more costly for the politician. Some reforms, which involve the introduction of greater

accountability on politicians, would not t this pattern. CBI reform is a natural candidate in this
context, since it is primarily focused with monetary policy and in ation.
The preferences of the lobby are modi ed to
w ( ; t) =
with again

0

+

0

2

( + )2

t;

> 0. The preferences of the politician are unchanged. We again look for a subgame

perfect equilibrium.
The best response of the politician now implies
t^ =

+
1

^+

16

0

1

^:

With an identical reasoning to that in the previous subsection, the optimal policy-transfer combination for the lobby is then given by the solution to the following maximization problem:
max

^ 0; ^ 0

^+

0^

2

+

2

^+^

1

^+

0

1

^ :

(8)

To simplify the discussion, let us impose the following assumption:
0

This assumption implies that policy

>

and

0

< :

(9)

is more costly for the citizens and less bene cial for the

lobby than policy . In view of this, the following result is immediate:
Result 4 Suppose (9) holds and there has been no policy reform, that is,

= 0. Then, ~ = 0.

Intuitively, it is more economical for the lobby to receive policy favors through

, which is

both more bene cial for the lobby and less costly for the citizens. Consequently, policy
never be used in equilibrium (either

> 0 and

= 0, or

=

will

= 0). Result 4 is a consequence of

the simplifying assumptions made in this subsection; in particular, it depends on the assumption
that the two policies,

and , are perfect substitutes. Without this assumption, both policies

might be used simultaneously before policy reform. Nevertheless, our main result, Result 5, would
continue to apply even when these policies are not perfect substitutes.
Next, suppose, that policy reform is enacted, so that

=

R

> 0. Our main result in this

subsection is that, following such policy reform, it may become bene cial to use the alternative
distortionary policy, . The following result summarizes the conditions under which this will
happen.
Result 5 Suppose (9) holds and consider policy reform increasing
+

R

1

0

0

<

and if

1
0

<~

0

+

0

from 0 to

;

R.

If
(10)

;

then the equilibrium following policy reform involves ~ 0 = 0 and
~0 = 1

0

0

1

> 0:

This result follows readily from the maximization problem (8), combined with (9) and (10).
Note that (9) and (10) are consistent with each other provided that
meaning that reforms is e ective in making policy
17

R

is su ciently large|

costly. Result 4 implies that before policy

reform the equilibrium involved ~ = 0. Moreover, given (9) and (10), before policy reform the
equilibrium involves ~ > 0. Consequently, policy reform in this case creates a typical seesaw
pattern; the policy that is regulated with the reform goes down (we go from ~ > 0 to ~ 0 = 0),
but at the same time the political process generates rents for the still-powerful lobby by using an
alternative policy instrument more intensively (we go from ~ = 0 to ~0 > 0). This result highlights
that when the political-economic interactions leading to distortionary policies remain unchanged,
the imposition of a (speci c or narrowly-targeted) policy reform might only change the form
of redistribution towards politically powerful groups|rather than eliminate policy distortions
entirely.
An interesting implication of the speci c con guration of parameters given by (9) and (10)
should also be noted: in the case discussed in Result 5, policy reform makes both citizens and
the lobby worse-o . Instead of the less costly instrument, now redistribution takes place with
the more costly instrument. This is not a general result and policy reform might improve the
allocation of resources despite the presence of seesaw-like e ects. Nevertheless, this result points
out the potential pitfalls of speci c policy reforms in societies where constraints on politicians are
absent and political-economic interactions lead to dysfunctional policy choices.

3.3

General Discussion

The model we have developed here is in the spirit of standard approaches to redistributive politics.
In particular, as noted above, it does not include any element of time inconsistency. We do not
believe that time-inconsistency issues play a major role in understanding high in ation or hyperin ationary episodes in less-developed economies. Most instances of high in ation are directly
related to the inability of governments to fund their (often politically-motivated) expenditures
through taxation and borrowing. Such policies are much more likely to emerge when there is severe distributional con ict that the political system is unable to resolve or when politicians have
only limited instruments to use to distribute patronage. The increasing in ation in Zimbabwe,
depicted in Figure 1, is an example of this; President Mugabe turned to hyperin ation when he
had no further resources left to redistribute patronage to the military and to his key supporters.
Finally, we should also note that though we followed Grossman and Helpman (1994) in setting
up the model with lobbies making o ers to politicians, the model could be reformulated to allow
politicians to make o ers to interest groups without a ecting any of the results. This reformulation
might be more in line with the political experiences of countries in Sub-Saharan Africa or Latin
America, where interest groups are as likely to be captured by politicians as politicians are likely
to be captured by interest groups (see Acemoglu, Robinson and Verdier, 2003, for a discussion).

18

For instance, in his seminal study of economic policy in Ghana, Killick (1978, p. 35) notes
that president \Nkrumah succeeded in capturing the lobbies; in making them dependent on him
instead of himself on them". The example of Argentina under Peron also illustrates the same
pattern (see, e.g., Collier and Collier, 1991). First as minister of labor and then president in
the 1940s, Peron played an active role in creating the interest groups which then constituted his
support base. Certain groups in society will have (political) resources that politicians need and
politicians will o er them redistribution in exchange for this support. The model above could be
reformulated along these lines and policy reform would now represent an increase in the cost to
the politicians in supplying policy favors to interest groups, possibly because they now have to
use patronage to also control those who run the independent central bank. Our major results, in
particular Results 3 and 5, would continue to apply in this modi ed setup.

4

Data Sources and Construction

Throughout the paper we focus on the \post-Bretton Woods" period 1972-2005.13 Between 1946
and 1971 countries under the Bretton Woods system agreed to coordinate monetary policy in
order to x their currencies with respect to gold. This naturally limited the discretion that both
governments and central banks had in managing their monetary policies. This implies that the
post-Bretton Woods era is a natural period for us to focus on in the analysis of the relationship
between CBI and in ation.
Several approaches have been used to measure CBI and there is some controversy over the
advantages and disadvantages of di erent approaches (see Arnone, Laurens and Segalotto, 2006,
for a comprehensive overview). The key question centers around whether one should use de
jure measures, which capture how much independence the central bank has in law, or de facto
measures, which correspond to how much independence the central bank has in practice. Another
distinction which has been made is whether or not the central bank has \goal independence," in
the sense of being able to determine its owns objectives, or \operational independence," where it
may not set its own goal but has freedom to achieve any goal set without interference.
Grilli, Masciandaro and Tabellini (GMT) developed an index based on Aufricht (1967), emphasizing political independence, as measured by the procedures regarding the appointment of
the central bank board, the relationship between the bank and the government in the formulation
of monetary policy, and the formal responsibilities of the central bank. They also measured \economic independence," which focuses on whether or not the central bank must nance government
13

The Bretton Woods system collapsed in 1971 when the United States suspended the convertibility of dollars to
gold.

19

debt. The current state of the art of the measurement of de jure CBI stems from Cukierman
(CUK) (1992) and Cukierman, Webb and Neyapti (1992). Cukierman and his collaborators constructed an index of de jure CBI for 72 countries over the period 1950-1989 coding the variable
for 4 ten-year periods with the index being constant within the period. They used 16 di erent
characteristics in the index with di erent weights.14
Each of the above indices has various drawbacks. Mangano (1998) argues that there is significant subjectivity both in the criteria included in the di erent indices and in the interpretation
of laws and legislature.15 It appears that these indices are not capturing only de jure CBI, but
are, at least in part, informative about how monetary policy is being conducted in practice. The
focus on policy reform makes it important that we focus on de jure CBI. A related problem
is that most existing work reports values for CBI indices computed at a speci c point in time.
However, within-country variation is essential for our empirical strategy (for panel xed-e ect
regressions).16
In order to overcome these problems, we measure de jure CBI by a dummy variable that takes
a value of 1 in every year after a major reform to the constitution or central bank law leading
to increased independence, and zero elsewhere. The advantage of this measure is that it does
not incorporate information on the de facto conduct of monetary policy. A drawback is that this
measure assumes CBI increases by the same magnitude in every country following a reform (which
we know is not true as reforms in di erent countries introduced di erent levels of independence).
Nevertheless, it captures in a simple way the e ect of central bank reform and changes in de jure
CBI.
14

For instance, 8 characteristics were used to judge the extent of limitations on central bank lending to the
government and these collectively received half of the weight in the index. Four legal characteristics which concerned
the way governors were appointed or dismissed were given 1/5th of the weight and three other characteristics which
determined how independent the policy making process of the bank was were given 15% of the total weight.
15
In particular, from a comparison of the CUK and GMT indices Mangano concludes that \... [there is] a
signi cant degree of inconsistency between the two indices' valuation of their common criteria. Only in one country
(out of 17) and in the case of one criterion (out of 9) have CUK and GMT translated the legislation in exactly
the same way: their interpretation of the laws governing the Italian CB, and of the regulations concerning the
CB Governors' terms of o ce in the countries sampled, exhibit no divergence. On the other hand, their average
interpretation spread when examining Danish, French, Greek, and Japanese legislation is close to 50%, and they
disagree in nearly 60% of countries when deciding whether the CB is legally allowed to purchase government debt in
the primary market or not. Overall, it appears that in the 17 countries included in both CUK's and GMT's samples,
virtually a third of the values attributed to their nine common criteria are subject to non-negligible interpretation
problems" (pp. 476-477).
16
Exceptions that construct and use time-varying indices are: Polillo and Guillen (2005), who provide values of
the Cukierman index for the period 1989-2000 for a sample of 90 countries; Jacome and Vasquez (2005) for Latin
America; Cukierman, Miller and Neyapti (2002) for former Soviet countries; Arnone, Laurens, Segalotto and Somer
(2007) for a sample of emerging market countries; and Crowe and Meade (2007) for a sample of 102 countries.
Both Arnone et.al (2007) and Crowe and Meade (2007) explore time-series variation in these indices by taking
values of them at two points in time (late 1980s and early 21st century) and assume the change from one value to
another occurs in the year in which central bank reform took place.

20

Our main sample consists of 52 countries for which information on changes in their central
bank legislation was reported by Jacome and Vasquez (2005) and Polillo and Guillen (2005). We
exclude all former socialist countries since there is limited data for these countries before CBI
and they enact CBI at the same time as many other reforms associated to the transition from
planned to market economies. We also exclude Africa since central bank reforms in these countries
are harder to determine and interpret, and in most cases, the reforms fell short of creating truly
independent central banks.17
Our sample includes almost every OECD and Latin American country and covers a sample
of 12 Asian countries (see Appendix Table A1). To construct our CBI dummy for Latin American countries we used the dates of major central bank reforms provided by Jacome and Vasquez
(2005). For the remaining countries, the CBI dummy takes a value equal to one starting in the
year in which the Cukierman index constructed by Polillo and Guillen (2005) increases. Moreover,
for every country we used Arnone, Laurens, Segalotto and Somer (2007), who provided the year
of major central bank reforms, to verify that a major reform did take place in the year in which
the index constructed by Polillo and Guillen (2005) increases. Whenever there was disagreement
between Polillo and Guillen (2005) and Arnone, Laurens, Segalotto and Somer (2007), we consulted additional sources (such as the central bank's website) in order to identify the year in which
the most substantial reform towards CBI (if any) took place. Similarly, for countries for which
the index constructed by Polillo and Guillen (2005) did not increase between 1989 and 2000 we
used Arnone, Laurens, Segalotto and Somer (2007) and other sources to explore if a central bank
reform took place after 2000. The countries included in our sample and the details of the coding,
including the laws that amended central bank charters as well as additional sources used can be
found in Appendix Table A1. As is evident from the table, most central bank reforms in these
countries took place during the 1990s.
In addition to this sample we also examined the impact of CBI on the 40 of these 52 countries
that changed their CBI over our sample period. Focusing on this sample enables us to obtain
identi cation from di erences in the timing of CBI; the countries in this sample might also be
more homogeneous since they have all undergone the same policy reform.
Though we believe our CBI dummy is a transparent way of investigating the relationship
between CBI and in ation, we also study the robustness of our results by using the Cukierman
index. Since these data are not in the form of an annual time series and earlier data exhibit
almost no variation we take the value of the index in 1989 and assume that this value holds for
17

For example, the Cukierman index of central bank independence reported by Polillo and Guillen (2005) is
very low for most African countries and reforms to the central bank charters during the nineties caused very small
increases in these indices.

21

all pre CBI periods. We then use the 2003 value from Crowe and Meade (2007) for all post CBI
periods.
Our main measure of political institutions is constraints on the executive from the Polity IV
dataset, which codes the extent of constitutional limits on the exercise of arbitrary power by the
executive. The Polity dataset reports a qualitative score, between 1 and 7, for every independent
country. We computed the average of the constraints on the executive variable for the period
1972-2004, and then classi ed each country in our sample into low, medium and high constraints
on the executive categories.18 Countries within one-standard deviation from the sample mean (of
the average constraints on executive) were assigned to the medium-constraint category, while the
rest were assigned to high-constraint and low-constraint groups. The histogram in Figure 3 shows
the distribution of average constraints on the executive for our sample as well as the cuto s for the
di erent categories. Appendix Table A2 shows the category in which each country was classi ed.
The low and medium constraints on the executive categories are composed mainly of Asian and
Latin American countries, while most OECD countries are in the high-constraint category.
To check that our results are not driven by the speci c cuto s used in creating the low, medium
and high groups, we also look at the interaction of a quadratic function of the average constraints
on the executive with the CBI dummy. We show that the results using this approach are similar
to those estimated using the dummies for low, medium and high constraints.
In addition, we also check the robustness of our results by using di erent measures of institutions. In particular, we use the rule of law and the control of corruption indices constructed by
Kaufmann, Kraay and Mastruzzi (2007) for the period 1996-2005.19 These indices are reported
on a scale from -2.5 to 2.5 and are based on subjective perceptions by public sector, private sector and NGO experts.20 The classi cation of countries based on these variables, following the
same one standard deviation rule described above, is reported in Appendix Table A2. Overall,
the classi cation under the three institutional variables is similar. The most notable exception is
Singapore, which is classi ed as a low-institutions country under constraints on the executive but
as a high-institutions country under both the rule of law and control of corruption indices.
18

We use the average of constraints on the executive over 1972-2004 rather than its value at the beggining of
the period or its year-to-year variation because the average value of this variable appears to provide a better and
less noisy measure of how constrained politicians are in a given country. The changes in this variable from year to
year are subject to potential miscodings, which are averaged out when we considered the average constraints on
the executive over a reasonable period of time.
19
One advantage of these indices is that they measure institutional quality around the time of central bank
independence for most countries.
20
The exact questions for the two variables are: \the extent to which agents have con dence in and abide by
the rules of society, and in particular the quality of contract enforcement, the police, and the courts, as well as the
likelihood of crime and violence" and \the extent to which public power is exercised for private gain, including both
petty and grand forms of corruption, as well as `capture' of the state by elites and private interests" (Kaufmann
et.al., 2007, p. 4).

22

Our main dependent variable, in ation, was obtained from the International Financial Statistics (IMF) and corresponds to the annual percentage variation of the consumer price index.21
Figures 4, 5 and 6 plot the in ation data over time as well as the date of CBI (indicated by a vertical line) for all the countries in our sample. Figure 4 looks at the 8 countries in the low constraints
on the executive category, Figure 5 looks at medium-constraint countries, while Figure 6 examines the countries with high levels of constraints. In order to isolate changes in individual country
in ation rates, throughout these gures the average normalized world in ation is subtracted from
each country's normalized in ation rate (so that the horizontal line at zero indicates when the
in ation rate of the country is at the world average).22 Figure 4 suggests that there appears to
be a mixed association between in ation and CBI in countries with the weakest constraints. In
China and Guyana, there is a decline in in ation following the introduction of the CBI, whereas
in Guatemala or Nepal, in ation drifts upward over time and the introduction of CBI in 2002
in both countries appears to have had no e ect on this process. Figure 5 shows several cases
where there are signi cant disin ations concurrent with the introduction of CBI. This happens in
Colombia and Argentina, as we already discussed in the Introduction, but it also seems to occur
in Greece, Turkey and Uruguay. It is important to note that in a number of instances, such as in
Bolivia or Chile, in ation starts declining before CBI. Finally in Figure 6 there is no case where
CBI is followed by a large fall in in ation.
The comparison of Figures 4 and 5 shows that, in contrast to our theoretical model, in ation
is generally higher in medium-constraint countries than in low-constraint countries. We do not
have an explanation for this pattern. It may re ect the fact that in countries with low constraints
politicians have access to other instruments for achieving their political objectives and do not
need to rely primarily on monetary policy (which may be a relatively blunt instrument to achieve
clientelistic objectives or self-enrichment).
The data on government expenditure as percentage of GDP we use in Section 6 were obtained
from the World Economic Outlook (IMF).23 In our robustness checks we also use additional
macroeconomic variables to control for other time-varying determinants of in ation. We use the
log of GDP per capita (in constant prices, chain series from PWT 6.2). Also, to control for
the extent to which

xed exchange rate regimes might have provided an anchor for in ation

and limited the discretionary use of monetary policy, we use an index of exchange rate exibility
21

The in ation data reported for Qatar by the IFS show an unusual spike in 1998 and 1999. Rather than verifying
and modifying the data provided by the IMF for every country we use the data exactly as reported by the IFS.
However, all our results are robust to excluding Qatar from the sample.
22
Normalized in ation is de ned as in ation/(1+in ation), see equation (11) in the next section.
23
Government expenditure corresponds to Total Expenditure and Net Lending by the General Government (WEO
variable GGTENL).

23

constructed by Reinhart and Rogo

(2002). This index takes values between 1 and 6, with higher

values corresponding to more exible exchange rate regimes. The index is reported on an annual
basis and covers the period 1972-2001.

5

Central Bank Independence and In ation

In this section, we present our main results concerning the relationship between CBI and in ation.
Throughout, the left-hand side variable is de ned as
yc;t =

in ationc;t
;
1 + in ationc;t

(11)

where in ationc;t denotes the in ation rate (e.g., 0.1 for 10% in ation) for country c in year t.
This transformation is useful, since, otherwise, hyperin ationary episodes entirely dominate the
empirical analysis. An alternative would have been to use the logarithm of in ation, but this is
not possible when there are cases of zero in ation. Moreover, using logs would shift the outlier
problem to cases in which there are very low levels of in ation. With a slight abuse of terminology,
we refer to yc;t as \in ation" (rather than referring to it as \normalized in ation").
It should be noted throughout that changes in CBI are not randomly assigned or exogenous,
so the empirical work we present here is intended to uncover robust correlations between central
banking reform and contemporaneous or subsequent declines in in ation. As already noted in the
Introduction, CBI is often adopted as part of an anti-in ation package of policies and this can be
seen in Figures 4 and 5, where we show a number of instances in which in ation starts declining
a few years before CBI. This is indicative of a pattern where other anti-in ation measures might
be taken simultaneously with or just before the introduction of CBI.

5.1

The Main E ect of Central Bank Independence on In ation

Our general estimating equation for Table 1 is
yc;t =

k
X
j=1

j yc;t j

+

0 xc;t

+

k
X

j xc;t j + c

+ !t + "c;t :

(12)

j=1

Here the rst summation includes lags of in ation and helps us control for potential serial correlation in this variable. The variable of interest is a dummy for CBI, described in the previous
section, and denoted by xc;t . Since CBI may have delayed e ects, we sometimes also control for
lags of CBI as shown by the second summation. The number of lags of in ation and CBI are
taken to be the same for simplicity. In addition, all regressions include the

c 's,

which stand for

a full set of country dummies and the !t 's, which are a full set of year dummies. The error term
24

"c;t captures all omitted in uences. Since CBI is not \randomly assigned," this disturbance term
can be correlated with some of the right-hand side variables. It is therefore important to interpret
the estimates we report as conditional correlations rather than causal e ects. The error term "c;t
may also have residual serial correlation and to control for this, throughout all standard errors
are fully robust for arbitrary serial correlation at the country level (i.e., clustered at the country
level, see Wooldridge, 2002).
Columns 1-3 of Table 1 examine the whole sample. Columns 4-6 repeat the same regressions
focusing on the sample of countries that changed their CBI and thus rely only on di erences in
the timing of CBI to identify its e ect on in ation. The rst column of Table 1 includes only the
contemporaneous CBI dummy, xc;t . The estimate of

0

is -0.036 with a (robust) standard error

of 0.034. Therefore, in this rst speci cation, there is a negative e ect of CBI on in ation, but
this e ect is not statistically signi cant at 10%. The magnitude of the coe cient is also rather
small. This estimate of

0

implies that CBI is associated with a reduction in the annual in ation

rate of 9 points (for example from 58% to 49%), while the mean of annual in ation in the whole
sample is 58%.24
The speci cation in column 1 does not control for persistence in in ation, however. Since
in ation is a highly serially-correlated variable doing so can have major e ects on the estimates.
Column 2 thus includes ve lags of in ation, but still only the contemporaneous CBI dummy.
When these lags are included, one can distinguish between short and long-run e ects of CBI. The
short-run e ect is still given by

0,

whereas the long run e ect is

Long-run e ect =

0

1

Pk

:

j=1 j

Column 2 reports both of these, together with the p-value for the statistical signi cance of the
long run e ect. It shows that neither the short run nor the long-run e ect are signi cant. For
example, the long-run e ect is about double the impact of CBI on in ation suggested in column
1, but it is only signi cant at 13%. The lags of in ation themselves are highly signi cant. The
results in the rst two columns therefore show that despite the preponderance of theory and some
evidence that CBI is important in practice, in this broad sample of countries the e ect of CBI on
in ation is modest and not statistically signi cant.
Column 3 also includes the ve lags of the CBI dummy. In this case, the long run e ect is
24

To calculate the economic magnitude of the coe cient estimates, we use average in ation over our sample
period. If, instead, we use median in ation (8% instead of 58%), then the magnitude is even smaller and suggests
CBI reduces in ation by 4 points. Throughout, the economic magnitudes implied by median in ation are about
60% smaller than those implied by mean in ation.

25

given by
Long-run e ect =

Pk

j=0

Pk

1

j

:

j=1 j

In this speci cation the short-run e ect is -0.031 (suggesting CBI decreases in ation by 8 points)
and is again insigni cant. The long-run e ect is estimated to be -0.087 (suggesting CBI decreases
in ation by 22 points in the long run) but it is also insigni cant (signi cant at just below 13%).
Column 4 then re-estimates the basic model from column 1 using the smaller sub-sample of
countries with change in CBI. The estimated e ect is now -0.063 with a standard error of 0.030
and is now signi cant. This turns out to be the general pattern from these 3 columns. Both the
short and the long-run e ects are negative and the estimated e ects are larger.
All in all then the basic message of Table 1 is that there is some weak evidence that CBI does
reduce in ation and this is particularly true when we only look at the sample of countries that
changed their CBI over the period.

5.2

Central Bank Independence, Political Constraints and In ation

Why does CBI not have a more major (quantitatively more signi cant) e ect on in ation? The
answer we will propose is based on the motivating theory presented in Section 3, that CBI will have
a strong e ect on in ation only in societies with intermediate levels of constraints on politicians.
Let the dummies Hc , Mc and Lc denote a high, medium or low-constraint country respectively.
Speci cally, for each country one of these dummies takes the value 1, while the other two take the
value zero. Including interactions with these dummies, the general estimating equation becomes
yc;t =

k
X

j yc;t j

+

H
0 Hc xc;t

M
0 Mc xc;t

+

M
j Mc xc;t j

+

+

L
0 Lc xc;t

(13)

j=1

+

k
X

H
j Hc xc;t j

j=1

This equation implies that

+

k
X
j=1

H
0

k
X

L
j Lc xc;t j

+ Z0c;t +

c

+ !t + "c;t :

j=1

measures the short-run e ect of CBI on countries with high con-

straints on the executive, while with the full set of lags included,
Long-run e ectH =

1

Pk

H
j=0 j
Pk
j=1 j

corresponds to the long-run e ect for these countries. The short-run and the long-run e ects
for medium and low-constraint countries are de ned similarly. In (13) we also include a vector
of country and time-varying covariates, Zc;t (with a vector of coe cients denoted by
covariates will be included in the robustness checks reported in Tables 7a and 7b.
26

). These

Table 2 reports the results of estimating (13) in our base sample, with constraints measured
with the average constraint on executive from the Polity IV data as described in Section 4. The
rst 3 columns are for the whole sample. Column 1 is again the most parsimonious speci cation,
which does not include any lags of in ation or of the CBI dummy. The estimates suggest that
CBI has no e ect on in ation in low and high-constraint societies, but has a marginally signi cant
e ect of -0.071 (standard error of 0.044) in the sample of medium-constraint societies. This e ect
is twice the size of the estimate in column 1 of Table 1, showing that almost all of the e ect in
Table 1 is due to the impact of CBI on in ation in societies with intermediate levels of constraints.
Moreover, the p-values at the bottom of the table indicate that we can reject the null hypothesis
that the impact of CBI in the medium-constraint group is equal to the e ect in the low or the
high-constraint group. Column 2 shows similar results when the lags of in ation are included
(again the e ect of CBI on in ation is statistically signi cant at about 7% signi cance level).
However, in this case, even though the long-run e ect in the medium-constraint group is almost
twice as large as the e ect for the low-constraint group, we can no longer reject the null hypothesis
that they are equal (we continue to reject the hypothesis that the e ect is the same between high
and medium-constraint countries).
The speci cation that includes the lags of CBI, as well as the lags of in ation, is reported
in column 3. Now the long-run e ect in the sample of countries with intermediate constraints is
larger at -0.125, and is signi cant at about 6%. The e ects in societies with high or low constraints
continue to be insigni cant. In this speci cation, we can reject that the e ect of CBI is the same
in the medium and low-constraint countries at 10% (and we continue to reject that they are the
same in the high and medium countries at 1%).
Columns 4-6 estimate the same models for the sample of countries that experienced a change
in CBI. The e ects of CBI in medium-constraint countries are now quantitatively larger and
more signi cant. The short-run e ect of -0.097 in column 4 is signi cant and implies that CBI
is associated with a decline in in ation of 24 points for this group of countries.25 We continue
to reject the hypotheses that this e ect is the same as that for high or low-constraint countries.
In columns 5 and 6, once we include lags of the CBI dummy and in ation, the short-run e ect
becomes smaller and less signi cant, but the long-run e ects are statistically and economically
signi cant. The e ect in column 6 of -0.196, for example, implies CBI reduces in ation by 49
points. As in columns 1-3 there is no evidence that CBI in uences in ation in countries with high
constraints. However, the results in these columns show some evidence that CBI might have a
25

If we use median in ation to calculate the magntiude of the coe cient, the coe cient implies that CBI reduces
in ation by 11 points.

27

negative long-run e ect on in ation in low-constraint countries, though this e ect is smaller than
that for medium-constraint countries.
Overall, we conclude from this evidence that the conditional correlations between the introduction of CBI and changes in in ation are broadly consistent with the theoretical ideas suggested
in Section 3. In particular, CBI appears to be followed by declines in in ation in countries with
intermediate levels of constraints on politicians, while there is no evidence of a negative e ect of
CBI on in ation in high-constraint countries. In low-constraint countries, there is typically no
e ect of CBI on in ation, though some speci cations show negative but less signi cant e ects.
Nevertheless, it is worth noting that while we can reject the hypothesis that the e ect of CBI on
in ation is di erent between high and medium-constraint countries, we can only reject the same
hypothesis in some of the speci cations for medium and low-constraint countries.

5.3

Robustness

Tables 3-7 investigate the robustness of these results. In Table 3 we replicate columns 1, 3, 4 and
6 of Table 2, but using the rule of law and control of corruption indices constructed by Kaufmann
et.al. (2007). The results in columns 1-4 based on the full sample are similar to those in columns
1-3 of Table 1 and do not show statistically signi cant e ects of CBI. The results in columns 5-8,
which focus on the sample of countries that experienced a change in CBI, are more encouraging for
us. They are broadly similar to those in columns 4-6 of Table 2. Columns 5 and 7 show evidence
of a statistically signi cant short-run e ect of CBI on in ation only in the countries with medium
institutions (both when using the rule of law or control of corruption indices). These coe cients
are of similar magnitude to the ones reported in column 4 of Table 2. Columns 6 and 8, on the
other hand, show evidence of a negative statistically signi cant long-run e ect of CBI on in ation
in both the medium and low-institutions countries. These results again show that the e ects in
the medium and high-institutions countries are statistically di erent, but we cannot reject the
null hypothesis that the e ects in the low and medium groups are equal. Overall, the results using
the alternative measures of institutions are generally consistent with those reported in Table 2,
though with these measures the di erences between low and medium-constraint countries are less
pronounced.
An econometric problem in the estimation of (13) is that the equation includes both xed
e ects and lagged dependent variables. In the presence of lagged dependent variables, the key
regressor xc;t (and its lags) will be mechanically correlated with "c;s for s < t, so the standard xed
e ects estimator, used in Table 2, is inconsistent (e.g., Wooldridge, 2002, chapter 11). However,
it can be shown that the xed e ects estimator becomes consistent as the number of time periods

28

in the sample increases (i.e., as T ! 1). Even though we have a relatively large number of time
periods here, this source of inconsistency might still be important depending on how close to unit
root in ation dynamics are. The most common way of ensuring consistency in this case is to use
the GMM estimator developed by Arellano and Bond (1991). This involves di erencing (13) to
eliminate xed e ects, so that we have
yc;t =

k
X

j

yc;t

j

+

H
0 Hc

xc;t +

M
0 Mc

xc;t +

L
0 Lc

xc;t

(14)

j=1

+

k
X
j=1

H
j Hc

xc;t

j

+

k
X

M
j Mc

xc;t

j=1

j

+

k
X

L
j Lc

xc;t

j

+

!t +

"c;t :

j=1

and then using lags of yc;t and xc;t to instrument for the di erenced terms (here

yc;t = yc;t yc;t

1,

and so on). These lags will be valid instruments to solve the endogeneity problem resulting from
the mechanical correlation between xc;t and the error term if there is no additional serial correlation in "c;t (so that there is no second-order serial correlation in

"c;t ), which can be tested.

Table 4 reports the results of estimating (14) where we replicate columns 2-3 and 5-6 of Table
2 (throughout the rest of the paper Lc ; Mc and Hc are again based on the constraints on the
executive variable). The results are similar to those of Table 2. In particular, the interactions
between the medium constraints dummy and CBI are still negative and the estimates are statistically more signi cant than in Table 2. There is no evidence of a negative e ect of CBI on in ation
in high-constraint countries. The results in Table 4 also show some evidence of a negative e ect of
CBI in low-constraint countries once we focus on the sample of countries that changed their CBI
in columns 3 and 4. Nevertheless, these results should be interpreted with caution; though the
tests for serial correlation cannot reject the null hypothesis of no second order correlation in the
di erenced residuals, the Sargan overidenti cation tests reject the null hypothesis in all columns,
which implies that di erent lags estimate di erent magnitudes for the coe cients of CBI and
lagged in ation (which is often a problem when using this GMM procedure with large T ).
Table 5 investigates alternatives to the use of the three dummy variables Hc , Mc and Lc for
high, medium and low constraints on the executive to capture the nonlinear e ects of this variable.
In particular, we use a quadratic in the average of constraints on the executive interacted with
the CBI dummy. The coe cients reported evaluate the quadratic at the levels 1, 4 and 7 of
constraints on the executive. The results in Table 5 are broadly similar to those in Table 2. The
short and long-run e ect of CBI on in ation is always negative and signi cant for countries with
intermediate constraints. There is no evidence of a signi cant e ect of CBI in countries with high
or low constraints. However, even though the e ects are larger in the medium than in the low
and high-constraint groups, we can only reject that they are equal when comparing the high and
29

intermediate group. Overall, these results suggest that the speci c way of parameterizing the
nonlinearity in the exact cuto s between low, medium and high constraints is not too important
for our results.
Table 6 reports the results of a simple falsi cation exercise. We include both the contemporaneous and the ve-year lead of CBI. To the extent that in ation was already declining in some
countries before central bank reform, this lead variable will capture the decline. When this is the
case, we cannot have much con dence that CBI might in fact be a major factor in the decline in
in ation. The contemporaneous e ect of CBI in countries with intermediate levels of constraints
is still signi cant. The ve-year lead is never negative for this group and typically very small.
Hence the negative association between CBI and in ation in this group of countries is not driven
mainly by a secular decline in in ation. For high-constraint countries, the lead of CBI is also
never signi cant and is typically very small. For low-constraint countries, there is some evidence
of a prior trend upwards in in ation. This suggests that in some of these cases CBI may have
been introduced in the midst of particularly high in ationary episodes.
Finally, Tables 7a and 7b conduct a range of other robustness checks. In Table 7a we focus
on the full sample and we use the equivalents of columns 1 and 3 of Table 2. In Table 7b we
restrict ourselves to the sample of countries that changed their CBI and use the equivalents of
columns 4 and 6 of Table 2. Columns 1 and 2 of Tables 7a and 7b report the robustness of the
results to including potential time varying determinants of in ation. In particular we include 5
lags of log of GDP per capita and 5 lags of an exchange rate exibility index constructed by
Reinhart and Rogo (2002). While the negative e ect of CBI on in ation is not signi cant when
we focus on the full sample, the results in Table 7b show a similar pattern to the one depicted in
Table 2 with a negative and statistically signi cant long run e ect of CBI only in the group with
intermediate constraints on the executive. The results in columns 3 and 4 of Tables 7a and 7b
include a quadratic time trend interacted with region dummies to control for di erential trends in
in ation across regions. These additional controls have little e ect on the estimates. In column
3 of Table 7a, the estimate of the impact of CBI in medium-constraint countries is -0.065, with
a standard error of 0.044 which is similar to that reported in column 1 of Table 2. The long-run
e ect in column 4 however, is smaller in magnitude and less signi cant than in column 2 of Table
2. Nevertheless, columns 3 and 4 in Table 7b show that in the sample of countries that changed
CBI, once we control for di erential regional trends, the results are again similar to those in Table
2.
In columns 5 and 6 of Tables 7a and 7b, we exclude Western Europe entirely. This robustness
check is motivated by the concern that policy dynamics and the e ect of CBI on in ation might

30

be di erent in Western Europe than the rest of the world. It is therefore useful to see whether
similar results are obtained when the contrast with the West European countries is removed. The
results in this case are again similar to the baseline estimates.
Columns 7 and 8 include an additional dummy for the introduction of the European Central
Bank or the country in question joining the monetary union after the European Central Bank.
Again, there is little change here from the results we found in Table 2.
Finally, columns 9 and 10 show the robustness of our results to using the CBI index constructed
by Cukierman rather than the CBI dummy. While, as discussed in Section 4, there are concerns
related to the coding and interpretation of this index, it still constitutes a useful check on our
measure of CBI and on our results. The results using this index are similar to those reported in
Table 2. As with our main results, only the interaction between the medium constraints dummy
and the new CBI index is negative and statistically signi cant.26
Interestingly, in columns 5-10 of both Tables 7a and 7b we can now reject the null hypothesis
that the e ects in the intermediate group are equal to those in the low or in the high-constraint
group.
We also checked the robustness of the results reported in Table 2 to the \type" of CBI di erent
countries implemented. In particular, we ran the same regressions as in Table 2 with a dummy
for \goal independence" of the CBI. This dummy takes a value of 1 for countries where CBI
reform de ned in ation as the unique objective of monetary policy and zero everywhere. This is
a useful robustness check against the possibility that CBI may have very di erent e ects when
the central banker is truly \conservative" with price stability as the unique objective (as with
the Bundesbank) than in instances where CBI has multiple objectives (as with the U.S. Federal
Reserve). The results using the \goal independence" CBI dummy are analogous to those in Table
2 and suggest a similar pattern with a negative e ect of goal independence on in ation only in
countries with intermediate constraints on the executive. We do not report these results to save
space. We also brie y investigated whether changes in the dynamics and persistence of in ation
in the mid-1980s, documented for example by Mumtaz and Surico (2006) and Stock and Watson
(2007), might be responsible for our results. As a crude control for this possibility, we interacted
the lags of in ation with a dummy for the period 1972-1990 and a dummy for the period 1991-2005.
The results of this exercise led to a similar pattern to that found in Table 2, with a negative e ect
of CBI only in countries with intermediate constraints on the executive, though the statistical
26
The coe cient in column 9 of Table 7b of -0.224 implies that an increase of one standard deviation in the
index is associated with a decrease of 11 points in the in ation rate in countries with intermediate constraints. The
coe cient in column 10, on the other hand, suggests that an increase of one standard deviation in the CBI index
decreases in ation by 18 points in the long run.

31

signi cance of some of the estimates became weaker. These results are again not reported to save
space.

6

The Seesaw E ect

In this section, we investigate the implications of CBI reform for other dimensions of policy.
In particular, we look at whether CBI is followed by an increase in government expenditure as
a percent of GDP in societies with intermediate political constraints. Our basic econometric
model is again (13) but now the dependent variable will measure scal policy. Table 8 reports the
di erential e ects of CBI in high, medium and low-constraint societies on government expenditure
as percentage of GDP. The table shows that there is no evidence that introducing CBI in countries
with high or low constraints has any impact on government expenditure relative to GDP in either
the short or long-run. However, in medium-constraint countries, where CBI is associated with
declines in in ation, CBI also appears to be associated with an increase in government expenditure.
Both the short and the long-run e ects are positive for these countries in all speci cations, and
in columns 2, 3, and 5, these e ects are statistically signi cant. In column 2 the estimated
M
0

is 0.011 with a standard error of 0.004, and suggests an immediate increase in government

expenditure equivalent to just above 1% of GDP. The long-run e ect of 0.050 is also signi cant
and corresponds to a substantial 5% point increase in government expenditure relative to GDP
in the long-run in medium-constraint countries that have introduced CBI.
Table 9 shows that the broad pattern is similar when we use the Arellano-Bond GMM estimator
(as in Table 4). In this case, the evidence consistent with the seesaw e ect is somewhat stronger,
though now we also nd some positive long-run e ect of CBI on government expenditure in lowconstraint countries (see, for example, column 2). Finally, Table 10 reports a falsi cation exercise
similar to that in Table 6. Here we again include a 5 year lead of the CBI dummy to check whether
the estimates in Table 8 might be capturing a secular upward trend in government expenditure
in countries with intermediate constraints. The results in Table 10 do not show any evidence of
such a pattern. The interaction between the medium constraints dummy and the lead of the CBI
dummy is never signi cantly di erent from zero.
We also checked whether CBI is associated with a change in government budget balance
(again measured as a fraction of GDP). These results do not show any signi cant e ect of CBI
on government balance (results not reported to save space). This might be because governments
in medium-constraint countries, which show a signi cant increase in spending, may have also
raised revenues. Alternatively, government balance may have improved automatically because
these governments held nominal debt and bene ted from the decline in interest rates associated
32

with reduced in ation. Counteracting this, however, they are also likely to have experienced a
reduction in the in ation tax.
Overall, we conclude that there is some suggestive evidence consistent with the seesaw pattern,
whereby in some of the cases where CBI reduces in ation, there may be an increase in government expenditure as a share of GDP. Nevertheless, this result is not always robust and further
investigation is necessary before reaching a rm conclusion.

7

Conclusions

In this paper, we argue that to understand when policy reform will be e ective one must understand the \political context" that leads to distortionary policies in the rst place. Though such a
claim would seem natural to those steeped in political economy, it appears not to have in uenced
either the design of policy reform in the past or the recent wave of revisionist research on the
failures of reform. Rather, scholars have taken some recent instances of failures of reform to imply
that the reforms themselves were misconceived because of second-best problems. We believe that
a much more fruitful approach is to study the political economy constraints that interact with
the implementation and the e ects of reform.
To develop this perspective, we construct a simple political economy model of policy distortions
and show that when such distortions arise as a result of the political equilibrium, there may be
strong forces, from those initially bene ting from the distortions, that negate the e ects of the
reform. The model illustrates in a simple way that both the extent of distortionary policy and the
e ects of reform will generally depend on political institutions (for example, on various measures
of the constraints on political o ce holders). The rst major insight of the model is that policy
reform may not be e ective when constraints are so weak that reform can be undermined or when
constraints are su ciently strong that policy is unlikely to have been highly distortionary to start
with. Rather, it is at intermediate values of constraints that policy reform might be most e ective.
The second important lesson from the model is that with multiple policy instruments, when reform
is partially e ective, it may lead to the seesaw e ect, whereby reform in one dimension leads to
more intensive use of other distortionary instruments.
The paper also provides empirical evidence consistent with these patterns in the context of
CBI. Our evidence suggests that CBI is associated with signi cant declines in in ation in countries
with medium constraints, while there are no or smaller e ects for countries with high and low
constraints. There is also some evidence that, consistent with the seesaw e ect, in countries where
CBI is associated with reduced in ation, there is also an increase in government expenditure. This
might partly re ect the use of an alternative policy instrument to achieve goals that high in ation
33

was previously being used for.
Do these results imply that policy reform can never work? We do not think this is the correct
conclusion. Firstly, our evidence is consistent with the view that targeted reforms, such as antiin ation programs and CBI, can be e ective. Secondly, the evidence is di cult to reconcile with a
naive approach which assumes that politicians adopt reforms for well meaning reasons or because
they have decided that their old policies were inappropriate. In this light, if reforms fail to be
fully e ective, this must be at least partly because of the constraints placed by existing political
economy factors. In particular, when reforms are promoted by international organizations and
imposed on reluctant leaders, they are less likely to be e ective, or at the very least, they need to
be designed much more carefully to ensure e ectiveness. Otherwise, our model and the empirical
correlations suggest that de jure reform may not translate into de facto reform, and when it does,
other dimensions of policy may deteriorate.
The general message from our paper is that the analysis of policy reform should start with
an understanding of the political economy constraints leading to distortionary policies in the rst
place. This type of political economy analysis might be ultimately useful both to predict when
reforms are likely to be e ective and to understand how reforms can be designed better so as to
reduce the risk of backlash. While we are currently far from a satisfactory theoretical or empirical
understanding to be able to design policy reforms that are robust to such challenges, we hope that
our paper and others in this vein make the case that an analysis of the political economic roots
of distortionary policies must be part of any debate on the e ectiveness and design of reforms.

34

References
Acemoglu, Daron (2006) \A Simple Model of Ine cient Institutions," Scandinavian
Journal of Economics, 108, 515-546.
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson and James A. Robinson (2005) \The Rise of Europe: Atlantic Trade, Institutional Change, and Economic Growth," American Economic Review,
95, 546-579.
Acemoglu, Daron, James A. Robinson and Thierry Verdier (2004) \Kleptocracy
and Divide-and-Rule: A Model of Personal Rule," Journal of the European Economic Association
Papers and Proceedings, 2, 162-192.
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, James A. Robinson and Yunyong Thaicharoen
(2003) \Institutional Causes, Macroeconomic Symptoms: Volatility, Crises and Growth," Journal
of Monetary Economics, 50, 49-123.
Alesina, Alberto (1988) \Macroeconomics and Politics," NBER Macroeconomics Annual,
Cambridge: MIT Press, 13-52.
Alesina, Alberto and Allan Drazen (1991) \Why are Stabilizations Delayed?" American
Economic Review, 81, 1170-1188.
Alesina, Alberto and Lawrence H. Summers (1993) \Central Bank Independence and
Macroeconomic Performance: Some Comparative Evidence," Journal of Money Credit and Banking, 25, 151-162.
Arellano, Manuel and Stephen R. Bond (1991) \Some Speci cation tests for Panel
Data: Monte Carlo Evidence and an Application to Employment Equations," Review of Economic
Studies, 58, 277-298.
Arnone, Marco, Bernard J. Laurens and Jean-Francois Segalotto (2006) \The Measurement of Central Bank Autonomy: Survey of Models, Indicators, and Empirical Evidence,"
IMF Working Paper WP/06/227.
Arnone, Marco, Bernard J. Laurens, Jean-Francois Segalotto and Martin Sommer
(2007) \Central Bank Autonomy: Lessons from Global Trends," IMF Working Paper WP/07/88.
Aufricht, Hans (1967) Central Banking Legislation, International Monetary Fund Monograph Series, Washington DC.
Banaian, King, Richard C. K. Burdekin, and Thomas D. Willett (1998) \Reconsidering the Principal Components of Central Bank Independence: The More the Merrier?" Public
Choice 97 (October 1998), 1-12.
Barro, Robert J. and David B. Gordon (1983) \A Positive Theory of Monetary Policy

35

in a Natural-Rate Model," Journal of Political Economy, 91, 589-610.
Bates, Robert H. and Anne O. Krueger eds. (1993) Political and economic interactions
in economic policy reform: evidence from eight countries, Oxford: Blackwell.
Beck, Thorsten, George Clarke, Alberto Gro , Philip Keefer and Patrick Walsh
(2001) \New Tools in Comparative Political Economy: The Database of Political Institutions,"
World Bank Economic Review, 15, 165-176.
Bekaert, Geert, Campbell R. Harvey and Christian Lundblad (2005) \Does Financial Liberalization Spur Growth," Journal of Financial Economics, 77, 3-56.
Boycko, Maxim, Andrei Shleifer and Robert W. Vishny (1996) \A Theory of Privatization," Economic Journal, 106, 309-319.
Burnside, Craig and David Dollar (2000) \Aid, Policies, and Growth," American Economic Review, 90, 847-868.
Cabrera, Mauricio and Jose Antonio Ocampo (1980) \Precios internacionales, tipo
de cambio e in acion" in Cabrera, Mauricio (editor). In acion y Pol tica Economica. Bogota:
Asociacion Bancaria.
Campillo, Marta and Je rey A. Miron (1997) \Why does In ation Di er across Countries," in Christina D. Romer and David H. Romer eds. Reducing In ation: Motivation and
Strategy, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Carrasquilla, Alberto (1999) Estabilidad y gradualismo: ensayos sobre econom a colombiana, Santafe de Bogota: Banco de la Republica: TM Editores.
Coate, Stephen T. and Stephen E. Morris (2005) \Policy Conditionality," in Gustav
Ranis and James Vreeland eds. Globalization and the Nation State: The Impact of the IMF and
World Bank, New York: Routledge.
Collier, David and Ruth Berins Collier (1991) Shaping the political arena: critical
junctures, the labor movement, and regime dynamics in Latin America, Princeton; Princeton
University Press.
Crowe, Christopher and Ellen E. Meade (2007) \The Evolution of Central Bank Governance around the World," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 21, 69-90.
Cukierman, Alex (1992) Central Bank Strategy, Credibility and Autonomy, Cambridge:
MIT Press.
Cukierman, Alex, Geo rey Miller and Bilin Neyapti (2002) \Central bank reform,
liberalization and in ation in transition economies: an international perspective," Journal of
Monetary Economics, 49, 237-264.
Cukierman, Alex, Steven B. Webb, and Bilin Neyapti (1992) \Measuring the Inde-

36

pendence of Central Banks and Its E ect on Policy Outcomes," World Bank Economic Review,
6, 353-398
Davila Ladron de Guevara, Andres, Rodolfo Escobedo, Adriana Gavina and Mauricio Vargas (2000) \El Ejercito Colombiano durante el per odo Samper: Paradojas de un proceso
tendencialmente cr tico", Colombia Internacional, 49/50, pp 148-177.
Daunfeldt, Sven-Olov and Xavier de Luna (2003) \Central Bank Independence and
Price Stability: Evidence from 23 OECD-countries," Working Paper, Umea University.
Dewatripont, Mathias and Gerard Roland (1997) \Transition as a Process of Large
Scale Institutional Change,"in David M. Kreps and Kenneth Wallis eds. Advances in Economic
Theory, New York: Cambridge University Press.
Dollar, David and Jakob Svensson (2000) \What Explains the Success or Failure of
Structural Adjustment Programmes?" Economic Journal, 110, 894-917.
Drazen, Allan (2000) Political Economy in Macroeconomics, Princeton; Princeton University Press.
Easterly, William (2005) \National Policies and Economic Growth: A Reappraisal," in
Philippe Aghion and Steve Durlauf eds. The Handbook of Economic Growth, Amsterdam: North
Holland.
Easterly, William, Ross Levine and David Roodman (2004) \Aid, Policies, and
Growth: Comment," American Economic Review, 94, 774-780
Echeverry, Juan Carlos (2002) Las Claves del Futuro: econom a y con icto en Colombia,
Bogota: Editorial Oveja Negra.
Eij nger, Sylvester C.W. and Jakob de Haan (1996) The political economy of centralbank independence, Princeton: Princeton University.
Fernandez, Raquel and Dani Rodrik (1991) \Resistance to Reform: Status Quo Bias in
the Presence of Individual Speci c Uncertainty," American Economic Review, 81, 1146-1155.
Forder, James (1998) \The case for an Independent European Central Bank: A Reassessment of Evidence and Sources," European Journal of Political Economy, 14, 53-71.
Galiani, Sebastian, Paul Gertler and Ernesto Schargrodsky (2005) \Water for Life:
The impact of the privatization of water supply on child mortality," Journal of Political Economy,
113, 83-120.
Gibson, Edward L. (1997) \The Populist Road to Market Reform: Policy and Electoral
Coalitions in Mexico and Argentina," World Politics, 49, 339-370.
Grilli, Vittorio, Donato Masciandaro and Guido Tabellini (1991) \Political and
Monetary Institutions and Public Financial Policies in the Industrial Countries, Economic Policy,

37

13, 341-392.
Grossman, Gene M. and Elhanan Helpman (1994) \Protection for Sale." American
Economic Review 84, 833-850.
Gutierrez, Eva (2003) \In ation Performance and Constitutional Central Bank Independence: Evidence from Latin America and the Caribbean," IMF Working Paper WP/03/53.
Henisz, Witold J. (2000) \The Institutional Environment for Economic Growth," Economics and Politics, 12, 1-31.
Jacome, Luis I. (2001) \Legal Central Bank Independence and In ation in Latin America
during the 1990s," IMF Working Paper WP/01/212.
Jacome, Luis I. and Francisco Vazquez (2005) \Any Link Between Legal Central Bank
Independence and In ation? Evidence from Latin America and the Caribbean," IMF Working
Paper WP/05/75.
Jaramillo, Juan Carlos, Roberto Steiner and Natalia Salazar (1999). \La econom a
pol tica de la pol tica cambiaria en Colombia". Coyuntura Economica, Vol 29, No. 2.
Kaufmann, Daniel, Aart Kraay and Massimo Mastruzzi (2007). \Governance Matters VI: Aggregate and Individual Governance Indicators 1996{2006," World Bank Policy Research
Working Paper 4280.
Keefer, Philip and David Stasavage (2002) \Checks and Balances, Private Information,
and the Credibility of Monetary Commitments," International Organization, 56, 751-74.
Keefer, Philip and David Stasavage (2003) \The Limits of Delegation: Veto Players,
Central Bank Independence, and the Credibility of Monetary Policy," American Political Science
Review, 97, 407-23.
Killick, Tony (1978) Development Economics in Action; A Study of Economic Policies in
Ghana, London; Heinemann.
King, Michael (2001a), \"The Bank of Canada's pursuit of price stability: reputation as
an alternative to independence," Quarterly Journal of Central Banking, 12 (1), 68-78
King, Michael (2001b), \Contrasting approaches to central bank independence: Australia
and New Zealand", Quarterly Journal of Central Banking, 12 (2), 58-68
La Porta, Rafael and Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes (1999) \The Bene ts of Privatization:
Evidence from Mexico," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114, 1193-1242.
Levitsky, Steven (2003) Transforming Labor-Based Parties in Latin America: Argentine
Peronism in Comparative Perspective, New York: Cambridge University Press.
Mangano, Gabriel (1998) \Measuring central bank independence: a tale of subjectivity
and of its consequences," Oxford Economic Papers, 50, 468-492.

38

Max eld, Sylvia (1997) Gatekeepers of Growth: The International Political Economy of
Central Banking in Developing Countries, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
McNamara Kathleen (2002) \Rational Fictions: Central Bank Independence and the
Social Logic of Delegation," West European Politics, 25, 47-76.
Moene, Karl-Ove, Halvar Mehlum and Ragnar Torvik (2006) \Institutions and the
resource curse," Economic Journal, 116, 1-20.
Mukand, Sharun and Dani Rodrik (2005) \In Search of the Holy Grail: Policy Convergence, Experimentation, and Economic Performance,"American Economic Review, 95, 374-383.
Mumtaz Haroon and Paolo Surico (2006), "Evolving International In ation Dynamics:
World and Country Speci c Factors", Working Paper, Bank of England.
North, Douglass C. and Barry R. Weingast (1989) \Constitutions and Commitment:
Evolution of Institutions Governing Public Choice in 17th Century England," Journal of Economic
History, 49, 803-832.
Oatley, Thomas (1999) \Central Bank independence and in ation: Corporatism, partisanship, and alternative indices of central bank independence," Public Choice, 98, 399-413.
Panagiotidis Theodore, and Afrioditis Triampella (2006) \Central Bank Independence
and In ation: the Case of Greece", Revista de Economia del Rosario, 9, 95-109
Persson, Torsten, Gerard Roland and Guido Tabellini (1997) \Separation of Powers
and Political Accountability" Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112, 1163-1202.
Polillo, Simone and Mauro Guillen (2005) \Globalization Pressures and the State: The
Worldwide Spread of Central Bank Independence" American Journal of Sociology, 110, 1764-1802.
Reinhart, Carmen and Kenneth S. Rogo

(2002) \The Modern History of Exchange

Rate Arrangements: A Reinterpretation", Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119, 1-48.
Reyes, Alvaro, Stefano Farne, Luis Angel Rodr guez, Angela Forero and Emilio
A.Carrasco (1998) \Empleo, Productividad e Ingresos: Colombia 1990-1996", Documento de
Trabajo No. 66, Organizacion Internacional del Trabajo, ETM Pa ses Andinos, Lima.
Roberts, Kenneth M. (1995) \Neoliberalism and the Transformation of Populism in Latin
America," World Politics, 48, 82-116.
Roberts, Kenneth M. (2008) Changing Course: Parties, Populism and Political Representation in Latin America's Neoliberal Era, New York: Cambridge University Press.
Rodrik, Dani (1996) \Understanding Economic Policy Reform," Journal of Economic Literature, 34, 9-41.
Rodrik, Dani (2005) \Growth Strategies," in Philippe Aghion and Steve Durlauf eds. The
Handbook of Economic Growth, Amsterdam: North Holland.

39

Rogo , Kenneth S. (1985) \The Optimal Degree of Commitment to an Intermediate
Monetary target," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 100, 1169-1189.
Shleifer, Andrei and Robert Vishny (1994) \Politicians and Firms," Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 109, 995-1026.
Sierra, Jorge Emilio (2004) 50 Protagonistas de la Econom a Colombiana, Bogota: Universidad Jorge Tadeo Lozano.
Slok, Torsten (2002) "Money Demand in Mongolia: A Panel Data Analysis", IMF Sta
Papers, Vol 49, No.1.
Stigler, George (1971) \The Theory of Economic Regulation," Bell Journal of Economics
and Management Science, 2, 3-21.
Stigler, George (1972) \Economic Competition and Political Competition," Public Choice,
13, 91-106.
Stiglitz, Joseph E. (2002) Globalization and its Discontents, New York: W.W. Norton &
Co.
Stock, James and Mark Watson (2007) \Why Has U.S. In ation Become Harder to
Forecast?", Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 39, 3-33.
van de Walle, Nicolas (1993) \The Politics of Nonreform in the Cameroon," in Thomas
M. Callaghy and John Ravenhill eds. Hemmed In: Responses to Africa's Economic Decline,
Columbia University Press, New York, NY.
van de Walle, Nicolas (2001) African economies and the politics of permanent crisis,
1979-1999, New York: Cambridge University Press.
Velasco, Andres (2005) \Why Doesn't Latin America Grow More, and What Can We Do
About It?" Unpublished Harvard University, Kennedy School of Government.
Wooldridge, Je ery M. (2002) Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data,
MIT Press; Cambridge.

40

0

Annual Inflation Rate
.5
1

1.5

Figure 1
The Case of Zimbabwe

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

Year
Note: Annual Inflation Rate corresponds to the annual variation in the consumer price index reported in the International Financial Statistics (IMF). Vertical line
shows the year of Central Bank reform taken from Polillo and Guillen (2005).

Figure 2
The See-Saw Effect

0

Annual Inflation Rate
.1
.2
.3

.4

.15
.2
.25
.3
.35
Government Expenditure as % of GDP

COLOMBIA

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

Year
Annual Inflation Rate

Government Expenditure as % of GDP

0

Annual Inflation Rate
10
20

30

.15
.2
.25
.3
.35
.4
Government Expenditure as % of GDP

ARGENTINA

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

Year
Annual Inflation Rate

Government Expenditure as % of GDP

Note: Annual Inflation Rate (scale on the left vertical axis) corresponds to the annual variation in the consumer price index reported in the
International Financial Statistics (IMF). Government expenditure data (scale on the right vertical axis) are from World Economic Outlook
(IMF). Vertical line shows the year of major Central Bank reform taken from Jácome and Vasquez (2005).

0

5

Frequency
10

15

20

Figure 3
Histogram of Constraints on the Executive
Average 1972-2004

1-1.99 2-2.99 3-3.90 3.91-4.99 5-5.99 6-6.99
7
Average Constraints on the Executive (1972-2004)

8

Note: Constraints on the Executive data are from Polity IV. Vertical lines at 3.9 and 7 show the cutoffs between the low, medium and highconstraint categories.

Normalized Inflation-Average Normalized World Inflation
-.15
-.1
-.05
0
.05
.1

2010

Normalized Inflation-Average Normalized World Inflation
-.2
-.1
0
.1
.2
.3

2010

Normalized Inflation-Average Normalized World Inflation
-.1
-.05
0
.05
.1

1980

1990
Year

2000

GUYANA

1970

1980

1990
Year

2000

NEPAL

1970

1980

1990
Year

2000

QATAR

1970

1980

1990
Year

2000

2010

Normalized Inflation-Average Normalized World Inflation
-.2
-.15
-.1
-.05
0
.05

1970

Normalized Inflation-Average Normalized World Inflation
-.15
-.1
-.05
0
.05

Normalized Inflation-Average Normalized World Inflation
-.4
-.2
0
.2
.4

2010

CHINA

Normalized Inflation-Average Normalized World Inflation
-.04
-.02
0
.02

Normalized Inflation-Average Normalized World Inflation
-.15
-.1
-.05
0
.05
.1

Figure 4a
Difference from Average Normalized World Inflation for countries with Low Constraints
on the Executive
GUATEMALA

1970

1980

1990
Year

2000

2010

2000

2010

2000

2010

2000

2010

INDONESIA

1970

1980

1990
Year

PARAGUAY

1970

1980

1990
Year

SINGAPORE

1970

1980

1990
Year

Note: Inflation data are from International Financial Statistics (IMF). Normalized inflation defined as inflation/(1+inflation). All
figures show the difference of the country's normalized inflation and world average normalized inflation. Horizontal line at zero to
illustrate whether the country's inflation is above or below the world average inflation. Vertical line shows year of major Central
Bank reform. For details see text and Appendix Table A1.

Normalized Inflation-Average Normalized World Inflation
-.1
0
.1
.2
.3
.4

Normalized Inflation-Average Normalized World Inflation
0
.2
.4
.6
.8
1970

1970

1970

1980

1980

1980

1980

1990
Year

1990
Year

1990
Year

1990
Year

2000

BRAZIL

2000

COLOMBIA

2000

2000
2010
Normalized Inflation-Average Normalized World Inflation
0
.2
.4
.6
.8

1970

2010
Normalized Inflation-Average Normalized World Inflation
-.1
0
.1
.2
.3

Normalized Inflation-Average Normalized World Inflation
0
.2
.4
.6
.8

2010

ECUADOR

2010

Normalized Inflation-Average Normalized World Inflation
0
.2
.4
.6
.8

ARGENTINA

Normalized Inflation-Average Normalized World Inflation
-.1
-.05
0
.05
.1

Normalized Inflation-Average Normalized World Inflation
-.05
0
.05
.1

Figure 5a
Difference from Average Normalized World Inflation for countries with Medium
Constraints on the Executive
BOLIVIA

1970

1970

1970

1970

1980

1980

1980

1980

1990
Year

1990
Year

1990
Year

1990
Year

2000

2000

2010

CHILE

2010

DOMINICAN REPUBLIC

EL SALVADOR
2000
2010

2000

2010

Normalized Inflation-Average Normalized World Inflation
0
.1
.2
.3
.4
Normalized Inflation-Average Normalized World Inflation
-.15
-.1
-.05
0
.05

Normalized Inflation-Average Normalized World Inflation
-.2
-.1
0
.1
.2
.3
Normalized Inflation-Average Normalized World Inflation
-.15
-.1
-.05
0
1970

1970

1970

1970
1980

1980

1980

1980
1990
Year

1990
Year

1990
Year

1990
Year
2000

KOREA

2000

MEXICO

2000

Normalized Inflation-Average Normalized World Inflation
-.06
-.04
-.02
0
.02
.04

HONDURAS
2010

2010
Normalized Inflation-Average Normalized World Inflation
-.2
-.15
-.1
-.05
0
.05

2000

2010
Normalized Inflation-Average Normalized World Inflation
-.2
-.15
-.1
-.05
0

FRANCE

2010

Normalized Inflation-Average Normalized World Inflation
0
.2
.4
.6

Figure 5b
Difference from Average Normalized World Inflation for countries with Medium
Constraints on the Executive
GREECE

1970

1970

1970

1970

1980

1980

1980

1980

1990
Year

INDIA

1990
Year

MALAYSIA

1990
Year

MONGOLIA

1990
Year

2000
2010

2000
2010

2000
2010

2000

2010

Normalized Inflation-Average Normalized World Inflation
-.15
-.1
-.05
0
.05

2010

Normalized Inflation-Average Normalized World Inflation
-.2
-.1
0
.1
.2

2010

Normalized Inflation-Average Normalized World Inflation
-.15
-.1
-.05
0
.05

2000

2010

2000

2010

NICARAGUA

Normalized Inflation-Average Normalized World Inflation
-.1
-.05
0
.05
.1

Normalized Inflation-Average Normalized World Inflation
0
.2
.4
.6
.8

1970

1980

1990
Year

2000

PERU

1970

1980

1990
Year

2000

PORTUGAL

1970

1980

1990
Year

2000

TURKEY

1970

Normalized Inflation-Average Normalized World Inflation
-.1
0
.1
.2
.3
.4

Normalized Inflation-Average Normalized World Inflation
-.1
0
.1
.2
.3
.4

2010

Normalized Inflation-Average Normalized World Inflation
0
.1
.2
.3
.4

Normalized Inflation-Average Normalized World Inflation
-.2
0
.2
.4
.6
.8

Figure 5c
Difference from Average Normalized World Inflation for countries with Medium
Constraints on the Executive

1980

1990
Year

PAKISTAN

1970

1980

1990
Year

2000

2010

2000

2010

2000

2010

2000

2010

PHILIPPINES

1970

1980

1990
Year

SPAIN

1970

1980

1990
Year

URUGUAY

1970

1980

1990
Year

VENEZUELA

1970

1980

1990
Year

Note: Inflation data are from International Financial Statistics (IMF). Normalized inflation defined as inflation/(1+inflation). All
figures show the difference of the country's normalized inflation and world average normalized inflation. Horizontal line at zero to
illustrate whether the country's inflation is above or below the world average inflation. Vertical line shows year of major Central
Bank reform. For details see text and Appendix Table A1.

Normalized Inflation-Average Normalized World Inflation
-.15
-.1
-.05
0
Normalized Inflation-Average Normalized World Inflation
-.15
-.1
-.05
0
1970

1970

1970
1980

1980

1980

1980
1990
Year

1990
Year

1990
Year

1990
Year
2000

BELGIUM

2000

COSTA RICA

2000

2000
2010
Normalized Inflation-Average Normalized World Inflation
-.15
-.1
-.05
0

1970

2010
Normalized Inflation-Average Normalized World Inflation
-.15
-.1
-.05
0

Normalized Inflation-Average Normalized World Inflation
-.15
-.1
-.05
0

2010

FINLAND

2010

Normalized Inflation-Average Normalized World Inflation
-.15
-.1
-.05
0

AUSTRALIA

Normalized Inflation-Average Normalized World Inflation
-.08
-.06
-.04
-.02

Normalized Inflation-Average Normalized World Inflation
-.1
0
.1
.2
.3

Figure 6a
Difference from Average Normalized World Inflation for countries with High Constraints
on the Executive
AUSTRIA

1970

1970

1970

1970

1980

1980

1980

1980

1990
Year

1990
Year

1990
Year

1990
Year

2000

2000

2010

CANADA

DENMARK

2000
2010

2000
2010

GERMANY

2010

Normalized Inflation-Average Normalized World Inflation
-.15
-.1
-.05
0

1970

1970

1970

1980

1980

1980

1980

1990
Year

1990
Year

1990
Year

1990
Year

2000

2000

2000

2000

ITALY

2010

NETHERLANDS

2010

NORWAY

2010

Normalized Inflation-Average Normalized World Inflation
0
.2
.4
.6

2010

Normalized Inflation-Average Normalized World Inflation
-.15
-.1
-.05
0

Normalized Inflation-Average Normalized World Inflation
-.15
-.1
-.05
0
.05
1970

Normalized Inflation-Average Normalized World Inflation
-.15
-.1
-.05
0
.05

Normalized Inflation-Average Normalized World Inflation
-.15
-.1
-.05
0
.05

IRELAND

Normalized Inflation-Average Normalized World Inflation
-.12
-.1
-.08 -.06 -.04 -.02

Normalized Inflation-Average Normalized World Inflation
-.2
-.15
-.1
-.05
0

Figure 6b
Difference from Average Normalized World Inflation for countries with High Constraints
on the Executive
ISRAEL

1970

1970

1970

1970

1980

1980

1980

1980

1990
Year

1990
Year

1990
Year

1990
Year

2000

2000

2000

2000

2010

JAPAN

2010

NEW ZEALAND

2010

SWEDEN

2010

Normalized Inflation-Average Normalized World Inflation
-.15
-.1
-.05
0

SWITZERLAND

1970

1980

1990
Year

2000

2010

2000

2010

Normalized Inflation-Average Normalized World Inflation
-.15
-.1
-.05
0
.05

Normalized Inflation-Average Normalized World Inflation
-.15
-.1
-.05
0

Figure 6c
Difference from Average Normalized World Inflation for countries with High Constraints
on the Executive
UNITED KINGDOM

1970

1980

1990
Year

2000

2010

UNITED STATES

1970

1980

1990
Year

Note: Inflation data are from International Financial Statistics (IMF). Normalized inflation defined as inflation/(1+inflation). All
figures show the difference of the country's normalized inflation and world average normalized inflation. Horizontal line at zero to
illustrate whether the country's inflation is above or below the world average inflation. Vertical line shows year of major Central
Bank reform. For details see text and Appendix Table A1.

Table 1
OLS Fixed Effects Regressions for Inflation and Central Bank Independence: Annual Panel 1972-2005
Dependent variable is inflation/(1+inflation)
Full Sample
Only Countries with Change in CBI
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
CBI Dummy
-0.036
-0.019
-0.031
-0.063
-0.028
-0.040
(0.034)
(0.012)
(0.022)
(0.030)
(0.013)
(0.023)
CBI Long Run Effect
P-value Long Run Effect

-0.079
[0.129]

-0.087
[0.126]

-0.119
[0.051]

-0.164
[0.021]

P-value 5 Inflation Lags=0
P-value CBI Dummy and 5 lags=0
Observations
R-squared

[0.000]

[0.000]
[0.826]
1500
0.83

[0.000]

[0.000]
[0.072]
1172
0.84

1670
0.50

1500
0.83

1300
0.47

1172
0.84

Robust standard errors, adjusted for clustering by country, in parentheses. P-values reported in brackets. All columns are unbalanced panels with
one observation per year, per country. All OLS regressions include country and year fixed effects. CBI Dummy takes a value of 1 in every year after
substantial reforms to Central Bank Laws leading to more independence are introduced (see text and appendix table A1). Inflation data are from
International Financial Statistics (IMF).

Table 2
OLS Fixed Effects Regressions for Inflation and Interactions of CBI with Const. on the Executive: Annual Panel 1972-2005
Dependent variable is inflation/(1+inflation)
Full Sample
Only Countries with Change in CBI
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
CBI Dummy*Low Const. Exec. Dummy
0.023
-0.016
-0.051
0.000
-0.026
-0.070
(0.025)
(0.013)
(0.032)
(0.017)
(0.014)
(0.034)
CBI Dummy*Med Const. Exec. Dummy
-0.071
-0.029
-0.048
-0.097
-0.039
-0.050
(0.044)
(0.016)
(0.033)
(0.041)
(0.017)
(0.032)
CBI Dummy*High Const. Exec. Dummy
0.023
0.003
0.011
-0.004
-0.007
-0.004
(0.027)
(0.008)
(0.011)
(0.021)
(0.008)
(0.011)
CBI*Low Const.Exec Long Run Effect
P-value Long Run Effect-Low-

-0.068
[0.203]

-0.023
[0.700]

-0.104
[0.087]

-0.097
[0.133]

CBI*Med Const.Exec Long Run Effect
P-value Long Run Effect-Med-

-0.119
[0.070]

-0.125
[0.056]

-0.158
[0.033]

-0.196
[0.010]

CBI*High Const.Exec Long Run Effect
P-value Long Run Effect-High-

0.012
[0.711]

0.013
[0.751]

-0.028
[0.428]

-0.060
[0.171]

P-value 5 Inflation Lags=0
P-value CBI*Low Const.Exec and 5 Lags =0
P-value CBI*Med Const.Exec and 5 Lags =0
P-value CBI*High Const.Exec and 5 Lags =0

[0.000]

[0.000]
[0.081]
[0.441]
[0.500]

[0.000]

[0.000]
[0.006]
[0.035]
[0.469]

[0.391]
[0.010]
1500
0.83

[0.087]
[0.004]
1500
0.83

[0.347]
[0.011]
1172
0.84

[0.098]
[0.005]
1172
0.84

P-Value Medium Effect=Low Effect
P-Value Medium Effect=High Effect
Observations
R-squared

[0.017]
[0.016]
1670
0.51

[0.014]
[0.017]
1300
0.49

Robust standard errors, adjusted for clustering by country, in parentheses. P-values reported in brackets. All columns are unbalanced panels with one observation per year,
per country. All OLS regressions include country and year fixed effects. CBI Dummy takes a value of 1 in every year after substantial reforms to Central Bank Laws leading
to more independence are introduced (see text and appendix table A1). Assignment of countries to low, middle and high constraints on the executive is based on the average
of the xcons variable from Polity IV for the period 1972-2004. All countries within one-standard deviation from the sample mean were assigned to the middle-constraints
category. P-values for equality of coefficients at the bottom of the table are for the short-run effects in columns 1 and 4 and the long-run effects in the remaining columns.
Inflation data are from International Financial Statistics (IMF).

Table 3
OLS Fixed Effects Regressions for Inflation and Interactions of CBI with Governance Measures: Annual Panel 1972-2005
Coding based on Governance Measures by Kaufmann, Kraay and Mastruzzi (2007)
Dependent variable is inflation/(1+inflation)
Full Sample
Only Countries with Change in CBI

CBI Dummy*Low Institutions Dummy
CBI Dummy*Medium Institutions Dummy
CBI Dummy*High Institutions Dummy

Coding based on
Rule of Law
(1)
(2)
-0.009
-0.064
(0.054)
(0.055)
-0.069
-0.025
(0.042)
(0.022)
0.022
0.004
(0.030)
(0.009)

Coding based on
Control of Corruption
(3)
(4)
0.003
-0.072
(0.059)
(0.074)
-0.062
-0.025
(0.040)
(0.019)
0.020
0.003
(0.030)
(0.008)

Coding based on
Rule of Law
(5)
(6)
-0.035
-0.069
(0.052)
(0.055)
-0.095
-0.032
(0.038)
(0.021)
-0.004
-0.010
(0.024)
(0.011)

Coding based on
Control of Corruption
(7)
(8)
-0.023
-0.081
(0.057)
(0.073)
-0.088
-0.031
(0.036)
(0.018)
-0.006
-0.009
(0.025)
(0.011)

CBI*Low Institutions Long Run Effect
P-value Long Run Effect-Low-

-0.125
[0.123]

-0.096
[0.244]

-0.193
[0.044]

-0.167
[0.087]

CBI*Medium Institutions Long Run Effect
P-value Long Run Effect-Med-

-0.084
[0.189]

-0.097
[0.123]

-0.157
[0.032]

-0.170
[0.022]

CBI*High Institutions Long Run Effect
P-value Long Run Effect-High-

0.001
[0.986]

0.001
[0.987]

-0.068
[0.136]

-0.070
[0.140]

P-value 5 Inflation Lags=0
P-value CBI*Low Institutions and 5 Lags =0
P-value CBI*Medium Institutions and 5 Lags =0
P-value CBI*High Institutions and 5 Lags =0

[0.000]
[0.521]
[0.730]
[0.269]

[0.000]
[0.029]
[0.592]
[0.354]

[0.000]
[0.137]
[0.144]
[0.120]

[0.000]
[0.006]
[0.098]
[0.292]

P-Value Medium Effect=Low Effect
P-Value Medium Effect=High Effect
Observations
R-squared

[0.322]
[0.018]
1670
0.50

[0.586]
[0.073]
1500
0.83

[0.301]
[0.024]
1670
0.50

[0.985]
[0.034]
1500
0.83

[0.325]
[0.019]
1300
0.48

[0.637]
[0.065]
1172
0.84

[0.311]
[0.025]
1300
0.48

[0.960]
[0.034]
1172
0.84

Robust standard errors, adjusted for clustering by country, in parentheses. P-values reported in brackets. All columns are unbalanced panels with one observation per year, per
country. All OLS regressions include country and year fixed effects. CBI Dummy takes a value of 1 in every year after substantial reforms to Central Bank Laws leading to more
independence are introduced (see text and appendix table A1). Assignment of countries to low, middle and high institutions categories is based on the average of the Rule of Law
(columns 1,2 5 and 6) or Control of Corruption (columns 3, 4, 7 and 8) from Kaufmann, Kraay and Mastruzzi (2007) for the period 1996-2005 (see appendix Table A2). All
countries within one-standard deviation from the sample mean were assigned to the middle-institutions category. P-values for equality of coefficients at the bottom of the table are
for the short-run effects in columns 1, 3, 5 and 7 and the long-run effects in the remaining columns. Inflation data are from International Financial Statistics (IMF).

Table 4
GMM Arellano-Bond Regressions for Inflation and Interactions of CBI with Const. on the Executive: Annual Panel 1972-2005
Dependent variable is inflation/(1+inflation)
Full Sample
Only Countries with Change in CBI
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
CBI Dummy*Low Const. Exec. Dummy
-0.010
-0.059
-0.050
-0.091
(0.040)
(0.048)
(0.024)
(0.042)
CBI Dummy*Med Const. Exec. Dummy
-0.046
-0.060
-0.053
-0.063
(0.027)
(0.037)
(0.021)
(0.032)
CBI Dummy*High Const. Exec. Dummy
0.032
0.034
0.010
0.012
(0.018)
(0.015)
(0.015)
(0.013)
CBI*Low Const.Exec Long Run Effect
P-value Long Run Effect-Low-

-0.039
[0.804]

-0.049
[0.725]

-0.203
[0.043]

-0.203
[0.035]

CBI*Med Const.Exec Long Run Effect
P-value Long Run Effect-Med-

-0.181
[0.068]

-0.191
[0.063]

-0.217
[0.034]

-0.273
[0.011]

CBI*High Const.Exec Long Run Effect
P-value Long Run Effect-High-

0.129
[0.072]

0.111
[0.186]

0.040
[0.480]

-0.014
[0.830]

P-value 5 Inflation Lags=0
P-value CBI*Low Const.Exec and 5 Lags =0
P-value CBI*Med Const.Exec and 5 Lags =0
P-value CBI*High Const.Exec and 5 Lags =0

[0.000]

[0.000]
[0.042]
[0.541]
[0.210]

[0.000]

[0.000]
[0.005]
[0.074]
[0.326]

P-Value Medium Effect=Low Effect
P-Value Medium Effect=High Effect

[0.387]
[0.001]

[0.236]
[0.000]

[0.890]
[0.003]

[0.445]
[0.001]

Sargan Test
2nd order serial correlation
Observations

[0.00]
[0.59]
1358

[0.00]
[0.45]
1358

[0.00]
[0.99]
1060

[0.00]
[0.85]
1060

Robust standard errors in parentheses. P-values reported in brackets. All columns are unbalanced panels with one observation per year, per country. All regressions include year
dummies and GMM (Arellano-Bond) uses all available lags of inflation as instruments. CBI Dummy takes a value of 1 in every year after substantial reforms to Central Bank Laws
leading to more independence are introduced (see text and appendix table A1). Assignment of countries to low, middle and high constraints on the executive is based on the average
of the xcons variable from Polity IV for the period 1972-2004. All countries within one-standard deviation from the sample mean were assigned to the middle-constraints category. Pvalues for equality of coefficients at the bottom of the table are for the long-run effects. Inflation data are from International Financial Statistics (IMF).

Table 5
OLS Fixed Effects Regressions for CBI and Inflation adding Quadratic Interaction with Const. on the Exec.: Annual Panel 1972-2005
Dependent variable is inflation/(1+inflation)
Full Sample
Only Countries with Change in CBI
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
CBI Short Run Effect at Const.Exec=1
0.217
0.000
-0.197
0.198
-0.006
-0.266
P-value Short Run Effect at Const.Exec=1
[0.264]
[0.998]
[0.152]
[0.300]
[0.916]
[0.048]
CBI Short Run Effect at Const.Exec=4
P-value Short Run Effect at Const.Exec=4

-0.075
[0.093]

-0.035
[0.056]

-0.073
[0.066]

-0.099
[0.016]

-0.045
[0.018]

-0.079
[0.047]

CBI Short Run Effect at Const.Exec=7
P-value Short Run Effect at Const.Exec=7

0.038
[0.202]

0.005
[0.544]

0.017
[0.185]

0.012
[0.617]

-0.005
[0.541]

0.002
[0.861]

CBI Long Run Effect at Const.Exec=1
P-value Long Run Effect at Const.Exec=1

0.001
[0.998]

0.189
[0.290]

-0.026
[0.915]

0.094
[0.515]

CBI Long Run Effect at Const.Exec=4
P-value Long Run Effect at Const.Exec=4

-0.145
[0.046]

-0.144
[0.050]

-0.183
[0.026]

-0.221
[0.010]

CBI Long Run Effect at Const.Exec=7
P-value Long Run Effect at Const.Exec=7

0.019
[0.558]

0.020
[0.633]

-0.020
[0.540]

-0.057
[0.180]

P-value 5 Inflation Lags=0

[0.000]

[0.000]

[0.000]

[0.000]

[0.172]
[0.017]

[0.577]
[0.020]

[0.221]
[0.014]

[0.164]
[0.019]

[0.544]
[0.024]

[0.255]
[0.015]

No

No

Yes

No

No

Yes

1670
0.51

1500
0.83

1500
0.83

1300
0.49

1172
0.84

1172
0.84

P-value Effect at Const.Exec(4)=Effect at Const.Exec(1)
P-value Effect at Const.Exec(4)=Effect at Const.Exec(7)
5 Lags of CBI Dummy and Linear and Quadratic Interactions
with Const on the Exec.
Observations
R-squared

P-values reported in brackets. All columns are unbalanced panels with one observation per year, per country. All regressions include a CBI dummy and a linear and quadratic interaction of
CBI dummy with average constraints on the executive (average for the period 1972-2004). All regressions include country and year fixed effects. CBI Dummy takes a value of 1 in every year
after substantial reforms to Central Bank Laws leading to more independence are introduced (see text and appendix table A1). P-values for equality of coefficients at the bottom of the table
are for the short-run effects in columns 1 and 4 and the long-run effects in the remaining columns. Inflation data are from International Financial Statistics (IMF).

Table 6
Falsification Exercise: Inflation and Interactions of CBI with Const. on the Executive: Annual Panel 1972-2005
Dependent variable is Inflation/(1+Inflation)
Full Sample
Only Countries with change in CBI
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
CBI Dummy*Low Category Dummy
-0.007
-0.044
-0.013
-0.048
(0.017)
(0.020)
(0.017)
(0.019)
CBI Dummy*Mid Category Dummy
-0.119
-0.035
-0.132
-0.042
(0.056)
(0.020)
(0.050)
(0.020)
CBI Dummy*High Category Dummy
0.032
0.006
0.023
0.002
(0.020)
(0.005)
(0.019)
(0.006)
CBI Dummy*Low Category Dummy (t+5)
CBI Dummy*Mid Category Dummy (t+5)
CBI Dummy*High Category Dummy (t+5)
P-value 5 Inflation Lags
Observations
R-squared

0.052
(0.024)
0.083
(0.042)
-0.001
(0.019)

0.030
(0.015)
0.016
(0.010)
0.002
(0.007)

1514
0.54

[0.000]
1344
0.83

0.032
(0.029)
0.070
(0.046)
-0.018
(0.024)

0.022
(0.014)
0.012
(0.010)
-0.006
(0.008)

1180
0.51

[0.000]
1052
0.84

Robust standard errors, adjusted for clustering by country, in parentheses. P-values reported in brackets. All columns are unbalanced panels with one observation per
year, per country. All OLS regressions include country and year fixed effects. CBI Dummy takes a value of 1 in every year after substantial reforms to Central Bank
Laws leading to more independence are introduced (see text and appendix table A1). Assignment of countries to low, middle and high categories is based on the
average of the xcons variable from Polity IV for the period 1972-2004. All countries within one-standard deviation from the sample mean were assigned to the middleconstraints category. Inflation data are from International Financial Statistics (IMF).

Table 7a
OLS Fixed Effects Regressions for Inflation and Interactions of CBI with Const. on the Executive (Robustness Checks): Annual Panel 1972-2005
Dependent variable is inflation/(1+inflation)
Full Sample

Adding Time Varying
Covariates

CBI*Low Const. Exec. Dummy
CBI*Med Const. Exec. Dummy
CBI*High Const. Exec. Dummy

(1)
-0.025
(0.028)
-0.018
(0.013)
0.001
(0.008)

(2)
-0.054
(0.043)
-0.034
(0.025)
0.007
(0.010)

Adding region specific
quadratic trend

(3)
0.025
(0.031)
-0.065
(0.044)
0.023
(0.025)

(4)
-0.049
(0.035)
-0.045
(0.033)
0.012
(0.011)

Excluding Europe

(5)
0.035
(0.034)
-0.078
(0.057)
0.008
(0.044)

(6)
-0.052
(0.034)
-0.050
(0.039)
0.022
(0.026)

Adding European
Central Bank Dummy
and 5 lags
(7)
0.030
(0.028)
-0.078
(0.046)
0.009
(0.027)

(8)
-0.051
(0.032)
-0.048
(0.033)
0.010
(0.011)

Using Cukierman CBI
Index

(9)
0.075
(0.052)
-0.182
(0.115)
0.064
(0.052)

(10)
-0.127
(0.080)
-0.124
(0.089)
0.020
(0.021)

CBI*Low Const.Exec Long Run Effect
P-value Long Run Effect-Low-

-0.021
[0.856]

-0.004
[0.961]

-0.013
[0.853]

-0.016
[0.778]

0.045
[0.712]

CBI*Med Const.Exec Long Run Effect
P-value Long Run Effect-Med-

-0.055
[0.306]

-0.090
[0.165]

-0.138
[0.105]

-0.131
[0.045]

-0.294
[0.071]

CBI*High Const.Exec Long Run Effect
P-value Long Run Effect-High-

0.016
[0.757]

0.029
[0.426]

0.016
[0.790]

-0.015
[0.724]

0.061
[0.406]

P-value 5 Inflation Lags=0
P-value CBI*Low Const.Exec and 5 Lags =0
P-value CBI*Med Const.Exec and 5 Lags =0
P-value CBI*High Const.Exec and 5 Lags =0
P-value 5 Exch. Rate Flex. Lags
P-value 5 log(GDP) Lags
P-value ECB Dummy and 5 Lags=0

[0.000]
[0.449]
[0.603]
[0.900]
[0.008]
[0.079]

[0.000]
[0.098]
[0.596]
[0.449]

[0.000]
[0.150]
[0.583]
[0.082]

[0.000]
[0.087]
[0.397]
[0.195]

[0.000]
[0.035]
[0.664]
[0.403]

P-Value Medium Effect=Low Effect
P-Value Medium Effect=High Effect
Observations
R-squared

[0.011]
[0.052]
[0.794]
[0.051]
1323
0.871

[0.770]
[0.144]
1323
0.871

[0.014]
[0.016]
1670
0.509

[0.207]
[0.006]
1500
0.833

[0.018]
[0.109]
1147
0.482

[0.067]
[0.014]
1027
0.822

[0.009]

[0.012]

[0.013]
[0.021]
1533
0.529

[0.059]
[0.006]
1500
0.833

[0.017]
[0.023]
1670
0.508

[0.034]
[0.009]
1500
0.833

Robust standard errors, adjusted for clustering by country, in parentheses. P-values reported in brackets. All columns are unbalanced panels with one observation per year, per country. All OLS regressions include country and year
fixed effects. CBI in columns 1-8 refers to a CBI Dummy. The CBI Dummy takes a value of 1 in every year after substantial reforms to Central Bank Laws leading to more independence are introduced (see text and appendix table
A1). In columns 9-10, CBI refers to values of the Cukierman index provided by Crowe and Meade (2007) for 1989 and 2003. We assume the 1989 value holds for the pre central bank reform period and the 2003 value holds for the
post central bank reform period. For the pre-reform period (1989), we assign the Latinamerican average to Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala and Paraguay since for these countries Crowe and Meade (2007) don't provide a value of
the index for 1989 but they do so for 2003. No values of the Cukierman index were provided for Dominican Republic, Guyana and Mongolia for 1989 or 2003.
Columns 1 and 2 include 5 lags of log(GDP per capita) obtained from Penn World Tables 6.2 and 5 lags of the Exchange Rate flexibility index constructed by Reinhart and Rogoff (2002) and available for the period 1972-2001.
Columns 3 and 4 include an interaction of year^2 with OECD and Latinamerica dummies. Columns 5 and 6 exclude Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland and the United Kingdom. The European Central Bank (ECB) dummy included in columns 7 and 8 takes a value of 1 from 1999 onwards for Austria, Belgium, Finland, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy,
Netherlands, Portugal and Spain and from 2001 onwards for Greece. Assignment of countries to low, middle and high constraints on the executive is based on the average of the xcons variable from Polity IV for the period 19722004. All countries within one-standard deviation from the sample mean were assigned to the middle-constraints category. P-values for equality of coefficients at the bottom of the table are for the short-run effects in columns 1, 3, 5,
7 and 9 and the long-run effects in the remaining columns. Inflation data are from International Financial Statistics (IMF).

Table 7b
OLS Fixed Effects Regressions for Inflation and Interactions of CBI with Const. on the Executive (Robustness Checks): Annual Panel 1972-2005
Dependent variable is inflation/(1+inflation)
Only Countries with Change in CBI

Adding Time Varying
Covariates

CBI*Low Const. Exec. Dummy
CBI*Med Const. Exec. Dummy
CBI*High Const. Exec. Dummy

(1)
-0.039
(0.028)
-0.033
(0.013)
-0.012
(0.009)

(2)
-0.069
(0.042)
-0.039
(0.025)
-0.006
(0.012)

Adding region specific
quadratic trend

(3)
-0.008
(0.015)
-0.098
(0.037)
0.006
(0.028)

(4)
-0.073
(0.037)
-0.050
(0.032)
-0.000
(0.011)

Excluding Europe

(5)
-0.002
(0.022)
-0.121
(0.052)
-0.036
(0.038)

(6)
-0.076
(0.036)
-0.054
(0.038)
0.003
(0.020)

Adding European
Central Bank Dummy
and 5 lags
(7)
0.013
(0.018)
-0.099
(0.042)
-0.012
(0.020)

(8)
-0.069
(0.033)
-0.050
(0.032)
-0.004
(0.011)

Using Cukierman CBI
Index

(9)
0.040
(0.042)
-0.224
(0.114)
0.027
(0.043)

(10)
-0.154
(0.082)
-0.120
(0.086)
0.002
(0.022)

CBI*Low Const.Exec Long Run Effect
P-value Long Run Effect-Low-

-0.096
[0.385]

-0.108
[0.180]

-0.112
[0.153]

-0.087
[0.176]

-0.028
[0.825]

CBI*Med Const.Exec Long Run Effect
P-value Long Run Effect-Med-

-0.130
[0.013]

-0.179
[0.008]

-0.234
[0.018]

-0.198
[0.009]

-0.362
[0.044]

CBI*High Const.Exec Long Run Effect
P-value Long Run Effect-High-

-0.061
[0.228]

-0.032
[0.469]

-0.085
[0.123]

-0.084
[0.067]

0.002
[0.982]

P-value 5 Inflation Lags=0
P-value CBI*Low Const.Exec and 5 Lags =0
P-value CBI*Med Const.Exec and 5 Lags =0
P-value CBI*High Const.Exec and 5 Lags =0
P-value 5 Exch. Rate Flex. Lags
P-value 5 log(GDP) Lags
P-value ECB Dummy and 5 Lags=0

[0.000]
[0.226]
[0.111]
[0.663]
[0.009]
[0.229]

[0.000]
[0.009]
[0.067]
[0.652]

[0.000]
[0.021]
[0.050]
[0.100]

[0.000]
[0.010]
[0.028]
[0.256]

[0.000]
[0.072]
[0.345]
[0.632]

P-Value Medium Effect=Low Effect
P-Value Medium Effect=High Effect
Observations
R-squared

[0.010]
[0.167]
[0.833]
[0.041]
1049
0.859

[0.742]
[0.153]
1049
0.859

[0.015]
[0.006]
1300
0.490

[0.303]
[0.000]
1172
0.843

[0.016]
[0.110]
892
0.460

[0.074]
[0.019]
800
0.830

[0.013]

[0.010]

[0.012]
[0.021]
1190
0.514

[0.069]
[0.008]
1172
0.842

[0.017]
[0.024]
1242
0.494

[0.050]
[0.011]
1127
0.849

Robust standard errors, adjusted for clustering by country, in parentheses. P-values reported in brackets. All columns are unbalanced panels with one observation per year, per country. All OLS regressions include country and year
fixed effects. CBI in columns 1-8 refers to a CBI Dummy. The CBI Dummy takes a value of 1 in every year after substantial reforms to Central Bank Laws leading to more independence are introduced (see text and appendix table
A1). In columns 9-10, CBI refers to values of the Cukierman index provided by Crowe and Meade (2007) for 1989 and 2003. We assume the 1989 value holds for the pre central bank reform period and the 2003 value holds for the
post central bank reform period. For the pre-reform period (1989), we assign the Latinamerican average to Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala and Paraguay since for these countries Crowe and Meade (2007) don't provide a value of
the index for 1989 but they do so for 2003. No values of the Cukierman index were provided for Dominican Republic, Guyana and Mongolia for 1989 or 2003.
Columns 1 and 2 include 5 lags of log(GDP per capita) obtained from Penn World Tables 6.2 and 5 lags of the Exchange Rate flexibility index constructed by Reinhart and Rogoff (2002) and available for the period 1972-2001.
Columns 3 and 4 include an interaction of year^2 with OECD and Latinamerica dummies. Columns 5 and 6 exclude Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland and the United Kingdom. The European Central Bank (ECB) dummy included in columns 7 and 8 takes a value of 1 from 1999 onwards for Austria, Belgium, Finland, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy,
Netherlands, Portugal and Spain and from 2001 onwards for Greece. Assignment of countries to low, middle and high constraints on the executive is based on the average of the xcons variable from Polity IV for the period 19722004. All countries within one-standard deviation from the sample mean were assigned to the middle-constraints category. P-values for equality of coefficients at the bottom of the table are for the short-run effects in columns 1, 3, 5,
7 and 9 and the long-run effects in the remaining columns. Inflation data are from International Financial Statistics (IMF).

Table 8
OLS Fixed Effects Regressions for Government Expenditure and Interactions of CBI with Const. on the Executive: Annual Panel 1972-2005
Dependent variable is Government Expenditure/GDP
Full Sample
Only Countries with Change in CBI
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
CBI Dummy*Low Const. Exec. Dummy
-0.047
0.003
-0.022
-0.033
0.005
-0.021
(0.065)
(0.012)
(0.033)
(0.056)
(0.011)
(0.033)
CBI Dummy*Med Const. Exec. Dummy
0.024
0.011
0.015
0.039
0.014
0.017
(0.023)
(0.004)
(0.008)
(0.034)
(0.005)
(0.008)
CBI Dummy*High Const. Exec. Dummy
-0.003
0.001
0.000
0.010
0.005
0.004
(0.025)
(0.005)
(0.006)
(0.035)
(0.005)
(0.007)
CBI*Low Const.Exec Long Run Effect
P-value Long Run Effect-Low-

0.012
[0.830]

0.029
[0.426]

0.023
[0.646]

0.041
[0.328]

CBI*Med Const.Exec Long Run Effect
P-value Long Run Effect-Med-

0.050
[0.013]

0.047
[0.099]

0.066
[0.008]

0.062
[0.140]

CBI*High Const.Exec Long Run Effect
P-value Long Run Effect-High-

0.007
[0.753]

0.015
[0.646]

0.025
[0.337]

0.035
[0.451]

P-value 5 Gov. Expenditure Lags=0
P-value CBI*Low Const.Exec and 5 Lags =0
P-value CBI*Med Const.Exec and 5 Lags =0
P-value CBI*High Const.Exec and 5 Lags =0

[0.000]

[0.000]
[0.000]
[0.025]
[0.523]

[0.000]

[0.000]
[0.009]
[0.026]
[0.534]

[0.510]
[0.070]
1227
0.94

[0.617]
[0.277]
1227
0.94

[0.467]
[0.088]
913
0.94

[0.560]
[0.349]
913
0.94

P-Value Medium Effect=Low Effect
P-Value Medium Effect=High Effect
Observations
R-squared

[0.346]
[0.300]
1431
0.78

[0.343]
[0.282]
1070
0.78

Robust standard errors, adjusted for clustering by country, in parentheses. P-values reported in brackets. All columns are unbalanced panels with one observation per year, per country. All OLS
regressions include country and year fixed effects. CBI Dummy takes a value of 1 in every year after substantial reforms to Central Bank Laws leading to more independence are introduced (see
text and appendix table A1). Assignment of countries to low, middle and high constraints on the executive is based on the average of the xcons variable from Polity IV for the period 1972-2004. All
countries within one-standard deviation from the sample mean were assigned to the middle-constraints category. P-values for equality of coefficients at the bottom of the table are for the short-run
effects in columns 1 and 4 and the long-run effects in the remaining columns. Government Expenditure data are from World Economic Outlook (IMF).

Table 9
GMM Arellano-Bond Regressions for Gov. Expenditure and Interactions of CBI with Const. on the Executive: Annual Panel 1972-2005
Dependent variable is Government Expenditure/GDP
Full Sample
Only Countries with Change in CBI
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
CBI Dummy*Low Const. Exec. Dummy
0.017
-0.008
0.008
-0.018
(0.010)
(0.027)
(0.007)
(0.026)
CBI Dummy*Med Const. Exec. Dummy
0.022
0.020
0.017
0.019
(0.008)
(0.008)
(0.006)
(0.008)
CBI Dummy*High Const. Exec. Dummy
0.003
-0.001
-0.002
-0.004
(0.005)
(0.007)
(0.005)
(0.008)
CBI*Low Const.Exec Long Run Effect
P-value Long Run Effect-Low-

0.079
[0.069]

0.119
[0.008]

0.035
[0.242]

0.050
[0.111]

CBI*Med Const.Exec Long Run Effect
P-value Long Run Effect-Med-

0.105
[0.002]

0.111
[0.016]

0.075
[0.003]

0.063
[0.160]

CBI*High Const.Exec Long Run Effect
P-value Long Run Effect-High-

0.013
[0.577]

0.027
[0.385]

-0.010
[0.633]

-0.006
[0.871]

P-value 5 Gov. Expenditure Lags=0
P-value CBI*Low Const.Exec and 5 Lags =0
P-value CBI*Med Const.Exec and 5 Lags =0
P-value CBI*High Const.Exec and 5 Lags =0

[0.000]

[0.000]
[0.000]
[0.024]
[0.487]

[0.000]

[0.000]
[0.036]
[0.003]
[0.206]

P-Value Medium Effect=Low Effect
P-Value Medium Effect=High Effect

[0.629]
[0.000]

[0.855]
[0.004]

[0.381]
[0.000]

[0.707]
[0.004]

Sargan Test
2nd order serial correlation
Observations

[0.00]
[0.41]
1137

[0.00]
[0.40]
1137

[0.00]
[0.25]
848

[0.00]
[0.25]
848

Robust standard errors in parentheses. P-values reported in brackets. All columns are unbalanced panels with one observation per year, per country. All regressions include year dummies and
GMM (Arellano-Bond) uses all available lags of government expenditure as instruments. CBI Dummy takes a value of 1 in every year after substantial reforms to Central Bank Laws leading to
more independence are introduced (see text and appendix table A1). Assignment of countries to low, middle and high constraints on the executive is based on the average of the xcons variable
from Polity IV for the period 1972-2004. All countries within one-standard deviation from the sample mean were assigned to the middle-constraints category. P-values for equality of coefficients
at the bottom of the table are for the long-run effects. Government Expenditure data are from World Economic Outlook (IMF).

Table 10
Falsification Exercise: Gov. Expenditure and Interactions of CBI with Const. on the Exec: Annual Panel 1972=2005
Dependent variable is Government Expenditure/GDP
Full Sample
Only Countries with change in CBI
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
CBI Dummy*Low Const. Exec. Dummy
0.061
0.018
0.069
0.018
(0.035)
(0.007)
(0.039)
(0.008)
CBI Dummy*Mid Const. Exec Dummy
0.008
0.013
0.028
0.017
(0.016)
(0.004)
(0.023)
(0.005)
CBI Dummy*High Const. Exec. Dummy
-0.021
-0.004
-0.011
-0.001
(0.018)
(0.004)
(0.025)
(0.004)
CBI Dummy*Low Const. Exec. Dummy (t+5)
CBI Dummy*Mid Const. Exec Dummy (t+5)
CBI Dummy*High Const. Exec. Dummy (t+5)
P-value 5 Government Expenditure Lags
Observations
R-squared

-0.140
(0.094)
0.015
(0.018)
0.025
(0.021)

-0.027
(0.021)
-0.003
(0.009)
0.005
(0.007)

-0.111
(0.079)
0.033
(0.028)
0.052
(0.032)

-0.019
(0.018)
0.001
(0.012)
0.011
(0.010)

1284
0.80

[0.000]
1080
0.93

959
0.79

[0.000]
802
0.94

Robust standard errors, adjusted for clustering by country, in parentheses. P-values reported in brackets. All columns are unbalanced panels with one observation per
year, per country. All OLS regressions include country and year fixed effects. CBI Dummy takes a value of 1 in every year after substantial reforms to Central Bank Laws
leading to more independence are introduced (see text and appendix table A1). Assignment of countries to low, middle and high constraints on the executive is based on
the average of the xcons variable from Polity IV for the period 1972-2004. All countries within one-standard deviation from the sample mean were assigned to the middleconstraints category. Government expenditure data are from World Economic Outlook (IMF).

Appendix Table A1
In this table we provide for each country the year in which major reforms to the Constitution or central bank charters conducive to greater
independence were enacted. For Latin-American countries we used the dates of major central bank reforms provided by Jacome and Vasquez
(2005). For the remaining countries, we use the year in which the Cukierman index constructed by Polillo and Guillén (2005) increases. However,
for every country we used Arnone, Laurens, Segalotto and Somer (2007), who provided the year of major central bank reforms, to verify that a
major reform did take place in the year in which the index constructed by Polillo and Guillén (2005) increases. Whenever there was disagreement
between Polillo and Guillén (2005) and Arnone, Laurens, Segalotto and Somer (2007) we consulted additional sources (such as the central bank's
website) in order to identify the year in which the most substantial reform towards CBI (if any) took place. Similarly, for countries for which the
index constructed by Polillo and Guillén (2005) did not increase between 1989 and 2000 we used Arnone, Laurens, Segalotto and Somer (2007)
and other sources to explore if a central bank reform took place after 2000. The specific law by which such reforms were passed is specified in the
third column. We provide a short description (if available) of the changes introduced by the law in the fourth column. For this description we
consulted the central bank's history available at the bank's website or other documents available at the central bank's webiste such as the laws
themselves or annual reports. Whenever no description was available at the bank's website we consulted other references included in the last
column.

Table A1 (a)
Data Sources and Legislation that introduced Central Bank Independence in countries in our sample
A. Countries with low constraints on the executive

Country

Year of
Major
Central
Bank
Reform

Legislation

Notes

1995

Law of the People's
Republic of China on the
People's Bank of China
promulgated by Order No.
46, 1995

Article 7 stipulates that "The People's Bank of China shall, under the leadership of the State
Council, implement monetary policies, perform its functions and carry out its business
operations independently according to law and be free from intervention by local
governments, government departments at various levels, public organizations or individuals."
Article 37 stipulates that "The People's Bank of China shall exercise independent control
over its financial budget".

Arnone et.al. (2007) and the Law of
the People's Bank of China available
at bank's website:
http://www.pbc.gov.cn/english/

GUATEMALA

2002

Decree 16-2002
ammending the Organic
Law of the Central Bank of
Guatemala, 2002

The Organic Law of the Bank of Guatemala was aimed at clearly defining the fundamental
objective of the Central Bank, strengthening its financial autonomy and demanding
transparency and accountability to the society. Similarly, it stipulates that the Monetary
Board, of which the Bank of Guatemala depends, in an autonomous entity with its own
budget that must be ruled by its Organic and Monetary Law.

Jácome and Vasquez (2005) and
bank's website:
http://www.banguat.gob.gt

GUYANA

1999

Bank of Guyana Act No.19,
1999

The Bank of Guyana Act No.19 established the Central Bank as an autonomous institution
governed by the Act.

Jácome and Vasquez (2005) and
bank's website:
http://www.bankofguyana.org.gy

CHINA

Source

The bank's website states that the Act conferred it the status and position as an independent
state institution and freedom from interference by the Government or any other external
parties.

Polillo and Guillen (2005), Arnone et.
Al (2007) and bank's website:
http://www.bi.go.id

Nepal Rastra Bank Act,
2058, 2002

The new Act, according to the bank's website "has provided operational autonomy and
independence to the Bank".

Arnone et.al. (2007) and the bank's
website: http://www.nrb.org.np/

Organic Law of the Central
Bank of Paraguay, Law
489, 1995

The Central Bank of Paraguay "has administrative and financial autarky and normative
autonomy according to the limits in the National Constitution and the laws".

Jácome and Vasquez (2005) and
bank's website:
http://www.bcp.gov.py

INDONESIA

1999

Central Bank Act, UU No.
23, 1999

NEPAL

2002

PARAGUAY

1995

QATAR
SINGAPORE

No change in
CBI
No change in
CBI

N.A

N.A

Polillo and Guillen (2005)

N.A

N.A

Polillo and Guillen (2005)

Table A1 (b)
Data Sources and Legislation that introduced Central Bank Independence in countries in our sample
B. Countries with medium constraints on the executive

Country

Year of
Major
Central
Bank
Reform

Legislation

ARGENTINA

1992

Central Bank of Argentina
Charter, Law 24.144, 1992

BOLIVIA

1995

Law 1670, 1995

BRAZIL

No change in
CBI

N.A

CHILE

1989

Organic Law of the Central
Bank of Chile, 1989

Notes
Article 3 of the Law establishes preserving the stability and value of domestic currency as the
primary and fundamental objective of the central bank. Moreover, the law also makes it
explicit that the bank will not be subject to orders, indications or instructions from the
executive power for conducting monetary policy.
Law 1670 establishes that the objective of the central bank is to maintain the stability of the
national currency and its purchasing power and recognizes the autonomous nature of the
institution and its status as the unique monetary and exchange authority in the country. This
Law “buried the times in which the monetary authority conceded credit without limit to the
government” and was in charge of duties potentially incompatible with sound monetary
policy such as development banking.
Eventhough Brazil pursued social consensus in favor of the operational independence of the
central bank and passed a Fiscal Responsibility Law (2000), which strengthened the central
bank’s financial autonomy and accountability, it did not pass legislation to bring about
reforms.

Source
Jácome and Vasquez (2005) amd
central bank law available at the
bank’s website: www.bcra.gov.ar

Jácome and Vasquez (2005) and
bank’s website: www.bcb.gov.bo

Jácome and Vasquez (2005)

The first article of Law 18,840 confirmed the Bank's independence in technical and financial
(equity) terms and defined its objectives. Independence referred to its ability to make its own
technical decisions while exercising its attributes and to the financial autonomy since the law
granted it its own equity. Similarly, the law stipulated that the Central Bank is not subject to
supervision by the General Comptroller of the Republic nor the Superintendent of Banks and
Financial Institutions.

Jácome and Vasquez (2005) and
bank's website:
http://www.bcentral.cl/eng/

Jácome and Vasquez (2005) and
bank's website:
http://www.banrep.gov.co

COLOMBIA

1992

Law 31, 1992

The Constitution and the Law grant autonomy to the Banco de la República as Colombia’s
central bank. The Bank does not form part of the Executive, Legislative and Judicial
branches of public power, nor of the regulatory, auditing, or electoral agencies. Technical
autonomy consists of the bank's ability to "analyze freely monetary phenomena, to design
and apply policy without being subject to other State pressures".

DOMINICAN
REPUBLIC

2002

Law No. 183-02 that
approves the Monetary and
Financial Law, 2002

Article 5 of the Monetary and Financial law stipulates that "the monetary and financial
administration has functional, organizational and budgetary autonomy for the fulfillment of
its functions"

Jácome and Vasquez (2005) and
Monetary and Financial Law available
in the bank's website:
http://www.bancentral.gov.do/

Organic Law of Monetary
Regime and State Bank,
Law No. 2, 1992

The Monetary Regime and State Bank Law (1992) clearly defined the functions of Ecuador's
Central Bank in the formulation and implementation of monetary and exchange rate policy
and in the construction of a stable economic environment in the country. The Law was aimed
at giving independence to the Bank and isolating it from political decisions in the economic
sphere such as the appointment of authorities by the government; restrictions on the
inflationary financing of the government and in the management of policy instruments,
directly, to guide the exchange rate and the interest rate.

Jácome and Vasquez (2005) and
bank's website: http://www.bce.fin.ec/

ECUADOR

1992

EL SALVADOR

FRANCE

GREECE

Organic Law of Central
Bank of El Salvador, 1991

On April 12, 1991, the new Organic Law of the Central Reserve Bank of El Salvador was
approved, establishing it as a public, autonomous institution of technical character. (…) Its
institutional functions were modernized, eliminating the authority to control the assignment
of credit and prohibiting the concession of financing to the State and other public enterprises,
allowing it to comply in a better manner its fundamental purpose of maintaining monetary
stability.

Jácome and Vasquez (2005) and
bank's website:
http://www.bcr.gob.sv/ingles

1993

Act of 4 August, 1993

The Act of 4 August 1993 was a turning point in the history of the Banque de France. The
move to an independent Bank was made to ensure the continuity and steadiness of monetary
policy by freeing it from short-term considerations, thereby enhancing its credibility. A clear
and solemn commitment in favor of price stability, regardless of domestic politics, is a
necessary, albeit not in itself sufficient, condition for credibility. Moreover, central Bank
independence has been deemed to be the best institutional solution in the move towards
European Monetary Union, making a reform of the Banque de France's statutes all the more
necessary.

Maxfield (1997), McNamara (2002),
Daunfeldt and de Luna (2003), Polillo
and Guillen (2005) and the bank's
website: http://www.banquefrance.fr/gb

1994

Law 2275, 1994 amending
Articles 45 and 46 of the
Statute of the Bank of
Greece

While Laws 2609/98 to meet the requirements of the Treaty of the European Union
introduced additional measures that increased the autonomy of the central bank it was the
reform of 1994, that abolished the rights of the Bank to provide the government with any
kind of advances or lending, that had the largest impact on the CBI index measured by
Panagiotidis and Triampella (2006)

Maxfield (1997), McNamara (2002)
and Panagioditis and Triampella
(2006) and Bank of Greece Statute
available at the bank's website:
http://www.bankofgreece.gr/en/

Jácome and Vasquez (2005) and
bank's website: http://www.bch.hn/

1991

HONDURAS

1996

Decree No. 228-96, 1996

Congress via Decree No. 228-96, approved a set of reforms to [the Central Bank Law] with
the aim of harmonizing the institution with the actual conditions and requirements of the
financial market. (...) The reforms are aimed at strengthening the autonomy and
independence of the monetary authority so that it can fulfill the new role that society has
granted it through its Legislative bodies.

INDIA

No change in
CBI

N.A

Even though a supplemental agreement between the Government and the RBI in September
1994 on the abolition of the ad hoc treasury bills to be made effective from April 1997 was
passed, India has not approved any legislation to reform the Reserve Bank of India Act.

Polillo and Guillen (2005)

KOREA

1997

Law 5491, 1997

Law 5491 of 1997 amends the Bank of Korea Act and (…) ensures the independence and
neutrality of the Bank of Korea as the central bank in carrying out currency and credit policy

Polillo and Guillen (2005), Arnone et.
al (2007) and Global Legal
Information Network:
http://www.glin.gov

MALAYSIA

1994

Ammendment to Central
Bank of Malaysia Act,
1994

N.A

MEXICO

1993

Law of the Central Bank of
Mexico, 1993

MONGOLIA

1995

Law of Mongolia on the
Central Bank of Mongolia

The Law amended article 28 of the Constitution which establishes that “the State will have a
central bank that will be autonomous in the exercise of its functions and in its administration.
Its highest priority will be to secure the stability of the purchasing power of the national
currency, strengthening with it the governing of the national development along with the
State. No authority may order the bank to give financing.”
The degree of independence given to the central bank, the Bank of Mongolia, is surprisingly
similar to that observed in many developed countries. The (1995) Banking Law of Mongolia
(…) states that the two primary objectives of the Bank of Mongolia are to ensure a stable
value for the Mongolian tugrik and to act as supervisor of the financial system.

Arnone et.al (2007)
Jacome and Vasquez (2005) and
Article 28 of the Mexican Constitution
available at the central bank’s website:
www.banxico.org.mx
Polillo and Guillen (2005) and Slok
(2002).

1992

Organic Law of the Central
Bank of Nicaragua, Decree
42-92, 1992

Article 3 of the law established the stability of domestic currency as the fundamental
objective of the bank. Article 48 established that the central bank could not provide direct or
indirect credit to the government in order to compensate for deficiencies in budgetary
revenues. Similarly, the bank cannot concede credit to any public, non-financial institution.

Jacome and Vasquez (2005) and
Decree 42-92 available at:
http://legislacion.asamblea.gob.ni

1997

Amendment Ordinances to
the State Bank of Pakistan
Act, 1997

The autonomy [of the State Bank of Pakistan] was strengthened by issuing three Amendment
Ordinances (which were approved by the Parliament in May, 1997) namely, State Bank of
Pakistan Act, 1956, Banking Companies Ordinance, 1962 and Banks Nationalization Act,
1974. The changes in the State Bank Act gave full and exclusive authority to the State Bank
to regulate the banking sector, to conduct an independent monetary policy and to set limit on
government borrowings from the State Bank of Pakistan.

Polillo and Guillen (2005) and bank's
website: http://www.sbp.org.pk

1993

Organic Law of the Central
Bank of Peru, Law 26123,
1992

The Organic Law states that the Central Bank is an autonomous public institution, and
stipulates that members of the Board of Directors can only be removed due to serious
wrongdoing, criminal offense, or should they: a) Finance the Public Treasury, except in the
case of purchases of Public Treasury securities in the secondary market up to a limit of five
percent of the previous year’s monetary base; b) Finance public development financial
institutions; c) Allocate resources to establish special funds aimed at financing or promoting
non-financial economic activities; d) Issue securities, bonds, or contribution certificates of
mandatory acquisition; e) Impose sector or regional coefficients on the loan portfolios of
financial institutions; f) Establish multiple exchange rate regimes or discriminatory
treatments in foreign exchange regulations and g) Issue guarantees, bid or performance
bonds, or any other kind of guarantees; use any other form of indirect financing; or provide
any form of insurance. These prohibitions provide the Central Bank with the operational
independence the bank requires to carry out its monetary policy-related responsibilities.

Jácome and Vasquez (2005) and
bank's website:
http://www.bcrp.gob.pe/bcr/ingles

PHILIPPINES

1993

Republic Act No. 7653,
1993

The New Central Bank Act of 1993 (...) provides for the establishment of an independent
monetary authority to be known as the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, with the maintenance of
price stability explicitly stated as its primary objective. This objective was only implied in
the old Central Bank charter. The law also gives the Bangko Sentral fiscal and administrative
autonomy which the old Central Bank did not have.

Polillo and Guillen (2005), Arnone et.
Al (2007) and bank's website:
http://www.bsp.gov.ph/

PORTUGAL

1990

Organic Central Bank Law,
Law 337/90, 1990

SPAIN

1994

Autonomy Law, Law 13,
1994

NICARAGUA

PAKISTAN

PERU

In 1990, a new Organic Law was published, the main innovations of which concerned the
constraints imposed on the financing of public deficits, and other provisions ensuring greater
independence for the Banco de Portugal’s board of directors.
The Law of the Bank of Spain was amended in 1994 to fulfill the requirements of the
European Monetary Union in order to join the Network of European Central Banks. The law
prohibits advances from the Central Bank to the treasury (even if transitory). It also extends
the term of the governor of the Central Bank to 6 years. According to the introduction to the
law says, it configures the Bank of Spain as an institution with full autonomy with respect to
monetary policy in order to fulfill its objective of price stability,

Bank's website:
http://www.bportugal.pt

Polillo and Guillen (1994) and central
bank’s law available at the bank’s
website: www.bde.es

TURKEY

2001

Law No. 4651, 2001

URUGUAY

1995

Law 16696, 1995

VENEZUELA

1992

Law of the Central Bank of
Venezuela, 1992

As a measure of independence, it was decreed that one of the main objectives of the Bank is
to achieve and maintain price stability. Furthermore, the Bank was delegated to be the only
body responsible for conducting monetary policy, which enhances the Bank’s independence.
With this new law, while the Bank attained instrument independence, the task of determining
the goal – i.e. the inflation target – is to be carried out jointly with the government. In order
to sustain independence, the law established that the Bank should not grant advances or
extend credit to the Treasury or public establishments and institutions. It was also legislated
that the Bank should not purchase debt instruments issued by the Treasury or by public
establishments and institutions in the primary market. Finally, the appointment of the Vice
Governors has been increased from 3 years to 5 years, parallel to the term of office of the
Governor of the Central Bank. Furthermore, similar to the Governor, Vice Governors cannot
be removed from their posts before the termination of their term of office.
Article 3 of the Law establishes the stability of domestic currency as the main objective of
the Central Bank. Similarly, this article establishes that while the bank has to seek
coordination with the executive on the conduct of economic policy, it has the autonomy to
maintain its criterion whenever the coordination of policy substantially affects the
achievement of its objectives.
The other major reform in the Bank’s legislation came about on 1992, when the central bank
was given administrative autonomy, turning it into a public legal entity. Until then, the Bank
had been corporate in nature, a situation reflected in the make-up of its directorship.
Previously, there was representation of the private sector, through the presence of
representatives from different economic sectors in the directory. Now, this was replaced by a
collegiate body of seven members, a president and six directors, who were chosen by the
President of the Republic. These officials serve for terms of six years – two years longer than
a political term, thus avoiding a constant chain of political appointments. The president’s
appointees must be approved by a two-thirds majority in the Senate, while the Executive’s
representative in the Bank’s directorship is limited to just one director, who can never be the
Treasury Minister. Another new aspect introduced by this reform was the express prohibition
of granting direct credit to the National Government, as well as the establishment of a
regulation obliging the Republic to replenish the Bank’s assets whenever it incurs losses due
to the Republic’s policies.

Arnone et.al (2007) and Annual
Inflation Report for 2001 available at
the bank’s website:
http://www.tcmb.gov.tr

Jacome and Vasquez (2005) and
central bank law available in the
bank’s website: www.bcu.gub.uy

Jacome and Vasquez (2005) and
bank's webiste:
http://www.bcv.org.ve/EnglishVersion

Table A1 (c)
Data Sources and Legislation that introduced Central Bank Independence in countries in our sample
C. Countries with high constraints on the executive

Country

Year of
Major
Central
Bank
Reform

Legislation

Notes

Source

AUSTRALIA

No change in
CBI

N.A

Even though in 1996, the Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia and the Treasurer
signed a Statement on the Conduct of Monetary Policy which set out the Government’s
recognition of the Reserve Bank’s independence and support for the inflation target, the
statute governing the RBA has not been significantly altered since the legislation was first
passed in 1959. The RBA seems to have increased its independence over the course of the
1990s without the need to change the central bank’s statute, in a similar way to the Bank of
Canada.

AUSTRIA

1998

Federal act BGBl. Part I
No. 60/1998

The Federal Act on the Oesterreichische Nationalbank was amended to establish the legal
prerequisites for Austria to participate in Stage Three of EMU

BELGIUM

1993

Ammendment to the Act of
the National Bank of
Belgium, 1993

N.A

Polillo and Guillen (2005) and
Daunfeldt and de Luna (2003)

CANADA

No change in
CBI

N.A

N.A

Polillo and Guillen (2005), King
(2001a) and Daunfeldt and de Luna
(2003)

COSTA RICA

1995

Organic Law of the Central
Bank of Costa Rica, Law
7558, 1995

DENMARK

No change in
CBI

N.A.

N.A

Act 214 on the Bank of
Finland, 1998

Legislation governing the Bank of Finland was revised in 1998 and 1999. The Act on the
Bank of Finland (719/1997) that entered into force on 1 January 1998 did not meet all the
requirements for Stage Three of Economic and Monetary Union (EMU), and therefore it was
amended by a new Act on the Bank of Finland (214/1998), which was passed by the
Parliament on 20 March 1998 and entered into force on 27 March 1998. The provisions of
the new Act concerning the independence of the Bank of Finland entered into force on 1 May
1998. The provisions of the Act state that the Bank of Finland is Finland's central bank and
acts as part of the European System of Central Banks in accordance with the guidelines and
instructions laid down by the European Central Bank. The Bank may not seek or take
instructions from any bodies other than the European Central Bank in performing tasks of the
European System of Central Banks. The primary objective of the Bank is maintenance of
price stability, and it also supports the achievement of other economic policy objectives,
without prejudice to the primary objective.

FINLAND

1998

With the purpose of granting more autonomy to the Central Bank of Costa Rica and in this
way help it achieve its objectives, it is explicitly forbidden to provide credit to the
government or any other public institution (…) Similarly, changes were made in the
procedure by which Board members were appointed and the length of their terms was
increased.

Polillo and Guillen (2005), Daunfeldt
and de Luna (2003) and King (2001b)

Polillo amd Gillen (2005), Arnone
et.al (2007), and Daunfeldt and de
Luna (2003)

Jacome and Vasquez (2005) and
appendix to Annual Report for 1995
available at the central bank’s website:
www.bccr.fi.cr
Polillo and Guillen (2005) and
Daunfeldt and de Luna (2003)

Polillo amd Gillen (2005), Arnone
et.al (2007), Daunfeldt and de Luna
(2003) and central bank’s website:

GERMANY

No change in
CBI

N.A

IRELAND

1998

Central Bank Act, 1998

ISRAEL

No change in
CBI

N.A.

ITALY

1993

Legislative Decree 385,
1993

JAPAN

1998

NETHERLANDS

N.A

Daufeldt and de Luna (2003)

The Central Bank Act was amended to establish the legal prerequisites for Ireland to
participate in Stage Three of EMU.

Polillo amd Gillen (2005), Daunfeldt
and de Luna (2003) and central bank’s
website: http://www.centralbank.ie

In 2005 a new Central Bank Law granting de jure independence to the Central Bank was
drafted but it is still pending approval.

Polillo and Guillen (2005) and bank's
website: http://www.bankisrael.gov.il/

The reform gave the Bank of Italy fully independent power to set official interest rates and
prohibited the State from financing itself by current account overdrafts with the Bank.

Polillo and Guillen (2005), McNamara
(2002), Arnone et.al (2007) and bank's
website: http://www.bancaditalia.it/

Law No. 89, 1997

Article 3 of the Bank of Japan's Law stipulates that the Bank's autonomy regarding currency
and monetary control shall be respected

Polillo and Guillen (2005), Arnone
et.al (2007), Daunfeldt and de Luna
(2003) and the bank's website:
http://www.boj.or.jp/en

1998

Bank Act, 1998

In 1998 the new Bank Act changed the relationship between the government and the DNB.
The Minister of Finance lost his right to give directions, and only has the right to request data
or information necessary for the government's policies.

Polillo and Guillen (2005), Arnone
et.al (2007), Daunfeldt and de Luna
(2003) and the bank's website:
http://www.dnb.nl/dnb

NEW ZEALAND

1989

The Reserve Bank of New
Zealand Act 1989

The Act gave the bank operational independence in the setting of interest rates (decisionmaking no longer relied on the executive but solely on the governor who had the final
decision with respect to monetary policy). Similarly, price stability became the unique
statutory objective of the central bank. In the case of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, CBI
also coincided with the adoption of an inflation targeting framework.

Polillo and Guillen (2005), McNamara
(2002), Daunfeldt and de Luna (2003)
and King (2001b).

NORWAY

No change in
CBI

N.A.

N.A.

SWEDEN

1999

Riksbank Law, 1999

In 1999 the target of low and stable inflation was written into the Sveriges Riksbank Act. In
connection with this, the Riksbank was also given greater independence, for instance, in that
decisions on the repo rate would be taken by an Executive Board consisting of six members.
Interest rate decisions were previously made by the Governing Board, whose successor, the
General Council, now has the main task of appointing the members of the Executive Board.
The six members of the Executive Board are also forbidden by law to seek or take
instructions when making monetary policy decisions. The legislation is largely in line with
the applicable legislation in other parts of the EU.

SWITZERLAND

No change in
CBI

N.A

N.A.

Polillo and Guillen (2005) and
Daunfeldt and de Luna (2003)

Polillo and Guillen (2005) , Daunfeldt
and de Luna (2003) and speech given
by Governor Stefan Ingves on
08/06/2007 available at the bank’s
website: www.riksbank.com

Polillo and Guillen (2005)

UNITED KINGDOM

1998

Bank of England Act, 1998

The main changes in the Bank of England Act conducive to independence were Part II and
Schedule 3 that conferred operational responsibility for monetary policy on the Bank and
established the Monetary Policy Committee (the ‘MPC’) as a Committee of the Bank with
responsibility for the exercise of its powers in relation to the formulation of monetary policy.
Similarly, Section 4(l) of the 1946 Act has been amended to exclude monetary policy from
the matters in relation to which the Treasury can give directions.

UNITED STATES

No change in
CBI

N.A

N.A.

Polillo amd Guillen (2005), Arnone
et.al (2007), Daunfeldt and de Luna
(2003) and bank's website:
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/

Polillo and Guillen (2005), Arnone
et.al (2007) and Daunfeldt and de
Luna (2003)

Appendix Table A2
Institutional Categories based on Constraints on the Executive from Polity IV and
Governance Measures by Kaufmann, Kraay and Mastruzzi (2007)
Coding based on
Coding based on Rule of
Coding based on Control of
Constraints on the
Law
Corruption
Country
Executive
MEDIUM
MEDIUM
MEDIUM
ARGENTINA
HIGH
HIGH
HIGH
AUSTRALIA
HIGH
HIGH
HIGH
AUSTRIA
HIGH
MEDIUM
MEDIUM
BELGIUM
MEDIUM
MEDIUM
LOW
BOLIVIA
MEDIUM
MEDIUM
MEDIUM
BRAZIL
HIGH
HIGH
HIGH
CANADA
MEDIUM
MEDIUM
MEDIUM
CHILE
LOW
MEDIUM
MEDIUM
CHINA
MEDIUM
LOW
MEDIUM
COLOMBIA
HIGH
MEDIUM
MEDIUM
COSTA RICA
HIGH
HIGH
HIGH
DENMARK
MEDIUM
LOW
MEDIUM
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC
MEDIUM
LOW
LOW
ECUADOR
MEDIUM
LOW
MEDIUM
EL SALVADOR
HIGH
HIGH
HIGH
FINLAND
MEDIUM
MEDIUM
MEDIUM
FRANCE
HIGH
HIGH
HIGH
GERMANY
MEDIUM
MEDIUM
MEDIUM
GREECE
LOW
LOW
LOW
GUATEMALA
LOW
MEDIUM
MEDIUM
GUYANA
MEDIUM
LOW
LOW
HONDURAS
MEDIUM
MEDIUM
MEDIUM
INDIA
LOW
LOW
LOW
INDONESIA
HIGH
HIGH
MEDIUM
IRELAND
HIGH
MEDIUM
MEDIUM
ISRAEL
HIGH
MEDIUM
MEDIUM
ITALY
HIGH
MEDIUM
MEDIUM
JAPAN
MEDIUM
MEDIUM
MEDIUM
KOREA
MEDIUM
MEDIUM
MEDIUM
MALAYSIA
MEDIUM
MEDIUM
MEDIUM
MEXICO
MEDIUM
MEDIUM
MEDIUM
MONGOLIA
LOW
MEDIUM
MEDIUM
NEPAL
HIGH
HIGH
HIGH
NETHERLANDS
HIGH
HIGH
HIGH
NEW ZEALAND
MEDIUM
LOW
LOW
NICARAGUA
HIGH
HIGH
HIGH
NORWAY
MEDIUM
LOW
LOW
PAKISTAN
LOW
LOW
LOW
PARAGUAY
MEDIUM
LOW
MEDIUM
PERU
MEDIUM
MEDIUM
MEDIUM
PHILIPPINES
MEDIUM
MEDIUM
MEDIUM
PORTUGAL
LOW
MEDIUM
MEDIUM
QATAR
LOW
HIGH
HIGH
SINGAPORE
MEDIUM
MEDIUM
MEDIUM
SPAIN
HIGH
HIGH
HIGH
SWEDEN
HIGH
HIGH
HIGH
SWITZERLAND
MEDIUM
MEDIUM
MEDIUM
TURKEY
HIGH
HIGH
HIGH
UNITED KINGDOM
HIGH
HIGH
MEDIUM
UNITED STATES
MEDIUM
MEDIUM
MEDIUM
URUGUAY
MEDIUM
LOW
LOW
VENEZUELA
Assignment of countries to low, middle and high institutions categories is based, respectively, on the average of the Constraints on the
Executive variable from Polity IV (for the period 1972-2004) and the average of the Rule of Law and Control of Corruption measures
from Kaufmann, Kraay and Mastruzzi (2007) for the period 1996-2005. All countries within one-standard deviation from the sample
mean were assigned to the middle-constraints category.

