                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       THE OWN AND SOCIAL EFFECTS OF AN UNEXPECTED INCOME SHOCK:
              EVIDENCE FROM THE DUTCH POSTCODE LOTTERY

                                           Peter J. Kuhn
                                          Peter Kooreman
                                        Adriaan R. Soetevent
                                           Arie Kapteyn

                                        Working Paper 14035
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14035


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2008




Please direct correspondence to Peter Kuhn at pjkuhn@econ.ucsb.edu. We thank Herma van der Vleuten
(University of Groningen), Kim Paulussen, Kamieke van de Riet, Peter Willems (GfK Benelux), and
Jenny van Laar (Bridgis) for their contributions to the data collection process. The data collection
was made possible through a grant from the Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research (NWO).
 Soetevent's research was supported by a grant from the Program of Fellowships for Junior Scholars
of the MacArthur Research Network on Social Interactions and Economic Inequality We thank Tobias
Klein, Andrew Oswald, Bruce Sacerdote and Linda Waite for helpful comments, as well as seminar
participants at the Université de Paris 1, Université de Lyon 2, University of Zurich, Duke University,
UCSB, the University of Siena, New York University, and the All-UC labor economics conference
at UC Davis. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Peter J. Kuhn, Peter Kooreman, Adriaan R. Soetevent, and Arie Kapteyn. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Own and Social Effects of an Unexpected Income Shock: Evidence from the Dutch Postcode
Lottery
Peter J. Kuhn, Peter Kooreman, Adriaan R. Soetevent, and Arie Kapteyn
NBER Working Paper No. 14035
May 2008
JEL No. C21,D12

                                            ABSTRACT

In the Dutch Postcode Lottery a postal code (19 households on average) is randomly selected weekly,
and prizes – consisting of cash and a new BMW – are awarded to lottery participants living in that
postal code. On average, this generates a temporary, unexpected income shock equal to about eight
months of income for about one third of the households in a typical winning code, while leaving the
incomes of nonwinning, neighboring households unaffected. We study the responses of consumption
and reported happiness of both winners and nonwinners to these shocks. Consistent with simple models
of in-kind transfers, the overwhelming majority of households who won a BMW convert it into cash.
With the exception of food away from home, the only 'own' effects of cash winnings we detect are
on durables expenditures and car consumption; these results support a version of the permanent income
hypothesis in which durable spending is used to smooth consumption. We detect social effects of
neighbors' winnings on two types of consumption: cars and exterior home renovations. Six months
after the fact, winning the lottery does not make households happier, nor do neighbors' winnings reduce
happiness.


Peter J. Kuhn                                      Adriaan R. Soetevent
Department of Economics                            Universiteit van Amsterdam
UC, Santa Barbara                                  Faculty of Economics and Business
2127 North Hall                                    Roetersstraat 11
Santa Barbara, CA 93106                            1018 WB Amsterdam
and NBER                                           The Netherlands
pjkuhn@econ.ucsb.edu                               a.r.soetevent@uva.nl

Peter Kooreman                                     Arie Kapteyn
Tilburg University                                 RAND Corporation
Room K 411                                         1700 Main Street
PO Box 90153                                       P.O. Box 2138
5000 LE Tilburg                                    Santa Monica, CA 90407-2138
The Netherlands                                    kapteyn@rand.org
p.kooreman@uvt.nl
       1. Introduction

       The question of how households change their economic behavior when they receive a

temporary income shock is of great importance for macroeconomic and fiscal policy, and for one

of the most influential hypotheses in economics –the permanent income hypothesis (PIH). A

second influential hypothesis in the discipline has been the notion that households’ consumption

behavior is directly affected by their neighbors, via competitive or imitative processes; see for

example Leibenstein (1950), Pollak (1976), Bagwell and Bernheim (1996), and Becker and

Murphy (2001). Finally, a fundamental prediction of consumer theory is the notion that

households who receive extramarginal in-kind transfers should, if possible, attempt to undo those

transfers by converting them to cash (e.g. Moffitt 1984, 1989).

       To date, empirical testing of all the above hypotheses has yielded less-than-definitive

results, due in part to the lack of credibly exogenous variation in either a household’s own

income, or in either the income or consumption of its neighbors. Recently, however, progress on

testing the PIH has been made by using the random timing of income tax rebates (Agarwal, Liu

and Souleles 2007). Regarding social effects, a number of recent studies have used plausibly

exogenous variation to study social and neighborhood effects, such as Sacerdote’s (2001) study

of (randomly assigned) college room mates, and social experiments such as Moving to

Opportunity which randomly assign households to neighborhoods (Katz et al. 2001, Kling et al.

2005, Ludwig et al. 2001). To our knowledge however, none of these newer studies of social

effects focus specifically on household consumption. We are aware of no experimental tests of

simple models of transfers in kind.

       In this paper we contribute to all the above research questions using data from the Dutch

Postcode Lottery (PCL). Each week, this lottery allocates a prize to participants in a randomly
                                                                                                     2

chosen postcode (containing 19 households on average). About one third of the Dutch

population participates in the lottery. A participant wins €12,500 per ticket. In addition, one of

the participants wins a BMW. From an experimental design perspective, the lottery provides

PCL participants in the winning code with an unexpected temporary income shock equal on

average to about eight months of income, while leaving all other households’ incomes

unchanged. In addition, a randomly chosen subet of those households receive a significant part

of their transfer in kind (in the form of a new BMW). Because our data include both winning

and nonwinning households, and both winning and nonwinning postcodes, this allows us to

estimate not only the effects of unexpected, temporary income shocks (both cash and in kind) on

a household’s own consumption (and, incidentally, happiness), but their effects on its neighbors’

consumption and happiness as well. Our consumption and happiness data is drawn from a

survey of households in winning and nearby non-winning postcodes six months after PCL prizes

were awarded, between September 2003 and July 2006.

       Compared to existing evidence on the own effects of income shocks, our approach has

the following advantages. Relative to Agarwal et al (2007), the income shocks we observe are

much larger (the tax rebates they consider amount to less than one percent of average annual

income); in addition our consumption measures are not restricted to items purchased with a

single credit card, we have significant detail about the distribution of expenditures across types

of consumption (for example, durables versus nondurables), and we have (self-reported)

information on other household income, which allows us to compare the effects of lottery

winnings on spending to those of other components of income. Limitations relative to their data

are a smaller sample size and less information on the timing of expenditure responses to income

shocks. A distinction (relevant to the interpretation of the results) is that the income shocks in
                                                                                                                   3

our experiment were almost surely unexpected by their recipients. Relative to Imbens et al.’s

(2001) study of lottery winners, we have a larger sample and more detail on types of

consumption expenditures. Our income shocks are for the most part smaller than theirs, and

temporary, which leads to different predicted effects. Unlike Imbens et al., we do not have any

information about our households later than six months after the lottery win.

        The current paper is, to our knowledge, the first random-assignment-based study of social

effects in household consumption. Another distinctive feature of our analysis of social effects is

its partial-population design, in which a subset of the members of a fixed peer group receives an

exogenous shock.1 Most quasi-experimental studies of neighborhood effects, like the Moving To

Opportunity (MTO) studies (Katz et al. 2001, Kling et al. 2005, Ludwig et al. 2001), use what

Moffitt (2001) calls group-changing interventions. In group-changing interventions, a randomly

selected number of households is given the opportunity to change peer groups (in our case, this

would involve moving to a different neighborhood). Since the disruptive effects of residential

mobility may directly impact the outcomes under study, the resulting estimates of social effects

could be contaminated.

        We identify the own and social effects of income shocks on households in two main

ways. The first, and simpler approach compares households in winning versus nonwinning

postcodes. Among lottery nonparticipants, this provides a clean test for the presence of social

effects: in neither case do nonparticipants receive any lottery winnings themselves, yet the PCL

randomly exposes those who live in winning codes to income shocks among their neighbors (on

average, the PCL injected a total of €217,980 into a postcode). As long as a household’s

postcode-mates are more likely to belong to its consumption reference group than are residents

1
  Partial population experiments have however been used in other contexts, for example to estimate the extent of
information dissemination and learning among neighbors and friends (Duflo and Saez 2003, Duflo et al. 2004,
                                                                                                       4

of other postcodes, this allows for a clean test of peer effects in consumption. Among lottery

participants, the comparison between winning and nonwinning codes estimates a combination of

own and social effects, since PCL ticket owners in winning codes are exposed to both own and

neighbors’ income shocks. In a regression-based estimation approach, we explore effects of the

amounts won (both in the household and in its vicinity) on own consumption, using variation in

winnings that is generated only by the random selection of winning postcodes in the PCL. We

also explore the sensitivity of our results to a wide range of alternative specifications of a

household’s reference group.

        Consistent with simple theories of in-kind transfers (e.g. Moffitt 1984, 1989), we find

that the vast majority of BMW winners trade their BMW for cash, despite significant tax or

transactions costs associated with this. Consistent with a simple life-cycle model of

consumption, we do not detect any own effect of winning the postcode lottery on most

components of households’ expenditures, including food at home, transportation, and total

monthly outlays. Own effects are, however detected for durables expenditures and car

consumption. Both of these effects are consistent with a version of the life-cycle consumption

model in which (because credit markets are imperfect) households use durables expenditures to

smooth consumption in response to unexpected, temporary income shocks (see for example

Browning and Crossley 2004). We also detect an effect of temporary income shocks on food

expenditures away from home; while these are small in magnitude they are still too large to

reconcile easily with a simple life-cycle model.

        Turning to social effects, we detect statistically significant effects of neighbors’ lottery

winnings on car consumption and exterior home renovations. For example, PCL nonparticipants

who live in winning codes are more likely to acquire a new car in the six months after the lottery


Miguel and Kremer 2004).
                                                                                                       5

win than nonparticipants living in nonwinning codes. Further, we find that nonwinning

households who live next door to PCL winners are significantly more likely to purchase a car in

the six months after the lottery than nonwinning households located elsewhere, and that

nonwinning households living in postcodes where a large number of households won the PCL

are more likely to start a major exterior home renovation in the six months since the lottery than

nonwinning households located elsewhere. We discuss a number of possible mechanisms that

might account for social effects of this nature.



2. The Dutch Postcode Lottery and the Street Prize


        The Nationale Postcode Loterij (PCL) is the second largest national lottery in the

Netherlands, with a revenue market share of 26.6 percent in 2005.2 Contrary to the Staatsloterij

(State Lottery), the largest Dutch lottery (market share 42.6 percent in 2005), the PCL is a

charity lottery: A condition for its license is that at least 50 percent of revenues must be donated

to approved charities. Since its inception in 1990 the PCL has grown steadily. In 2005 about 30

percent of the Dutch population participated in the PCL, with an estimated annual expenditure

per participant of €175.3

        The popularity of the PCL is sometimes attributed to its potential to induce regret among

nonparticipants (Zeelenberg and Pieters, 2004). In the PCL the lottery ticket number is the

participant’s 6-digit postcode.4 As a result, conditional on a given postcode being the winning

code, a nonparticipant in that code knows that he or she would have won a prize for sure had s/he

purchased a ticket. Moreover, the weekly award of prizes is widely publicized in the media,

2
  Source: College van toezicht op de kansspelen (Government Agency for Lottery Supervision;
www.toezichtkansspelen.nl).
3
  Estimate based on the sample described in Section 3.
                                                                                                                    6

including – in most cases – a broadcast on national television around 10 pm on Sunday evenings.

This five minute program features happy winners and, occasionally, less happy nonwinners.5

        During our sample period, participants paid from €6.25 to €6.75 per ticket, which is

debited monthly from their bank account.6 There are no restrictions on the number of lottery

tickets that can be purchased per participant.7 The PCL awards several prizes, ranging from very

large ones (around €10 million, once or twice a year) to very small ones.8 In this paper we focus

on one specific prize, the weekly Street Prize. If a postcode is selected as the winning code, a

prize of €12,500 per lottery ticket is awarded to participants living in that postcode. This

amounts to €9,375 net of a 25% tax that is applied to all lottery winnings.9


        In addition to the monetary prizes, one of the street-prize winners wins a new BMW. The

BMW winner is chosen by randomly selecting one of the winning lottery tickets. BMW winners

have the option of receiving the cash value of the BMW in lieu of the car itself. This however

involves a substantial tax penalty, since the PCL authority pays the 25% lottery tax for winners

who accept the BMW in kind, but not for those who choose the cash equivalent (about €25,000).

Of course, winners also have the option of selling their new BMW, and incurring any associated

transactions costs.10




4
  Thus, conditional on purchasing a ticket, a household’s probability of winning the PCL in any given week is
approximately equal to one divided by the number of postcodes in the Netherlands (about 430,000).
5
  Videos of recent award broadcasts can be viewed on www.postcodeloterij.nl.
6
  The price increased during our sample period.
7
  The maximum number of tickets available per postcode is capped at 499; this maximum number was not reached
in any of the postcodes in our sample.
8
  Eligibility for the large ‘jackpot’ prize requires households to pay an extra monthly fee (which increased from
€1.25 to €1.50 during our sample period).
                                                                                                       7


3. Data


        From September 2003 until July 2006 we sent out written surveys to all addresses in

PCL-winning postcodes, six months after the prize was won. Moreover, for each winning

postcode, we selected one or more neighboring postcodes as control groups, and sent out the

same written survey in those postcodes. In all, we surveyed households in 419 postcodes. Dutch

postcodes are much smaller than, for example, U.S. zip codes. An average postcode contains 19

households; the smallest postcode surveyed contained 4 households and the largest 105. Very

few Dutch postcodes (8/419 = 2.1% in our sample) contain more than 45 households. The

survey contains questions on household composition, demographic variables (age, gender,

ethnicity, family relationships, marital status), education, labor supply, happiness, car ownership,

large expenditures, income, and lottery participation.11 For some of the questions respondents

provided information on both current behavior (i.e. six months after the prize) and,

retrospectively, behavior a year earlier (i.e. six months before the prize).


        The selection of nonwinning postcodes was guided by two (opposing) objectives. One is

that nonwinners in nonwinning codes should on average live farther away from winners than do

nonwinners in winning postal codes. (In our simplest specification, this differential distance

identifies social interaction effects.) The other (opposing) objective is that nonwinners in

nonwinning codes should not live too far away from winners and nonwinners in winning-postal

codes. This is to control as well as possible for any unobserved household characteristics that

vary smoothly over space, in case these are not perfectly randomized away by our lottery-based


9
  This tax applies to all lottery prizes larger than €454. It rose to 29 percent on January 1, 2006.
10
   We have observed a small number of ads for BMWs won in the PCL on the Dutch equivalent of eBay.
11
   Facsimiles of the survey instrument, cover letter and written reminders are available at:
http://www.econ.ucsb.edu/~pjkuhn/Data/PCL/PCLIndex.html The survey was administered by GfK, a survey
research firm.
                                                                                                                8

design. Throughout our discussion, we refer to a winning postcode plus all the nonwinning

nearby codes associated with it as a “codegroup”. Most of our analyses will condition on a full

set of codegroup fixed effects, although that does not affect our main conclusions.


        At the beginning of the survey, households were invited to participate in ”scientific

research on expenditures and income of Dutch households”, without any reference to social

interactions or the PCL. Questions about lottery were asked after the consumption questions,

near the end of the survey. Households were offered €7.50 (€10.00 in a small number of cases)

to complete the survey. Respondents could choose among a number of charities to receive this

fee, or could provide any bank account number (including their own) to which the token was to

be credited.

        If households did not respond within two weeks, a reminder was sent to households

whose phone number was not known. Other nonrespondents were called and asked to complete

the questionnaire by telephone with the assistance of a survey agency employee. For the

codegroups used in our analysis (i.e. those for which official PCL winner information was

provided), the response rate was 32.1 percent in winning postcodes, 33.0 percent in nonwinning

codes, and 32.7 percent overall. This overall rate is close to the average response percentage of

Statistics Netherlands for similar surveys. Our final sample contains 2011 observations, 510 of

which were completed by telephone.12


        The street addresses of all respondents to our survey are of course known. Identification

of social effects is however facilitated if we know the location of all lottery winners in the


12
  Since our sampling frame is based on addresses six months after the lottery, our sample would be
nonrepresentative if households’ propensity to move out of a postcode depends on whether that code (or household)
won the PCL. We examined this question directly using the Cadastre and Public Register Agency data on house
sales, finding no significant difference in the number of home sales after the PCL prize draw between winning and
nonwinning addresses. Detailed results are available from the authors.
                                                                                                                      9

winning codes surveyed, including those winners who did not respond to our survey. Street

addresses of all winners, plus information on winnings, were provided by the PCL administration

for every winning postcode in our survey. From these addresses, we computed two broad types

of “proximity to winners” indicators that provide much greater detail than an indicator for

whether a household lived in a winning code. The first defines a household’s two immediate

neighbors as those addresses in the same postcode with house numbers (or unit numbers in the

case of multi-unit addresses) immediately below and above its own house number (houses in a

postcode all share the same street name); its nearest four neighbors are defined analogously. A

second class of proximity measures uses the (x, y) coordinates (in meters) for all addresses in all

postcodes in our sample, plus those of all the lottery winners as reported by the PCL

administrators.13 In this data, addresses within the same building have the same (x, y)

coordinates. (Thus, within buildings, our ‘neighbor’ variable based on the unit number might be

a superior measure of proximity to winners than that based on (x, y) coordinates.) One might

argue that physical visibility, or social distance is more relevant to peer effects than Euclidian

distance. Our choice of the latter is guided by data availability, though we do explore the effects

of some social distance indicators later in the paper.


4. Descriptive Statistics


           Descriptive statistics for the households in our survey sample are presented in Tables 1-3.

Table 1 restricts attention to characteristics that are relatively permanent (such as the age and

education of the household head(s)), or that refer (retrospectively) to the period before the lottery

prize in that household’s codegroup was awarded. In addition to providing a statistical portrait

of our respondents before the ‘treatment’ --a set of lottery prizes-- was administered to a subset

13
     We obtained the (x, y)-coordinates from Bridgis (www.bridgis.nl), which generates its data from municipal land
                                                                                                    10

of the postcodes in our sample, Table 1 provides a test of the exogeneity of this treatment by

comparing winning versus nonwinning postcodes. If winning postcodes are truly randomly

selected, if the decision to respond to our survey is independent of whether the code was a

winning one, and if households’ reporting of their own (current and past) consumption behavior

is not affected by living in a winning postcode, there should be no statistically signficant

differences between the two columns of Table 1.


         As Table 1 shows, there is substantial support for the exogeneity of our indicator variable

for whether a household lives in a winning code: only 2 of 23 comparisons – involving the share

of households that are single-headed and spending on vacations-- are statistically significant at

the 10 percent level. Overall, the message of Table 1 is one of consistency with random

selection of winning codes and absence of response or recall bias. On those dimensions for

which comparable information is available, the statistics in Table 1 are also consistent with

national means from Statistics Netherlands. For example, national mean household size in 2005

was 2.30, and 65.5 percent of households were two-headed, compared with 2.31 and 64.9 among

respondents to our survey. The average age of the Dutch population in 2005 was 38.5; if we add

non-household heads to the sample in Table 1, the mean age in our sample is 38.4.14

         Table 2 presents descriptive statistics on awareness of and participation in the post-code

lottery, and on amounts won, both by survey respondents and their ‘neighbors’. Awareness by

residents of the fact that their postcode won the PCL is high, even six months after the win. For

example, 87 percent of respondents in winning codes (including both winning and nonwinning

households) say they remember that a PCL Street Prize was awarded in that code 6 months after


registry offices.
                                                                                                                  11

the fact. 53 percent of households in winning codes say they recall the number of households

who won, and 25 percent report house numbers of at least some of these winners when asked to

do so. Such high awareness levels seem likely to be conducive to the existence of social effects

in this context. As we would expect, awareness of the lottery is considerably lower in

neighboring, nonwinning codes.

         The next two sections of Table 2 provide information on PCL ticket ownership and

winnings, both conditional on PCL participation and not. The average PCL participant held

about 1.8 tickets; the average amount won was €18,596. After the 25% lottery tax, these

winnings correspond to about €13,947, or about 7 months of post-tax income for a typical Dutch

household. 11.2 percent of ticket owners in winning codes won a BMW. Adding in the

expected value of this BMW (we value the BMW at €25,000), the average amount won by a

household in the PCL rises to €13,947 + .112(€25,000) = €16,047, or about 8 months of income

for an average family in our sample.15 About 32 percent of surveyed households in winning

codes reported owning at least one PCL ticket; this figure is lower in nonwinning codes, possibly

because households in those codes are less likely to recall owning a ticket.16

         The remainder of Table 2 presents a variety of indicators of the amount of lottery

winnings that took place in the geographical vicinity of a typical household in our data.

According to our data, just over half (52%) of households living in winning postcodes had an

14
   Source: authors’ extracts from http://statline.cbs.nl. Comparable education information is not easily calculated
because the national mean refers to all persons aged 15-64, and our survey does not collect education information
for non-household heads.
15
   The BMW awarded in the PCL is a model 116i. Between 2005 and 2007 we found advertised new prices for this
vehicle ranging from €25,400 to €28,500. For reasons that become apparent later in the paper, we apply the 25%
lottery tax to the BMW as well as to the cash winnings in this calculation.
16
   Another possible reason is that, by construction, winning codes must contain at least one household that purchased
a PCL ticket; nonwinning codes do not have so satisfy this criterion to be in our sample. To see if this might affect
our results, we replicated most of our estimates of social effects after excluding postcodes containing fewer than 19
households from our sample (if the true share of households buying tickets is .25 and buyers are independently
                                                                                                                 12

immediate neighbor who won a PCL prize.17 In winning codes, the average amount won by a

household’s two immediate neighbors was €13,392. For an average household living in a

winning code, 2.46 winning households lived in the same building (and were thus assigned the

same (x, y) location). About 3 winning households lived within 25 meters of an average survey

household; 7 within 100 meters. A typical winning postcode contained 8.5 winning households,

and the average total amount won in a winning postcode was €217,980. Finally, 8.1 percent of

households living in winning postcodes lived directly next door to a BMW winner; 37 percent

lived within 25 meters of a BMW winner. As for all rows of Table 2, this share was statistically

highly distinct from the share in nonwinning codes.

        Table 3 presents descriptive statistics for a long list of outcome variables that might have

been affected either by winning the lottery, or by living close to lottery winners. Since Table 3

does not yet distinguish between PCL participants and nonparticipants, it will not distinguish

between own and social effects of a PCL win; it simply provides a first look at whether large

effects of either type are likely to be present. According to Table 3, no statistically significant

post-lottery differences in consumption between winning and nonwinning codes are found for

monthly expenditures on food at home, food away from home, transportation, other monthly

items, or total monthly expenditures.18 Insignificant differences are also found for happiness,

PCL participation at the survey date, and for several indicators of major expenditures that refer to

the entire six-month period between the lottery and survey dates: whether the household


distributed over space, this reduces the probability that a code will contain zero buyers to less than .004). The
estimated social effects were, if anything, slightly stronger and more significant.
17
   In principle, a household in (but at the boundary of) a nonwinning code could live next door to a PCL winner; our
method of identifying neighbors will not capture these households. Households living in nonwinning codes but
close to winners will, however, be included in our Euclidean-distance-based measures of proximity to winners.
18
   All of these consumption items are asked in the sixth month after winning the survey and refer to the previous
month. We also examined differences in post-lottery labor market behavior, including whether household heads
work and their hours of work. No effects were found, either in the Table 3 specifications or the regression-based
analyses undertaken later in this paper.
                                                                                                                 13

initiated major interior home renovations, total expenditures on vacations, and purchases of

durable goods (excluding automobiles).19 In contrast, households living in winning codes were

twice as likely (3.0 versus 1.5 percent) to initiate major exterior home renovations during this

period; this difference is statistically significant.

        Table 3 also shows a number of significant differences in car ownership between winning

and nonwinning codes six months after the lottery date. In particular, compared to nonwinning

codes, households in winning codes are more likely to have acquired a new car in the six months

since the lottery; they also own more cars (and more car efficiency units20) at the survey date.

Their main car is on average nine months newer. Of course, all of these outcomes could simply

be mechanical consequences of the fact that cars (specifically BMWs) were a prize in the PCL.

Table 3 addresses this issue in two ways: first, we exclude all BMW winners from the sample;

and second, we look specifically at BMW ownership six months after the lottery. In the first

approach, we find that all the above indicators of car consumption remain higher in winning

codes even when BMW winners are excluded from the sample (in fact the statistics are almost

identical). Thus the households who won only cash (and/or their nonwinning neighbors) appear

to be increasing their car consumption after a lottery win.21 Second, the results for BMW

ownership are both clear and, perhaps, surprising: six months after the lottery, households in

winning codes are statistically no more likely to own a BMW than households in nonwinning

codes. Thus it appears that most BMW winners either elected to receive the cash prize in lieu of


19
   The ‘occasional’ expenditure amounts (including vacations and durables) in Table 3 are not directly comparable to
the pre-lottery levels in Table 1 because the latter refer to the 18-month period preceding the lottery date in one’s
codegroup.
20
    A new car is defined as one unit; older cars are depreciated at 15 percent per year. This is the average
depreciation rate over the first 11 years of a car’s life in the Netherlands, which we calculated from historical
purchase prices and current resale values obtained at from www.autoweek.nl. The sample of vehicles used was all
cars owned by the households in the Table 11 sample.
21
   In a nonexperimental study, Grinblatt et al (2004) find correlations between the models of cars purchased by
neighbors in Finland, but conclude that this is not the result of imitative behavior.
                                                                                                             14

the BMW (thus incurring a 25% tax penalty), or sold their BMWs shortly after they received

them, presumably incurring some transactions costs in the process (we cannot distinguish these

with our data).

        To explore this result further, Table 4 provides more details on post-PCL BMW

ownership; it shows that 26 BMW winners responded to our survey. Of these, only four still

owned a BMW at the survey date, six months after the lottery.22 While four BMWs is more than

one would expect in a random sample of 26 Dutch households, overall the behavior of the BMW

winners in our sample is remarkably consistent with simple models of in-kind transfers (see for

example Moffitt 1984, 1989): whenever a gift in kind would induce a suboptimal consumption

mix (as a new BMW is likely to do for the vast majority of Dutch households), that gift should, if

possible, be converted into its cash equivalent and spent on other items (or, of course, saved).


5. Own and Social Effects of the PCL: Simple Tests

        As noted, a clean and simple way to detect social effects of the postcode lottery is to

examine the post-lottery consumption behavior of the households in our survey who did not

participate in the lottery. None of these households won any money; thus they were not directly

affected by the lottery. However a subset of these households was randomly exposed to the

treatment of having its postcode-mates win significant amounts of money: an average winning

postcode contained 8.5 (out of 19) winning households who won a total of €217,980. Thus, as

long as a household’s own postcode contains, on average, more members of its reference group

than live in nearby ‘control’ codes, a simple comparison of the behavior of PCL nonparticipants

22
  One possible concern with this result is that our survey collects information on a maximum of two cars per
household. Could a significant number of BMW winners still own a BMW as their third, or higher-order car? For
18 of the 26 BMW winners, this is impossible, since they own either zero or one car at the survey date. Of the
remaining 8 households, two report owning a BMW at the survey date. Thus at the very most, 6 BMWs could be
                                                                                                                 15

between winning and nonwinning codes will reveal the presence of social consumption effects.

The same comparison for participants, in contrast, identifies a combination of own and social

effects, since winners receive shocks to both their own and their neighbors’ income when their

postcode is randomly selected by the PCL.

        Table 5 provides the above comparisons for essentially all the household consumption

measures available in our survey. Column 1 reports the mean consumption difference between

PCL ticket holders living in winning versus nonwinning codes; column 3 reports the same

difference for households who did not own any PCL tickets. These differences and their

standard errors are calculated from a regression of consumption on a dummy variable for

residence in a winning code. Columns 2 and 4 add a full set of codegroup fixed effects to those

regressions. If winning postcodes are indeed randomly chosen and if survey response patterns

are not affected by a PCL win, postcode fixed effects should not be necessary to eliminate bias.

However, if unobserved household characteristics vary smoothly over geographical space,

codegroup fixed effects should correct for any response or randomization bias. For some of our

outcome variables, we collected retrospective (i.e. pre-lottery) as well as current information.

For those cases, Table 5 presents comparisons of within-household consumption changes as well

as post-lottery levels.23 These differenced measures should also eliminate simple forms of

randomization or response bias; on the other hand (as is well known) differencing typically adds

noise, making it harder to detect an effect. Finally, because some expenditure distributions




missing from our sample for this reason. Since owning more than two cars is very rare in the Netherlands, the true
number is likely much smaller.
23
   Unfortunately, due to some flaws in survey design, our data do not allow us to analyze changes in car ownership
before and after the lottery. These flaws include the fact that the survey did not ask any retrospective questions
about car ownership of households who owned no cars at the survey date, and the fact that we do not know when a
household disposed of the cars it owned prior to the survey.
                                                                                                              16

(especially those for vacations and durables) both contain a substantial number of zeros and have

a long right tail, we also include specifications based on the square root of expenditures.

        Turning first to social effects (in columns 3 and 4), with just a handful of apparently

random exceptions, the only consumption item for which Table 5 indicates any significant social

effects is automobiles. Specifically, nonparticipating households are more likely to have

acquired a car within the past six months if they live in a winning postcode.24 Among

households who did not participate in the PCL at the lottery date, those who live in winning

codes are less likely to play the PCL six months later. Witnessing one’s postcode-mates win the

PCL does not make nonwinning households any less happy six months after the fact.

        Turning now to the behavior of PCL participants (i.e. households who owned at least one

PCL ticket at the time of the win in their codegroup), we see a few more significant differences

in consumption between winning and nonwinning codes. For example, six months after the win,

PCL winners’ main car is newer than nonwinners’, and the household owns a larger total number

of car efficiency units. Both of these effects are robust to excluding BMW winners from the

sample, so they are not a mechanical result of the BMW prizes. (To eliminate such mechanical

effects, BMW winners are excluded from all the car consumption regressions in the remainder of

the paper.) These car consumption effects are also somewhat robust to adding codegroup fixed

effects. Among other consumption measures, effects are most consistently detected for food

away from home and durables expenditures (excluding cars). Some indication of a possible

effect is also present for food at home, total monthly outlays, and vacations, though these are

present in a minority of specifications and may be due to sampling error. Finally, PCL winners

are more likely than nonwinners to donate the fee they receive for completing our survey to


24
  We also see a ‘perverse’ negative social effect on BMW ownership, but as noted BMWs are very rare in this
population.
                                                                                                      17

charity.

       In sum, Table 5 provides preliminary evidence of social consumption effects for only one

type of good: cars. Perhaps this is not surprising since (with the possible exception of exterior

home renovations) cars are probably the most highly visible consumption item to one’s

residential neighbors. Table 5 also shows that PCL-participating households whose postcode

was selected as a winner have higher car consumption, in addition to spending more on non-car

durables and food away from home. Technically, these differences estimate the sum of own- and

social effects affecting winners in winning codes; however since most of our estimated social

effects are zero it seems likely that these differences represent responses to own income shocks.



6. A Statistical Model

       In the PCL, as in all lotteries, the variation in a household’s winnings (and in our case in

its neighbors’ winnings) is driven by two distinct factors, only one of which (the selection of a

household’s postcode by the lottery authorities) is strictly exogenous. The remaining factor, of

course, is the number of lottery tickets purchased by the household; included in this category is

the decision to buy any lottery tickets (i.e. to participate in the PCL) at all. This section

describes a simple statistical model whose goal is to isolate the effects of the exogenous

component of lottery winnings on household consumption.

       Let a household’s consumption, Ci, depend on its own PCL winnings (WiO) and its

neighbors’ PCL winnings (WiN) as follows:

       Ci = α + β WiO + γ WiN + θXi + gTiO + hTiN + ei                                          (1)

where Xi includes measurable determinants of income and preferences (including own non-

lottery income, for example), TiO is the total number of PCL tickets owned by the household, TiN
                                                                                                                 18

is the number of tickets owned by the household’s reference group, and ui is iid.25 We include

TiO to capture unobserved household tastes or constraints that may affect its consumption of all

items, including lottery purchases (for example, risk-loving households may buy more PCL

tickets, and will also have different consumption patterns for other items than risk-averse

households). We include TiN to capture possible correlation of such unobserved tastes or

constraints within neighborhoods. For example, if immigrant households disproportionately tend

to live together (even within postcodes), and immigrants tend to share common unobserved tastes

or constraints, then a household’s own consumption may be correlated with the number of lottery

tickets purchased by its neighbors.26

        Since each winning lottery ticket pays 12.5 (thousand) euro,

        WiO = 12.5 * TiO * δi, and                                                                         (2)

        WiN = 12.5 * TiN * δi .                                                                            (3)

where δi is an indicator for living in a winning postcode.27 Since winning postcodes are

randomly selected by the PCL authorities, δi is orthogonal to TiO, TiN, Xi and ui.




25
   An alternative specification of social effects, of course, has own consumption depend not on neighbors’ income
but on neighbors’ consumption. In this paper we focus on the effects of shocks to neighbors’ incomes, for three
reasons. Most obviously, shocks to neighbors’ income are exogenous in our context; changes in consumption are
not. Second, households’ consumption is highly multidimensional, which makes it far from clear how to best
model consumption interdependencies. (Does my propensity to buy a new car depend on your purchase of a specific
model and quality of car, on your decision to purchase any car, on the fact that you recently made a visible purchase
of any kind, or simply on the fact that you won some money?). Third (and related) effects of neighbors’
consumption and income on a household’s own consumption are, in general, not separately identified by a
neighbor’s-income instrument. This is demonstrated in Appendix 2.
26
   The simple model estimated in Table 5 can, of course be seen as a special case of model (1), specifically one
where TiO is simply an indicator for holding a positive number of PCL tickets; own winnings, WiO, are measured by
TiO * δi (see equation 2); neighbors’ winnings, WiN, are measured by δi; and θ = h = 0.
27
   To simplify notation, equation 3 does not include the BMW in winnings. The BMW of course adds an additional
random component to winnings, which is desirable from an experimental point of view. Like cash, however, it can
only be won if the household (endogenously) chooses to participate in the PCL. Equation 3 also implicitly assumes
that households living in nonwinning codes have no winning households in their peer group. This is easily
generalized; in fact a number of our empirical definitions of peer groups (indeed all those based on Euclidean
distance) include households in winning codes that are geographically close to households in nonwinning codes in
the latter households’ consumption reference groups.
                                                                                                    19

       Equations (1) – (3) imply the following. First, suppose unobserved household tastes and

income do not vary systematically with the number of lottery tickets purchased, i.e. that g = h =

0. Then OLS applied to equation (1) yields unbiased estimates of the own and social effects of

unexpected income shocks, β and γ. In fact, our estimates of β and γ are unbiased even if we

exclude all measured observable characteristics, X, from the regression; their only role would be

to improve efficiency. This is because the variation in own and neighbors’ winnings is generated

only by variation that is either by construction (δi) or by assumption (TiO and TiN) uncorrelated

with the error term.

       Of course we cannot be sure that g = h = 0, which in general leads to bias in (1). To

accommodate g ≠ 0, we have access to a simple solution—we simply include controls for the

number of PCL tickets held by the household at the time of the win, TiO. In fact, we include in

all of our regressions a quadratic in number of tickets purchased plus a fixed effect for

purchasing a positive number of tickets (i.e. a fixed effect on consumption of participating in the

PCL).28 Unfortunately, we do not have comparable measures of TiN, for two reasons: (a) we do

not know ticket purchases for those neighbors of our respondents who did not respond to our

survey, and (b) we do not know, ex ante, which households (or which particular weighted sum of

households) constitute a household’s reference group.

       In the following sections we address the above data limitation in several ways. First, we

can test for the exogeneity of all of our measures of a houshold’s neighbors’ winnings by asking

whether these measures are correlated with a households’ observable characteristics. In almost

all cases, we find that they are not. Second, as in Section 5, we have access to codegroup fixed

effects and (for some of our consumption measures) time-differencing within households. Third,

especially for some definitions of a household’s reference group, we are able to generate
                                                                                                                          20

estimates of the number of PCL tickets purchased by that group using our own survey data; we

report the results of these exercises near the end of the Section 8.

           Fourth, and finally, we can use the strict exogeneity of δi to rewrite (1) as:

Ci = [α + h T N ] + β WiO + gTiO + [ γ W N ] δi + θXi + [ hui + 12.5γ δiui + ei ]                                (4)

where T N is the (unconditional) mean of the number of PCL tickets purchased by a household’s

reference group in our sample, ui = TiN - T N , and (by implication) W N =12.5 T                      N
                                                                                                          (i.e. the the

mean amount won by a household’s peer group if its code is selected to win the PCL).

Equation (4) simply regresses consumption on own winnings, own ticket purchases, and a

dummy for whether the household lives in a winning postcode. While (4) has a heteroskedastic

error term, OLS still yields unbiased estimates of the own effect of lottery winnings, β, and of the

social effect, γ, where the latter is scaled by the mean amount won by a household’s peers if its

code wins the PCL. Unless an average household has zero peers living in its neighborhood, or

those peers purchase a mean of zero lottery tickets, this allows for hypothesis tests on γ = 0 even

in the absence of data on TiN. Intuitively, (4) identifies the own effect of lottery winnings from

the interaction of living in a winning code with the number of lottery tickets owned. According

to (4), any additional effects of living in a winning code must be due to social effects.



7. Results-- Own Effects of Lottery Winnings

           In this section we report the results of estimating equations (1) and (4) for the parameter

β, i.e. the own effects of lottery winnings. As discussed above, our identification strategy is

based on the notion that, conditional on the number of lottery tickets purchased by a household

(including zero), income shocks are randomly assigned by the random event of a household’s


28
     The results are very similar if we include a fixed effect for each integer number of tickets purchased.
                                                                                                    21

postcode being drawn as a winner. To verify this, Appendix Table A1 reports the results of a set

of “exogeneity checks” for the variation in winnings we will use to identify the own effects of

winning the lottery. Specifically, the coefficients reported are from a regression of total

individual winnings (these include the monetary equivalent of any BMWs won, and equal zero

for nonwinners) on an indicator for whether the household lived in a winning postcode. Included

in all regressions are a fixed effect for lottery participation, and a quadratic in the number of

tickets purchased. For the most part, the results in Table A1 are encouraging: virtually all

observable, pre-lottery characteristics are uncorrelated with this measure of own winnings.

Exceptions are food away from home and total pre-lottery income (the latter significant at only

10%); both correlations become insignificant in the presence of codegroup fixed effects.

Overall, it appears that, conditional on the number of tickets purchased, lottery winnings are

essentially randomly assigned among our respondents.

       Our estimated effects of lottery income on a household’s own consumption, based on

equation 4, are reported in Table 6. Coefficients in the Table represent the effects of winning

€10,000 pre tax (slightly less than the winnings from a single lottery ticket) on the outcome

variable in question. All regressions include a fixed effect for owning any PCL tickets, a

quadratic for the number of tickets purchased, and a fixed effect for residence in a winning

postcode. As discussed, all the variation in the lottery winnings variable is therefore induced by

the random draw of whether one’s postcode won the lottery. This notion is confirmed by the fact

that our estimates of own effects are very similar in all three regression specifications shown in

that Table: neither adding codegroup fixed effects, nor adding controls for demographic

characteristics –including the level of household income before the lottery date— has much

effect on either the estimated coefficients or their standard errors.
                                                                                                   22

         According to Table 6, winning the PCL has no detectable effects on several expenditure

categories, including food at home, transportation expenditures, other monthly expenditures, and

total monthly expenditures. As in Table 5, effects are however detected on certain aspects of car

consumption, in particular the age of the household’s main car six months after the lottery date

and the number of ‘car efficiency units’ owned at that time. In terms of magnitudes, winning

€10,000 appears to reduce the average age of a household’s main car by about .4 years. Since the

average age of a main car is about 7 years, this is about a six percent decline. Another detectable

effect of winning the lottery is on food away from home: unexpectedly winning a lump sum of

€10,000 appears to raise eating out by about €18 per month, six months after the win. In one

specification, we see marginally significant effects of own winnings on home renovations. We

also see strong and robust effects of lottery winnings on durables expenditures, as we might

expect from some versions of the life cycle consumption model (e.g. Browning and Crossley

2004).

         Unexpectedly winning the PCL (which, as noted, amounts to about 8 months of income

for an average household) has no detectable effects on a household’s reported happiness: In both

the level and differenced specifications, the estimated coefficients are always statistically

insignificant. Further, the estimated coefficients are very small, relative to the standard deviation

of current happiness (1.75) and of year-to-year changes in happiness (1.33) in our sample. In the

fixed-effects specification, we can rule out (with 95% confidence) effects greater than .07 of a

standard deviation (in either direction) on either the level or the change in happiness.

Participation in the postcode lottery at the survey date (six months after a win in one’s

neighborhood) is positively related to the amount won in the lottery. In contrast to the simple
                                                                                                                   23

results in Table 5, greater lottery winnings do not raise the likelihood that a household will

donate its fee for completing our survey to charity.

         In order to shed additional light on the estimated effects of lottery winnings in Table 6,

Table 7 reproduces the lottery effects from columns 5 and 6 of Table 6, and compares them to

the coefficients on the household’s own pre-lottery income, which was included in the same

regression. Compared to lottery winnings –which are both temporary and unexpected--, cross-

sectional income differences should have a substantially larger permanent component.

According to the life-cycle model of consumption, they should therefore be more strongly related

to current expenditures than are lottery winnings, at least for nondurables. Are they?

         In Table 7, some expenditure categories do appear to respond more to total income than

to lottery income, for example food at home, ‘other’ monthly expenditures, vacations, and the

propensity to donate the survey fee to charity (though some of these differences are clearly not

statistically significant). For other expenditure categories, however, consumption appears to be

just as sensitive, if not more sensitive, to lottery income as it is to total income. These include

the age of the household’s main car, total car consumption, food away from home, and durables

expenditures. For car and durables, this high relative sensitivity to lottery winnings could simply

reflect consumption smoothing. Our result for food away from home, however, is harder to

reconcile with a simple life-cycle model.29,30


29
   According to our estimates, a one-time, €10,000 lottery prize raises expenditures on food away from home by
about 18 percent, six months after the prize. The average age of our respondents is 50, and their average annual
post-tax household income is €23,000. Using a life expectancy of 75 and a discount rate of 5 percent, the present
value of their remaining lifetime income is about €330,000. Thus a prize of €10,000 corresponds to about a 3
percent increase in lifetime income. Unless eating out is an extreme luxury good, an 18% increase in response to
this appears very unlikely in a life cycle model.
30
   Two other implications of the life cycle model are that the effects of lottery winnings on expenditures should be
greater for older households, and for lower-income households, since in both these cases a 10,000-euro PCL prize
has a larger proportional effect on the present value of lifetime income. To explore these predictions we re-
estimated Table 6 separately for low- and high-education groups, and for households whose heads are above and
below the median age of 50. While interesting, the results may reveal more about the distinction between luxuries
                                                                                                                      24

         The one outcome on which lottery and nonlottery income have the most dramatically

different effects in Table 7 is happiness. Indeed, in contrast to our results for lottery winnings,

and consistent with both Easterlin (1974) and Stevenson-Wolfers (2008), higher total income is

very strongly associated with happiness in a cross-section of households. One interpretation of

these contrasting results is that the six-month lag we chose between the PCL win and the survey

date is too long: lottery winnings could affect own happiness, but the effects are very transitory,

as argued by both Easterlin and Kahneman et al (2006). Alternatively, the results of Gardner and

Oswald (2007) suggest that six months might be too short: In their analysis of Britons who

receive lottery wins between £1000 and £200,000 they find that in the year a prize is won,

mental stress goes up, while in subsequent years lottery winners show less stress than non-

winners. That said, absence of mental stress and happiness are not the same thing. Finally, it is

possible that happiness is simply more linked to long-run personal income than short-run

fluctuations, both because permanent income differences enable the household to take more

happiness-improving actions, and perhaps because long-term income differences are more likely

to be seen as “earned” and thus legitimate.31



8. Results—Social Effects of Lottery Winnings
                                                            N
         In this section we report estimates of γ W             in equation (4), and of γ in equation (1) for a

variety of explicit specifications of households’ consumption peer group. In fact, we estimated

social effects using all the indicators of neighbors’ winnings summarized in Table 2; only a


and necessities and age-related variation in a household’s consumption priorities than the life cycle hypothesis per
se: low-education households seem to spend more lottery winnings on cars, and less on vacations than high-
education households. Young households also spend more of their lottery winnings on cars than older households,
but older households’ durables consumption is much more responsive to lottery income than younger households’.
31
   Another interpretation of our own-happiness results is of course the possibility that the cross-sectional correlation
between income and happiness is driven by reverse causation (happier people are more successful in the labor
                                                                                                                 25

subset of those results are reported here.32 As noted, these alternative measures of neighbors’

winnings are randomly assigned only if we can condition on the number of tickets purchased by

whomever we define as the household’s neighbors. Since that is not possible for most of the

measures we use, we first conduct a set of simple ‘exogeneity checks’ of the variation in

neighbors’ winnings we use to identify social effects, parallel to what we did in Table A1 for

own winnings.

        Specifically, Appendix Table A2 examines the variation in the following indicators of a

household’s neighbors’ winnings: whether the household lives in a winning postcode, the

number of winning households in its postcode, the total amount won within 25 meters, and

whether one of the household’s two immediate neighbors won a PCL prize. The coefficients

reported there are the estimated “effects” of fixed household characteristics on indicators of

neighbors’ winnings, with controls for PCL participation and a quadratic in number of tickets

bought. For the most part, these tests are reassuring as well. Some significant coefficients do

appear, but with one exception they do not suggest a consistent pattern. In the specification with

codegroup effects (but not without), it appears that households who live close to winners tend on

average to be poorer (pre-lottery) than other households. This raises the possibility that our

estimates of social effects that do not control for pre-lottery household income are biased

downwards (for normal goods); in practice our estimates of social effects are however very

similar whether or not we control for codegroup effects, or the vector of demographic controls

(X), which includes household income.


market). This interpretation would, however, be at odds with Stevenson and Wolfers’ recent claim that economic
growth promotes happiness.
32
   Other possible comparison groups that cannot be captured in our data include the workplace, family and voluntary
associations including churches, etc. While we cannot examine these comparisons directly, we defend our (data-
driven) focus on neighborhoods by noting that (a) awareness that one’s neighbors won the PCL is very high (see
Table 2), and (b) at least some consumption items, such as cars and exterior home renovations, are highly visible to
neighbors, even when those neighbors are not necessarily closely connected socially.
                                                                                                   26

       Our estimates of social effects, using all four alternative indicators of neighbors’

winnings in Table A2, are presented in Table 8. Columns (1) and (2) present estimates of γ W N ,

taken from the regressions underlying columns 5 and 6 in Table 6. The remaining columns

replace the dummy for residence in a winning code in those regressions by alternative measures

of neighbors’ winnings. As already noted, all of these regressions control for the household’s

own PCL winnings, a fixed effect for whether it purchased any PCL tickets, a quadratic in the

number of tickets purchased, and a full set of codegroup fixed effects, and a vector of

demographic characteristics including prelottery income.

       One pattern is clearly evident in Table 8: for the vast majority of consumption items,

essentially no social effects on consumption are detected. In particular, with a few apparently

random exceptions, Table 8’s indicators of neighbors’ lottery winnings have no statistically

significant effects on any category of monthly expenditures, on vacations, durables, or happiness.

A natural question to ask for these outcomes, of course, is whether the insignificant coefficients

indicate truly small social effects, or simply large standard errors on our estimates. To better

understand these magnitudes, we focus on column 1 of Table 8; by construction these

coefficients give the effect on own consumption of seeing one’s postcode-mates win a total of

€217,980. The estimated effect of a neighborhood win of this magnitude on a household’s own

monthly eating out is €-10.55; the 95% confidence interval surrounding it runs from €-35.66 to

€14.57. Coincidentally, the upper bound of this confidence interval is is roughly the same as our

(relatively precise) point estimate of the effect of the household winning €10,000 itself in Table 6

(€17.49). This upper bound on social effects is also small when compared to the typical year-to-

year variation in eating out in our sample of Dutch households; in particular it is about one-fifth

of the standard deviation of year-to-year changes in expenditures on food away from home
                                                                                                  27

(€78).

         Similar calculations apply to most of the other components of monthly expenditures, and

to vacation and durable spending in Table 8; in general, if a shock to neighbors’ incomes of the

size generated by the PCL had large effects on any of these outcomes relative to the outcome’s

typical year-to-year variation, it would have been detected by these regressions. Because it has

received considerable attention in recent literature, we discuss only one additional outcome in

detail here: happiness. According to column 1 of Table 8, the effect of living in a winning

postcode (but not winning oneself) on a household’s happinessis is -.0515, with a 95%

confidence interval ranging from -.205 to +.102. The lower bound of this confidence interval

amounts to a reduction in happiness of about one sixth of the standard deviation of year-to-year

changes in happiness in our sample. Our ‘social’ results for happiness contrast with Luttmer’s

(2005), though his refer to effects of neighbors’ earnings on happiness, which have a bigger

permanent component than lottery winnings, and neighbors’ earnings are not randomly assigned

in his analysis. The absence of an effect of exogenous changes in neighbors’ incomes on own

happiness in our data also supports Stevenson and Wolfers’ (2008) conclusions from a large

sample of within- and between-country data, though that analysis is not able to consider the

effects of strictly exogenous changes in peers’ incomes.

         In contrast to the above results, Table 8 provides quite robust evidence of two social

effects related to the PCL and to our survey instrument respectively. First, in contrast to lottery

winnings’ own effects on PCL participation, social effects of lottery winnings in one’s

neighborhood on current PCL participation are robustly negative. In other words, lottery

nonparticipants who are surrounded by households who won the PCL six months ago are less

likely to play the PCL today than nonparticipants who are not surrounded by winners. To the
                                                                                                                   28

extent that the ‘regret-minimization’ hypothesis associated with the PCL predicts that non-

players will be induced to start playing when they see others win around them, this finding

contradicts that hypothesis.33 Second, living in close proximity to winners increases the

likelihood that the respondent will donate his/her survey fee to charity (even though we detect no

own effects of winning on this outcome).34

         Finally, we note that Table 8 suggests the presence of social effects for two aspects of

consumption that are likely to be visible to one’s neighbors: exterior home renovations and cars.

The evidence for the former confirms the simple differences in means found in Table 3, but is

confined to one regression specification. The latter (for cars) is more robust. In particular,

significant effects are found on at least one indicator of car consumption for three of our four

measures of neighbors’ winnings. These estimates of social effects on car consumption are

substantial in size, though the standard errors are high as well. For example, having an

immediate neighbor win the PCL raises the probability that a household will buy a new car by

just under 5 percentage points, reduces the mean age of its main car at the survey date by about

half a year (about a 7 percent decline), and raises the total number of car efficiency units it

possesses by .021 (about a 5 percent increase). Each of these estimated effects is larger in

magnitude than the estimated effects of winning €10,000 itself, in Table 6.

         In sum, with the exception of car consumption and (possibly) exterior home renovations,

and of two items closely associated with our survey and the PCL itself (current PCL participation

and the disposition of the survey fee), Table 8 allows us to quite confidently rule out large social

effects of the lottery on consumption patterns, and on happiness. Perhaps this is not surprising

33
  Superficially, it is more consistent with a “lightning never strikes (the same postcode) twice” misperception,
however we note from Table 6 that that the opposite misperception seems to apply to PCL participants.
                                                                                                                     29

given the fact that, consistent with the life-cycle hypothesis, households’ own consumption

choices are hardly affected by a sizable one-time lottery win. In the remainder of this section we

conduct a more detailed analysis of social effects of the PCL on car consumption (and to a lesser

extent on exterior home renovations). In part this is because Table 8 suggests these effects might

be present. In addition, there are two good reasons for expecting stronger social effects here: of

all our consumption indicators, cars and exterior renovations are (a) likely to be the most visible

to one’s residential neighbors, and (b) durable. Unlike an expensive party or vacation which

only happens once, your neighbors are continuously reminded of your new car or windows every

day after they have been purchased.

         To explore the social effects of lottery winnings on car consumption further, Table 9

presents estimated effects of a much larger variety of neighbors’ winnings measures on our four

indicators of car consumption. The specification is identical to Table 8; for convenience we

reproduce Table 8’s estimates there as well. Several patterns are evident. First, none of the

indicators of neighbors’ winnings based on Euclidean distance have significant effects on any

measure of car consumption. We conjecture that these measures do not discriminate sufficiently

among the very large share (81 percent) of Dutch households who live in multi-unit dwellings.35

Second, significant social effects are never observed for our ‘number of cars’ indicator; given

the parking constraints facing many Dutch households, it seems likely that any lottery-induced

car consumption takes the form of quality rather than quantity. Finally, while we detect a

number of effects at the level of the entire postcode, statistically significant social effects are

most consistently observed for measures of neighbors’ winnings based on a household’s two or

34
  Since the main purpose of the PCL is to raise funds for charity, it may be that participants view their participation
as a charitable contribution. It has been suggested that the publicity associated with a local win induces non-
participants to make charitable donations as well, for example via their survey fee.
                                                                                                                      30

four nearest neighbors. This suggests that social effects on car consumption are highly localized.

As in Table 8, both the point estimates and confidence intervals surrounding Table 9’s estimated

social effects are large. For example, raising the share of households in one’s postcode who won

the PCL from zero to one is estimated to reduce the age of one’s main car by about 1.5 years

(from a mean of 7 years). However, the 95% confidence interval ranges from a decline of .34

years to one of 2.73 years.

         If the social effects identified in Table 9 are genuine, they should also be visible in simple

comparisons that take the best possible advantage of the exogenous assignment of lottery

winnings in our sample. Focusing, as suggested by Table 9, on a household’s two and four

nearest neighbors, Table 10 restricts attention to PCL non-participants (like the simple

comparison in Table 5, this holds own winnings constant) and presents simple means of our four

car consumption indicators for three subgroups: those who live in nonwinning codes, those who

live in winning codes but do not live next door to a PCL winner (these households will be

affected by any postcode-wide social effects on car consumption), and those who do live next

door to a PCL winner (who are affected both by post-code-wide social effects and those

stemming from their immediate neighbors). In addition to our four car consumption measures,

Row 2 of Table 10 asks whether a household acquired one of its current vehicles in the six

months before (rather than after) the lottery; it is included as a falsification test. Clearly, all

indicators of car consumption in Table 10 except row two are largest for households living next

door to PCL winners. To the extent that, within postcodes, living next door to a PCL ticket

holder is exogenous, Table 10 provides convincing evidence that (a) social effects of winning the

PCL do exist, but (b) they are highly localized, restricted in large part to a household’s nearest


35
  Thoughout this paper, households are defined as living in a multi-unit dwelling if their address shares a Bridgis
(x,y) location with at least one other address.
                                                                                                                    31

neighbors.36

         Table 11 extends the analysis of Table 10 by addressing the possible endogeneity of

living within one or two doors of a PCL winner. As already discussed, if unobserved household

characteristics are correlated within postcodes at the extremely detailed level of next-door

neighbors, households who live next door to ticket buyers may differ from other households in

unobserved ways that could contaminate Table 10’s estimates. To address this concern, Table 11

uses information from our survey to construct an indicator of whether a household lives next

door to a PCL buyer. As already noted, this indicator is necessarily incomplete because it is

survey-derived. In particular, to be in the sample for Panel A of Table 11, a survey household

must have had at least one of its two nearest neighbors respond to the PCL survey and at least

one of those neighbors must report holding a PCL ticket in our survey. Thus, by construction, all

the households in the Table 11 sample live next door to a PCL ticket owner; the only variation in

whether the neighbors of the Table 11 households won is generated by the random choice of

their postcode as winning or not in the PCL. As the Table makes clear, all indicators of current

car consumption with the exception of the ‘placebo’ measure in row 2 are higher for those

households who were exposed to the treatment of having a next-door neighbor win the PCL.

Sample sizes are small, however, and only one of the comparisons is statistically significant (and

that at 10%). Both sample size and statistical significance rise if we define the ‘treatment’ as

having at least one of one’s four nearest neighbors win the PCL.


36
  We conducted three additional exercises to test for the exogeneity of living next door to a PCL ticket buyer. First,
within winning postcodes (where we know the location of all buyers) we examined the sample of nonbuyers and
asked whether their tendency to live next door to a buyer was related to any of their observable characteristics (using
a method similar to Appendix Table A2). Second, we conducted the same test in both winning and nonwinning
codes using a survey-based indicator of whether one’s neighbor purchased tickets that is available in both types of
codes (described in the following paragraph). Third, we added this indicator as a control variable to some of our
‘social effects’ regressions, such as those reported in Table 8. None of these exercises indicated a significant or
robust association between living next door to a lottery winner and other observed characteristics (including pre-
lottery income).
                                                                                                              32

        As noted, the other indicator of conspicuous consumption (i.e. consumption that is easily

observable to its neighbors over an extended period) available to us is whether a household

undertook any exterior home renovations during the six months since the lottery. As Table 3

indicated, this is a relatively rare event (occuring in 1.5 versus 3.0 percent of households in

nonwinning versus winning codes respectively); the odds of detecting an effect of the lottery are

thus relatively small. Nonetheless we replicated Table 9’s analysis of car consumption for

renovations. Statistically significant social effects were detected only for postcode level

measures of neighbors’ winnings; only these measures are reported in Table 12 to save space. In

sum, Table 12 provides weak but suggestive evidence that, when a large number of households

in a postcode win, all households (including nonwinners) are more likely to conduct exterior

renovations to their home, and less likely to conduct interior renovations. While this reallocation

of consumption is consistent with ‘competitive’ consumption behavior, it is also consistent with

other motivations.37

        As a final exercise, we added interaction terms to our main estimates of social effects to

identify the types of neighborhoods in which estimated social effects are the strongest. To

illustrate the results, we focus on two cases where our estimated social effects in Table 8 were

strongest: the effects of living in a winning code on new car purchases, and the effects of a large

number of winning households in the postcode on exterior home renovations. The results are

reported in Tables 13 and 14. The first five rows of these tables measure neighborhood

characteristics by whether the respondent’s postcode is above or below the sample mean on a

given characteristic, such as age or education. The sixth simply differentiates postcodes in the


37
   For example, suppose that households derive utility from living near attractively-maintained homes. A
neighborhood-level PCL win might provide a focal point that helps solve this public-good problem, either by
stimulating communication among households or by providing simultaneous income shocks to multiple credit-
constrained households.
                                                                                                                    33

Netherlands’ 30 largest cities from all other postcodes. The remaining rows differentiate the

social effect by the characteristics of the respondent’s dwelling. Specifically, we define a

household as living in a multi-unit building if it shares an (x,y) location with at least one other

household in its codegroup; this method also allows us to differentiate households in small (up to

4 units) versus larger multiunit buildings. Because none of the above neighborhood

characteristics vary much within codegroups, all the specifications in Tables 13 and 14 omit the

codegroup fixed effects.38 The Tables show both the main effect of winnings in the

neighborhood, and its interaction with a selected neighborhood or dwelling characteristic.39

         According to Table 13, social effects of a PCL win on new car purchases are strongest in

postcodes with an above-average share of single-headed households, with few children, in large

cities, and in large, multi-unit dwellings. In contrast, according to Table 14, social effects of a

large number of winning households on exterior home renovations are strongest outside the large

cities and in small multi-unit dwellings. The latter result is consistent with the notion that a local

PCL win facilitates co-ordination of building improvements, at least in cases where the number

of households sharing a building is not large.

         In other regressions (not shown), we also explored interactions between social effects and

indicators of the social and economic homogeneity of the postcode (essentially whether the

within-postcode variance of the characteristics in Tables 13 and 14 was above the sample

average). No consistent associations were found. We also focused on a household’s two and

four nearest neighbors and asked whether estimated social effects were stronger when the social



38
   They also omit the vector of household characteristics, X. Our objective here is to examine the effects of variation
in overall neighborhood type (including the household itself), not the distinct effects of own versus neighborhood
characteristics on social interactions. (We ask whether social interactions are greater when a household’s Xs
‘match’ its neighbors’ later in this section).
39
   “Main” effects of each characteristic are also included as controls, but not reported.
                                                                                                    34

distance between a winning neighbor and oneself (measured for example by the difference in

household income or education levels, or whether the households match each other by headship

type or presence of children) was smaller. Likely because the share of neighboring households

for whom such characteristics are available in our survey is small, no statistically significant

differences were detected.



7. Summary

        We have used the natural experiment associated with the Dutch postcode lottery (PCL) to

study both the own and social effects of a temporary, unexpected income shock equal to about

eight months of income on households’ consumption behavior and self-reported happiness. For

most aspects of household consumption, we are able to rule out large effects of such a shock on

own consumption in the six months after it occurs. This fact, plus the fact that the main

consumption effects we do detect involve durables, is consistent with a permanent income model

in which households use durable expenditures as well as capital markets to smooth consumption

(Browning and Crossley 2004). In addition, as predicted by simple models of transfers in kind,

the vast majority of households who exogenously receive a large, in-kind transfer (a new BMW)

converted that prize into other goods or savings, despite the transactions cost and/or tax penalty

associated with doing so. The only own consumption effect that is hard to reconcile with a

simple permanent income model is our estimated effect of a PCL win on eating out six months

after the lottery: while the effect we detect is small, it is still considerably larger than one would

expect from a simple life cycle model. Also consistent with the life cycle model, we find that

nondurables expenditures are less sensitive to lottery winnings than to cross-sectional income

differentials.
                                                                                                              35

        We do detect social effects of lottery winnings, but only for two goods: car consumption

and exterior home renovations, both of which are likely to be easily, and repeatedly, visible to a

household’s neighbors. While we observe a strong cross-sectional association between (non-

lottery) income and self-reported happiness in our data, lottery winnings do not make households

happier, nor do they make neighboring households less happy. Together, these results are

consistent with a scenario in which (a) happiness is more linked to permanent than to short-term

increases in income, and (b) at least in the short term, income comparisons with one’s residential

neighbors do not affect happiness.

        What simple models of consumer behavior might explain the social effects estimated in

our data? While it is tempting to interpret our estimates as reflective of a psychological need to

(be seen to be?) “keeping up with the van den Bergs”40, we note that they could also be driven by

other factors. For example, our results for home renovations are also consistent with a scenario

where a simultaneous lottery win provides a focal point (and perhaps eases liquidity constraints)

for voluntary contributions to the local public good of neighborhood (or even building)

appearance. Social spillovers in car consumption in our data could be driven by information-

sharing about cars and/or dealers (Grinblatt et al, 2004), or by something as simple as households

passing money to immediate neighbors, who might be family members. Also, it is worth re-

emphasizing that our estimates do not distinguish ‘imitative’ consumption patterns (I buy a car

because you buy one) from more general effects of neighbors’ incomes on a household’s

consumption. Still, we find that households’ consumption of visible, durable goods (and only

such goods) are affected by exogenous shocks to their neighbors’ incomes. We find these effects

intriguing and deserving of further study using lottery-based or other research designs.


40
  Parallel to “Jones”, van den Berg is the fourth most common surname in the Netherlands, according to Wikipedia.
(De Jong is first).
                                                                                                     36

        Finally, we note that, when taken together, our own and social effects results can --

perhaps paradoxically-- be seen as ‘good news’ for both the life-cycle hypothesis (suitably

modified to include durables’ consumption-smoothing role) and for fiscal policies such as

unexpected tax rebates designed to stimulate consumer spending: To the extent that the latter

aim specifically at “big-ticket items” (mostly durables) –where consumer spending is most

cyclically sensitive to begin with—our results suggest that unexpected income shocks (such as

tax rebates) may not only have substantial ‘own’ effects on consumption, but significant social

multiplier effects as well (Glaeser et al., 2003). These social multipliers are distinct from, and

would presumably operate in addition to, the usual Keynesian multipliers that have been studied

in this context.
                                                                                                37


                                              References

Agarwal, Sumit, Chunlin Liu, and Nicholas S. Souleles. 2007 “The Reaction of Consumer
      Spending and Debt to Tax Rebates—Evidence from Consumer Credit Data” Journal of
      Political Economy 115(6) (December): 986-1019.

Bagwell, L. S., and B. D. Bernheim (1996): “Veblen Effects in a Theory of Conspicuous
      Consumption,” American Economic Review, 86(3), 349– 373.
Becker, G. S., and K. M. Murphy (2001): Social Economics; Market Behavior in a Social
       Environment. Belknap Print.

Browning, M. and T. Crossley. (2004) “Shocks, stocks and socks: smoothing consumption over a
      temporary income loss” Centre for Applied Microeconometrics, University of
      Copenhagen, working paper no. 2004-05 (March)

Duflo, E., M. Kremer, and J. Robinson (2004): “Understanding Technology Adoption: Fertilizer
       in Western Kenya – Preliminary Results from Field Experiments,” Unpublished
       manuscript, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

Duflo, E., and E. Saez (2003): “The Role of Information and Social Interactions in Retirement
       Plan Decisions: Evidence from a Randomized Experiment,” Quarterly Journal of
       Economics, 118(3), 815–842.

Easterlin, Richard A. “Does Economic Growth Improve the Human Lot? Some Empirical
        Evidence”. In Nations and Households in Economic Growth: Essays in Honor of Moses
        Abramowits, Paul A. David and Melvin Reder, eds. New York: Academic Press, 1974.

Gardner, Jonathan and Andrew J. Oswald (2007) “Money and mental wellbeing: A longitudinal
      study of medium-sized lottery wins” Journal of Health Economics 26 (2007) 49–60

Glaeser,Edward L., Bruce I. Sacerdote and Jose A. Scheinkman. (2003) “The Social Multiplier”.
       Journal of the European Economic Association1(2-3) (April-May): 345-53

Grinblatt, Mark, Matti Keloharju and Seppo Ikaheimo. (2004) “Interpersonal Effects in
       Consumption: Evidence from the Automobile Purchases of Neighbors” NBER working
       paper no. 10226
Imbens, G., D. Rubin, and B. Sacerdote, "Estimating the Effect of Unearned Income on Labor
      Earnings, Savings and Consumption: Evidence from a Survey of Lottery Players"
      American Economic Review 91(4)(September 2001): 778-794.
Kahneman, Daniel, Alan Krueger, David Schkade, Norbert Schwarz, and Arthur Stone. (2006)
     “Would You Be Happier If You Were Richer? A Focusing Illusion”: Princeton
     University, Department of Economics, Center for Economic Policy Studies, Working
     Paper.
                                                                                                   38

Katz, L. F., J. R. Kling, and J. B. Liebman (2001): “Moving To Opportunity in Boston: Early
       Results of a Randomized Mobility Experiment,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116,
       607–654.


Kling, J. R., J. Ludwig, and L. F. Katz (2005): “Neighborhood Effects on Crime for Female and
        Male Youth: Evidence from a Randomized Housing Voucher Experiment,” Quarterly
        Journal of Economics, pp. 87– 130.

Leibenstein, H. (1950): “Bandwagon, Snob, and Veblen Effects in the Theory of Consumer’s
       Demand,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 64, 183–207.
Ludwig, J., G. J. Duncan, and P. Hirschfield (2001): “Urban Poverty and Juvenile Crime:
      Evidence from a Randomized Housing-Mobility Experiment,” Quarterly Journal of
      Economics, CXVI, 655–679.

Luttmer, Erzo. (2005) “Neighbors as Negatives: Relative Earnings and Well-Being” Quarterly
      Journal of Economics, 120(3) (August): 963-1002.

Manski, Charles, (1993). “Identification of Endogenous Social Effects: The Reflection Problem,”
      Review of Economic Studies, 60(3), 531-42.

Miguel, E. and Kremer, M. (2004). Worms: identifying impacts on education and health in the
      presence of treatment externalities. Econometrica 72(1): 159-217.

Moffitt, R. A. (1984). The effects of grants-in-aid on state and local expenditures: The case of
       AFDC. Journal of Public Economics, 23, 279-305.

Moffitt, R. A. (1989). Estimating the value of an in-kind transfer: The case of food stamps.
       Econometrica, 57(2), 385-409.

Moffitt, R. A. (2001): “Policy Interventions, Low-Level Equilibria, and Social Interactions,” in
       Social Dynamics, ed. by S. N. Durlauf, and H. P. Young, pp. 45–82. MIT Press.

Pollak, R. A. (1976): “Interdependent Preferences,” American Economic Review, 66(3), 309–
        321.

Sacerdote, Bruce, (2001) “Peer Effects with Random Assignment: Results for Dartmouth
       Roommates,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(2), 681-704.

Stevenson, Betsey and Justin Wolfers (2008). “Economic Growth and Subjective Well-Being:
       Reassessing the Easterlin Paradox” unpublished manuscript, Wharton, University of
       Pennsylvania, April 16.

Zeelenberg, M. and Pieters, F.G.M. (2004). “Consequences of regret aversion in real life: The
       case of the Dutch postcode lottery”. Organization Behavior and Human Decision
       Processes, 93, 155-168
                                                                                                                 39
                    Table 1: Descriptive Statistics, Pre-Lottery Characteristics

  Permanent or pre-Lottery Characteristic:                             Live in a winning postcode?
                                                                          No                Yes
  Number of persons in household 1                                       2.28               2.36
  Two-headed Household? 1                                                .628               .683
  Secondary Education?2                                                  .915               .925
  Higher Vocational Training or University? 2                            .338               .308
  Age3                                                                  49.90              50.64
  Number of children in household                                        .513               .562
  For single-headed households:
     Head works?                                                         .434                .477
     Head’s hours4                                                       14.30               16.65
  For two-headed households:
     Husband works?                                                       .665                .641
     Husbands’ hours4                                                    25.23               24.19
     Wife works?                                                          .572               .555
     Wife’s hours4                                                       15.99               15.45

  Monthly Expenditures: (euro, one year before survey date)
     Food at home                                                       435.24              428.70
     Food away from home                                                 96.21               96.23
     Transportation                                                     177.87              188.84
     Other monthly                                                      239.82              261.75
     Total monthly                                                      947.60              957.98
  Occasional Expenditures:
  Exterior Home renovations before lottery (any?) 5                      .052                .049
  Other Home renovations before lottery (any?) 5,6                       .171                .150
  Vacation expenditures before lottery (euro) 5                          339                 471
  Durables expenditures before lottery (euro) 5                          1616                1661

  Total Annual Household Income (euro, post tax, pre lottery)            23358              24045

  Happiness7                                                              6.73               6.82

  Sample size8                                                           1179                 701

Notes: Statistically significant differences at 5% in bold, at 10% in italics.
1. refers to one year before the survey date.
2. For single-headed households, indicates whether the head has at least the level of education indicated. For two-
headed households, indicates whether at least one head has this level of education.
3. For single-headed households, age in years. For two-headed households, a simple average of the husband’s and
wife’s ages.
4. Usual weekly hours one year before the survey date. Equals zero for non-workers.
5. Refers to the 18 month period preceding the lottery date.
6. Includes interior renovations and those whose type could not be determined.
7. Self assessed on a scale from 1 to 10 (refers to one year before the survey date)
8. Gives the number of observations in winning and nonwinning codes. Sample sizes vary across rows of the table
due to missing values and sample restrictions.
                                                                                                               40
                       Table 2: Descriptive Statistics, Lottery Characteristics

                                                                  Live in a winning postcode?
                                                                     No                Yes
                Awareness of Lottery:
                Remember PCL Street Prize?                          .653               .874
                Recall number of winning households?                .221               .533
                Recall winners’ house numbers?                      .053               .248

                Lottery Participation and Winnings (unconditional):
                Held a PCL ticket?                              .255                   .318
                Number of tickets held                          .455                   .564
                Amount of Cash Won (euro)                         0                    5915
                Won BMW?                                          0                    .037
                Total Winnings (incl. value of BMW)               0                    6843

                Lottery Tickets and Winnings (conditional on participation):
                Number of tickets held                          1.853                 1.783
                Amount of Cash Won (euro)                          0                  18596
                Won BMW?                                           0                   .112
                Total Winnings (incl. value of BMW)                0                  21399

                Indicators of Neighbors’ Winnings:
                Had an immediate neighbor who won?                    0                .524
                Number of immediate neighbors who won                 0                .635
                (0,1 or 2)
                Total amount won by immediate neighbors               0               13392
                (incl. value of BMW)
                Number of winning households:
                   In same building                                .428                2.463
                   Within 25 meters                                .497                3.010
                   Within 100 meters                               4.079               7.027
                    In your postcode                                 0                 8.491
                Total Amount Won:
                   In same building                                 11297              63252
                   Within 25 meters                                 12947              77328
                   Within 100 meters                               101831             178223
                    In your postcode                                  0               217980

                Proximity to BMWs:
                 Immediate neighbor won a BMW?                        0                .081
                Number of BMWs won:
                  In same building                                  .067               .302
                  Within 25 meters                                  .078               .371
                  Within 100 meters                                 .471               .699
                   In your postcode                                   0                .814

Notes: Statistically significant differences at 5% in bold.

Indicators of own winnings and tickets bought are taken from survey data, and cross-checked against PCL data for
winners. BMW-winner indicator is taken from PCL data only. Indicators of neighbors’ and post-code level
winnings are taken from PCL data.
                                                                                                                     41
                          Table 3: Descriptive Statistics, Outcome Variables

                                                                        Live in a winning postcode?
                                                                           No                Yes
              Monthly Expenditures:
                (euro, at the survey date)
                Food at home                                              469.71              464.45
                Food away from home                                        94.18              101.59
                Transportation                                            191.71              216.87
                Other monthly                                             255.11              298.07
                Total monthly1                                           1000.56             1080.51

              Occasional Expenditures:
              Exterior Home renovations before lottery (any?)             .015                 .030
              Other Home renovations before lottery (any?)                .075                 .067
              Vacation expenditures since lottery (euro) 2               260.25               274.54
              Durables expenditures since lottery (euro) 2               768.21               889.18

              Total Annual Household Income (euro, at                     24185               25546
              survey date)

              Car Variables:
              New Car since Lottery Date?3                                 .111                 .157
              Own a BMW at the Survey Date?                               .0204                .0157
              Number of Cars (up to 2)                                     .999                1.086
              Age of Main Car (years)                                      7.08                 6.31
              Total Car Efficiency Units4                                  .380                 .455

              Car Variables, non-BMW winners only:
              New Car since Lottery Date? 3                                .111                 .148
              Own a BMW at the Survey Date?                               .0204                .0104
              Number of Cars (up to 2)                                     .999                1.079
              Age of Main Car (years)                                      7.08                6.392
              Total Car Efficiency Units4                                  .380                 .447

              Other Outcomes:
              Happiness5                                                   6.88                6.93
              PCL participant at Survey Date?                              .333                .361
              Donate Survey Fee to Charity?                                .424                .466


Notes: Statistically significant differences at 5% in bold, at 10% in italics.
1. Sum of food at home, food away from home, transportation plus other expenditures.
2. Refers to the 6 month period between the lottery and survey dates.
3. Equals one if the household acquired any of the autos it currently owns after the lottery date.
4. A car that is less than one year old counts as one unit. All other cars are depreciated at 15 percent per year.
5. Self assessed on a scale from 1 to 10 (refers to the survey date)
                                                                    42
    Table 4: BMW Ownership Six Months After the Lottery



                     Number with   Share with a      Number
                       a BMW         BMW          Of Observations
Nonwinners-               24          2.04             1179
Nonwinning codes
Nonwinners-              4            0.79             506
Winning codes
    All Nonwinners       28           1.66             1685
    combined
Cash winner              3            1.78             169

BMW Winner               4            15.38             26

   All Respondents       35           1.86             1880
                                                                                            43

Table 5: Simple Estimates of Own and Social Effects of Lottery Winnings on Consumption


                                      Effect of living in a winning code on consumption
   Consumption Measure:               For PCL ticket holders      For non-ticket holders
                                        (1)              (2)       (3)              (4)
   CAR OWNERSHIP, including BMW winners:
   Acquired new car since lottery     .0395            .0364       .0489            .0439
   date?                             (.0294)         (.0346)     (.0194)          (.0173)
   Own a BMW at the survey date?      -.0052          -.0273     -.0064            -.0104
                                     (.0171)         (.0158)     (.0062)          (.0044)
   Number of cars at survey date (up  .0126           -.0337       .0958            .0089
   to two)                           (.0601)         (.0607)     (.0511)          (.0351)
   Age of main car (years)            -1.120          -1.436      -.3661           -.1842
                                      (.414)         (.3982)     (.3223)          (.2697)
   Car efficiency units               .0872            .0655       .0592            .0165
                                     (.0427)         (.0350)     (.0293)            .0194
   CAR OWNERSHIP, excluding BMW winners from the sample:
   Acquired new car since lottery     .0083            .0174      .0489             .0439
   date?                             (.0297)         (.0360)     (.0194)          (.0173)
   Own a BMW at the survey date?      -.0214          -.0398     -.0064            -.0104
                                     (.0158)         (.0141)     (.0062)          (.0044)
   Number of cars at survey date (up  .0095           -.0300      .0958             .0089
   to two)                            .0629          (.0637)     (.0511)          (.0351)
   Age of main car (years)           -1.1142        -1.3703      -.3661            -.1842
                                     (.4203)         (.4232)     (.3223)          (.2697)
   Car efficiency units               .0776            .0592      .0592             .0165
                                     (.0444)         (.0369)     (.0293)            .0194
   MONTHLY EXPENDITURES:
   Food at home: (euros)              29.65            24.75      -20.90           -53.90
                                     (32.73)         (39.18)     (45.17)          (35.87)
      (square root of euros)          .6833            .8031      -.0747           -.5365
                                     (.6147)         (.6586)     (.5857)          (.4398)
      (change, euros)                 10.96            21.43      12.75             14.87
                                      (7.56)            9.89      (7.40)           (6.18)
      (change in square root)1        .5809          1.2702        .4722            .6605
                                     (.5289)         (.6311)     (.4168)          (.3829)
   Food away from home: (euros)       40.87            27.42       -6.91          -14.06
                                     (14.58)         (13.84)     (13.66)          (13.69)
       (square root of euros)        1.4813          1.0756      -.1402           -.2491
                                     (.6216)         (.6226)     (.4238)          (.3406)
       (change, euros)                 9.41            -3.73        8.09             8.96
                                      (7.58)         (11.98)      (5.78)           (5.00)
       (change in square root)1      1.0143            .4565      .2767             .3413
                                     (.4742)         (6236)      (.3323)          (.3154)
   Transportation expenditures:       23.99           -15.60      25.92             21.62
   (euros)                           (28.20)         (26.82)     (34.11)          (24.45)
       (square root of euros)         .4502           -.5808      .7006             .3031
                                     (.6865)         (.7368)     (.5713)          (.4317)
       (change, euros)                 -1.23           -1.40       -1.49             3.61
                                      (7.83)          (9.70)      (8.97)           (5.60)
       (change in square root)1       -.1376          -.0514      .0764             .2127
                                     (.5101)         (.6735)     (.3721)          (.3012)
                                                                                                                  44

Other monthly: (euros)                      81.21              82.27              25.80             11.60
                                           (45.06)            (52.48)            (35.80)          (31.29)
  (square root of euros)                    1.2566             1.1626             .4070             .1064
                                           (.7623)            (.8532)            (.5373)          (.4492)
  (change, euros)                           15.51              14.17               8.84              6.07
                                            (9.71)             (8.97)             (6.64)            (6.59)
  (change in square root)1                  .9552              .9734              .5415             .3923
                                           (.5390)            (.6209)            (.3567)          (.3748)
Total monthly (euros):                     185.77             130.36              33.36            -20.02
                                           (87.91)            (86.87)            (95.38)          (76.12)
  (square root of euros)                   2.1593             1.6294              .4656            -.1616
                                           1.0128             (.9822)            (.8567)          (.6380)
  (change, euros)                           30.47              25.08              20.01            31.09
                                           (18.76)            (24.37)            (17.97)          (16.10)
  (change in square root)1                 1.4423             1.2356              .5993            .9730
                                           (.8464)           (1.0646)            (.7047)          (.6687)
OCCASIONAL EXPENDITURES:
Home renovations: (any exterior?)            .0349             .0404              .0059            .0055
                                           (.0142)             .0166             (.0106)          (.0083)
 (any other?)                               -.0113             -.0216            -.0069            -.0190
                                           (.0234)            (.0282)            (.0150)          (.0131)
Vacation expenditures: (any?)               .0525              .0390              -.0018           -.0038
                                           (.0271)             .0262             (.0149)          (.0142)
  (euros)                                   33.29             -340.47            -18.01            -40.62
                                          (275.95)           (533.48)            (53.40)          (50.62)
  (square root of euros)                   2.8898              1.1757             -.1375           -.3814
                                          (1.8353)           (2.4830)            (.7625)          (.7431)
Durable expenditures: (any?)                .0563              .0201              -.0211           -.0321
                                           (.0410)            (.0461)            (.0222)          (.0192)
  (euros)                                  532.91              707.29             -57.69           -36.46
                                          (272.79)           (313.45)           (222.70)         (182.79)
  (square root)                            5.8324              5.4824             -.7171          -1.2065
                                          (2.6258)           (3.0535)           (1.4559)         (1.2973)
OTHER OUTCOMES:
Happiness (level)                           .0363              .0165              .0447            -.0967
                                           (.1468)            (.1372)            (.1139)          (.0890)
  (change)                                  .0011             -.0819              -.0546           -.0027
                                           (.1213)            (.1370)            (.0759)          (.0754)
Participate in PCL at Survey                .0091             -.0188              -.0368           -.0437
Date?                                      (.0245)            (.0259)            (.0189)          (.0166)
Donate Survey Fee to Charity?               .0828              .1247              .0213            .0364
                                           (.0493)            (.0499)            (.0285)          (.0265)
N (levels)                                   506                506                1293             1293
N (changes)                                  430                430                1028             1028

Notes: columns 1 and 3 simply regress the consumption measure on a dummy for living in a winning code.
Columns 2 and 4 add a full set of codegroup fixed effects to this regression. Sample sizes (N) are for food at home;
sample sizes vary slightly for other outcomes due to missing data.

See previous tables for variable definitions. All specifications regress an indicator of consumption on a dummy for
living in a winning code. Bold indicates significant at 5%; italic indicates significant at 10%. Standard errors
clustered by postcode.

1. If the change in consumption (x) is negative, this equals minus the square root of minus x.
                                                                                                                         45

                            Table 6: Own Effects of Total Amount won in the Lottery
             Outcome                        Basic Specification             With Codegroup                Codegroup effects
                                                                                effects                       and Xs
                                     coefficient std. error              coefficient     std. error     coefficient     std. error
                                          (1)        (2)                     (3)             (4)            (5)             (6)
CAR OWNERSHIP (excluding BMW winners from the sample):
Acquired new car since lottery date?    -.001       .014                     .007           .016           .013            .016
Own a BMW at survey date?                .005       .011                    .001            .008           -.000           .008
Number of cars at survey (up to two)    .015        .028                    .008            .027           .013            .024
Age of main car (years)                 -.422       .184                    -.468           .197           -.367           .200
Car efficiency units                    .042        .020                    .042            .021           .035            .021
MONTHLY EXPENDITURES:
Food at home: (euros)                   3.89       11.21                    3.49            15.88           4.66          14.70
  (square root of euros)                .021        .191                    .044            .225            .031           .203
  (change, euros)                       -2.02       2.44                    -1.88           2.37           -1.98           2.48
  (change in square root)1              -.135       .182                    -.170           .186           -.166           .190
Food away from home: (euros)           18.98        7.87                    19.24           7.97           17.49           7.77
   (square root of euros)               .623        .247                    .683            .261            .644           .244
   (change, euros)                      5.33        3.81                    4.75            4.19            5.00           4.01
   (change in square root)1             .384        .193                    .348            .220            .365           .209
Transportation expenditures: (euros)    2.95        9.72                    3.69            10.58           3.56          11.18
   (square root of euros)               .056        .217                    .064            .239            .010           .238
   (change, euros)                      -0.67       2.27                    -0.01           2.84            1.02           3.41
   (change in square root)1             -.069       .146                    -.066           .157           -.053           .170
Other monthly: (euros)                 11.13       15.13                    14.48           15.37          10.64          15.42
   (square root of euros)                .137       .249                     .190            .271           .110          .260
   (change, euros)                       0.05       2.42                    -0.81            2.87           -.61          3.03
   (change in square root)1             -.076       .158                    -.145            .188          -.119          .192
Total monthly (euros):                  36.10       34.26                   36.59           36.50          36.11          35.23
   (square root of euros)                .348       .368                     .395            .388           .350          .355
   (change, euros)                       1.51       6.85                    -0.11            7.72           0.39          8.01
   (change in square root)1              .124       .312                    -.093            .375          -.055          .357
OCCASIONAL EXPENDITURES:
Home renovations: (any exterior?)        .002       .003                     .004           .003            .004           .003
 (any other?)                            .014       .009                     .008           .009            .008           .008
Vacation expenditures: (any?)            .010       .007                     .007           .008            .007           .008
   (euros)                             42.82       35.27                     6.12          53.30           -0.02          58.29
   (square root of euros)                .690       .425                     .437           .481            .387           .506
Durable expenditures: (any?)             .029       .012                     .027           .012            .029           .012
   (euros)                             288.33      113.72                   318.13         122.75         294.09          126.38
   (square root)                       2.868       1.023                    2.939           1.041         2.875            1.055
OTHER OUTCOMES:
Happiness (level)                       -.014       .055                     .008           .050           .007            .054
  (change)                              -.010       .029                     -.010          .037           .002            .036
Participate in PCL at Survey Date?       .020       .008                     .017           .009           .016            .009
Donate Survey Fee to Charity?           -.004       .013                     -.010          .013           -.011           .013

      Notes: Total winnings are measured in euros/10000 and equal zero for nonwinners. Monetary value of BMW
      (valued at €25,000) is included in winnings. See previous tables for definitions of other variables. All specifications
      include a fixed effect for lottery participation, a quadratic in the number of tickets purchased, and an dummy for
      residence in a winning postcode. Covariates (Xs) in columns 5 and 6 are own household income 6 months before
      the lottery data, presence of a partner, number of children and its square, age and its square, and education controls.
      Bold indicates significant at 5%; italic at 10%. Standard errors clustered on postcodes.
      1. If the change in consumption (x) is negative, this equals minus the square root of minus x.
                                                                                                                    46
            Table 7: Comparing own Lottery Effects to Cross-sectional Engel Curves

                                                                       Income Component
                             Outcome                             Household       Lottery Winnings
                                                             Nonlottery Income
                                                             Coeffi-      Std.   Coeffi-    Std.
                                                              cient      error    cient    Error
                                                               (1)        (2)      (3)       (4)
             CAR OWNERSHIP1
             Acquired new car since lottery date?              .003        .007         .013       .016
             Number of cars at survey date (up to two)        .033         .008        .013        .024
             Age of main car (years)                          -.114        .078        -.367       .200
             Car efficiency units                             .024         .006        .035        .021
             MONTHLY EXPENDITURES:
             Food at home (euros)                              9.44       11.17        4.66        14.70
                (square root of euros)                         .313       .132         .031        .203
             Food away from home (euros)                      15.27        5.91       17.49         7.77
                (square root of euros)                         .503       .155        .644         .244
             Transportation expenditures (euros)              -8.15       11.92        3.56        11.18
                (square root of euros)                         .209        .164       .010         .238
             Other expenditures (euros)                       16.12        9.32       10.64        15.42
                (square root of euros)                         .436       .146         .110        .260
             Total monthly expenditures (euros)               44.36       24.77       36.11        35.23
                (square root of euros)                         .738       .215         .350        .355
             OCCASIONAL EXPENDITURES:
             Home renovations: (any exterior?)                .001         .003         .004       .003
              (any other?)                                    .007         .004         .008       .008
             Vacation expenditures (any?)                     .012         .005         .007       .008
                (euros)                                      88.40        72.98        -0.02      58.29
               (square root of euros)                         .772         .446         .387       .506
             Durables expenditures (any?)                     .013         .006         .029       .012
                (euros)                                      197.00       79.10       294.09      126.38
                (square root of euros)                       1.437         .513       2.875       1.055
             OTHER OUTCOMES:
             Happiness (level)                                 .125        .025        .007        .054
             Participate in PCL at Survey Date?                .008        .005        .016        .009
             Donate Survey Fee to Charity?                     .014        .008        -.011       .013



Notes to Table 7:

Income and lottery winnings are measured in euros/10000. Household nonlottery income is measured six months
before the lottery date. Total winnings include value of BMW and equal zero for nonwinners. See previous tables
for definitions of other variables. All regressions include a fixed effect for lottery participation, a quadratic in the
number of tickets purchased, and a dummy for residence in a winning code. Also included in all regressions are
controls for the presence of a partner, number of children and its square, age and its square, education controls, and a
full set of codegroup fixed effects. Bold indicates significant at 5%; italic at 10%. Standard errors not clustered.

1. All estimates of car ownership exclude BMW winners from the estimation sample.
                                                                                                                           47
                           Table 8: Effects of Neighbors’ Winnings on Consumption

                                                                      Indicator of Neighbors’ Winnings
                Outcome                          Live in a winning      Number of win-          Total winnings        Neighbor Won?
                                                    postcode?           ning households        within 25 meters
                                                                           in postcode
                                                  Coef-       Std.       Coef-      Std.       Coeff-       std.       Coef-      Std.
                                                 ficient     error      ficient    error       icient      error      ficient    error
                                                   (1)        (2)         (3)       (4)          (5)        (6)         (7)       (8)
CAR OWNERSHIP:1
Acquired new car since lottery date?                .0265      .0162     .0030       .0014       .0012     .0015       .0485     .0225
Number of cars at survey date (up to two)           .0041       .0257    .0036       .0023       .0001     .0024       .0077     .0300
Age of main car (years)                            -.4338      .2398     -.0475      .0183      -.0271     .0211      -.4858     .2624
Car efficiency units                                .0234      .0162     .0042       .0015       .0005     .0013       .0420     .0226
MONTHLY EXPENDITURES:
Food at home: (euros)                              -19.62      36.85      -0.38       2.59       -0.77      1.85      -25.33     36.32
  (square root of euros)                           -.0818       .4130    .0017       .0309       .0135     .0242       .1611     .4587
  (change, euros)                                   14.16        5.32      0.83       0.52        0.07      0.54        6.40      8.51
  (change in square root)2                           .697        .330    .0516       .0320       .0056     .0274       .2042     .5042
Food away from home: (euros)                       -10.55       12.81     -0.94       1.01        0.50      0.74       -7.93     10.65
   (square root of euros)                           -.167        .324    -.0033      .0295       .0232     .0236       .0230     .3496
   (change, euros)                                   6.32        4.86      0.62       0.39        0.56      0.43        1.29      4.75
   (change in square root)2                         .3397      .2911     .0428       .0258       .0195     .0268       .1999     .3301
Transport expenditures: (euros)                     31.37      21.67       1.43       1.67        1.84      2.05       52.57     34.16
   (square root of euros)                           .5260      .3793     .0199       .0334       .0387     .0428      1.0201     .4950
   (change, euros)                                   2.59        5.92    -.0.48       0.53        0.03      0.48        5.43      7.36
   (change in square root)2                         .2104      .2844     -.0161      .0272       .0176     .0282       .3162     .3587
Other monthly: (euros)                              12.62      24.76       0.38       3.42       -0.61      2.52       12.08     37.62
   (square root of euros)                           .3304      .3908     -.0142      .0449       .0026     .0351       .2795     .5447
   (change, euros)                                  11.83        6.29      0.82       0.44       -0.13      0.50       12.23      7.89
   (change in square root)2                         .7799      .3343     .0634       .0246       .0113     .0294       .7493     .4244
Total monthly (euros):                              22.33      70.65       0.78       6.36        0.90      4.53       50.62     92.65
   (square root of euros)                           .3785      .5785     .0127       .0591       .0344     .0406       .8832     .7562
   (change, euros)                                  31.46      14.57       2.02       1.30       1.343     1.665       18.14     15.93
   (change in square root)2                       1.2329       .5991     .0954       .0588       .0580     .0598      1.0204     .7256
OCCASIONAL EXPENDITURES:
Home renovations: (any exterior?)                   .0082      .0072     .0014       .0006      -.0006     .0005      -.0072     .0107
 (any other?)                                      -.0196      .0114     -.0010      .0010       .0004     .0011       .0048     .0164
Vacation expenditures: (any?)                       .0080      .0126     .0015       .0010       .0014     .0012       .0061     .0172
   (euros)                                         -60.84      95.56       7.15       4.99        5.85      4.90      -40.11     96.84
   (square root of euros)                           .1260      .7228     .0910       .0574       .0865     .0646       .2093     .9470
Durable expenditures: (any?)                       -.0185      .0175     -.0032      .0015      -.0006     .0017      -.0230     .0250
   (euros)                                         -18.43      168.45     -5.06      17.87       18.23     12.28     -116.67     230.83
   (square root)                                   -.5362      1.2163    -.1298      .1225       .0829     .1160      -.7366     1.6566
OTHER OUTCOMES:
Happiness (level)                                  -.0515        .0781   -.0010      .0086      -.0086     .0074      .1252      .1046
  (change)                                         -.0196        .0700   -.0018      .0097       .0035     .0057      -.0073     .0340
Participate in PCL at Survey Date?                 -.0446        .0136   -.0031      .0012      -.0025     .0010      -.0030     .0191
Donate Survey Fee to Charity?                       .0739        .0228    .0086      .0019      -0037      .0025      .0805      .0295
     Notes: Total winnings are measured in euros/10000, and equal zero for nonwinners. Monetary value of BMW is
     included in winnings. See previous tables for other variable definitions. All specifications include own winnings, a
     fixed effect for lottery participation, a quadratic in the number of tickets purchased, the same covariates as in cols. 5
     and 6 of Table 6, and a full set of codegroup fixed effects. Bold indicates significant at 5%; italic indicates
     significant at 10%. Standard errors clustered by postcode.
     1. All estimates of car ownership exclude BMW winners from the estimation sample.
     2. If the change in consumption (x) is negative, this equals minus the square root of minus x.
                                                                                                                     48
Table 9: Effects of Alternative Indicators of Winner Density on Four Measures of Car
Consumption
                                                               Dependent Variable
Winner Density Indicator                 New Car?            Number of   Age of main                 Car efficiency
                                                               Cars       car (years)                    units
INDICATORS BASED ON
HOUSE NUMBERS:
Had an immediate neighbor who               .0458                .0077                -.4858               .0420
won?                                       (.0225)              (.0300)                .2624              (.0226)
Number of immediate neighbors               .0220                .0053                -.3346               .0284
who won (0,1 or 2)                         (.0163)              (.0224)              (.1969)              (.0177)
Total winnings of immediate                 .0080               -.0017                -.1249               .0062
neighbors (incl. value of BMW)             (.0061)              (.0076)              (.0577)              (.0066)
Number of neighbors within two              .0150                .0160                -.2667               .0260
doors who won (0 to 4)                     (.0101)              (.0159)              (.1222)              (.0123)
Total Winnings of neighbors                 .0074                .0075                -.1034               .0089
within two doors                           (.0048)              (.0055)              (.0409)              (.0047)
Weighted count of neighbors                 .0194                .0149                -.3262               .0305
within 2 doors who won1                    (.0127)              (.0191)              (.1546)              (.0150)
Weighted winnings of neighbors              .0088                .0054                -.1277               .0095
within 2 doors1                            (.0053)              (.0065)              (.0504)              (.0056)
INDICATORS BASED ON
EUCLIDEAN DISTANCE:
Number of winning households:
  In same building                          .0057                .0035               -.0527                .0012
                                           (.0045)              (.0076)              (.0705)              (.0038)
  Within 25 meters                          .0044                .0017               -.0588                .0013
                                           (.0042)              (.0072)              (.0610)              (.0034)
  Within 100 meters                         .0014                .0028               -.0481                .0050
                                           (.0030)              (.0048)              (.0448)              (.0031)
Total Amount Won:
  In same building                          .0008                .0007               -.0248                .0000
                                           (.0015)              (.0027)              (.0234)              (.0014)
  Within 25 meters                          .0012                .0001               -.0271                .0005
                                           (.0015)              (.0024)              (.0211)              (.0013)
  Within 100 meters                        -.0001                .0011               -.0588                .0015
                                           (.0011)              (.0016)              (.0610)              (.0011)
POST-CODE LEVEL
INDICATORS:
  Live in a Winning Postcode?                 .0265                .0041               -.4338              .0234
                                             (.0162)              (.0257)             (.2398)             (.0162)
   Number of winning households               .0030                .0036               -.0475              .0042
                                             (.0014)              (.0023)             (.0183)             (.0015)
   Total amount won                           .0008                .0012               -.0148              .0013
                                             (.0005)              (.0009)             (.0069)             (.0005)
   Share of households that won               .0589                .0108              -1.5348              .0996
                                             (.0476)              (.0728)             (.6092)             (.0444)
   Amt won per household                      .0114                .0015               -.3932              .0248
                                             (.0191)              (.0285)             (.2356)             (.0169)
Notes: Total winnings are measured in euros/10000, and equal zero for nonwinners. All estimates exclude BMW-
winning households, but monetary value of BMW (valued at €25,000) is included in neighbors’ winnings. See
previous tables for other variable definitions. All regressions include a control for own winnings, a fixed effect for
lottery participation, a quadratic in number of tickets purchased, a vector of socioeconomic characteristics, and a full
set of codegroup fixed effects. Standard errors are in parentheses and are clustered at the postcode level. Bold
indicates significant at 5%; italic indicates significant at 10%.
1. Immediate neighbors weighted by 1; non-immediate neighbors by 0.5
                                                                                               49
Table 10: Car Consumption Indicators for PCL Non-Participants, by Proximity to
Winners

a) By whether the next-door neighbor won the PCL

                                 (1)                       (2)                      (3)
                            Living in Non-        Living in Winning        Living in Winning
                            Winning Codes         Codes, not next to a      Codes, next to a
                                                     PCL Winner               PCL Winner
New car since lottery             .110                    .135                  .183‡‡‡
date?                            (878)                   (244)                    (234)
New car between 6 and             .121                    .133                     .122
12 months ago                    (647)                   (180)                    (189)
Number of cars at                 .929                    .975                 1.077†‡‡‡
survey date                      (877)                   (244)                    (234)
Age of main car                  7.139                  7.084                    6.492‡
(years)                          (660)                   (178)                    (197)
Car efficiency units              .350                    .371                 .447††‡‡‡
                                 (851)                   (234)                    (226)



b) By whether a PCL winner lives within two doors:
                                 (1)                      (2)                       (3)
                            Living in Non-        Living in Winning        Living in Winning
                            Winning Codes         Codes, not within        Codes, within two
                                                 two doors of a PCL         doors of a PCL
                                                       Winner                   Winner
New car since lottery             .110                   .153                    .161‡‡
date?                            (878)                  (137)                     (341)
New car between 6                 .121                   .116                      .131
and 12 months ago                (647)                   (95)                     (274)
Number of cars at                 .929                   .920                 1.067††‡‡‡
survey date                      (877)                  (137)                     (341)
Age of main car                  7.139                  6.978                     6.706
(years)                          (660)                   (93)                     (282)
Car efficiency units              .350                   .353                  .430†‡‡‡
                                 (851)                  (131)                     (329)



*, **, ***: statistically different from column 1 at 10, 5 and 1 percent respectively

†, ††, †††: statistically different from column 2 at at 10, 5 and 1 percent respectively

‡, ‡‡, ‡‡‡: statistically different from column 1 at 10, 5 and 1 percent respectively

Sample sizes in parentheses.
                                                                                     50


Table 11: Car Consumption Indicators for PCL Non-Participants who are Neighbors of
Participants

a) Next-door neighbors of PCL Participants only:

                              (1)                      (2)
                          Living in            Living in Winning
                       Nonwinning Codes              Codes
New car since                .102                     .145
lottery date?                (88)                     (55)
New car between 6            .121                     .087
and 12 months ago?           (66)                     (46)
Number of cars at            .955                    1.073
survey date                  (88)                     (55)
Age of main car             7.386                    6.298
(years)                      (70)                     (47)
Car efficiency units         .352                    .451*
                             (83)                     (55)


b) Live within 2 doors (either way) of a PCL Participant:

                              (1)                       (2)
                          Living in            Living in Winning
                       Nonwinning Codes               Codes
New car since                .108                      .117
lottery date?               (157)                     (103)
New car between 6            .131                      .126
and 12 months ago?          (122)                      (87)
Number of cars at            .994                   1.155**
survey date                 (157)                     (103)
Age of main car             7.133                     6.449
(years)                     (128)                      (89)
Car efficiency units         .376                    .492**
                            (152)                     (101)



* Differs from column 1 at 10%
** Differs from column 1 at 5%
***Differs from column 1 at 1%
                                                                                   51


Table 12: Effects of Alternative Measures of Winner Density on Incidence of Home
Renovations, by Type


                                             Dependent Variable
     Winner Density Indicator             Exterior        Other
                                         Renovations   Renovations
        Live in a Winning Postcode?         .0082         -.0193
                                           (.0072)       (.0114)
        Number of winning households        .0014         -.0010
                                           (.0006)       (.0010)
        Total amount won                    .0004         -.0005
                                           (.0002)       (.0004)
        Share of households that won        .0228         -.0465
                                           (.0183)       (.0310)
        Amt won per household               .0034         -.0233
                                           (.0063)       (.0122)
                                                                                        52
Table 13: Effects of Postcode and Dwelling Characteristics on Social Effects for New Car
Purchases


                                          (1)                        (2)                         (3)
Postcode Characteristic:           Live in a               Live in a Winning            P value for joint F
                                   Winning                 Postcode and                 test of (1) and (2)
                                   Postcode?               Postcode
                                                           Characteristic is
                                                           above average:
Share of Households with                  .0620                    -.0661                       .0138
Two Heads                                (.0213)                  (.0308)
Mean Age of Household                     .0333                    -.0161                       .3115
Head(s)                                  (.0244)                  (.0304)
Mean Education1                           .0344                    -.0110                       .2217
                                         (.0220)                  (.0324)
Mean Number of                            .0519                    -.0649                       .0210
Children                                 (.0192)                  (.0333)
Mean Household Income                     .0281                    -.0062                       .3354
                                         (.0223)                  (.0316)
Neighborhood is Urban? 2                  .0040                    .0700                        .0314
                                         (.0209)                  (.0334)
Dwelling is in a multi-                   -.0379                   .0798                        .0355
unit building                            (.0434)                  (.0452)
Dwelling is in a small                    .0435                    -.0564                       .0783
multi-unit building3                     (.0203)                  (.0335)
Dwelling in a large multi-                -.0208                   .0924                        .0015
unit building4                           (.0258)                  (.0311)


1. A household’s education level is an integer from 1 to 8.

2. Urban means the postcode is located in one of the 30 largest cities in the Netherlands.

3. Up to four units.

4. Five or more units.


Notes: Each row corresponds to a different regression. Dependent variable in all regressions is an indicator for
whether the household acquired a new car in the six months since the PCL date. All regressions include the
postcode characteristic under consideration, a control for own winnings, a fixed effect for lottery participation, and a
quadratic in number of tickets purchased. Standard errors are in parentheses and are clustered at the postcode level.
Bold indicates significant at 5%; italic indicates significant at 10%.
                                                                                                                   53

Table 14: Effects of Postcode and Dwelling Characteristics on Social Effects for Exterior
Home Renovations

                                     (1)                            (2)                         (3)
Postcode or Dwelling        Number of Winning              Number of Winning           P value for joint F
Characteristic:             Households in                  Households in               test of (1) and (2)
                            Postcode                       Postcode x Postcode
                                                           Characteristic is
                                                           above average:
Share of Households                    .0015                      -.0004                       .127
with Two Heads                        (.0016)                    (.0016)
Mean Age of                            .0015                      -.0009                       .115
Household Head(s)                     (.0008)                    (.0012)
Mean Education1                        .0011                      .0004                        .072
                                      (.0009)                    (.0012)
Mean Number of                         .0017                      -.0007                       .149
Children                              (.0014)                    (.0015)
Mean Household                         .0024                      -.0017                       .045
Income                                (.0010)                    (.0012)
Neighborhood is                        .0018                      -.0024                       .022
Urban? 2                              (.0007)                    (.0009)
Dwelling is in a                       -.0002                     .0021                        .020
multi-unit building                   (.0011)                    (.0013)
Dwelling is in a small                 .0005                      .0026                       .0004
multi-unit building3                  (.0007)                    (.0012)
Dwelling in a large                    .0016                      -.0006                       .055
multi-unit building4                  (.0007)                    (.0011)

1. A household’s education level is an integer from 1 to 8.

2. Urban means the postcode is located in one of the 30 largest cities in the Netherlands.

3. Up to four units.

4. Five or more units.

Notes: Each row corresponds to a different regression. Dependent variable in all regressions is an indicator for
whether the household started an exterior renovation project in the six months since the PCL date. All regressions
include the postcode characteristic under consideration, a control for own winnings, a fixed effect for lottery
participation, and a quadratic in number of tickets purchased. Standard errors are in parentheses and are clustered at
the postcode level. Bold indicates significant at 5%; italic indicates significant at 10%.
                                                                                                            54
Appendix 1: Exogeneity Checks
Table A1: Exogeneity Checks for Own Winnings


    Permanent or pre-Lottery                            Without codegroup          With codegroup fixed
    Characteristic:                                          fixed effects                  effects
                                                       coefficent     std. error   coefficient std. error
    Number of persons in household                       .0303          .0437        -.0043         .0398
    Two-headed Household?                                .0113          .0110        .0018          .0105
    Secondary Education?                                 -.0012         .0085        -.0039         .0073
    Higher Vocational Training or University?            -.0085         .0116        -.0099         .0130
    Age                                                  .5132          .3175        .5485          .3228
    Number of children in household                      -.0062         .0301        -.0214         .0301

    Monthly Expenditures: (euro, one year before survey date)
       Food at home                                      6.84           9.18          7.32       13.83
       Food away from home                              13.31           5.63          7.69        5.47
       Transportation                                   12.71           9.91         15.53       10.18
       Other monthly                                    19.39          15.05         20.67       16.42
       Total monthly                                    52.91          34.82         49.88       35.67
    Occasional Expenditures:
    Exterior Home renovations before lottery (any?)     .0021          .0087         .0011       .0089
    Other Home renovations before lottery (any?)        -.0016         .0096         -.0083      .0108
    Vacation expenditures before lottery (euro)         28.02          36.56         19.90       37.33
    Durables expenditures before lottery (euro)        -171.96         163.18       -193.45      190.95

    Total Annual Household Income (euro, post           920.77         534.27       591.97       496.65
     tax, pre lottery)

    Happiness                                            .0109         .0458         .0026       .0409


Notes: Coefficients from regressions of the characteristic on total amount won, with controls for whether any
tickets were purchased and a quadratic in the number of tickets purchased. Winnings are in euros/10000. Total
winnings are zero for nonwinners. Monetary value of BMW (valued at €25,000) is included in winnings. See Table
1 for additional notes and variable definitions.
                                                                                                                    55
     Table A2: Exogeneity Checks for Selected Indicators of Neighbors’ Winnings

                                                                  Indicator of Neighbors’ Winnings
Permanent or pre-Lottery                     Live in a winning      Number of win-        Total winnings       Neighbor Won?
Characteristic:                                 postcode?           ning households      within 25 meters
                                                                       in postcode
A. Without Codegroup fixed                     Coef-      Std.       Coef-      Std.     Coeff-       Std.      Coef-      Std.
effects                                       ficient    Error      ficient    error     icient      error     ficient    Error
Number of persons in household                .0433      .1254       .0194     .0102     -.0159      .0085     .2639      .1132
Two-headed Household?                         .0434      .0338       .0082     .0022     -.0034      .0021     .1140      .0313
Secondary Education?                          .0098      .0145       .0018     .0009      .0006      .0009     .0050      .0170
Higher Vocational Training or University?     -.0258     .0294      -.0002     .0031     -.0021      .0021     -.0525     .0300
Age                                           .5822      1.0065     .0005      .0628      .0039      .0758      .6927     1.0114
Number of children in household               .0376      .0604       .0113     .0045     -.0082      .0030     .1415      .0692
Monthly Expenditures, one year ago:
   Food at home                               -6.02      35.19      2.19        2.04      -1.07      1.73      -9.16       29.59
   Food away from home                         0.15      11.59      0.40        0.68      1.43       1.30      5.36        10.45
   Transportation                             12.34      24.35      -0.23       1.01      -0.62      1.56      39.06       34.55
   Other monthly                              23.31      27.99      -0.31       1.13      0.67       2.03      5.35        32.99
   Total monthly                              12.58      70.33      2.48        3.60      2.17       5.37      -1.38       61.87
Occasional Expenditures:
Exterior Home renovations before lottery?     -.0079     .0110      -.0008     .0007     -.0022      .0005     -.0008     .0141
Other Home renovations before lottery?        -.0175     .0193      -.0002     .0020     -.0032      .0010     -.0105     .0230
Vacation expenditures before lottery (€)      134.14     84.85       11.94      7.86     12.58        5.56     123.65     90.30
Durables expenditures before lottery (€)       28.01     346.72      21.97     29.42      1.74       29.82      94.36     291.28

Total Annual Household Income (€,             578.80    1217.97     179.18    110.72     -127.28     74.44     107.90     1268.76
 Post tax, pre lottery)
Happiness (pre-lottery)                       .0835      .1031      .0051      .0063     -.0124      .0066     .1283       .1098

B. With Codegroup fixed effects
Number of persons in household                -.0309     .0713      .0094      .0062     -.0021      .0071     .1039       .0838
Two-headed Household?                         -.0004     .0218      .0011      .0019      .0018      .0018     .0392       .0265
Secondary Education?                          -.0010     .0113      .0013      .0008      .0012      .0012     -.0044      .0163
Higher Vocational Training or University?     -.0383     .0206      -.0036     .0021     -.0041      .0024     -.0545      .0257
Age                                           .0164      .8229      -.0519     .0677      .0232      .0750     .2460       .9806
Number of children in household               -.0327     .0466       .0076     .0046     -.0050      .0038     .0252       .0655
Monthly Expenditures, one year ago:
   Food at home                               -14.57     32.87      1.88        2.51      1.62       1.73       -9.95      37.03
   Food away from home                         -6.27     11.83      -1.22       1.10      0.34       0.73       -7.93      13.39
   Transportation                             12.91      19.22      0.19        1.30      0.97       1.92       42.89      31.87
   Other monthly                              10.83      30.53      -2.41       2.38      -1.45      2.44       2.60       37.59
   Total monthly                               -5.88     65.29      -1.52       5.66      1.96       4.61      -10.56      74.26
Occasional Expenditures:
Exterior Home renovations before lottery?     -.0065     .0096      -.0004     .0009     -.0013      .0008     .0006      .0143
Other Home renovations before lottery?        -.0314     .0154      -.0023     .0016     -.0015      .0011     -.0378     .0217
Vacation expenditures before lottery (€)       59.88     60.20       -0.59      6.45      8.49        6.51      80.61     91.60
Durables expenditures before lottery (€)     -305.24     295.42     -60.79     53.61      12.16      24.40    -177.67     343.63

Total Annual Household Income (€,            -1393.29    792.27    -143.03     62.11     -163.92     74.09    -1940.6     1039.6
 Post tax, pre lottery)
Happiness (pre-lottery)                       .0592      .0737      -.0024     .0066     -.0143      .0072     .0308       .1055

     Notes: Coefficients from regressions of the characteristic on the neighbors’ winnings indicator, controlling for a
     quadratic in the number of tickets purchased. All measures of winnings are in euros/10000. See previous tables for
     other variable definitions.
                                                                                                                  56
 Appendix 2: Identification of Imitative versus Other Social Effects


         To focus on essentials, consider a household that did not win in the PCL (so own

winnings, WiO, are zero) and let θ = g = h in (1) also equal zero. But now allow the household’s

consumption to depend both on its neighbor’s winnings, WiN, and its neighbor’s consumption,

CiN, (of perhaps the same item we are studying for the original household). Thus (1) becomes:

         Ci = α + γ WiN +φ CiN + ei                                              (A1)

where φ captures “imitative”social effects and γ all other social effects.

Let the household’s neighbor’s consumption be given by:

         CiN = a + bWiN + ui                                                     (A2)

Under reasonable conditions, the lottery ensures that WiN is independent of both ei and ui.

While it might be tempting to use WiN as an instrument for CiN in (A1), this is not possible

unless γ = 0. In other words, imitative social effects can be identified by a neighbor’s-winnings

instrument only under the assumption that no other social effects are present. More generally,

substituting (A2) into (A1) reveals that (φb + γ) is identified from an OLS regression of

consumption on neighbors’ winnings. Since imitative social effects cannot be distinguished

from other social effects without additional assumptions (or a different social experiment41), we

interpret all estimated social effects in this paper as estimates of the combined effect, (φb + γ).




41
   An obvious example of such an experiment would involve the random assignment of a particular consumption
item to a neighboring household. In this respect, the BMW prizes in the PCL would have been ideal, had the
households in the experiment not ‘undone’ this treatment by cashing in their BMWs. This raises interesting
questions about whether imitative social effects for large consumption items can be identified without substantially
coercing study participants.
