                                     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    INTERPRETING THE GREAT MODERATION:
CHANGES IN THE VOLATILITY OF ECONOMIC ACTIVITY AT THE MACRO AND MICRO LEVELS

                                                 Steven J. Davis
                                                 James A. Kahn

                                              Working Paper 14048
                                      http://www.nber.org/papers/w14048


                           NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                      Cambridge, MA 02138
                                           May 2008




    Doug Elmendorf, Nick Bloom, and other participants at the San Francisco Fed’s CSIP conference
    offered helpful comments, as did Charles Steindel. The editors of this journal – Jim Hines, Andrei
    Shleifer, Jeremy Stein and Timothy Taylor – provided many constructive comments that led to significant
    improvements in the paper. Parts of the paper also owe a significant debt to discussions with Meg
    McConnell. Responsibility for any flaws in the final product remains with the authors. The views
    expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the position of the Federal
    Reserve Bank of New York, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

    NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
    reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
    NBER publications.

    © 2008 by Steven J. Davis and James A. Kahn. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
    two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
    is given to the source.
Interpreting the Great Moderation: Changes in the Volatility of Economic Activity at the Macro
and Micro Levels
Steven J. Davis and James A. Kahn
NBER Working Paper No. 14048
May 2008
JEL No. E32

                                              ABSTRACT

We review evidence on the Great Moderation in conjunction with evidence about volatility trends
at the micro level. We combine the two types of evidence to develop a tentative story for important
components of the aggregate volatility decline and its consequences. The key ingredients are declines
in firm-level volatility and aggregate volatility – most dramatically in the durable goods sector – but
the absence of a decline in household consumption volatility and individual earnings uncertainty.
Our explanation for the aggregate volatility decline stresses improved supply-chain management, particularly
in the durable goods sector, and, less important, a shift in production and employment from goods
to services. We provide evidence that better inventory control made a substantial contribution to declines
in firm-level and aggregate volatility. Consistent with this view, if we look past the turbulent 1970s
and early 1980s much of the moderation reflects a decline in high frequency (short-term) fluctuations.
While these developments represent efficiency gains, they do not imply (nor is there evidence for)
a reduction in economic uncertainty faced by individuals and households.


Steven J. Davis
Graduate School of Business
The University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
steve.davis@gsb.uchicago.edu

James A. Kahn
Stern School of Business, Economics Department
New York University
44 W. 4th St
New York, NY 10012
and Federal Reserve Bank of New York
james.kahn@ny.frb.org, james.kahn@alum.mit.edu
        Most advanced economies have experienced a striking decline in the volatility of
aggregate economic activity since the early 1980s. Volatility reductions are evident for
output and employment at the aggregate level and across most industrial sectors and
expenditure categories. Inflation and inflation volatility have also declined dramatically.
Previous studies offer several potential explanations for this “Great Moderation.” Some
studies credit improved monetary policy for reductions in the volatility of real economic
activity and inflation (for example, Clarida, et al., 2000). Others suggest that financial
innovation and increased global integration play a role (Dynan et al., 2006). Still others,
pointing to evidence that output volatility fell more than sales volatility, highlight the
potential role of better inventory control methods (for example, Kahn et al. 2002).
Another line of research stresses “good luck” in the form of smaller exogenous shocks
(for example, Stock and Watson, 2002).
        These explanations are not mutually exclusive. As Bernanke (2004) remarks in
his discussion of the Great Moderation: “Explanations of complicated phenomena are
rarely clear cut and simple, and each … probably contains elements of truth.” The main
elements can also interact in complicated ways. Perhaps, for example, the unsuccessful
monetary policy of the 1970s or the more successful policy that followed facilitated the
spread of volatility-reducing financial innovations. Or perhaps sound monetary policy is
easier when shocks are milder. Nonetheless, even if no single factor fully explains the
phenomenon, it is useful to amass evidence for and against particular hypotheses.
        We seek to address two fundamental questions about the Great Moderation: What
are its causes? And does it matter for economic welfare? We consider a variety of
evidence related to the Great Moderation, drawing mainly on U.S. data, and work
towards a story with a few key themes. Unlike most research on the topic, ours considers
volatility behavior at the micro level for clues about the sources and consequences of
aggregate volatility changes. From a welfare perspective, a key issue is whether the
Great Moderation led to lower consumption volatility and less economic uncertainty for
individuals and households. It matters, for example, whether the Great Moderation
mainly involves transient sources of income volatility or long-lasting shocks, since
consumers can more readily buffer transient income movements. It also matters whether
the decline in aggregate volatility translated into a decline in volatility at the micro level.

                                               1
        As it turns out, the micro story is complex. The average volatility of firm-level
employment growth fell after the mid-1980s (Davis et al., 2006). At the individual level,
several indicators point to a large decline in the risk of unwanted job loss after the early
1980s (Davis, 2008). Declines in firm-level volatility and job-loss risks fit naturally with
the decline in aggregate volatility. However, when we consider household-level
consumption changes, we find no evidence for a decline in volatility after 1980. The
evidence on individual earnings uncertainty points to a longer term rise, not a decline.
Reconciling the fuller set of facts about micro volatility trends with the aggregate
volatility decline presents a significant challenge, which we meet only part way.
        We begin with some facts about the Great Moderation, centered on the reduced
volatility of real activity and the stabilization of inflation. Our interpretation of this
evidence casts doubt on explanations for the Great Moderation that emphasize better
monetary policy or financial innovation. Instead, it points toward a technological story
focused on the durable goods sector, and in particular on inventory investment. We then
examine inventory behavior in more detail and provide additional evidence of improved
supply-chain management and a specific story for how it can explain reduced volatility.
Next, we consider whether evidence about volatility in micro data is consistent with our
story. We present evidence on volatility in household-level consumption data and briefly
discuss research on earnings and income uncertainty. In the end, we conclude that a
substantial component of the Great Moderation reflects reductions in short-term volatility
that have had little or no apparent impact on consumption risks at the household level.
        We will not devote much space to the “good luck” hypothesis, even though a
number of influential studies find support for it. We interpret these findings as
demonstrating the need for better models to explain the volatility reductions, or
convincing evidence that measurable and plausibly exogenous, economic disturbances—
oil supply disruptions, wars, or weather, for example—can explain observed declines in
the volatility of economic activity. 1

1
   For more discussion of the “good luck” hypothesis, see, for example, Stock and Watson (2002),
Justiniano and Primiceri (2006), Ahmed et al. (2004). Along these lines, a recent study (Giannone, et al,
2008) argues that the econometric models that underlie the support for good luck hypothesis are too simple.
When they examine more complex models with a larger number of variables, they find that the reduced
volatility comes from a change in the propagation of shocks rather than in the size of the shocks.
 .

                                                    2
       There is also an older debate about whether economic volatility fell after World
War II in comparison to the prewar era. That discussion focused on measurement issues
and data quality. Romer (1986) argued that the apparent postwar stabilization was only a
“figment of the data” resulting from improved statistical methods and more complete
measurement in the postwar era. Our discussion will focus exclusively on postwar data
where, subject to controlling for compositional changes, we believe the data permit
meaningful comparisons over time.


   1. Declines in the Volatility of Aggregate Economic Activity


       An abrupt drop in the volatility of U.S. real GDP growth in the early 1980s,
shown in Figure 1, provided the initial impetus for research on the Great Moderation.
Early findings of a discrete break in volatility around 1984 (Kim and Nelson, 1999;
McConnell and Perez-Quiros, 2000) encouraged a focus on comparisons before and after
1984. This approach conceals the fact that many economic series did not undergo an
abrupt volatility drop around 1984. Some did so much earlier, some later, and for some,
volatility trended down rather than dropped.
       We begin our exploration by decomposing real GDP growth and its volatility by
what the National Income and Product Accounts call “major product” categories. Figure
2 shows annualized quarterly growth rates for the four major products that constitute
GDP: nondurable goods, durable goods, services, and structures. Each sectoral growth
rate is scaled by its share of nominal GDP so that we can readily assess its contribution to
the aggregate growth rate in Figure 1. These charts show that only the durable goods
sector experienced a volatility change in much the same way—in terms of magnitude and
timing—as GDP. Volatility of nondurables output fell after the early 1980s, but it was
also lower in the 1960s before rising in the 1970s, and it was never nearly as high as the
volatility of durables. Thus, the volatility decline for nondurables—such as it was—
figures only modestly in the stabilization after the early 1980s. Likewise, the service
sector was never nearly as volatile as durable goods output; and moreover, its volatility
fell in the early 1960s and again in the 1970s, long before the onset of the Great
Moderation in the 1980s. Structures underwent a decline in output volatility similar in

                                               3
timing to that for overall GDP, but the size of the sector and its contribution to GDP
volatility are modest. Thus, the drop in GDP volatility appears most closely related to
developments in the durable goods sector.
       Figure 3 demonstrates this point in a different way by plotting the volatility
(measured by rolling five-year standard deviations) of GDP growth, the growth
contribution of durables sector output, and, for comparison, the growth contributions of
inventory investment and residential investment. Our analysis begins in 1954, to diminish
the impact of the Korean War period in which volatility was unusually high even for that
era. Inventory investment, which overlaps with durable goods output, displays nearly as
large a drop in volatility as durable goods output despite having an average GDP share of
less than 1 percent. Residential investment experienced a large drop in volatility
beginning in the early 1980s, but its impact on overall GDP volatility is limited by its
small share of aggregate activity (about 5percent). Thus, the residential investment sector
played a small role in the Great Moderation, unless it had disproportionately large
spillover effects on other sectors. Volatility declines in other components of GDP (not
shown) are also relatively modest, and not necessarily synchronized with the Great
Moderation (Kahn, 2008).
       Figure 3 also suggests that both for total GDP and especially for durables, the
volatility decline in the early 1980s was an acceleration of a trend dating back to World
War II. Indeed, Blanchard and Simon (2001) argue that the suddenness of the volatility
drop is more apparent than real—that, in fact, large shocks in the 1970s and a deep
contraction in the early 1980s obscure the longer term volatility decline that began well
before the 1980s. The idea that the 1970s (really the period from 1970 to 1983) were
exceptional will be a recurring theme in our discussion. But whereas Blanchard and
Simon stress that volatility declines occurred across a broad range of GDP components,
we argue that only the decline in the durable goods sector’s volatility is comparable to
that of overall GDP in trend, timing, and magnitude.
       A related question is the extent to which the Great Moderation reflects a secular
shift away from relatively volatile sectors. In particular, the rising GDP share of a low-
volatility sector like services might be expected to moderate output volatility. It turns
out, however, that the secular shift toward services plays a modest role in the reduction of

                                              4
overall output volatility. Specifically, using 1984:1 as a break point, we calculate that the
volatility of quarterly GDP fell by 1.97 percentage points (as measured by standard
deviations of annualized growth rates). If we reconstruct GDP growth by fixing output
shares for the four major product categories at their 1959 values, we instead calculate that
the volatility of quarterly GDP growth fell by 1.75 percentage points. According to this
calculation, broad sectoral shifts account for about 12 percent of the long-term decline in
GDP volatility.
         What about shifts within major product categories? For example, are shifts away
from automobiles and toward electronic equipment partly responsible for the large
decline in durables volatility? Disaggregated output data from the National Income and
Product Accounts are available only annually, which throws out higher frequency
volatility, and only back to 1977, which leaves only seven observations prior to the
commonly used break point of 1984. A useful alternative is to construct output data from
the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) series on constant-dollar shipments and
inventories, available monthly on a consistent basis from 1967 to 1997 for durable goods
manufacturing and eleven industries at the two-digit Standard Industrial Classification
(SIC) level. These data show a pattern of greatly reduced volatility after 1983, and they
confirm that volatility varies greatly across the disaggregated industries. However,
repeating the same type of exercise as before, we find that volatility in the durables sector
fell slightly more on a fixed-weight basis (51 percent) than the 48 percent drop from
1967-83 to 1984-97 in the raw data. We conclude that long-term sectoral shifts
contribute to, but are not the main force behind, the Great Moderation.2
         Another illuminating fact about the Great Moderation is that volatility fell
substantially more, and earlier, for output than for final sales. In the durable goods sector,
for example, comparing pre- and post-1983, the standard deviation of output growth

2
  Another way to cut the data is to decompose the production function into factor input and productivity
components. Stiroh (2005) decomposes output growth into the growth of hours worked and labor
productivity. He finds that the volatility of both components fell, and that their covariance declined. Gali
and Gambetti (2007) provide additional evidence of a major shift in the pattern of comovements among
output, hours, and labor productivity. They interpret the evidence as favoring a “structural change”
interpretation of the Great Moderation (rather than lower shock volatilities) in the form of more
aggressively anti-inflationary monetary policy and reduced labor adjustment costs. In contrast, Arias et al
(2007) argue that a decline in the volatility of the Solow residual points toward the reduction of
“productivity-like” shocks in the context of a real business cycle model of fluctuations.


                                                     5
declined from 17.8 percent to 7.7 percent, whereas the standard deviation of sales growth
declined only from 10.3 to 8.4 percent (McConnell and Perez-Quiros, 2000; Blanchard
and Simon, 2001; Kahn et al., 2002). Since inventory investment makes up the
difference between output and final sales, this fact implies a change in inventory
behavior—either a reduction in the volatility of inventory investment or a change in the
covariance between inventory investment and sales. By national income accounting
conventions, the services and structures sectors do not carry inventories, so the source of
the change in inventory behavior must by definition lie in the goods sector.3 We will
return to this topic below when we discuss inventory behavior in more detail.
        Finally, not all volatility matters equally for economic welfare. Households can
save and borrow to buffer their consumption against income volatility, particularly if the
income movements are transitory. Thus the volatility of consumption expenditure is
much lower than that of GDP, especially if one removes expenditures on durables (which
are really a form of investment). In fact, whereas the volatility of real GDP growth fell
by 2.5 percentage points post-1983, from 4.5 percent to 2 percent, the volatility of real
expenditures on non-durables and services fell by just 0.8 percentage points, from 2.1
percent to 1.3 percent. This pattern suggests that that the decline in GDP volatility may
have had only a modest impact on welfare.
        One possibility is that a substantial part of the output volatility decline has been of
the transitory type. To examine this, we consider how output volatility is apportioned
across different “frequencies”—fluctuations of different durations. We can think of
fluctuations in economic activity as being composed of cycles of varying length: daily,
weekly, yearly, or longer. The amplitude of fluctuations in activity between daytime and
nighttime, or weekday to weekend, is considerably larger than that between business
cycle peaks and troughs; yet these “high-frequency” fluctuations are usually seen as
beneficial or benign. Even seasonal fluctuations are regarded as much less consequential
for economic welfare in a modern economy, partly because of their relatively short
duration and partly because of their predictable nature. Indeed, the predictable seasonal


3
 In structures, construction is counted as part of final output (see, for example,
http://www.census.gov/const/c30/definitions.pdf ). There is, however, evidence of a change in inventory
behavior in residential construction, even though it is not treated as such in the National Income and
Product Accounts. (Kahn, 2000).

                                                    6
component is typically removed from economic time series via “seasonal adjustment” so
as to isolate the more consequential, unpredictable part.
        Fluctuations of a few years or longer, including the so-called business cycle, can
have adverse welfare consequences because they are much less predictable and because
they are longer and cannot be relied on to average out. At a practical level, consumers
have greater difficulty using savings to buffer expenditures against the uncertainty related
to business cycles, as compared to seasonal cycles. Milton Friedman’s (1957)
“permanent income” theory of consumption recognizes this point explicitly, predicting
that consumers smooth spending relative to short-term or “transitory” fluctuations in
income but not relative to “permanent” changes, by which he meant changes of at least
several years duration.
        To understand the frequency dimension of the Great Moderation, it is helpful to
divide the post-Korean War era into three periods: the relatively tranquil period from
1954 to 1969, the turbulent period from 1970 to 1983, and the period from 1984 to the
present. Figure 4 decomposes GDP volatility into a high frequency component (cycles
lasting fewer than 12 quarters) and a “business cycle” frequency component (longer
cycles) for each period.4 High-frequency volatility declined modestly from the first to the
second period, then fell sharply after 1983. This result suggests that the welfare
consequences of the Great Moderation might be modest, because much of the Great
Moderation reflects a drop in the type of short-term volatility that presents fewer
difficulties for households in any event. Another piece of evidence pointing in this
direction is the greatly diminished role of temporary layoffs in recessionary
unemployment movements since the mid-1980s (Groshen and Potter, 2003). At the
household level, consumption and living standards are probably less sensitive to
temporary layoffs than to permanent job loss. Temporary layoffs are also naturally
associated with output movements of short duration, such as inventory corrections.


4
  To obtain the decomposition in Figure 4, we start with quarterly observations on log real GDP from
1954:Q1 to 2004:Q3 and remove the low frequency component by applying a Hodrick-Prescott filter with
smoothing parameter set to 1600. We then apply the band pass filter routine in the E-Views software
package. We use the Christiano and Fitzgerald, 1999, fixed-length symmetric filter with twelve leads and
lags for Figure 4, but obtain similar results with other methods. The frequency decomposition yields two
time series, one for cycles longer than 12 quarters and one for shorter cycles. Lastly, we calculate the
variance of each time series within each subperiod and report the results in Figure 4.

                                                    7
         Figure 4 also shows that business cycle volatility jumped sharply in the middle
period and then returned to approximately the same level as in the 1954-69 period.
Someone lumping the first two periods together might see a decline in both types of
volatility in the post-1983 era, but that approach masks highly volatile business cycle
fluctuations from 1970 to 1983 compared to before and after.5 We have repeated the
exercise of Figure 4 for durable goods output and obtained a similar pattern. This result
reinforces the view that developments in the durable goods sector play an important role
in the Great Moderation.


    2. Inflation and the Role of Monetary Policy


         In addition to the apparent break in volatility around 1983, that year is also often
viewed as a turning point in monetary policy: the beginning of the Volcker-Greenspan
era of low and stable inflation. A large literature, led by Clarida et al. (2000), debates the
extent to which there was a change in monetary policy regime, one that had the effect of
reducing both inflation and output volatility. For a change in monetary policy regime to
have both effects requires not just a more aggressive anti-inflationary policy, which
according to traditional policy analysis would actually increase output volatility, but a
superior policy that improves the locus of the tradeoff.
         Low and stable inflation is not uniquely a post-1983 phenomenon. Inflation
volatility from 1954 to 1969 is almost as low as after 1983. This does not necessarily
refute the “better monetary policy” hypothesis, but it requires a more complicated story.
How could a low-inflation policy in one era leave output volatility high, and then, some
15 years later be responsible for dramatically reducing output volatility? One hypothesis
that can reconcile these facts goes as follows: Monetary policy can reduce inflation
volatility in two ways: 1) it can choose a different point in a fixed tradeoff between
inflation volatility and output volatility; or 2) it can somehow get “better” (more


5
 Ahmed et al. (2004), for example, provide evidence that the volatility decline after 1983 was essentially
uniform across all frequencies. Figure 4 does not contradict their finding, but it suggests that treating the
1970-83 period separately, especially with detrended levels rather than growth rates, could produce a
different result. Kahn (2008) has more detailed results confirming the statistical significance of the relative
decline in high frequency volatility.

                                                      8
efficient) and reduce both. The story would be that the 1955-69 period is an example of
the former, while the post-1983 period is a case where policy became more efficient.
         While one can tell such a story, little evidence supports it. Romer and Romer
(2002a, 2002b) argue, in fact, that policy in the 1950s was similar to policy in the 1990s.
In addition, the “better monetary policy” story would have to account for the range of
facts about the Great Moderation described in the previous section, including the long
downward trend in durables output volatility, and the changes in inventory behavior
implied by the small drop in sales volatility compared to output volatility.
         A different argument for the “better monetary policy” hypothesis is that it is the
only story compatible with a discrete drop in volatility after the early 1980s. Improved
inventory management is unlikely to have emerged suddenly. And financial innovation
is most plausibly a gradual process, even if there were specific discrete events such as the
demise of Regulation Q interest rate ceilings in the early 1980s (for example, Bernanke,
2007).
         Monetary policy, on the other hand, can be subject to sudden changes in
“regime.” In the last 20 years, for example, many central banks around the world
adopted “inflation targeting” regimes that arguably involve a discrete departure from
earlier policies. In October 1979, the Federal Reserve under Volcker shifted from
targeting the federal funds rate to targeting nonborrowed reserves, a regime that lasted
until 1983. A number of studies (for example, Clarida et al., 2000) provide evidence that
the interest rate targeting regimes pre-1979 and post-1983 were fundamentally different,
the former resulting in both inflation and output instability.
         Nonetheless, the evidence for an important shift in monetary policy regime is not
clear cut. Sims and Zha (2006) argue that changes in monetary policy regimes were
relatively inconsequential and in any case do not line up very well with changes in
volatility. In a series of papers, Orphanides (2002, for example) argues that the policy
regime of the 1970s was not fundamentally different from earlier policies, but the Fed
was hit with large structural changes (a higher “natural” unemployment rate and lower
trend productivity growth) for which it had limited and imperfect information in real
time.



                                              9
       There are, moreover, good reasons to doubt the hypothesis that advances in the
conduct of monetary policy are responsible for the discrete drop in volatility post-1983.
Modern research on monetary policy points to a variety of factors that influence the
efficacy of monetary policy. These include the credibility of the policymaker,
transparency, and commitment to rules-oriented decision making. With hindsight, the
Volcker-Greenspan era looks like a discrete break with the immediate past, but it is not
plausible that the Fed achieved enhanced credibility overnight. In addition, increased
transparency has been an evolutionary process. The Federal Open Market Committee
(FOMC) began making public its interest rate target decisions only in 1994. It did not
begin releasing statements explaining its policy decisions until 1998, and the
informational content of these statements continues to evolve. Thus, the contention that
there was a discrete breakthrough for monetary policy in 1983 that explains the drop in
output volatility after the early 1980s looks shakier under close scrutiny.
       International evidence also provides grounds for skepticism about the role of
monetary policy. Since the early 1980s, most industrialized countries experienced
reduced output and inflation volatility, but with no clear connection to changes in
monetary policy. Some countries adopted the policy of “inflation targeting,” some did
not, and among those that did, there was considerable variety in its implementation.
Truman (2003) finds some evidence that inflation targeting countries experienced larger
declines in output volatility, but there were differences in initial conditions between
adopters and non-adopters. A more robust conclusion is that volatility dropped for nearly
all industrialized countries, but the evidence is mixed regarding any connection with the
timing and specifics of monetary policy changes.
       The 1970s experience does point to a role for monetary policy in the Great
Moderation, but not in the way usually emphasized by adherents of the “better monetary
policy” explanation. The evidence described earlier points to an underlying downward
trend for aggregate volatility in much of the postwar era, interrupted by the turbulent
1970s (Blanchard and Simon, 2001). This reading of the evidence suggests that policy
mistakes during the 1970s raised volatility for a time. Ending those mistakes with a
return to policies resembling those of the 1950s and early 1960s allowed volatility to
return to its underlying postwar path. According to this view, the resumption of sound

                                             10
monetary policy led to a large drop in volatility by removing the role of policy mistakes
in the 1970s, restoring an underlying postwar trend toward lower output volatility.
        To summarize, the apparent suddenness of the drop in output volatility after the
early 1980s does not persuade us that new-found skill in monetary policy making drove
the Great Moderation. There is evidence that the Great Moderation began before the
Greenspan-Volcker era, and in any case monetary policy did not experience a once-and-
for-all change in 1983. The case is stronger that monetary policy mistakes or unusual
shocks in the 1970s temporarily overwhelmed the forces behind the Great Moderation,
until the economic environment or policy making reverted to something resembling
earlier times. A persuasive case for a more positive role for monetary policy requires: 1)
showing how monetary policy in the post-1983 period is distinct from the policies of both
the 1970s and earlier; and 2) a model that traces changes in sectoral volatility patterns
and inventory behavior to changes in monetary policy.


    3. Inventory Behavior


        The behavior of aggregate inventory investment has changed significantly since
the early 1980s. Here we focus on the durable goods sector, where the most dramatic
declines in output volatility occurred and where we have also seen evidence of a change
in inventory behavior.6 Traditionally, the inventory literature focuses on disaggregated
data, in particular on data for two-digit manufacturing industries, but aggregate data have
distinct advantages for our purposes. Disaggregated data are potentially misleading,
because it is impossible to judge whether measured changes in inventory behavior reflect
genuine shifts or simply result from less meaningful relocation of inventories between
sectors. For example, if manufacturers shift final goods inventories downstream to
wholesalers and retailers, or materials inventories upstream to their suppliers,
manufacturing inventories decline relative to their shipments. Yet that decline would be
largely offset by inventory increases elsewhere in the economy, and a mere re-labeling
would be misinterpreted as evidence of structural change. We should note that the


6
  We refer the reader to Bils and Kahn (2000) and Kahn et al. (2002) for discussions of inventory behavior
in the nondurable goods sector.

                                                    11
aggregate U.S. data we use are not entirely immune from this criticism—for example,
firms could shift materials inventories offshore to foreign suppliers.
         Because output is the sum of final sales and inventory investment, we can
decompose the variance of output growth rates into components for sales growth and
inventory investment, plus a covariance term.7 The covariance term reflects the extent to
which changes in inventory investment are positively correlated with sales growth and
thereby add to output volatility. This decomposition allows us to track the contributions
of sales and inventory investment to output volatility over time. Since sales volatility
declines little, as mentioned above, we focus on the other two terms of the
decomposition. They are shown in Figure 5, which plots the rolling five-year variance of
the inventory investment term and the sales-inventory covariance term for the durable
goods sector. Both terms show substantial downward trends, with the covariance term
accounting for a very big drop in output volatility after the early 1980s. The results
displayed in Figure 5 motivate additional investigation of inventory behavior.
         We inspected the inventory-sales ratio for the durable goods sector using a data
source that captures all durable goods inventories, including those situated outside the
manufacturing sector. After peaking in the years 1982-83, the ratio trends downward for
nearly two decades (the solid line in Figure 6). By itself, the downward trend in the
inventory-sales ratio after the early 1980s is not proof of technical progress in inventory
management. It could, instead, reflect compositional shifts or movement along a fixed
technological tradeoff in response to rising inventory carrying costs. Maccini et al. (2004)
argue that inventory investment is responsive to very persistent changes in real interest
rates. But the timing of the break in the trend is striking. The inventory-sales ratio has
also become less volatile since the early 1980s, suggesting that businesses were hit by
smaller shocks, made smaller mistakes or could more readily correct inventory
7
  Although inventory investment, because it can be negative, does not have a conventionally defined
growth contribution, we can define it indirectly as the difference between the growth rate of output and the
growth contribution of final sales (cf. Kahn et al., 2002). Following Whelan (2000), we approximate the
latter in terms of the real growth rate of sales and the nominal share of sales in output. Letting γ xy denote
the growth contribution of x to output y, where x = s for sales and x = i for inventories, define the growth
contribution of inventory investment as
         γ iy ≡ γ yy − γ sy
where γ sy = γ ssθ sy , θ sy is the nominal share of s in y (measured as the average of current and lagged shares).
The growth contribution of a variable to itself is just its growth rate.

                                                        12
imbalances. Again, this pattern is not conclusive, but it is consistent with the idea of
improved inventory management technologies.
         Kahn et al. (2002) describe results from forecasting equations with sales and
inventories that point to another important difference before and after 1983. Before 1983,
sales helped to forecast inventories more than inventories helped to forecast sales. After
1983, they were similar, reflecting both a decrease in the usefulness of sales in
forecasting inventories and an increase in the usefulness of inventories in forecasting
sales. Moreover, the variance of sales forecast errors dropped precipitously, meaning that
less of the variation in sales was unpredicted given prior sales and inventories. These
results are also consistent with the idea that firms became better able to anticipate sales
and adjust inventories in advance.8


A Theory of Improved Inventory Control
         One approach to assessing the role of improved inventory control is to be agnostic
about the deeper story for technological change and look instead for changes in
parameters or shocks in a dynamic empirical model of inventory behavior. McCarthy and
Zakrajsek (2007) apply this approach to industry-level manufacturing data, which makes
it not directly comparable to the GDP-level and sector-level data we use.9 They
investigate the extent to which changes in the behavior of manufacturing inventories after
1983 reflect better inventory management versus changes in what they call the “macro
structure,” which includes shock magnitudes and the effects of monetary policy. They
find evidence for both types of changes.
         A second approach is to apply a specific optimizing model of improved inventory
control as in Kahn et al. (2002), which draws on earlier work by Kahn (1987) and Bils

8
  Stock and Watson (2002) are skeptical of the role of inventory management in the Great Moderation. But
they focus on four-quarter growth rates of economic time series, a transformation that essentially filters out
the higher frequency volatility associated with inventory investment. Indeed, it should be no surprise that
inventory behavior appears less important in explaining the (smaller) volatility declines of four-quarter
growth rates. Still, looking at four-quarter growth rates might be a reasonable thing to do if changes in high
frequency volatility were economically uninteresting or played a small role in the Great Moderation, but we
have argued otherwise. Stock and Watson’s other grounds for skepticism—the fact that sales volatility
declined, and that most inventories in manufacturing are raw materials or work-in-progress—are addressed
in the next section.
9
  The disaggregated manufacturing data are subject to the measurement concerns raised earlier—both the
concerns about interactions with upstream and downstream activity, and also those about basing
conclusions regarding the pre-1984 era on data that are primarily from the exceptionally volatile 1970s.

                                                     13
and Kahn (2000). In this model, firms carry finished goods inventories to avoid
stockouts in the face of uncertain demand, trading off the cost of forgone profits against
the cost of carrying inventories. If demand is serially correlated, mistakes in forecasting
sales get magnified in production volatility, so that it exceeds the volatility of sales. To
see why, suppose sales are unexpectedly low. Not only does this leave the firm with
more inventories than planned, but the firm now needs lower inventories than it
previously thought, because the persistence of the sales shock means lower sales than
earlier forecasts for some time. Consequently, the firm cuts production by more than the
current sales shock.
       Given this “stockout-avoidance” mechanism, suppose that better technology gives
firms better information about future demand disturbances. Then firms make smaller
errors in production decisions, and the output volatility induced by correcting those errors
diminishes. In addition, firms hold fewer inventories because they now face less
uncertainty.
       This story can account for reduced production volatility in absolute terms and
relative to sales volatility, but it has important drawbacks as a full explanation for the
changes in inventory, output, and sales behavior that we have documented. First,
depending on when the firm receives information regarding demand shocks, the story has
counterfactual implications for sales volatility. To see this point, suppose that better
technology yields earlier information about a future demand increase, in time to build up
inventories before the demand increase arrives. Then when the demand increase actually
occurs, the firm draws down the inventories it built up in anticipation. This result is
consistent with the more negative correlation of inventory investment and sales, but the
advance information has the counterfactual implication of greater sales volatility. Why?
Because the firm is better able to accommodate fluctuating demand by adjusting
production, without running out of stock. Second, the stockout-avoidance approach does
not apply so obviously or directly to the durable goods sector, much of which is best
characterized as production-to-order rather than production-to-stock. A related point (see
Blinder and Maccini, 1991, Humphries et al., 2001, among others) is that most
inventories, particularly in durable goods, are of materials or works in process, not final
goods. Finally, while there is much anecdotal evidence concerning technology

                                              14
improvements that provide better information about future sales, there is no direct
evidence to assist in specifying a model.
          Kahn (2008) develops a variation on the “better information” story that addresses
these concerns. Firms are production-to-order, and therefore hold only inventories of
materials and works-in-process. They must order materials in advance. A stockout
occurs when works-in-process inventories are insufficient to allow the firm to meet its
(stochastic) orders, in which case the order gets added to the stock of unfilled orders. This
setup is broadly consistent with the argument of Irvine and Schuh (2005), who attribute a
substantial volatility decline to reduced co-movement between the manufacturing and
trade sectors.
          The intuition for how the model works is similar to that of the stockout-avoidance
motive in Kahn (1987), described above, except that stockouts occur internally when the
firm runs out of works-in-process inventories, rather than externally with finished goods
stocks. Once again, because orders for final goods are serially correlated, errors in
forecasting demand get magnified in the volatility of production (sales plus inventory
investment). The key difference is that the firm produces “to order” so that the improved
information is not translated so directly into the accommodation of demand shocks and
greater sales volatility. Sales are shipments of completed production, so some of the
reduced production volatility lessens the volatility of shipments, potentially offsetting the
effect (still present here) from improved accommodation of demand shocks.
          So this model immediately addresses all but one of the objections raised above: It
is specifically tailored to characteristics of the durable goods sector in that it assumes
production-to-order rather than production-to-stock. It features works-in-process rather
than final goods inventories. It has the property that better information about final orders
has the potential to reduce the volatility of output and sales, the former more than the
latter.
          The remaining objection to this approach concerns the lack of direct evidence of
firms’ improved ability to forecast orders. Here we consider survey data obtained from
the Institute of Supply Management on average lead times for orders of production
materials. This is imperfect evidence and is not confined to the durable goods sector, but
it is striking nonetheless. The series is depicted in Figure 6, plotted against the inventory-

                                              15
sales ratio for the durable goods sector. While the average lead-time series does not
exhibit the underlying downward trend of the volatility series, it does feature a clear drop
in level post-1983 relative to earlier. It also shows some elevation in the more volatile
1970s.
         What is the connection between shorter lead times and better information? In
deciding on its materials orders, the firm must base its forecast of future final goods
orders on whatever information it has available to it at the time. The longer the firm can
delay materials orders, the more information it has about its final goods orders at any
given date. Consequently, the firm can order materials more accurately and carry
smaller precautionary stocks..
         Of course, what allows for shorter lead times is not modeled but taken as direct
evidence of technical progress. Given that the goal of the “just-in-time” approach is
greater flexibility to reduce the need to carry large stocks, this is a reasonable
interpretation, but it may be only part of the story. For example, some of the increased
lead times in the 1970s could be caused by Nixon-era price controls, which created
shortages and bottlenecks in materials deliveries. It would be natural for firms concerned
about an inability to obtain materials in a given time frame to order farther in advance.
This observation does not negate the mechanism in the model, but it points out that
something other than technical progress can yield sustained movements in average lead
times. Perhaps price controls, or even the high inflation of the 1970s, disrupted market
signals and caused some of the rise in lead times and volatility, but this hypothesis awaits
further research.
         There is little doubt that vast resources have been devoted to improving what is
generally referred to as “supply-chain management.” How this translates into observable
behavior and data is another question entirely. As Mentzer et al. (2001) write:

         “Despite the popularity of the term Supply Chain Management, both in academia
         and practice, there remains considerable confusion as to its meaning. Some
         authors define SCM in operational terms involving the flow of materials and
         products, some view it as a management philosophy, and some view it in terms of
         a management process.”




                                              16
They go on to define the term as “the systemic, strategic coordination of the traditional
business functions and the tactics across these business functions within a particular
company and across businesses within the supply chain, for the purposes of improving
the long-term performance of the individual companies and the supply chain as a whole.”
This definition is vague, but it clearly encompasses a number of specifics, notably what
the authors refer to as a logistics system: “the total flow of materials, from the acquisition
of raw materials to delivery of finished products, to the ultimate users, as well as the
related counter-flows of information that both control and record material movement.”
       The strong prediction of the model is that shorter lead times give rise to a
reduction in output volatility and a somewhat smaller reduction in the volatility of final
sales. While the magnitudes of these declines depend on specifics such as the average
inventory-sales ratio (which is endogenous in the model and depends on price-cost
markups and inventory holding costs) and the ratios of inputs to gross output at each
stage of production, the qualitative results require only some degree of persistence in
final goods orders.


   4. Changes in Volatility at the Micro Level


       Thus far, our discussion suggests that much of the Great Moderation involves a
reduction in the volatility of durable goods output, and much of that reflects significant
changes in inventory dynamics. We turn now to volatility trends at the level of firms,
individuals and households and ask whether the micro evidence sheds additional light on
the Great Moderation and its consequences.


Firm-Level Volatility
       Figure 7 plots the average volatility of firm-level employment in the United States
from 1977 to 2001. Davis et al. (2006) construct the figure using annual Census Bureau
data on domestic employment for all firms in the U.S. private sector. They calculate the
rolling standard deviation of employment growth rates for each firm and then compute
the employment-weighted mean across firms for each year. As shown in the figure, the
average volatility of firm-level employment fell from 49 percent in 1978 and 53 percent

                                             17
in 1987 to 38 percent in 2001. Thus, firm-level volatility shows a substantial long-term
decline, but the timing differs somewhat from the decline in aggregate output volatility.
The trend decline in firm-level employment volatility holds across one-digit industry
groups and is not especially concentrated in the goods-producing sector.
         Figure 7 also highlights a striking difference in the volatility behavior of publicly
traded and privately held firms.10 Volatility is high and declining for privately held firms,
but low and rising for publicly traded firms. This “volatility convergence” between
publicly traded and privately held firms helps in understanding other recent findings on
trends in firm-level variability. Comin and Philippon (2005) and Comin and Mulani
(2006), for example, document a large upward trend in the volatility of sales among
publicly traded firms. An influential paper by Campbell et al. (2001) documents a large
upward trend in the volatility of firm-level equity returns for U.S. common stocks.
Specifically, they find that the variance of firm-level returns in daily data more than
doubles from 1962 to 1997. They also show that the trend increase in return volatility
reflects a rise in the volatility of the idiosyncratic, firm-specific component. These
findings for publicly traded firms led some observers to conclude that overall firm-level
volatility rose sharply in recent decades, in puzzling contrast to the large drop in
aggregate volatility. Figure 7, however, shows otherwise.
         Why does the volatility trend among publicly traded firms depart so sharply from
the overall trend? At one level, the answer is simple: Publicly traded firms account for
less than one-third of private-sector employment, so there is much room for the trend
among publicly traded firms to depart from the overall trend. Digging deeper reveals
another, more interesting answer: There was a pronounced shift in the economic selection
process governing entry into the set of publicly traded firms, and this shift greatly
affected volatility trends among publicly traded firms.
         To see this point, it is important to first recognize the large influx of newly listed
firms in the 1980s and 1990s. Fama and French (2004) report that the number of new
listings (mostly initial public offerings) on major U.S. stock markets jumped from 156

10
   Here, “publicly traded” refers to firms with equity securities listed on a stock exchange or traded in over-
the-counter markets. As a practical matter, given the heavy reliance on COMPUSTAT for research in this
area, “publicly traded” means firms that are also in COMPUSTAT, which has reasonably comprehensive
coverage of publicly traded firms since the addition of NASDAQ listings in 1973. For publicly traded
firms, it is possible to compute the volatility of sales and employment; they exhibit similar trends.

                                                      18
per year in the 1973-1979 period to 549 per year in 1980-2001. Remarkably, about 10
percent of listed firms are new in each year from 1980 to 2001. Similarly, Davis et al.
(2006) report that firms newly listed in the 1980s and 1990s account for about 40 percent
of employment among all publicly traded firms by the late 1990s. So the influx of new
listings in the 1980s and 1990s is large in number and rather quickly accounts for a large
share of activity.
        In addition, Fama and French (2004) provide evidence that new listings are riskier
than seasoned public firms by a variety of measures and that they become increasingly
risky relative to seasoned firms after 1979. Based on their review of the evidence, they
conclude that the upsurge of new listings explains much of the trend increase in
idiosyncratic stock return volatility documented by Campbell et al. (2001). They also
suggest that there was a decline in the cost of equity that allowed weaker firms and those
with more distant payoffs to issue public equity. A more recent study by Brown and
Kapadia (2007) reaches an even stronger conclusion. Using a regression methodology,
they find that “there is generally no significant trend in idiosyncratic risk after accounting
for the year a firm lists.” They also provide other evidence that firm-specific risks in the
economy as a whole did not increase, even though the volatility of firm-level equity
returns rose because of an influx of successively riskier cohorts.
        Davis et al. (2006) obtain similar results for firm-level employment volatility.
Using a regression framework, they find that simple cohort effects for the year of first
listing account for two-thirds of the volatility rise among publicly traded firms from 1978
to 2001. In contrast, firm size, age and industry effects—separately and in
combination—account for little of the volatility rise among publicly traded firms.


The Risk of Job Loss
        As discussed in Davis (2008), a wide variety of labor market indicators point to a
secular decline in the risk of job loss. These indicators include unemployment inflows by
experienced workers in the Current Population Survey (CPS), the three-year job-loss rate
in the CPS Displaced Worker Survey, several measures for the gross rate of job
destruction at the level of individual employers, the number of workers involved in mass
layoff events, and the number of new claims for unemployment insurance benefits. All

                                             19
of these indicators point to a secular decline in the risk of job loss, although the extent
and timing of the decline differ among the indicators. One of the most striking declines
occurs in weekly new claims for unemployment insurance benefits. This measure of
unwanted job loss fell from 0.46 percent of nonfarm employment per week in 1970-1983
to 0.30 percent in 1984-2007 and 0.27 percent since 1993.
        Similarly, Current Population Survey data show a dramatic decline in
unemployment inflows as a percentage of employment since the early 1980s. Davis et al.
(2007) provide evidence that about half of the long-term decline in unemployment inflow
rates is explained by the reduction in the gross job destruction rates and the volatility of
firm-level growth rates. Hence, their study provides evidence of a direct link between the
secular decline in firm-level volatility in Figure 7 and the secular decline in the incidence
of job loss.


Consumption Volatility and Income Uncertainty
        In a permanent income model of consumption expenditures with stable
preferences, a decline in the variability of persistent income innovations produces a
decline in the average magnitude of consumption changes. The intuition is
straightforward: smaller shocks to permanent income necessitate smaller adjustments to
consumption. In the light of this implication, we investigate whether the average
magnitude of household-level consumption changes rose or fell over time. A rise
indicates an increase in economic uncertainty for the average household. Conversely, if
the Great Moderation, the decline in firm-level volatility, and the reduced risk of job loss
led to a more tranquil economic environment for the average household, then permanent-
income logic implies a decline in the average magnitude of household-level consumption
adjustments.
        We take a simple approach to this issue using quarterly data from the interview
segment of the Consumer Expenditure Survey, which has a short panel component. To
measure the magnitude of household-level consumption adjustments, we compute the
absolute value of the log change in consumption expenditures for each household and
then average over households. This average value for the magnitude of household-level
consumption changes is our measure of consumption volatility. To assess whether trends

                                              20
in consumption volatility differ between richer and poorer households, we sort
households into deciles of predicted consumption before computing the consumption
volatility.11 We sort the data this way to ensure that we do not overlook important
changes in consumption volatility for certain groups, such as the lowest deciles, that we
might miss by looking only at the overall average consumption volatility.
         Figure 8 shows consumption volatility by decile of predicted consumption for two
periods. There are two results. First, consumption volatility rises with the consumption
level in a given time period, except at the low end of the distribution. Second, and more
important for our purposes, there is no evidence for a decline in consumption volatility
after the 1980s. In fact, Figure 8 points to a modest increase in household consumption
volatility over most of the consumption distribution. This second result is quite
surprising given the declines in aggregate and firm-level volatility and the reduced risk of
job loss. Indeed, by capturing the recessions of the early 1980s and 1990s in the first of
the two periods shown in Figure 8, one might worry that we stack the deck in favor of
finding a trend decline in consumption volatility. For this reason, the absence of such a
trend is all the more surprising. Taken at face value, and seen through the lens of the
permanent-income theory, the second result says that the Great Moderation failed to
deliver more economic tranquility in the form of less consumption risk for the average
household.
         Given the surprising nature of the result in Figure 8, it would be reassuring to
know that other consumption data tell a similar story. Gorbachev (2007) uses data on
food expenditures in the Panel Study of Income Dynamics to estimate the volatility of
household consumption after controlling for predictable variation associated with
movements in real interest rates and changes in family structure. She finds that the
volatility of household consumption expenditures increased over the period from 1970 to



11
    We restrict attention to nondurable goods and services and consider six-month changes in expenditures
per adult equivalent in the consumer unit. Results are similar for three-month and nine-month changes.
Our measure of adult equivalents is 1.0 times the first adult plus 0.7 times each additional adult in the same
consumer unit plus 0.5 times each child in the consumer unit. We computed predicted consumption based
on a regression of log expenditures per adult equivalent on sex of the household head, a quartic polynomial
in the head’s age, four educational attainment categories, marital status of the head, interview month, and
employment status of the head and the head’s spouse, if there is one. We perform this sort based on the
first interview with consumption expenditures for the consumer unit

                                                     21
2002. Thus, data from both the Consumer Expenditures Survey and the Panel Study of
Income Dynamics point to a trend rise in consumption volatility.
       Another approach to assessing trends in economic uncertainty at the level of
households and individuals is to exploit income or earnings data. There is an enormous
literature on earnings inequality and changes in the structure of wages, but few previous
studies seek to quantify long term changes in earnings uncertainty from the vantage point
of the individual. An exception is Cunha and Heckman (2007), who estimate the
contribution of earnings uncertainty to the rise in earnings inequality. Their method uses
data on schooling choices, in combination with data on earnings outcomes, to decompose
the realized variance of earnings into a component that is predictable by individuals and
an unpredictable component that is not. They estimate a substantial rise in the variance
of the unforecastable component in the present value of earnings uncertainty among
young workers. This result is broadly consistent with the evidence of increased
consumption volatility.
       A recent paper by Dynan et al. (2008) investigates the volatility of household
income using data from the PSID for households whose heads are at least 25 years old
and not yet retired. They find that the standard deviation of two-year percent changes in
household-level income rose by a third from the early 1970s to the early 2000s, with
trend increases in all major age and education groups. They trace the rise of household
income volatility to a greater frequency of very large income changes. While greater
income volatility does not imply greater income uncertainty, it is certainly suggestive of
such a development. In this respect, the results in Dynan et al. (2008) lend credence to
the evidence of rising consumption volatility. In addition, Dynan et al. (2008) summarize
many studies that investigate trends in earnings and income volatility or trends in
estimated earnings uncertainty based on statistical models. Although the studies differ
greatly in their particulars, none show a decline in income volatility or earnings
uncertainty that even approximates the decline in aggregate volatility, and the vast
majority of the studies point to greater volatility or uncertainty.




                                              22
Summary of Micro Volatility Evidence and Implications
       The volatility of firm-level employment growth rates fell after the early to mid
1980s. The decline in average firm-level volatility is similar in magnitude to the decline
in aggregate volatility, but the timing differs. Although we did not discuss it here, the
volatility of state-level employment growth rates also fell after the 1980s (Carlino et al.,
2007). Among publicly traded firms, the volatility in real activity and in equity returns
rose sharply after the early 1980s. This rise in volatility among publicly traded firms is a
striking phenomenon, but it mainly or entirely reflects shifts in the selection process
governing which firms become public. Hence, considerable care is required when
drawing inferences about the sources and nature of the Great Moderation from data on
equity returns or from any data limited to publicly traded firms.
       Declines in firm-level volatility and gross job-destruction rates are closely linked
to declines in the risk of unwanted job loss, as reflected in sharply lower unemployment
inflows after the early 1980s. In this respect, data on aggregate volatility, average firm-
level volatility, job destruction rates, and the incidence of unemployment all point to a
much more quiescent economic environment since the early 1980s. In contrast, data on
labor earnings, income and consumption expenditures do not conform to a story of
greater tranquility and lower uncertainty at the household or individual level. Although
there is much room for further research, the available evidence suggests at least a modest
increase in individual and household economic uncertainty. Assuming that this
assessment of trends in household-level consumption volatility and related measures of
individual uncertainty holds up under further study, it highlights a puzzle that research on
the Great Moderation has yet to confront: Why has the dramatic decline in the volatility
of aggregate real activity, and the roughly coincident decline in firm-level volatility and
job-loss rates, not translated into sizable reductions in earnings uncertainty and
consumption volatility facing individuals and households?
       We do not know the answer to this question, but we conjecture that greater
flexibility in pay setting for workers played a role, possibly a major one. Greater pay
flexibility is consistent with the rise in wage and earnings inequality in U.S. labor
markets since 1980 and with increases in individual income volatility and earnings
uncertainty. If these developments involve a rise in the variance of idiosyncratic

                                             23
permanent income shocks to households, then household consumption volatility also rises
according to permanent income theory. Greater wage (and hours) flexibility also leads to
smaller firm-level employment responses to idiosyncratic shocks and smaller aggregate
responses to common shocks, because firms can respond by adjusting compensation
rather than relying entirely on layoffs and hires. By the same logic, wage adjustments can
substitute for unwanted job loss. So, at least in principle, greater wage flexibility offers a
unified explanation for the rise in wage and earnings inequality, flat or rising volatility in
household consumption, a decline in job-loss rates, and declines in firm-level and
aggregate volatility measures. Sources of greater pay flexibility include the decline of
real minimum wages, a diminished role for private sector unionism and collective
bargaining, intensified competitive pressures that undermined rigid compensation
structures, the growth of employee leasing and temp workers, and the erosion of norms
that formerly restrained wage differentials and prevented wage cuts.


   5. Concluding Remarks


       We summarize the main elements of our evidence and analysis. First,
macroeconomic volatility has generally trended downward in the postwar United States
(and in many other countries as well), interrupted by heightened turbulence in the 1970s
and early 1980s. Otherwise, however, much of the Great Moderation reflects a decline in
the high frequency component of aggregate output volatility. Second, declining volatility
in the durable goods sector is a major contributor to declines in U.S. aggregate output
volatility. Third, changes in inventory behavior appear to play a major role in the decline
of output volatility in the goods-producing sector and, hence, in the economy as a whole.
Fourth, the broad decline in aggregate volatility is mirrored by declines in firm-level
employment volatility and in job-loss risks for workers. Lastly, declining volatility is not
evident in microeconomic data on wages, incomes, or consumption expenditures. If
anything, micro evidence on consumption volatility and other measures of individual
uncertainty points in the opposite direction.
       From this configuration of findings, we conclude that the welfare implications of
the Great Moderation are subtler than one might think. While the benefits of reduced

                                                24
inflation uncertainty are well understood, the benefits on the “real” side are elusive. It is
likely that reduced volatility at the firm level reduces production costs, a first-order
welfare benefit. But the fact that it has not coincided with reduced consumption or
income volatility for individuals and households suggests that economically meaningful
uncertainty—the kind that affects welfare—does not have a simple and direct connection
to aggregate output volatility.
       Of course, more research and better data may alter our perception of the facts.
Consumption at the individual and household level is poorly measured, and it may be that
noisy data or idiosyncratic risks swamp the effect of lower aggregate volatility in micro
data. But, at this juncture, the weight of the evidence points toward a different
conclusion: The Great Moderation brought few benefits in the form of lower
consumption volatility or reduced economic uncertainty for individuals and households.




                                              25
Acknowledgements



Doug Elmendorf, Nick Bloom, and other participants at the San Francisco Fed’s CSIP
conference offered helpful comments, as did Charles Steindel. The editors of this journal
– Jim Hines, Andrei Shleifer, Jeremy Stein and Timothy Taylor – provided many
constructive comments that led to significant improvements in the paper. Parts of the
paper also owe a significant debt to discussions with Meg McConnell. Kristin Mayer and
Peter Fielding provided capable research assistance. Responsibility for any flaws in the
final product remains with the authors. The views expressed in this article are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the position of the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York or the Federal Reserve System.




                                            26
                                           References

Ahmed, Shaghil, Andrew Levin, and Beth Anne Wilson, 2004. “Recent U.S.
     Macroeconomic Stability: Good Policies, Good Practices, or Good Luck?”
     Review of Economics and Statistics 86, 824-832.

Arias, Andre, Gary Hansen, and Lee Ohanian, 2007, “Why Have Business Cycle
       Fluctuations Become Less Volatile?” Economic Theory, 32, 43-58.

Bernanke, Ben, 2003. "'Constrained Discretion' and Monetary Policy," before the Money
      Marketeers of New York University, New York, New York, February 3.

Bernanke, Ben, 2004. “The Great Moderation.” At the meetings of the Eastern Economic
      Association, Washington, D.C., February 20.

Bernanke, Ben, 2007. "Housing, Housing Finance, and Monetary Policy," at the Federal
      Reserve Bank of Kansas City's Economic Symposium, Jackson Hole, Wyoming,
      August 31.

Bils, Mark., and James A. Kahn, 2000, “What Inventory Behavior Tells Us about
       Business Cycles,” American Economic Review 90, 458-481.

Blanchard, Olivier, and John Simon, 2001. "The Long and Large Decline in U.S. Output
      Volatility," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1, pp. 135-64.

Blinder, Alan S., and Louis J. Maccini, 1991, “Taking Stock: A Critical Assessment of
       Recent Research on Inventories,” The Journal of Eocnomic Perspecxtives, 5
       (Winter), pp. 73-96.

Brown, Gregory and Nishad Kapadia, 2007, “Firm-Specific Risk and Equity Market
      Development,” Journal of Financial Economics, 84, pp. 358-388.

Campbell, John Y., Martin Lettau, Burton Malkiel and Y. Xu, 2001, “Have Individual
     Stocks Become More Volatile? An Exploration of Idiosyncratic Risk,” Journal of
     Finance, 56, no. 1, 1-43.

Carlino, Gerald, Robert DeFina and Keith Sill, 2007 “The Long and Large Decline in
       State Employment Growth Volatility,” Working Paper no. 07-11, Research
       Department, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia.

Christiano, L. J. and T.J. Fitzgerald, 2003, “The Band Pass Filter,” International
        Economic Review 44(2), 435-465.


                                            27
Clarida, Richard, Jordi Gali, and Mark Gertler, 2000. "Monetary Policy Rules and
       Macroeconomic Stability: Evidence and Some Theory," Quarterly Journal of
       Economics, 115, pp. 147-80.

Comin, Diego and Sunil Mulani, 2006, “Diverging Trends in Aggregate and Firm
      Volatility,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 88, no. 2, 374-383.

Comin, Diego, and Thomas Philippon. 2005. “The Rise in Firm-Level Volatility: Causes
      and Consequences.” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2005, M. Gertler and K.
      Orgoff, eds. MIT Press.

Cunha, Flavio and James J. Heckman, 2007, “The Evolution of Inequality, Heterogeneity
       and Uncertainty in Labor Earnings in the U.S. Economy,” NBER working paper
       no. 13526.

Davis, Steven J., 2008, “The Decline of Job Loss and Why It Matters,” American
       Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings, 98, no. 2.

Davis, Steven J., R. Jason Faberman, John Haltiwanger, Ron Jarmin and Javier Miranda,
       2007, “Business Volatility, Job Destruction and Unemployment,” working paper,
       October.

Davis, Steven, J., John Haltiwanger, Ron Jarmin and Javier Miranda, “Volatility and
       Dispersion in Business Growth Rates: Publicly Traded versus Privately Held
       Firms,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2006, Daron Acemoglu, Kenneth Rogoff,
       and Michael Woodford, eds. MIT Press.

Dynan, Karen E. Douglas W. Elmendorf, and Daniel E. Sichel, 2006, “Can Financial
      Innovation Help Explain the Reduced Volatility of Economic Activity,” Journal
      of Monetary Economics 53, 2006, pp. 123-150.

Dynan, Karen E. Douglas W. Elmendorf, and Daniel E. Sichel, 2008, “The Evolution of
      Household Income Volatility,” The Brookings Institution. Downloadable at
      http://www.brookings.edu/papers/2008/02_us_economics_elmendorf.aspx.

Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French, 2004, “New Lists: Fundamentals and Survival
      Rates,” Journal of Financial Economics, 73, no. 2, 229-269.

Friedman, M., A Theory of the Consumption Function, National Bureau of Economic
      Research, Princeton, N.J., 1957.

Gali, Jordi, and Gambetti, Luca, 2007, “On the Sources of the Great Moderation,”
        Working Paper no. 1041, Universitat Pompeu Fabra.




                                          28
Giannone, D., M. Lenza, and L. Reichlin, 2008, “Explaining the Great Moderation: It is
      not the Shocks,” European Central Bank, Working Paper Series No. 865,
      February.

Gorbachev, Olga, 2007, “Did Household Consumption Become More Volatile?” working
      paper, available at http://www.columbia.edu/~ocg2001/JMP.pdf.

Groshen, Erica, and Simon Potter, 2003, “Has Structural Change Contributed to a Jobless
      Recovery?” Current Issues in Economics and Finance 9 (August), Federal
      Reserve Bank of New York.

Humphries, Brad, Louis J. Maccini, and Scott Schuh, 2001, “Input and Output
     Inventories, Journal of Monetary Economics 47, 347-375.

Irvine, F. Owen, and Scott Schuh, 2005, “The Roles of Comovement and Inventory
        Investment in the Reduction of Output Volatility,” Federal Reserve Bank of
        Boston Working Paper 05-9.

Justiniano, A., and G. Primiceri, 2006, “The Time-Varying Volatility of Macroeconomic
        Fluctuations,” NBER Working Paper No. 12022, February 2006.

Kahn, James A., 1987, “Inventories and the Volatility of Production,” American
       Economic Review 77 (September), 667-679.

Kahn, James A., 2000, “Explaining the Gap between New Home Sales and Inventories,”
       Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Current Issues in Economics and Finance, 6
       (May).

Kahn, James A., 2008, “Durable Goods Inventories and the Great Moderation,” Federal
       Reserve Bank of New York, Staff Report No. 325.

Kahn, James A., Margaret McConnell, and Gabriel Perez-Quiros, 2002. "On the Causes
       of the Increased Stability of the U.S. Economy, " Federal Reserve Bank of New
       York, Economic Policy Review, 8, pp. 183-202.

Kim, Chang-Jin, and Charles Nelson, 1999. "Has the U.S. Economy Become More
      Stable? A Bayesian Approach Based on a Markov-Switching Model of the
      Business Cycle," Review of Economics and Statistics, 81, pp. 608-16.

Kim, Chang-Jin, Charles Nelson, and Jeremy Piger, 2003. "The Less Volatile U.S.
      Economy: A Bayesian Investigation of Timing, Breadth, and Potential
      Explanations," Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, forthcoming.

Maccini, L.J., B. J. Moore and H. Schaller, 2004, “The Interest Rate, Learning, and
      Inventory Investment,” The American Economic Review 94(5), December 2004,
      1303-1327.

                                          29
McCarthy, Jonathan, and Egon Zakrajsek, 2007. “Inventory Dynamics and Business
      Cycles: What Has Changed?” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Vol. 39,
      No. 2–3 (March–April), 591-613.

McConnell, Margaret, and Gabriel Perez-Quiros, 2000. "Output Fluctuations in the
     United States: What Has Changed since the Early 1980s?" American Economic
     Review, 90, pp. 1464-76.

Mentzer, John, W. DeWitt, J. Keebler, S. Min, N. Mix, C. Smith, and Z. Zacharia, 2001,
      “Defining Supply Chain Management” Journal of Business Logistics.

Nelson, Edward, 2004. "The Great Inflation of the Seventies: What Really Happened?"
       Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, working paper (January).

Orphanides, Athanasios, 2002 “Monetary-Policy Rules and the Great Inflation,”
      The American Economic Review, 92 (May), Papers and Proceedings, pp. 115-120.

Orphanides, Athanasios, 2003. "The Quest for Prosperity without Inflation," Journal of
      Monetary Economics, 50 (April), pp. 633-63.

Orphanides, Athanasios, and John C. Williams, 2003a. "Imperfect Knowledge, Inflation
      Expectations, and Monetary Policy," forthcoming in Ben Bernanke and Michael
      Woodford, eds., Inflation Targeting, Chicago: University of Chicago Press for
      NBER.

Rogoff, Kenneth, 2006, “The Impact of Globalization on Monetary Policy,” prepared for
       the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City symposium, "The New Economic
       Geography: Effects and Policy Implications," Jackson Hole, Wyoming, August
       24-26.

Romer, Christina, 1986, “Is the Stabilization of the Postwar Economy a Figment of the Data?”
       American Economic Review 76 (June), 314-334.

Romer, Christina, and David Romer, 2002a. "A Rehabilitation of Monetary Policy in the
      1950’s," American Economic Review (Papers and Proceedings) 92 (May), pp.
      121-127.

Romer, Christina, and David Romer, 2002b. "The Evolution of Economic Understanding
      and Postwar Stabilization Policy," Rethinking Stabilization Policy, Federal
      Reserve Bank of Kansas City, pp. 11-78.

Sims, Christopher, and Tao Zha, 2006, “Were There Regime Switches in U.S. Monetary
       Policy?” American Economic Review, 96 (March), pp. 54-81.

Stiroh, Kevin, 2005, “Volatility Accounting: A Production View of Increased Economic
        Stability,” working paper, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.

                                              30
Stock, James H. and Mark W. Watson, 2002, “Has the Business Cycle Changed and
        Why?” in Mark Gertler and Kenneth Rogoff, eds., NBER Macroeconomics
        Annual 2002. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 159-218.

Truman, Edwin M., 2003. Inflation Targeting in the World Economy. Institute for
      International Economics, Washington, D.C.

Warnock, M.V. Cacdac, and Francis Warnock, 2000. "The Declining Volatility of U.S.
      Employment: Was Arthur Burns Right?" Board of Governors of the Federal
      Reserve System, International Finance Discussion Paper no. 677 (August).

Whelan, Karl, 2000, “A Guide to the Use of Chain Aggregated NIPA Data,” Division of
      Research and Statistics Discussion Paper, Federal Reserve Board.




                                          31
                        Figure 1: GDP Growth, 1947-2007
        20

        15

        10

          5

          0

         -5

       -10

       -15
              50 55 60 65 70 75 80 85 90 95 00 05
Quarterly, Annual Rate. Source: NIPA
Note: Shaded periods represent NBER-designated recessions




                                32
                                                 Figure 2: GDP Growth Contributions by Major Product

                                Nondurables                                                                           Durables



   8                                                                                   8


   4                                                                                   4


   0                                                                                   0


  -4                                                                                  -4


  -8                                                                                  -8

        50 55 60 65 70 75 80 85 90 95 00 05                                                 50 55 60 65 70 75 80 85 90 95 00 05




                                  Services                                                                            Structures



   8                                                                                   8


   4                                                                                   4


   0                                                                                   0


  -4                                                                                  -4


  -8                                                                                  -8

        50 55 60 65 70 75 80 85 90 95 00 05                                                 50 55 60 65 70 75 80 85 90 95 00 05

Quarterly, Annual Rate. Source: NIPA

Note: Grow th contributions are grow th rates scaled by the product's share in total GDP. Thus, they are affected by trends in sector shares
over time, but the ef fect is very slight.

Shaded periods represent NBER designated recessions.




                                                               33
                                            Figure 3: Volatility* over Time in Key Categories

                                  GDP                                                                   Durable Goods Output
6                                                                                    6

5                                                                                    5

4                                                                                    4

3                                                                                    3

2                                                                                    2

1                                                                                    1

0                                                                                    0
    55   60    65     70     75     80     85     90     95    00                        55   60   65   70   75   80   85   90   95   00



                       Residenial Investment                                                            Inventory Investment*
6                                                                                    6

5                                                                                    5

4                                                                                    4


3                                                                                    3

2                                                                                    2

1                                                                                    1

0                                                                                    0
    55   60    65     70     75     80     85     90     95    00                        55   60   65   70   75   80   85   90   95   00
*5-year rolling standard deviations of quarterly annualized grow th contributions.
**Inventory investment grow th contributions w ere computed by subtracting
fixed investment's contribution from total investment's.




                                                               34
                      Figure 4: GDP Volatility by Frequency

              10

                8

                6

                4

                2

                0
                      1954-69       1970-83       1984-2004
                        Business Cycle    High Frequency


Note: Units are standard deviations of annualized growth rates.




                                    35
             Figure 5: Contributions to Durables Output Variability
      12


        8


        4


        0


       -4


       -8
            55    60     65    70     75     80    85   90   95   00

                        Inventory Investment            Covariance


5-year rolling variances of growth contributions




                                    36
Figure 6: Inventory-Sales Ratios in Durable Goods in Relation to Lead Times for
                           Materials Orders in Manufacturing

                                                                                            .7
                                                                 Inventory-sales ratio,
                                                                 durable goods sector
                                                                 (nominal)**
        120                                                                                 .6


        100
                                                                                            .5
 Days




                   Pre-1984 average = 65.8
        80

                                                                                            .4
        60                                                       Post-1984 average = 48.0

                           Avg. lead time for orders*
                           (in days, left scale)
        40
              55      60     65     70       75        80   85    90     95     00
          * Source: Institute for Supply Management
          ** Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis




                                                  37
                            Figure 7: Volatility in Firm-Level Employment Growth Rates,
                          Overall and by Ownership Status, U.S. Private Sector, 1977 to 2001




                          0.7
                          0.6
Average Firm Volatility




                          0.5
                          0.4
                          0.3
                          0.2
                          0.1

                                                                  Year
                                             All Private Sector   Privately Held   Publicly Traded



Notes: Firm-level volatility calculated as a ten-year weighted moving average of
growth rates, inclusive of entry and exit and with a degrees-of-freedom
correction. See equation (6) in Davis et al. (2006). Average volatility across
firms computed on an employment-weighted basis.

Source: Calculations on the Longitudinal Business Database by Davis et al.
(2006).
Figure 8: Household-Level Consumption Volatility by Deciles of Predicted Consumption




Note: We compute the absolute value of six-month log changes in expenditures on
nondurable goods and services per adult equivalent in each household. Averaging the
absolute changes by time period and decile yields the reported measure of consumption
volatility.
