                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  CIGARETTE TAXES AND THE TRANSITION FROM YOUTH TO ADULT SMOKING:
          SMOKING INITIATION, CESSATION, AND PARTICIPATION

                                           Philip DeCicca
                                          Donald S. Kenkel
                                          Alan D. Mathios

                                        Working Paper 14042
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14042


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2008




We thank Martin Forster, Richard Frank, Michael Grossman, Andrew Jones, Peter Zweifel, an anonymous
referee, and participants at a session of the American Economic Association, Philadelphia, January
7-9 2005, for helpful comments on earlier drafts. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Philip DeCicca, Donald S. Kenkel, and Alan D. Mathios. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Cigarette Taxes and the Transition from Youth to Adult Smoking: Smoking Initiation, Cessation,
and Participation
Philip DeCicca, Donald S. Kenkel, and Alan D. Mathios
NBER Working Paper No. 14042
May 2008
JEL No. I12

                                              ABSTRACT

Policy makers continue to advocate and adopt cigarette taxes as a public health measure. Most previous
individual-level empirical studies of cigarette demand are essentially static analyses. In this study,
we use longitudinal data to examine the dynamics of young adults’ decisions about smoking initiation
and cessation. We develop a simple model to highlight the distinctions between smoking initiation,
cessation, and participation and show that the price elasticity of smoking participation is a weighted
average of corresponding initiation and cessation elasticities, a finding that applies more broadly to
other addictive substances as well. The paper’s remaining contributions are empirical. We use data
from the 1992 wave of the National Education Longitudinal Study, when most of the cohort were
high school seniors, and data from the 2000 wave, when they were about 26 years old. The results
show that the distinction between initiation and cessation is empirically useful. We also contribute
new estimates on the tax-responsiveness of young adult smoking, paying careful attention to the possibility
of bias if hard-to-observe differences in anti-smoking sentiment are correlated with state cigarette
taxes. We find no evidence that higher taxes prevent smoking initiation, but some evidence that higher
taxes are associated with increased cessation.


Philip DeCicca                                       Alan D. Mathios
422 Kenneth Taylor Hall , Dept of Economics          182 MVR Hall
McMaster University                                  Cornell University
Hamilton, ON L8S 4M4                                 Ithaca NY 14853
decicca@mcmaster.ca                                  adm5@cornell.edu

Donald S. Kenkel
Department of Policy Analysis and Management
College of Human Ecology
Cornell University
Martha Van Rensselaer Hall
Ithaca, NY 14853-4401
and NBER
dsk10@cornell.edu
1. Introduction

       Many policy makers continue to advocate and adopt cigarette taxes as a public health

measure. For example, the European Commission (2004) and the U.S. Healthy People 2010

(USDHHS 2004) objectives call for regular increases in cigarette taxes to prevent smoking-

related deaths and disease. Over the past six years (2000 - 2006), in addition to increases in the

U.S. federal cigarette tax, 43 States and the District of Columbia enacted a total of 70 cigarette

excise tax hikes (Orzechowski and Walker 2007). In 2007 a substantial hike in the U.S. federal

cigarette tax was proposed but vetoed.

       A large number of empirical studies in health economics estimate the impact of cigarette

taxes or prices on aggregate cigarette consumption and individual cigarette demand. The

standard approach to study individual cigarette demand uses a two part model, where the first

part is a model of smoking participation, and the second part analyzes consumption conditional

upon participation.1 Because they use cross-sectional data (or in a few cases repeated cross-

sections), these studies are essentially static analyses of the relationship between the level of

taxes and smoking behavior at a point in time. In this study, we use longitudinal data to examine

the dynamics of young adults’ decisions about smoking initiation and cessation.

       Our study of smoking dynamics makes several contributions to health economics research

on substance use. In section 2 we develop a simple empirical model of smoking initiation and

cessation. In section 3, we use the model to highlight the distinctions between smoking




        1
         Chaloupka and Warner (2000) and Grossman (2005) provide reviews of the empirical
literature. Examples that use the two-part model to study adolescent and/or adult smoking
include Lewit, Coate and Grossman (1981), Wasserman et al. (1991), Evans, Farrelly, and
Montgomery (1999), Gruber and Zinman (2001), and Levy and Meara (2006).

                                                  1
initiation, cessation, and participation. Our first contribution is to stress that if smoking is

addictive, the standard participation equation is mis-specified because it fails to condition on past

smoking status. Our second contribution is to show that because current smoking participation

reflects past decisions about initiation and cessation, the elasticity of smoking participation with

respect to price is a weighted average of the price elasticities of initiation and cessation. These

insights also contribute to economic research on the demand for other addictive substances. For

example, one implication is that participation in the use of an addictive substance is less price

elastic than the initiation or cessation of use because of the accounting relationship between

stocks and flows.

       The paper’s remaining contributions are empirical. As discussed in section 4, we use data

from the 1992 wave of the National Education Longitudinal Study (NELS), when most of the

cohort were high school seniors, and data from the 2000 wave, when they were about 26 years

old. Although cigarette prices increased by over 50 percent in real terms between 1992 and

2000, smoking prevalence among the NELS respondents also increased from 18 percent to 23

percent, about the same increase observed in other cohorts over these ages. But these numbers

mask important dynamics: by the year 2000, about 13 percent of 1992 non-smokers initiated

smoking; while about one-third of 1992 smokers had quit. Put differently, nearly half of smokers

at around age 26 were not daily smokers as high school seniors.

       In section 5 we estimate models that explore the determinants of young adults’ decisions

about smoking initiation and cessation. The results show that key explanatory variables have

different impacts on initiation and cessation. We also contribute new estimates on the tax-

responsiveness of young adult smoking, paying careful attention to the possibility of bias if hard-



                                                   2
to-observe differences in anti-smoking sentiment are correlated with state cigarette taxes. Our

first identification strategy is to include a direct measure of state anti-smoking sentiment as an

additional explanatory control variable. Our second strategy exploits a new source of

identifying variation by focusing on young adults who face difference cigarette taxes because

they moved to a different state between 1992 and 2000. Using these strategies, we find no

evidence that higher taxes prevent smoking initiation, but some evidence that higher taxes are

associated with increased cessation. Section 6 concludes.

2. An Empirical Model of Smoking Initiation and Cessation

       In this section we sketch a simple empirical model to guide the specification of the

smoking initiation and cessation equations to be estimated. We use a myopic addiction model.

The consumer’s current period utility is given by u(Gt, St, St-1), where G is a non-addictive

composite good and S is the addictive good – smoking. Our empirical work focuses on discrete

smoking statuses and discrete choices: non-smokers (St-1 = 0) choose to initiate smoking or not

(I = 1 or 0) ; smokers (St-1 = 1) choose to cease/ quit smoking or not (Q = 1 or 0) ; or,

unconditional on past smoking status, people choose to participate in smoking or not (St = 1 or

0). The model can be easily extended to distinguish discrete levels of smoking, such as light

versus heavy smoking. The model can also be extended to include additional past periods, so for

example smoking at time t-2 can be allowed to influence the current utility from smoking. These

extensions introduce additional historical smoking statuses, smoking-status-dependent utility

functions, and smoking status transitions. Our empirical work mainly focuses on transitions

between non-smoking and smoking, but we estimate some models that distinguish between




                                                  3
different levels of past smoking.2

       To begin to derive the equations to be estimated, we assume that a non-smoker decides to

initiate smoking based on the utility gain from starting:

                  yI* = u(Gt, St =1, St-1 = 0) - u(Gt, St =0, St-1 = 0)                       (1)

       Similarly, a smoker decides to cease based on the utility gain from quitting:

                  yQ* = u(Gt, St =0, St-1 = 1) - u(Gt, St =1, St-1 = 1)                       (2)

       Finally, for the discussion below in section 3 it is useful to note that unconditional on past

smoking status, smoking participation depends on the utility gain from smoking:

                  yS* = u(Gt, St =1, St-1) - u(Gt, St =0, St-1 )                              (3)

            The utility gains yI* and yQ* are the unobserved continuous latent variables that underlie

the observed discrete outcomes of smoking initiation and cessation. As shown in the Appendix

for a specific utility function, the utility gains yI* and yQ* can be shown to be functions of current

prices (Pt), other time-varying factors Xt, an environmental factor (F) such as prevailing anti-

smoking sentiment that is assumed to be fixed over time, and a random term e:3




        2
        Because we only consider smoking status at time t-1, our models of initiation do not
distinguish new starters from re-starters. Because we focus on transitions between non-smoking
and smoking, we mainly abstract from differences in cigarette consumption conditional on
smoking. The second part of the standard two-part model focuses on cigarette consumption
conditional on smoking participation; see the references in footnote 1. A related strand of
empirical research estimates double hurdle models of cigarette consumption (e.g., Jones 1989,
Yen and Jones 1996, Labeaga 1999).
        3
         In the Appendix, we also show that our approach is consistent with the shadow price
approach suggested by Colman, Grossman, and Joyce (2002, 2003). Our approach could be
extended to a rational addiction model by replacing current period utility u( ) with lifetime
utility. The rational addict takes into account the implications of his current consumption of S
for future choices and lifetime utility. As a result, yI* and yQ* would also depend upon
expectations of future cigarette prices and other time-varying variables.

                                                       4
               yI* = "0 + "1 Pt + "2 F + "3 Xt + eI                                           (4)

               yQ* = $0 + $1 Pt + $2 F + $3 Xt + eQ                                           (5)

       If the consumer decides to initiate or cease smoking based on whether yI* > 0 and yQ* > 0

respectively, this implies :

               Pr{It = 1*St-1 = 0} = G("0 + "1 Pt + "2 F + "3 Xt)                             (6)

               Pr{Qt =1*St-1 = 1}= G($0 + $1 Pt + $2 F + $3 Xt)                               (7)

Assuming G( ) is the standard normal cumulative distribution function implies the probit discrete

time hazard models of smoking initiation and cessation we estimate below.

       Because smoking initiation and cessation reflect changes in smoking status over time, it

might seem surprising that equations (6) and (7) do not include Pt-1 and Xt-1 (or )P = Pt- - Pt-1 and

)X = Xt- - Xt-1 ). Instead, the empirical model captures the role of past variables by conditioning

on past smoking status (St-1). Current smoking decisions are influenced by past smoking status

St-1, but except through St-1 the combination of past prices and other demand influences that led to

St-1 = 0 or 1 does not matter.4 Our empirical model captures the role of past smoking status by

allowing the parameter vectors " and $ in equations (6) and (7) to differ. Put differently, our

empirical model given by equations (6) and (7) is equivalent to a smoking participation model

that includes on the right hand side: past smoking status; and the interactions of past smoking




        4
         Becker, Grossman, and Murphy (1994) use an analogous result to identify their
structural linear difference equation that shows current cigarette consumption as a function of
past and future consumption. Becker, Grossman and Murphy (1994) and many previous rational
addiction studies focus on continuous measures of the consumption of an addictive good, while
we focus on discrete outcomes.

                                                      5
status with all of the other explanatory variables.5

3. More on the Distinctions between Smoking Initiation, Cessation, and Participation

The Role of Addiction

       It is necessary to empirically distinguish smoking initiation, cessation, and participation

because smoking is addictive. In contrast to the empirical model given by equations (6) and (7),

the standard specification of a smoking participation equation does not condition on past smoking

status and thus omits all past influences.6 The standard specification is correct only if smoking is

not addictive. If smoking is non-addictive St-1 does not appear in the current period utility

function. After appropriate sign changes the latent variables behind non-addictive smoking

initiation, cessation, and participation decisions in equations (1) - (3) are identical: yI* = - yQ* =

yS*. That is, if smoking were non-addictive, there would be no meaningful distinction between

initiation and the decision not to quit, because past smoking would be irrelevant to the current




        5
         Our empirical model faces the familiar problem of distinguishing state dependence,
where past smoking status is a determinant of current smoking, from unobservable
heterogeneity, where past period non-smokers and smokers have different unobservable tastes.
Even though past demand influences do not enter the structural model given by equations (6) and
(7), the unobservable heterogeneity in tastes can be systematically related to past observed
demand influences. For example, suppose the price Pt-1 is higher in New York than in Kentucky.
Because they chose to smoke despite facing a higher Pt-1, it is clear that the population of
smokers in New York will on average have a stronger unobservable propensity to smoke than the
population of smokers in Kentucky. The problem of distinguishing state dependence from
heterogeneity arises if unobservables at time t-1 and t are correlated.
        6
         An alternative to conditioning on past smoking status is to estimate a reduced-form
smoking participation equation that includes the determinants of past smoking status as
additional explanatory variables. DeCicca, Kenkel and Mathios (2005) estimate a smoking
participation model that includes both current and past prices. As noted there (p. 300), this is
only a first step towards the correct reduced-form specification because it does not include the
entire relevant history of past prices and other demand influences.

                                                  6
decision to smoke.7 This is consistent with common usage: the terms ‘starting/ quitting’ or

‘initiation/ cessation’ are not used to refer to changes in non-addictive or non-habitual behavior.

For example, while we refer to someone starting or quitting smoking, we do not refer to someone

starting or quitting milk consumption.

       A testable implication of the hypothesis that smoking is not addictive is that the

explanatory variables should have symmetric effects on smoking cessation and initiation. In

terms of equations (6) and (7), the testable implication is that the parameter vectors " and $ are

identical (with appropriate sign changes). For example, if smoking is non-addictive an

explanatory variable like the price of cigarettes is expected to have equal and opposite effects on

initiation and cessation.8 The standard specification of a smoking participation model implicitly

imposes this restriction; we test it below.

Elasticities of Smoking Participation, Initiation, and Cessation

       Linking smoking participation to initiation and cessation behavior also sheds new light on

the interpretation of the standard smoking participation equation. Consider the individual-level

relationship between the probability of smoking participation and the conditional probabilities of

initiation and cessation:

       Pr{St =1}= Pr{I t = 1* St-1 = 0} C (Pr {St-1 =0} + (1 - Pr{Qt =1* St-1 =1) C Pr{St-1 = 1}   (8)

       The price-elasticity of smoking participation is a common focus of attention. Taking the

        7
         Although Labeaga (1999) estimates a rational addiction model of smoking, he appears to
implicitly assume that there is a single latent variable behind the smoking participation decision
(see his equation 5, page 53).
        8
        In a double-hurdle model of smoking and quitting, Yen and Jones (1996) suggest that
variables unrelated to the fixed costs of quitting should have equal and opposite effects on the
decision to quit and on cigarette consumption by continuing smokers. This is not inconsistent
with our point about the determinants of non-smokers’ decisions about initiation.

                                                  7
partial derivative of equation (8) with respect to price, the short-run impact of the current price of

cigarettes on smoking participation is through its impact on current initiation and cessation

decisions:9

        M Pr{St = 1}/ M Pt = [M Pr {It = 1*St-1=0}/ M Pt ] C Pr {St-1 = 0}

                        - [M Pr{Qt = 1*St-1=1}/ M Pt ] C Pr {St-1 = 1}                          (9)

       To further explore the implications of this for the correct interpretation of the results,

aggregate and replace the probabilities with corresponding fractions of the population (i, q, and s)

and re-write equation (10) in elasticity form:

               *gSt * = *gIt *(1 - st-1) (i t / st ) + gQt (st-1) (q t / st )                   (10)

       Equation (10) makes explicit some straight-forward relationships between the price-

elasticities of smoking participation, initiation, and cessation that are often overlooked. First, the

price-elasticity of smoking participation is a weighted average of the price-elasticities of

initiation and cessation.

       Second, because in the short run the weights do not sum to one, the stock of smoking

participation will be much less price elastic than the flows of initiation and cessation. The

weights correspond to the magnitudes of the annual flows of new smokers and former smokers,

relative to the stock of smokers.10 In very rough terms, in the U.S. about 1.5 million people start


        9
         When taking the partial derivative we assume that the probabilities of past smoking
participation Pr {St-1 = 0} and Pr {St-1 = 1}do not depend on the current price. This assumption
follows from a myopic addiction model. In a rational addiction model, the assumption holds for
a change in price at time t that was not anticipated at time t-1.
        10
         Using the empirical population fractions st , st-1, it and qt, if N = adult population, the flow
of new smokers = N (1- st-1) (it), the flow of former smokers = N qt st-1, and the stock of current
smokers = N st. Because N cancels out, the ratios of the flows of new and former smokers to the
stock of current smokers equal the weights on gIt and gQt in equation (10).

                                                        8
smoking each year and about 1.5 million quit, compared to a stock of about 50 million smokers.

So on an annual basis for all adults, the weights sum to 3/50 = 0.06. Some estimates suggest the

price elasticity of adult smoking participation is around -0.2 (USDHHS 2000, pp. 327-337). If

so, on an annual basis the price elasticity of initiation and cessation must average to be about

16.7 (= 1/0.06) times larger in absolute value, i.e. about -3.3. Or using the rough numerical

estimates, if gSt = -0.2, a 10 percent increase in price causes the number of adult smokers to fall

by 1 million. The change of 1 million smokers requires large increases in the flows of starters

and quitters. For example, this change could be achieved if a 10 percent price hike: causes

initiation to fall by one-third from 1.5 million to 1 million; and causes cessation to increase by

one-third from 1.5 million to 2 million.

       In equation (10) smoking participation is less price elastic than initiation or cessation

because of the accounting relationship between stocks and flows. As such, equation (10) does

not contradict the behavioral prediction from the model of rational addiction that an addictive

choice like smoking is more price elastic in the long run than in the short run. For example, in

the short run smoking cessation might be relatively price inelastic, with the short run response

mainly coming through reductions in intensity. However, if our model were extended to allow

different levels of past smoking, because of addiction the utility gain from quitting would depend

on the intensity of past smoking. In such a model, cutting down in the short run makes cessation

more likely in the long run, which in turn means that smoking cessation is more price elastic in

the long run than in the short run. This is consistent with the empirical evidence from Falba et al.

(2003), who find that smokers who reduce the quantity they smoke are more likely to

subsequently quit.



                                                  9
        A third implication of equation (10) is that because smoking initiation and cessation rates

vary over the life course, the correct interpretation of the elasticity of smoking participation (gSt )

also varies over the life course. Early in adolescence, quitting behavior is relatively unimportant.

Even if the quit rate (qt ) is substantial, there is a small fraction of smokers (s t-1) who can

potentially quit. So for younger adolescents, gSt mainly reflects the price elasticity of initiation.

By early adulthood, initiation (it ) becomes less common and the fraction of non-smokers at risk

of initiating (1- st-1) is smaller, so the price elasticity of cessation gains in importance as a

determinant of gSt . As noted above, in the sample of young adults we use in our empirical study

both initiation and cessation are significant. By middle age, gSt is driven entirely by the price

elasticity of cessation. As a matter of interpretation these patterns make it problematic to

compare the price-elasticity of smoking participation estimates for samples of different ages –

they reflect different behaviors.

Implications for the Correct Specification of a Model of Smoking Participation

        In the empirical work below, we focus on estimating models of smoking initiation and

cessation. However, the distinctions we emphasize have important implications for the correct

specification of models of smoking participation. One approach is to estimate a structural

smoking participation equation that includes prior smoking status as an endogenous explanatory

variable.11 Another approach is to estimate a reduced-form smoking participation equation that


        11
         The structural participation equation is analogous to the linear difference equation
derived by Becker, Grossman, and Murphy (1991), where current cigarette consumption is a
function of past and future cigarette consumption, the current price of cigarettes, and shift
variables. Most studies of rational addiction focus on estimating this structural equation,
although the reduced-form equation of current consumption as a function of current, past and
future prices has also been estimated (e.g., Gruber and Kosegi 2000). Most studies also use a
continuous measure of smoking. However, Kan and Tsai (2001) and Contoyannis and Jones

                                                   10
includes the determinants of prior smoking status as additional explanatory variables. Most

previous studies estimate models of smoking participation that do not include a measure of prior

smoking status, often because the data sets used do not contain that information. But the

standard approach in previous studies can still be usefully compared with a correctly specified

reduced-form approach. If prior smoking status is not known, smoking participation at time t can

be re-expressed in terms of I and Q. Recursively substituting for S in equation (8) and

substituting equations (1) and (2) into equation (3) yields an empirical model of smoking

participation at time t:

                St = G((0 + (1 Pt + (2 F + (3 Xt + (4 Pt-1 + (5 Pt-2 + ...)                        (11)

        The exact specification of equation (11) and the relationships between the ( parameters of

the participation equation and the " and $ parameters of the initiation and cessation models given

by equations (6) and (7) are complicated and depend upon simplifying assumptions. In the

Appendix we show that after a number of simplifying assumptions a linear probability model of

smoking participation should be specified as:

                St =       (0 + (1 Pt + (2 Pt-1 + (3 Pt Pt-1 + (4 F + (5 F2 + (6 F Pt + (7F Pt-1    (12)

        The general point for empirical work is that current smoking participation depends on a

series of past decisions, i.e. the probability of currently smoking is a joint probability. Therefore,

the multiplicative terms in the joint probability mean that current smoking participation should be

modeled as a function of the relevant history of prices and their interactions with each other and

other determinants of smoking decisions. In practice, estimating an equation like (12) will



(2001) estimate structural models of a dichotomous measure of cessation and Gilleskie and
Strumpf (2005) and Auld (2005) estimate structural models of a dichotomous measure of youth
smoking initiation.

                                                      11
usually be infeasible because of lack of data or multicollinearity among the explanatory

variables.

       In contrast to equations (11) or (12), the standard approach estimates the probability of

smoking participation at time t as a function of only current variables. The standard approach

that omits past variables is correct if smoking is not addictive. But if smoking is addictive, the

standard participation equation is mis-specified because it only includes the current price of

cigarettes. This creates omitted variables bias to the extent current and past prices are correlated.

Most of the variation in cigarette prices is driven by state excise tax policy. During times when

tax policies are not frequently revised, cigarette prices will tend to be very serially correlated.12

In this situation the current price of cigarettes tends to proxy for the history of prices. As a result,

the estimated effect of the current price on smoking participation tends to reflect the effects of

past prices on initiation and cessation decisions in earlier years. Put differently, the resulting

price-elasticity estimate roughly corresponds to a long-run price-elasticity because it reflects

long-standing differences in prices across states. An additional problem is that many studies are

also unable to control for differences in anti-smoking sentiment across states that are correlated

with long-standing differences in prices across states.13

        12
         Bertrand, Duflo, and Mullainathan (2004) and Helland and Tabarrock (2004) make a
similar point in their demonstrations that serial correlation can cause serious problems in
inference (deflated standard errors) in difference-in-difference estimates of policy effects.
        13
          Warner (1982) and Hunter and Nelson (1992) provide evidence that states increased
cigarette taxes in response to a shift in the public’s demand for anti-smoking policies. DeCicca,
et al. (2006) develop an empirical measure of state-level anti-smoking sentiment during the
1990s. They find that after controlling for differences in state anti-smoking sentiment, the price
of cigarettes has a weak and statistically insignificant influence on smoking participation. In
contrast, the CDC (1998) and Gruber (2000) continue to find significant price effects in model of
youth smoking that include state dummies (state fixed effects) to control for unobservable state-
level influences on youth smoking.

                                                  12
       Because of the practical difficulties we do not attempt to estimate the model of smoking

participation given by equation (12). Instead, for comparison with previous studies we adopt the

standard (mis-) specification that omits the determinants of prior smoking status. Our main

emphasis is on our models of smoking initiation and cessation.

4. Data

Overview of NELS

       The National Education Longitudinal Study (NELS) began in 1988 as a nationally

representative survey of U.S. eighth graders. Since this initial wave there have been four follow-

up surveys, with the most recent coming in 2000 when most sample members were twenty-five

or twenty-six years old. Of the five available NELS waves, four contain information on smoking

behavior; only the third follow-up (1994) does not. To focus on the transition from youth to

young adult smoking, we use the last two waves with smoking information — the second follow-

up (1992) and the fourth follow-up (2000). While this is a relatively long interval, NELS

retained approximately two-thirds of the respondents to the 1992 wave.14 More precisely, of the

19,220 respondents to the 1992 wave, 12,144 are included in the 2000 wave. Table 1 presents

descriptive statistics for the key variables used in the analysis.




14
  NELS staff made special efforts to locate prior respondents for the 2000 wave. These
measures included the use of marketing databases and, when possible and necessary, state motor
vehicle registries. Additional efforts were made to locate those inherently more difficult to find
(e.g., individuals in the military and those incarcerated at time of survey). In DeCicca, Kenkel
and Mathios (2005), we use an inverse probability weighted (IPW) model to correct for attrition
bias (Wooldridge 2002a, b). The IPW models and the unweighted models yield very similar
results.

                                                  13
Smoking Patterns in the NELS Data

       Our measure of smoking is based on responses to a question about the number of

cigarettes smoked per day. Legitimate responses include: zero, less than one, one to five, six to

ten, one-half to two packs (10-40 cigarettes) and more than two packs (41 or more cigarettes) per

day. In the 2000 data: 75.3 percent report being non-smokers, 1.3 percent smoking less than one

cigarette per day, 6.4 percent one to five, 7.0 percent six to ten, 9.3 percent eleven to forty, and

0.7 percent report smoking more than two packs per day. We collapse this information into

dichotomous measures of whether each respondent smoked in 1992 and 2000. While smokers

report less than their true consumption (Warner, 1978), a meta-analysis of studies that compared

self-reported smoking with biochemical markers of smoking shows that people fairly accurately

report whether they smoke (Patrick et al., 1994). This suggests our dichotomous measure of

smoking status is fairly accurate. We include the relatively small number of individuals who

report smoking less than one cigarette per day with non-smokers, because this group likely

includes those with very little attachment to daily smoking.

       Using our measures of smoking we find that between 1992, when NELS respondents

were about 17 years old, and 2000, the cumulative smoking initiation rate was 13 percent. This

might seem to contradict conventional wisdom that smoking initiation mainly occurs during

adolescence. Of course, over the previous eight years that preceded 1992, the cumulative

initiation rate among NELS respondents was even higher at 18 percent. And evidence from other

sources suggests that much of the initiation in the NELS cohort after 1992 was probably

concentrated over the ages of 17 to 21. However, recent trends in other data also lead Lantz

(2003, p. 169) to suggest that “the upsurge in smoking among young adults appears to be part of



                                                  14
a broader phenomenon involving changes in substance use and risk taking behaviors among

youth making the transition to young adulthood.”

       Between 1992 and 2000 the cumulative smoking cessation rate in the NELS cohort was

about 34 percent, or slightly over 4 percent a year. Thus, while smoking cessation is not as

common among young adults as it becomes later in the life course, it is still important in this

sample of young adults.

Cigarette Taxes: Measurement and Identification of Causal Effects

        The key explanatory variable of interest is the cigarette excise tax. Cigarette taxes were

merged to the data on the basis of state of residence information in 2000.15 There is not a strong

consensus among researchers about whether to use cigarette taxes or prices in empirical models

of smoking. Arguments in favor of the use of taxes include: prices may be subject to market-

level endogeneity and so may be higher in areas with higher demand; and taxes are the directly-

manipulable policy tool. We use taxes in our empirical models, and use the results to calculate

the implied price elasticity. To calculate the price elasticity from the tax elasticity, we assume

that taxes are fully passed through to prices.

       Because we rely on cross-state differences in cigarette taxes for identification of causal

effects, we use several strategies to control for the possibility that taxes are correlated with hard-

to-observe state-level influences on smoking such as anti-smoking sentiment. The challenges


15
  Given the timing of fourth follow-up interviewing, which occurred between January and
September 2000, only one state, New York, presents problems in assigning the appropriate tax
rate. New York increased its cigarette tax from 56 to 111 cents, effective March 1, 2000. In
previous work with NELS data, we assigned tax based on respondent date of interview, but this
information is not available in the fourth follow-up. Because the majority of interviewing occurs
after this increase, and because it was announced long before January 2000, we assign a tax of
111 cents to New York residents.

                                                  15
posed by relying on cross-state tax differences for identification are widely recognized (see for

example DeCicca, Kenkel and Mathios 2002, Gruber and Zinman 2001, and Carpenter and Cook

2008). State cigarette taxes are not randomly set, but result from the political process which

reflects public sentiment towards smoking. Warner (1982) and Hunter and Nelson (1992)

provide evidence that states increased cigarette taxes in response to a shift in the public’s demand

for anti-smoking policies. If public anti-smoking sentiment is itself an important determinant of

smoking, failing to control for differences in anti-smoking sentiment across states will bias

estimates towards finding stronger tax-responsiveness. In addition, states with higher anti-

smoking sentiment and higher taxes may have stronger non-tax tobacco control measures. If

other tobacco control measures are important but hard-to-observe determinants of smoking, this

leads to further bias in the estimated tax effect. Several studies that use data from repeated

cross-sections include state fixed effects and rely on within-state variation in cigarette taxes for

identification (for example, Gruber and Zinman 2001 and Carpenter and Cook 2008). We can

not use that strategy, but the rationale behind our identification strategies is similar.

       Our first strategy follows DeCicca et al. (2008) and uses a direct measure of state anti-

smoking sentiment. The measure of state anti-smoking sentiment is based on a factor analysis of

responses to questions about attitudes towards smoking in the Tobacco Use Supplements to the

Consumer Population Survey (TUS-CPS). The factor analysis of the answers to the nine anti-

smoking attitude questions suggests they reflect a common source. DeCicca et al. estimate the

first factor for every individual TUS-CPS respondent, and then calculate the average of the

estimated factor by state. In the empirical models below we use the measure of state anti-

smoking sentiment based on the 1998-1999 TUS-CPS, which is matched to individual NELS



                                                  16
respondents based on their state of residence in 2000.

       DeCicca et al. (2008) provide an in-depth discussion of the usefulness of the measure of

anti-smoking sentiment as a control variable. First, they present evidence that it is reasonable to

interpret the result as a measure of state anti-smoking sentiment. For example, the lowest levels

of anti-smoking sentiment measured this way are in tobacco-producing states. The highest

measured anti-smoking sentiment is in Utah, presumably reflecting the influence of the Mormon

religion. Second, DeCicca et al. explore the possibility that the measure of anti-smoking

sentiment might itself be econometrically endogenous due to omitted variables or simultaneity.

As discussed above sentiment might be correlated with other tobacco control measures. To the

extent our models omit other important tobacco control measures, even after including the

sentiment measure our results may still be biased towards over-estimating the tax-responsiveness

of smoking.   Smoking and sentiment might also be simultaneously determined at the state level,

if high levels of smoking in a state cause lower anti-smoking sentiment as well as vice versa.

However, DeCicca et al. find very similar results when they use an alternative measure of

sentiment based only on survey responses of people living in never-smoking households. This

measure of the strength of non-smokers’ anti-smoking sentiment is less likely to pick up reverse

causality from smoking to sentiment. DeCicca et al. also report simple analyses of state-level

data that support a political economy model where anti-smoking sentiment in 1992 drives future

tax increases. In this situation, simultaneity biases our results towards over-estimating the tax-

responsiveness of smoking. Third, DeCicca et al. compare the usefulness of the sentiment

measure with alternative proxies used in previous studies. The results suggest that the measure

of anti-smoking sentiment is a more useful control variable than including an index of state



                                                 17
regulations or indicators for residence in a tobacco-producing state. In data where it is possible

to include state fixed effects, the results are similar to those obtained when the sentiment measure

is included.16

        As an alternative to including the measure of state anti-smoking sentiment, we use a

second identification strategy. This strategy exploits a new source of identifying variation by

focusing on young adults who face different cigarette taxes because they moved to a different

state between 1992 and 2000. State movers face current taxes that are uncorrelated with the taxes

and anti-smoking sentiment they faced during their adolescence. Holding other influences

constant, this suggests that models estimated over the sample of state movers should yield less

biased estimates of the causal impact of current taxes on smoking initiation and cessation.

However, state movers might also face different peer influences. With peer influences, taxes

have two potential impacts on an individual’s smoking: a direct impact; and an indirect impact

where changing peers’ smoking influences the individual’s smoking. Models estimated over the

sample of state movers capture the direct impact of current taxes on smoking and the indirect

impact of current taxes through their current peers’ behavior. If movers and stayers face much

different indirect impacts because of different peers, even if there is no bias from unobserved

anti-smoking sentiment the estimated impact of taxes will be different between the two groups.

But to the extent that individuals sort themselves into similar peer groups regardless of moving,


        16
          In a recent study of youth smoking Carpenter and Cook (2008) mainly rely on including
state fixed effects, but they explore our measure of anti-smoking sentiment as an alternative
approach. Using a different individual-level data on youth smoking they “reproduce the main
DeCicca et al. finding [that] the tax coefficient becomes smaller, with much of the estimated
variance ‘loading onto’ the sentiment measure.” (p. 18) In contrast to DeCicca et al., however,
Carpenter and Cook continue to find evidence of significant tax-responsiveness after controlling
for anti-smoking sentiment.

                                                18
moving-induced differences in peer influences are likely to be small. Furthermore, even if peer

influences differ, the magnitude and even the direction of the difference are difficult to predict.17

However, it is important to keep in mind all the factors that are controlled for in the mover/

stayer analysis.

       Given the mover/stayer identification strategy, a natural question is whether there are

observable differences between these two groups. Table 1 contains several comparisons of

movers and stayers. In particular, note that the levels of taxes in both 1992 and 2000 are virtually

identical for the two groups. So on average, movers and stayers faced almost the exact same

change in taxes between 1992 and 2000. This suggests that respondents’ movement across states

is largely orthogonal to taxes. To the extent that this is true, comparisons of movers and stayers

should provide improved estimates of tax responsiveness, relative to the traditional cross-

sectional model. While taxes are unrelated to mover/stayer status, there are other, non-trivial

differences between stayers and movers. As seen in Table 1, movers are less likely to smoke,

more likely to be white, and perhaps more academically inclined, as the average test score for

this group is roughly one half of one standard deviation higher than their non-mover counterparts.

On the surface, these differences suggest college attendance may be a prime reason for state

moving.


        17
          Clark and Loheac (2007) find that adolescent substance use is correlated with lagged
peer group behavior, but they note that the peer influences they estimate are much smaller than
in some previous studies. Based on their results, Clark and Loheac suggest that “such copycat
[indirect] effects may make intervention more effective with respect to alcohol than to cigarettes
or marijuana.” (p. 781). Whatever its size, it is also unclear whether the indirect impact will be
larger or smaller for movers compared to stayers. Clark and Loheac do not find systematic
differences in the role of peer influences between adolescents who recently moved and others.
Gaviria and Raphael (2001) suggest that movers may be more influenced by peers, at least with
respect to illicit drugs.

                                                 19
        Although there are observable differences between movers and stayers, there seems little

reason to suspect that tax-responsiveness varies across these groups in ways that invalidate the

mover vs. stayer identification strategy. To the extent moving is related to college attendance,

movers may be more future-oriented than stayers. In a simple two-period rational addiction

version of the model presented in the Appendix, more future-oriented consumers are predicted to

be more price-responsive (derivation available upon request).18 Intuitively, future-oriented

consumers are more price-responsive because they react more to the fact that a permanent price

increase not only increases the current price but also increases the price of next period

consumption, which is a complement to current consumption. If because of their greater future

orientation movers are more price-responsive than stayers, by focusing on movers our

identification strategy remains somewhat biased towards finding a significant negative tax

response.

Analysis Sample

       As noted above, the fourth follow-up of NELS includes 12,144 individuals. Restricting to

those with complete smoking and relevant state-of-residence information in both 1992 and 2000

reduces sample size slightly to 10,706, or about 88 percent of fourth wave respondents. All

specifications include controls for gender, race, year of birth, region and the respondent’s

composite score on from standardized tests in reading and mathematics. Missing data on the


       18
          On the other hand, in the general rational addiction model Becker, Grossman, and
Murphy (1991, note 3) show that under what they argue is a plausible condition, more future-
oriented consumers will be less price-responsive. The condition involves second and cross-
partial derivatives of the utility function. In words, it requires that “The increase in S [the
addictive stock] has a larger effect on its marginal utility than does the increase in c [current
consumption].” We thank Michael Grossman for pointing out the possible interaction between
future orientation and tax-responsiveness.

                                                 20
covariates race (35 cases), year of birth (251 cases) and test score (136 cases) reduces the

available sample for complete case analysis to 10,336.19 We follow our earlier work and use

conditional mean imputation to fill in missing values for these covariates. Hence, our overall

analysis sample consists of the above-mentioned 10,706 individuals with smoking and state

information in 1992 and 2000. Differences between the results we present and those generated

by complete case analysis are trivial.

4. The Dynamics of Yong Adult Smoking

Probit Models of Young Adult Smoking Behaviors

       In this section, we estimate probit models of smoking initiation and cessation between

1992 and 2000. For the smoking initiation models, the at-risk sample consists of the 8,759

respondents who were non-smokers in 1992. For the smoking cessation models, the at-risk

sample consists of the 1,947 respondents who were smokers in 1992. In addition, to test the

restrictions implicit in the standard specification in previous research, we also estimate probit

models of smoking participation in 2000. In the models of smoking participation, 1992 non-

smokers and smokers are pooled together yielding a sample of 10,706. The results are presented

in Table 2.

       The results in Table 2 suggest that the distinction between smoking initiation and

cessation is empirically important and useful. As discussed above in section 3, if smoking is

non-addictive it would be appropriate to ignore past smoking status and estimate the standard

specification of a smoking participation model. In that case, the latent variables underlying


        19
        Note that some observations are missing information on more than one covariate. So
although there are 422 cases of missing information, there are only 370 observations missing one
or more covariates.

                                                 21
participation, initiation and cessation are identical and it would be appropriate to pool together

1992 non-smokers and 1992 smokers . That is, it would be appropriate to constrain the

estimated parameters in a model of smoking in 2000 to be the same for 1992 non-smokers and

1992 smokers. The standard specification of the participation model presented in Table 2

imposes this constraint. A likelihood ratio test rejects the constraint, implying that the standard

specification is incorrect.20

        In addition to differences in the estimated impact of taxes, which will be discussed in

more detail below, the results in Table 2 reveal a number of substantive differences between the

determinants of smoking initiation and the determinants of smoking cessation. For example,

while about 13 percent of 1992 non-smokers initiated smoking, males were about 4 percentage

points more likely to initiate smoking than were females. In contrast, while about 34 percent of

1992 smokers quit, there was only a slight (1.5 percentage point) and statistically insignificant

difference in cessation between males and females. Race/ethnicity, age, and academic ability as

measured by standardized tests in reading and mathematics all have quantitatively different

impacts on smoking initiation versus cessation.

        As in previous studies, the role of cigarette taxes in smoking initiation and cessation

attracts special attention. In addition to the benchmark models, Table 2 contains the results from

our first identification strategy where we use a direct measure of state anti-smoking sentiment to


        20
         Let L0 and L1 be the log-likelihood values associate with the unconstrained and
constrained models, respectively. The log-likelihood for the unconstrained model equals the
sum of the log-likelihoods for the initiation and cessation models. So for the models that include
anti-smoking sentiment L0 = -3300.5472 + (-1212.0467) = -4512.5939. The log-likelihood for
the constrained model is the log-likelihood for the corresponding participation model: L1 = -
5,469.458. The likelihood ratio test statistic -2 (L1 - L0) = 1,913.7282 is distributed P2 with 14
degrees of freedom, and is statistically significant at above the 0.001 level.

                                                  22
control for differences across states that may be correlated with taxes. As shown in Table 2, in

the benchmark models taxes are negatively and statistically significantly associated with smoking

participation, and positively and statistically significantly associated with smoking cessation.

The implied price elasticity of smoking participation is -0.49, fairly similar to a commonly cited

consensus estimate of around -0.7 for the price elasticity of youth smoking participation

(Treasury Department 1998, GAO 1998, CBO 1998). However, the previous cross-sectional

studies behind the consensus have been unable to adequately control for differences across states

in anti-smoking sentiment. The tax coefficients in Table 2 are very sensitive to whether the

measure of state anti-smoking sentiment is included. After controlling for anti-smoking

sentiment, the results in Table 2 provide no evidence that higher taxes reduce smoking

participation or smoking initiation. There is some evidence that higher taxes increase smoking

cessation: the implied price elasticity of smoking cessation is 0.47, but this is based on a

statistically insignificant parameter estimate.

       The estimates show a strong negative association between the measure of anti-smoking

sentiment itself and the smoking behaviors of young adults. A one-unit increase in anti-smoking

sentiment (which is approximately a one-standard-deviation increase) is associated with: a

decrease in smoking participation of 14 percentage points; a decrease in smoking initiation of 3.4

percentage points; and an increase in smoking cessation of 16 percentage points. However, the

measure of anti-smoking sentiment is included as a control variable to obtain an unbiased

estimate of the causal impact of taxes on youth smoking. Because the measure may be

econometrically endogenous, we have not necessarily identified the causal effect of anti-smoking

sentiment on smoking behavior.



                                                  23
       The Appendix reports additional empirical results that explore the nature of the state-level

differences captured by the measure of anti-smoking sentiment.      We merged state-level

measures of school spending and social capital with our NELS data. At the individual-level

schooling is strongly associated with smoking (Kenkel, Lillard and Mathios 2006), and state

school spending might tend to capture general state-level attitudes toward public policy.

Reasoning along somewhat similar lines, Brown et al (2006) explore the influence of a

community’s social capital on smoking. Appendix Table A1 presents the results from probit

models of smoking behaviors that include these new measures as additional explanatory

variables. The estimated coefficients on the new measures are always statistically insignificant

and do not provide any evidence that school spending or social capital are strongly related to

youth smoking participation, initiation, or cessation. Moreover, the estimated coefficients on the

measure of anti-smoking sentiment are robust to the inclusion of each of the new measures.

Appendix Table A2 presents the simple correlations between these state-level variables. The

measure of anti-smoking sentiment is most strongly correlated with the cigarette tax and is

virtually uncorrelated with school spending. The measure of anti-smoking sentiment has a

non-trivial correlation (0.33) with the social capital index, suggesting that these two variables

share common variation. However, the results of the probit models in Appendix Table A1 show

that only the independent variation in the anti-smoking sentiment measure is associated with the

youth smoking behaviors. The Appendix results thus tend to support the interpretation that the

measure of anti-smoking sentiment indeed captures state-level attitudes specific to smoking.




                                                 24
Smoking Initiation and Cessation by Mover/ Stayer Status

       Table 3 presents results from our second identification strategy, where we estimate

separate models for respondents who stayed in their 1992 state of residence versus those

respondents who moved to a different state between 1992 and 2000. Recall, the identification

strategy is based on the argument that state movers face current taxes that are uncorrelated with

the taxes and anti-smoking sentiment they faced in adolescence. Thus, models estimated over the

sample of state movers should yield less biased estimates of the causal impact of current taxes on

smoking behavior. The results for the tax variable are presented in Table 3; the complete results

are available upon request.

       For initiation we find that stayers appear to be more tax-responsive than movers. We

interpret this pattern as evidence of bias in the models estimated over the sample of stayers. The

bias in the sample of stayers stems from the fact that for stayers the 2000 tax tends to be highly

correlated with the anti-smoking sentiment respondents faced during their adolescence and young

adulthood.21 Our preferred model for the sample of movers provides no evidence that higher

taxes prevent smoking initiation; in fact, the point estimate actually implies that higher taxes

increase smoking initiation.




        21
          An alternative interpretation is that the difference in the estimated tax-responsiveness of
movers versus stayers is due to the role of peer influences. Our estimates of tax-responsiveness
capture both the direct impact of taxes on the individual’s smoking and the indirect impact
through peer influences (if the taxes change peers’ smoking and this in turn influences the
individual’s smoking). As discussed above in section 4, if movers and stayers face much
different indirect impacts, even if there is no bias from unobserved anti-smoking sentiment the
estimated tax-responsiveness will be different for movers and stayers. For the reasons discussed
in the text and footnote 17 above, we are skeptical that the pattern of results in Table 3 is due to
the role of peer influences.

                                                 25
       In contrast, we find some evidence that higher taxes encourage smoking cessation.

Again, in our preferred specification that uses state movers, the impact of taxes is in the expected

positive direction and implies a relatively large price-elasticity of cessation of 1.49, although the

coefficient lacks statistical significance perhaps due to a rather small sample size (N=321).

Smoking Cessation by Light/ Heavy Smoking Status

       Finally, Table 4 presents estimates from exploratory models of smoking cessation that

distinguish between two different levels of 1992 smoking. Table 4 again presents only the results

for the tax variable; the complete results are available upon request. The first model is estimated

using the sub-sample of 1,267 “light” smokers, defined as those individuals who smoked between

one and ten cigarettes per day in 1992. The second model is estimated for the sub-sample of 680

“heavy” smokers who reported smoking more than ten cigarettes per day in 1992. Each model is

estimated with and without our state anti-smoking sentiment measure. (We do not use our

second identification strategy that distinguishes movers from stayers due to small cells when

defined over both light/ heavy smoking and mover/stayer status.) Not surprisingly, 1992 light

smokers were much more likely to quit than were 1992 heavy smokers (39 percent versus 24

percent). The estimates also suggest that an increase in cigarette taxes has a larger marginal

effect on the probability of smoking cessation among light smokers than among heavy smokers.22

        22
          In the preferred specification that controls for anti-smoking sentiment, the larger
marginal effect translates into a smaller price elasticity of cessation: gQ = 0.62 for light smokers
versus gQ = 0.71 for heavy smokers. This is due to the substantially higher rate of cessation
among light smokers. While the marginal effect of taxes on light smokers’ cessation is larger in
absolute terms, it is smaller relative to their average rate of cessation. The marginal effects in
Table 4 are calculated at the averages of the other explanatory variables for each sub-sample
(light smokers and heavy smokers). Consequently, the marginal effects are evaluated at different
points of the probability function. The marginal effects calculated at the same point of the
probability function (at the averages of the explanatory variables for the full sample) are very
similar to those reported in Table 4.

                                                 26
However, in our preferred specification that controls for state anti-smoking sentiment, the results

lack statistical significance. In larger samples or in older samples that include more quitters, the

results in Table 4 provide preliminary evidence that it may be important for cessation models to

make distinctions between levels of past smoking.

5. Conclusions

       In this paper, we extend the standard approach to estimating individual cigarette demand

by decomposing smoking participation into smoking initiation and cessation. The estimated

models for a sample of young adults show that the distinction between smoking initiation and

cessation is empirically useful. Our results have particular policy relevance to the conventional

wisdom that youth smoking is more tax- or price-responsive than adult smoking.23 Our two

different identification strategies show the same pattern: we find no evidence that taxes

discourage smoking initiation but some evidence that taxes encourage smoking cessation.

Looking at our results as a whole, we suggest that conventional wisdom may have it exactly

backwards: adult smoking behavior may be more, not less, tax- or price-responsive than

adolescent smoking.

       As a broad generalization, what is special about adolescent smoking is smoking initiation.

More precisely, as we show above the price elasticity of smoking initiation tends to drive the

price elasticity of youth smoking participation; the price elasticity of smoking cessation plays a

        23
          For example, the 2000 Surgeon General’s Report concludes that: “The price of tobacco
products has an important influence on the demand for tobacco products, particularly among
young people.” (USDHHS 2000, p. 359, emphasis added). Similarly, a World Health
Organization Report concludes that: “Price increases on tobacco products are one of the most
effective means of reducing cigarette smoking. Studies show that a price increase of 10% results
in a 2.5% – 5% smoking reduction in the short run and possibly up to 10% in the long run, if
prices are increased to keep pace with inflation. Young people may reduce their smoking at two
to three times the rate of older people.” Gilbert and Cornuz (2003, emphasis added).

                                                 27
more important role in the price elasticity of adult smoking participation. Our results contribute

to a series of studies that use longitudinal data and find evidence that higher prices increase

cessation but have little or no impact on smoking initiation in the U.S. (Douglas 1998, Douglas

and Hariharan 1994, DeCicca, Kenkel and Mathios 2002), Britain (Forster and Jones 2001), and

Spain (Nicolas 2002).




                                                 28
APPENDIX

Specification of the Latent Utility Gains

Text equations (1) and (2) define the utility gains yI* and yQ* that are the unobserved continuous
latent variables that underlie the observed discrete outcomes of smoking initiation and cessation.
Assuming a simple functional form for utility implies the empirical model given by equations (4)
and (5). Suppose utility from the non-addictive good G and the addictive good S is given by:

               u = aG + bSt + c St St-1 + dG St-1                                           (A1)

The linear utility function in (A1) is similar to the quadratic utility function assumed in the
empirical rational addiction model of Becker, Grossman, and Murphy (1994). (Extending the
function to include the quadratic terms for smoking is not interesting given that in our model St is
dichotomous. However, below we sketch how the model can be extended to distinguish discrete
levels of past smoking.) In (A1), the parameter c > 0 captures adjacent inter-temporal
complementarity where the marginal utility from St depends upon prior smoking : Mu/MSt = b +
c St-1. The marginal utility of G may also depend upon prior smoking, so Mu/MG = a + d St-1, but
there are not strong a priori reasons to sign the parameter d.

Let W = income and Pt = current price of cigarettes, so the budget constraint is W = G + Pt S,
which implies G = W - PtS. Substituting this in yields:

       yI*     = u(Gt, St =1, St-1 = 0) - u(Gt, St =0, St-1 = 0)

               = aW - a Pt + b - aW

               = -a Pt + b                                                                  (A2)

That is, when deciding to start a non-smoker compares the loss in utility from foregone
consumption of G, given by -aPt , to the gain in utility from smoking, given by b.

Similarly,

       yQ*     = u(Gt, St =0, St-1 = 1) - u(Gt, St =1, St-1 = 1)

               = aW - [aW - aPt + b + c + dW - d Pt]

               = (a + d) Pt - (b + c) - dW                                                  (A3)

When deciding to quit, the smoker compares the possible gain in utility from increasing
consumption of G, given by (a + d) Pt , to the loss in utility from giving up smoking, given by -
(b+c). The sign of the term dW is ambiguous and depends on whether prior smoking increases or
decreases utility from current period goods consumption. Note that the smoker’s loss in utility

                                                    29
from giving up smoking is greater than the non-smoker’s gain from starting, because of addiction
(the c term). The c term can also be thought of as an adjustment cost to quitting (Suranovic 1999,
Jones 1999). Even this simple functional form for the utility function implies that yI* …- yQ*.
For example, the marginal effect of price on starting is given by -a, while the marginal effect of
price on quitting is given by (a+d). Note that if smoking were not addictive, c = d = 0, so (A3)
would reduce to (A2). This illustrates for the specific utility function the point made more
generally in section 3, that for non-addictive smoking yI* = yQ*

The expressions for yI* and yQ* imply the empirical initiation and cessation equations presented
in text equations (4) and (5), where differences in tastes for smoking (b, c, and dW) are captured
by the anti-smoking sentiment the individual faces (F), individual socioeconomic characteristics
(X), and the random error term.

The model can be extended to make additional distinctions between smoking histories by
considering multiple smoking-status-dependent utility functions and smoking status transitions.
To illustrate, consider a model of smoking cessation that distinguishes between light smoking
(LS) and heavy smoking (HS). For a past period light smoker (LSt-1 = 1), let utility from the non-
addictive good and light smoking be given by:

       u’ = a G + b’ LSt + c’ LSt LSt-1 + d’ G LSt-1 = a G + b’ LSt + c’ LSt + d’ G        (A4)

For a past period heavy smoker (HSt-1 =1), let utility from the non-addictive good and heavy
smoking be given by:

       u” = a G + b” HSt + c” HSt HSt-1 + d” G HSt-1 = a G + b” HSt + c” HSt + d” G        (A5)

The decision to quit light smoking depends on the utility gain from quitting light smoking
compared to continuing light smoking and will involve the parameters a, b’, c’ and d’. Similarly,
the decision to quit heavy smoking will involve the parameters a, b”, c”, and d”. This extension
allows the strength of addiction or adjacent complementarity to vary with the level of past
smoking. The natural assumption is that c” > c’, so past heavy smoking has a stronger impact on
the marginal utility of current heavy smoking than is true for past light smoking’s impact on the
marginal utility of current light smoking.

The extension also involves additional smoking status transitions, such as the transition from
light smoking to heavy smoking and vice versa. Because the purpose of this Appendix is to
illustrate how the approach can be extended, we do not specify the complete set of smoking-
status dependent utility functions and smoking status transitions.

The Reservation Price Approach

Colman, Grossman and Joyce [CGJ] (2002, 2003) argue that a woman’s smoking participation
decision is made with reference to a reservation price. CGJ (2002) use a quadratic utility
function that does not involve addiction. From this they derive their equation (2), which states

                                                30
that a woman’s smoking participation before pregnancy depends on whether her reservation price
exceeds the monetary price of a pack of cigarettes Tb:

                ("C/:) - ($b/:) > Tb
                                                                                            (A6)
]               - : Tb + "C - $ b> 0

To compare the CGJ condition to our approach, recall that text equation (3) states that someone
decides to participate in smoking by examining whether yS* > 0. Substituting in the linear utility
function yields a condition describing the smoking participation decision that can easily be
compared to the CGJ approach:

                yS*     = u(Gt, St =1, St-1) - u(Gt, St =0, St-1)

                        = aW - a Pt + b + c St-1 + d (W- Pt ) St-1 - aW                     (A7)

                        = -(a + d St-1 ) Pt + b + c St-1 + d W St-1 > 0

We can now compare the CGJ approach and our approach by comparing (A6) and (A7) term by
term. In CGJ : is the marginal utility of wealth. In our model it corresponds to the first term in
the last line of (A7): : = a for past-period non-smokers and : = a + d for past-period smokers.
So the first term in both (A6) and (A7) is the marginal utility of wealth multiplied by the price of
cigarettes (Tb or Pt ).

In CGJ the marginal utility of smoking is given by "C. The marginal utility of smoking in our
model is given by the next terms in the last line of (A7): "C = b for past-period non-smokers and
"C = b + c for past-period smokers. In CGJ, $ b is a coefficient to capture differences in the
utility from smoking based on pregnancy status, which is not a feature of our model.

The CGJ condition does not contain terms involving past smoking, because they have assumed
that smoking is not addictive so past smoking does not affect the current marginal utility of
wealth or smoking.

Therefore, after making appropriate adjustments for differences in modeling assumptions, our
latent variable approach and the CGJ reservation price approach yield comparable conditions
describing how smoking decisions are made.

Specification of the Participation Equation

Text equation (8) above shows that the probability of smoking participation at time t depends
upon the probabilities of initiation (I) and cessation (Q). To further simplify the analysis, assume
there are two periods: young adulthood (time t) and youth (time t-1):

Pr{St =1}= (Pr{I t = 1* St-1 = 0})(1 - St-1) + (1 - Pr{Qt =1* St-1 =1}) St-1                (A6)

                                                     31
If for simplicity’s sake we assume that no one starts smoking before adolescence, St-1 = It-1,. and
equation (A1) can be re-written as:

St     =        Pr{I t = 1* St-1 = 0} + Pr{I t-1 = 1* St-2 = 0}

                - Pr{I t = 1* St-1 = 0} Pr{I t-1 = 1* St-2 = 0}

                - Pr{Q t =1* St-1 = 1} Pr{I t-1 = 1* St-2 = 0}                               (A7)

Text equations (6) and (7) show the probabilities of smoking initiation and cessation as functions
of current prices (Pt), other variables (Xt), an environmental factor (F) such as prevailing anti-
smoking sentiment that is assumed to be fixed over time, and random terms e. To further
simplify the analysis, we allow the influence of the X variables to be captured in the constant
term, and we use the linear probability model where the function G ( ) in text equations (6) and
(7) is the identity function. Under these assumptions (A7) simplifies to:

=      ["0 + "1 Pt + "2 F] + ["0 + "1 Pt-1 + "2 F]
       - ["0 + "1 Pt + "2 F ] ["0 + "1 Pt-1 + "2 F]
       - [$0 + $1 Pt + $2 F] ["0 + "1 Pt-1 + "2 F]

=      [2"0 - "02 - $0 "0 ] + ["1 - "0 "1 - $1 "0 ] Pt + [ "1 - "0 "1 - $0 "1 ] Pt-1
       + [-"12 - $1 "1 ] Pt Pt-1 + [2"2 - 2"0 "2 - 2$0 "2 ] F + [-"22 - $2 "2 ] F2
       + [ -"1 "2 - $1 "2] F Pt + [ -"2 "1 - $2 "1] F Pt-1

=      (0 + (1 Pt + (2 Pt-1 + (3 Pt Pt-1 + (4 F + (5 F2 + (6 F Pt + (7F Pt-1                 (A8)

Equation (A8) is a specific form of text equation (12), a reduced form smoking participation
equation. Equation (A8) has seven estimable parameters ((0 - (7) which are functions of the six
parameters of the equations for smoking initiation ("0 , "1, "2) and cessation ($0 ,$1, $2). Thus in
this special case it is possible to recover the separate effects of current price on initiation and
cessation from this specification of the smoking participation equation.




                                                      32
References

Auld, Christopher (2005). “Causal Effect of Early Initiation on Adolescent Smoking Patterns.”
Canadian Journal of Economics 38(3): 709-734.

Becker, Gary S. and Kevin M. Murphy (1988). “A Theory of Rational Addiction.” Journal of
Political Economy 96 (4): 675-700.

Becker, Gary S., Michael Grossman and Kevin M. Murphy (1994). "An Empirical Analysis of
Cigarette Addiction," American Economic Review 84 (3): 396-418.

Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan (2004). “How Much Should We
Trust Differences-in-Differences Estimates?” Quarterly Journal of Economics (February): 249-
275.

Brown, Timothy T., Richard M. Scheffler, Sukyoung Seo, and Mary Reed (2006). “The
empirical relationship between community social capital and the demand for cigarettes.” Health
Economics 15 (11): 1159-1172.

Carpenter, Christopher and Cook, Philip J. (2008). “Cigarette taxes and youth smoking: New
evidence from national, state and local Youth Risk Behavior Studies.” Journal of Health
Economics 27 (2): 287-299.

Centers for Disease Control [CDC] (1998). “Responses to Increase in Cigarette Prices by
Race/Ethnicity, Income, and Age Groups -- United States, 1976 - 1993,” Morbidity and Mortality
Weekly Report 47 (29): 605 - 609.

Chaloupka, Frank J. and Kenneth Warner (2000). "The Economics of Smoking." Handbook of
Health Economics, Joseph Newhouse and Anthony Culyer, Editors. (North-Holland)

Clark and Loheac (2007). “‘It wasn’t me, it was them’ Social influences on risky behavior by
adolescents.” Journal of Health Economics 26 (4): 763-784.

Colman, Greg, Michael Grossman, and Ted Joyce (2003). “The Effect of Cigarette Excise Taxes
on Smoking Before, During, and After Pregnancy.” Journal of Health Economics. Earlier
circulated as NBER Working Paper 9245 (2002).

Congressional Budget Office [CBO] (1998). "The Proposed Tobacco Settlement: Issues from a
Federal Perspective." CBO Paper, April.

Contoyannis, P and Jones, A (2001). "Addiction, and Adjustment Costs: An Empirical
Implementation", in The Economic Analysis of Substance Use and Abuse, M Grossman, C R
Hsieh (eds.), Edward Elgar, 2001, pp. 61-83.



                                              33
DeCicca, P, Kenkel DS, and Mathios, AD (2002). Putting out the fires: Will higher taxes reduce
the onset of youth smoking? Journal of Political Economy 110 (1): 144-169.

DeCicca P, Kenkel DS, and Mathios AD (2005). “The Fires Aren’t Out Yet: Cigarette Taxes and
Young Adult Smoking.” In: Advances in Health Economics and Health Services Research. (B.
Lindgren and M. Grossman, eds.), Volume 16, 301-320.

DeCicca, P, Kenkel, DS, Mathios, AD, Shin, Y-J, and Lim, J-Y (2008). “Youth smoking, taxes,
and anti-smoking sentiment.” Health Economics 17 (6): 733-749.

Douglas, S (1998). “The Duration of the Smoking Habit.” Economic Inquiry 36 (1):49-64.

Douglas, S and Hariharan, G (1994). “The Hazard of Starting Smoking: Estimates from a Split
Population Duration Model.” Journal of Health Economics 18: 429-441.

European Commission (2004). Tobacco or Health in the European Union -- Past, Present, and
Future. Luxembourg: Office for Official Publications of the European Commission.

Evans, William N., Matthew C. Farrelly, and Edward Montgomery (1999). “Do Workplace
Smoking Bans Reduce Smoking?” American Economic Review 89: 728-747.

Falba, Tracy, Miria Jofre-Bonet, Susan Busch, Noelia Duchovny, and Jody Sindelar (2003).
“Reduction of Quantity Smoked Predicts Future Cessation among Older Smokers.” Addiction 99
(1): 93-102

Forster, M and Jones A. (2001). “The Role of Tobacco Taxes in Starting and Quitting Smoking:
Duration Analysis of British Data.” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society (Series A) 164: 517-
547.

Gavira, Alejandro and Raphael, Steven (2001). “School-based peer effects and juvenile
behavior.” Review of Economics and Statistics 83(2): 257-268.

General Accounting Office [GAO] (1989). Teen Smoking: Higher Excise Tax Should
Significantly Reduce the Number of Smokers. A report to the Honorable Michael A. Andrew,
House of Representatives, GAO/HRD 89-119, Rockville, MD.

Gilbert, Allison, and Jacques Cornuz (2003). World Health Organization, Health Evidence
Network Synthesis Report.

Gilleskie, Donna and K. Strumpf (2005). “The Behavioral Dynamics of Youth Smoking.”
Journal of Human Resources 40 (4): 822-866.




                                               34
Grossman, Michael (2005). “Individual Behaviors and Substance Use: The Role of Price.” In:
Advances in Health Economics and Health Services Research. (B. Lindgren and M. Grossman,
eds.), Volume 16, pp. 15-40.

Gruber, Jonathan and Botond Kosegi (2000). “Is Addiction ‘Rational’? Theory and Evidence.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 116 (4): 1261-1303.

Gruber, Jonathan and Jonathan Zinman (2001). “Youth Smoking in the U.S.: Evidence and
Implications.” In Jonathan Gruber, editor, Risky Behavior Among Youth: An Economic Analysis.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 69-120

Hunter, William J. and Michael A. Nelson (1992). “The Political Economy of State Tobacco
Taxation.” Public Finance/ Finances Publiques 47(2): 214-228.

Jones, Andrew M. (1989). “A Double-Hurdle Model of Cigarette Consumption.” Journal of
Applied Econometrics 4: 23-39.

Jones, Andrew M. (1999). Adjustment costs, withdrawal effects, and cigarette addiction.
Journal of Health Economics 18 (1): 125-137.

Kan, Kamhon and Wei-Der Tsai (2001). “Rational Cessation and Re-initiation of Cigarette
Smoking: Evidence from Taiwan.” In, Michael Grossman and Chee-Ruey Hsieh editors,
Economic Analysis of Substance Use and Abuse (Edward Elgar).

Kenkel, Donald S., Dean Lillard, and Alan D. Mathios (2006). “The role of high school
completion and GED receipt in smoking and obesity.” Journal of Labor Economics 24 (3): 635-
660.

Labeaga, Jose M. (1999). “A Double-Hurdle Rational Addiction Model with Heterogeneity:
Estimating the Demand for Tobacco.” Journal of Econometrics 93: 49-72.

Lantz, Paula M. (2003). “Smoking on the Rise Among Young Adults: Implications for Research
and Policy.” Tobacco Control 12 (Supplement I): i60-i70.

Levy, Douglas E. and Ellen Meara (2006). “The Effect of the 1998 Master Settlement
Agreement on Prenatal Smoking. Journal of Health Economics 25 (2): 276-294.

Lewit, Eugene M., Douglas Coate, and Michael Grossman (1981). “The Effects of Government
Regulation on Teenage Smoking.” Journal of Law and Economics 24: 545-570.

Nicolas, Angel Lopez (2002). “How Important Are Tobacco Prices in the Propensity to Start and
Quit Smoking? An Analysis of Smoking Histories from the Spanish National Health Survey.”
Health Economics 11: 521-535.



                                              35
Orzechowski and Walker (2005). The Tax Burden on Tobacco: Historical Compilation,
Orzechowski and Walker, Arlington, VA.

Patrick DL, Cheadle A, Thompson DC, Diehr P, Koepsell T, Kinne S 1994. The validity of self-
reported smoking: A review and meta-analysis. American Journal of Public Health 84, no. 7:
1086-1093.

Suranovic, SM, Goldfard RS, and Leonard TC (1999). An economic theory of cigarette
addiction. Journal of Health Economics 18 (1): 1-29.

Treasury Department (1998). “The Economic Costs of Smoking in the U.S. and the Benefits of
Comprehensive Tobacco Legislation.”

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services [USDHHS] (2000). Reducing Tobacco Use: A
Report of the Surgeon General. . Atlanta, Georgia: U.S. Department of Health and Human
Service, Public Health Service, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for
Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, Office on Smoking and Health.

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services [USDHHS] (2004). Data 2010: The Healthy
People 2010 Database. Division of Health Promotion Statistics, National Center for Health
Statistics. Website: http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/about/otheract/hpdata2010/aboutdata2010.htm.
Accessed February 2004.

Warner, Kenneth E. 1978. Possible increases in the underreporting of cigarette consumption.
Journal of the American Statistical Association 73, no. 362: 314 - 318.

Warner, Kenneth E. (1982) “Cigarette Excise Taxation and Interstate Smuggling: An
Assessment of Recent Activity.” National Tax Journal 35: 483-490.

Wasserman, J, Manning, WG, Newhouse, JP and Winkler, JD (1991). The effects of excise taxes
and regulations on cigarette smoking. Journal of Health Economics 10: 43-64.

Wooldridge, Jeffrey M. (2002a). “Inverse Probability Weighted M-Estimators for Sample
Selection, Attrition, and Stratification.” Centre for Microdata Methods and Practice working
paper CWP 11/02.

Wooldridge, Jeffrey M. (2002b). Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data.
Cambridge: The MIT Press.

Yen, Steven T. and Andrew M. Jones (1996). “Individual Cigarette Consumption and Addiction:
A Flexible Limited Dependent Variable Approach.” Health Economics 5 (2): 105-117.




                                               36
Table 1. Sample means and standard deviations, by state moving status.
                                   Full sample            Stayers                               Movers
   Daily smoker                       0.226                0.237                                0.184
                                     -0.418               -0.425                                -0.387

    State cigarette tax in 1992                27.247                   27.231                  27.306
                                                -11.64                  -11.72                   -11.32

    State cigarette tax in 2000                 47.543                  47.785                  46.647
                                                -31.59                  -31.48                  -31.97

    Male                                         0.469                   0.464                   0.489
                                                -0.499                  -0.499                    -0.5

    Black                                        0.091                   0.094                   0.077
                                                -0.287                  -0.292                   -0.266

    Hispanic                                     0.126                   0.143                   0.063
                                                -0.331                  -0.349                  (0.243)

    Other race                                   0.083                   0.078                   0.101
                                                (0.275)                 -0.268                   -0.301

    Born in 1972                                0.046                   0.052                    0.025
                                                -0.207                  -0.219                   -0.155

    Born in 1973                                0.286                    0.294                   0.255
                                                -0.447                   -0.45                   -0.433

    Born in 1975                                0.011                   0.009                    0.017
                                                -0.102                  -0.093                   -0.13

    Test score                                  51.715                  50.542                   56.06
                                               -10.108                  -9.797                  -10.059

    Northeast                                    0.176                   0.178                   0.166
                                                -0.381                  -0.383                   -0.372

    Midwest                                      0.254                   0.27                    0.192
                                                -0.435                  -0.444                   -0.394

    South                                       0.353                   0.345                    0.385
                                                -0.478                  -0.477                   -0.487

    N                                           10706                    8430                    2276
Notes: Omitted categories are female, white, born in 1974, western region. Stayers are individuals who lived in same
state in 1992 and 2000; movers are those who changed states between these years. Summary statistics in the second



                                                          37
column include only non-switchers and those in the third column include only switchers. Samples correspond to
those used to generate model estimates




                                                       38
Table 2. Probit models of smoking participation, initiation, and cessation
                                          Participation                            Initiation                   Cessation
   Cigarette tax                  -0.00107              0.00029            -0.00031           0.00016    0.00244          0.00124
                                 [-0.00031]            [0.00084]          [-0.00006]        [0.00003]   [0.00088]       [0.00045]
                                    -1.79                 -0.51              -0.52             -0.21      -1.99            -0.97

    Anti-smoking sentiment             ----             -0.48353              ----         -0.16824        ----         0.43223
                                                       [-0.14139]                         [-0.03453]                   [0.15703]
                                                          -3.54                              -0.96                       -1.54

    Male                             0.13148            0.13241            0.20195          0.2025       -0.04098       -0.04105
                                    [0.03856]          [0.03883]          [0.04180]        [0.04191]    [-0.01488]     [-0.01491]
                                      -4.32               -4.4              -7.54            -7.57         -0.68          -0.68

    Black                           -0.53569            -0.53176          -0.13886          -0.1385       0.1669        0.16052
                                   [-0.15676]          [-0.15549]        [-0.02832]       [-0.02842]    [0.06066]      [0.05832]
                                     -10.42              -10.51             -2.73            -2.73        -0.97          -0.93

    Hispanic                        -0.39265            -0.37533          -0.13796         -0.13218      0.27464        0.26094
                                   [-0.11490]          [-0.10975]        [-0.02832]       [-0.02713]    [0.09980]      [0.09480]
                                      -7.76               -7.44              -3.2            -3.05         -2.1          -1.99

    Other race                      -0.24865            -0.24477          -0.11813         -0.11685      -0.10898       -0.10964
                                   [-0.07276]          [-0.07157]        [-0.02425]       [-0.02398]    [-0.03960]     [-0.03983]
                                      -5.53               -5.34             -1.94            -1.92         -0.71          -0.71

    Birth year 1972                  0.13318            0.13995           -0.01247         -0.00955      -0.13316       -0.13611
                                    [0.03897]          [0.04092]         [-0.00256]       [-0.00196]    [-0.04839]     [-0.04945]
                                      -2.13              -2.29              -0.17            -0.13         -1.28          -1.33

    Birth year 1973                   0.1075            0.11256            0.09291          0.09503      -0.03969       -0.04042
                                    [0.03145]          [0.03291]          [0.01907]        [0.01950]    [-0.01442]     [-0.01469]
                                       -2.93             -3.03              -2.26            -2.27         -0.62          -0.63


                                                                         39
    Birth year 1975                       -0.00938               -0.0008              0.09012             0.09373             -0.3556            -0.35538
                                         [-0.00274]            [-0.00023]            [0.01850]           [0.01923]          [-0.12922]          [-0.12911]
                                            -0.08                 -0.01                 -0.7               -0.73               -0.96               -0.95

    Test score                            -0.02206              -0.02179              -0.01058            -0.01051            0.01909             0.01877
                                         [-0.00645]            [-0.00637]            [-0.00217]          [-0.00216]          [0.00694]           [0.00668]
                                            -9.64                 -9.51                 -3.84               -3.81              -6.64               -6.59

    Northeast                             0.23523                0.13892              0.19569             0.16131            -0.24746             -0.1659
                                         [0.07280]              [0.04203]            [0.04316]           [0.03513]          [-0.08649]          [-0.05878]
                                           -5.18                  -2.94                -4.41                -2.8               -2.38               -1.52

    Midwest                               0.23937                0.12468              0.23957             0.19926            -0.18407             -0.0827
                                         [0.07317]              [0.03733]            [0.05272]           [0.04334]          [-0.06573]          [-0.02982]
                                           -5.13                  -2.32                -4.82               -2.93               -1.57               -0.62

    South                                 0.08347                0.00044              0.07769             0.04946            -0.08863            -0.01067
                                         [0.02466]              [0.00013]            [0.01616]           [0.01023]           [-0.0320]           [-0.0039]
                                           -1.51                  -0.01                -1.37               -0.86               -0.75               -0.08
    log-likelihood                      -5476.3017              -5469.458           -3301.0437          -3300.5472          -1213.3107          -1212.0467
    Implied price elasticity               -0.49                   0.13                -0.17                0.08                0.93                0.47

    N                                      10706                  10706                  8759               8759                1947               1947
Notes: Marginal effects are in brackets [ ], absolute values of t-ratios are in parenthesis ( ). Price elasticities are calculated by multiplying tax elasticities by the
ratio of average price to average tax. In 2000, this ratio was 7.445. Standard errors adjusted for non-independence of observations within states.




                                                                                    40
Table 3 Smoking initiation and cessation models, by state mover/stayer status.
                                           Initiation models                                                   Cessation models
                         Full sample            Stayers              Movers                  Full sample            Stayers                Movers

 Cigarette tax             -0.000306             -0.001255              0.002931              0.002435              0.002108             0.004186
                          [-0.000063]           [-0.000265]            [0.000534]            [0.000885]            [0.000759]            [0.00158]
                              -0.52                 -2.02                 -2.03                 -1.99                 -1.51                -1.56

 Dependent mean              0.129                 0.134                 0.112                  0.336                 0.328                 0.377

 Implied elasticity           -0.17                 -0.7                    1.69                  0.93                  0.82                  1.49
 N                            8759                 6,804                   1,955                 1,947                 1,626                  321
Notes: Marginal effects are in brackets and absolute values of t-ratios are in parenthesis ( ). Initiation models are probit regressions of 2000
smoking status for those who were not daily smokers in 1992, when most individuals were about seventeen years old. Cessation models are also
probit regressions, but of 2000 non-smoking status for those who reported being daily smokers in 1992. All models included the following
additional explanatory variables: male, black, hispanic, other race, birth year 1972, birth year 1973, birth year 1975, test score, northeast, midwest,
and south. Price elasticities are calculated by multiplying tax elasticities by the ratio of average price to average tax. In 2000, this ratio was 7.445.
Standard errors adjusted for non-independence of observations within states.




                                                                           41
Table 4 Smoking Cessation models, by level of 1992 smoking
                                           Light Smokers in 1992                                    Heavy Smokers in 1992

 Cigarette tax                           0.00314                    0.00177                   0.00167                     0.00155
                                        [0.00120]                  [0.00068]                 [0.00051]                   [0.00048]
                                          -2.89                      -1.29                     -0.61                       -0.52
 Includes measure of anti-                  No                        Yes                        No                         Yes
 smoking sentiment?

 Dependent mean                            0.388                     0.388                      0.24                        0.24

 Implied elasticity                          1.09                        0.62                       0.75                        0.71
 N                                          1267                         1267                       680                         680
Notes: Marginal effects are in brackets and absolute values of t-ratios are in parenthesis ( ). All models included the following additional
explanatory variables: male, black, hispanic, other race, birth year 1972, birth year 1973, birth year 1975, test score, northeast, midwest, and south.
Price elasticities are calculated by multiplying tax elasticities by the ratio of average price to average tax. In 2000, this ratio was 7.445. Standard
errors adjusted for non-independence of observations within states.




                                                                          42
Appendix Table A1. Estimates from Table 2 models including other state-level covariates.
                                   -1           -2         -3          -4          -5
 A. Participation Models

 Cigarette tax                      0        -0.002         0        -0.001         0
                                  -0.51       -2.17       -0.34       -1.78       -0.91

 Anti-smoking sentiment         -0.4835         ----     -0.4808       ----      -0.546
                                 -3.54                    -3.23                   -3.53


 School spending                  ----       0.0219       0.001        ----        ----
                                              -1.27       -0.06


 Social capital index             ----          ----       ----      -0.0469     0.0191
                                                                      -1.34       -0.53


 N                               10706       10,706      10706       10586       10586

 B. Initiation Models

 Cigarette tax                      0           0           0           0           0
                                  -0.21       -1.22       -0.52       -0.47       -0.13


 Anti-smoking sentiment         -0.1682         ----     -0.1056       ----      -0.1332
                                 -0.96                    -0.57                   -0.62


 School spending                  ----       0.0269      0.0026        ----        ----
                                              -1.36       -0.26


 Social capital index             ----          ----       ----      -0.0439     -0.028
                                                                      -1.11       -0.58


 N                                8759        8759        8759        8656        8656

 C. Cessation Models

 Cigarette tax                   0.0012      0.0022      0.0014      0.0023         0
                                  -0.97       -1.39       -1.07       -1.88       -0.75

                                           43
 Anti-smoking sentiment            0.4322           ----      0.5283         ----       0.4806
                                    -1.54                      -1.72                     -1.67


 School spending                     ----        0.0108       0.0348         ----        ----
                                                  -0.3         -0.92


 Social capital index                ----           ----        ----       0.0597       0.004
                                                                            -0.67       -0.93

 N                                    1947         1947         1947          1930          1930
Notes: Column 1 estimates are taken from the even-numbered columns of Table 2. “School
spending” represents state-level per pupil spending on elementary and secondary schools in 2000
and is measured in 1000s of dollars (Source: Estimates of School Statistics, via the Statistical
Abstract of the United States). “Social Capital Index” represents Robert Putnam’s
Comprehensive Social Capital Index (Source: www.bowlingalone.com/StateMeasures.xls).
Sample sizes are slightly smaller in models that include the Social Capital Index since it is not
available for all states.




                                               44
Appendix Table A2. Simple correlations between state-level variables.
                               Cigarette      Anti-Smoking         School         Social Capital
                                 Tax           Sentiment          Spending            Index
 Cigarette Tax                     1                0.64            0.55              0.28
 Anti-Smoking Sentiment           0.64               1              -0.02             0.33
 School Spending                  0.55              -0.02             1               0.18
 Social Capital Index               0.28            0.33               0.18               1
Notes: “School spending” represents state-level per pupil spending on elementary and secondary
schools in 2000 and is measured in 1000s of dollars (Source: Estimates of School Statistics, via
the Statistical Abstract of the United States). “Social Capital Index” represents Robert Putnam’s
Comprehensive Social Capital Index (Source: www.bowlingalone.com/StateMeasures.xls).




                                               45
