                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        AN ANATOMY OF CREDIT BOOMS:
              EVIDENCE FROM MACRO AGGREGATES AND MICRO DATA

                                        Enrique G. Mendoza
                                         Marco E. Terrones

                                        Working Paper 14049
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14049


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2008




We thank participants at the 2007 AEA Meetings in Chicago and the April 2008 IMF conference on
"Financial Cycles, Liquidity and Securitization" for comments and suggestions. We also thank Ricardo
Caballero, Charles Calomiris, Stijn Claessens, Jose De Gregorio, Giovanni Dell'Ariccia, Simon Gilchrist,
Dale Henderson, Ayhan Kose, and Jonathan Ostry for their comments, and Dio Kaltis for high-quality
research assistance. This paper represents only the authors' views and not those of the International
Monetary Fund, its Executive Board, its Management, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Enrique G. Mendoza and Marco E. Terrones. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
An Anatomy Of Credit Booms: Evidence From Macro Aggregates And Micro Data
Enrique G. Mendoza and Marco E. Terrones
NBER Working Paper No. 14049
May 2008
JEL No. E32,E44,E51,F3,G21

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper proposes a methodology for measuring credit booms and uses it to identify credit booms
in emerging and industrial economies over the past four decades. In addition, we use event study methods
to identify the key empirical regularities of credit booms in macroeconomic aggregates and micro-level
data. Macro data show a systematic relationship between credit booms and economic expansions, rising
asset prices, real appreciations, widening external deficits and managed exchange rates. Micro data
show a strong association between credit booms and firm-level measures of leverage, firm values,
and external financing, and bank-level indicators of banking fragility. Credit booms in industrial and
emerging economies show three major differences: (1) credit booms and the macro and micro fluctuations
associated with them are larger in emerging economies, particularly in the nontradables sector; (2)
not all credit booms end in financial crises, but most emerging markets crises were associated with
credit booms; and (3) credit booms in emerging economies are often preceded by large capital inflows
but not by financial reforms or productivity gains.


Enrique G. Mendoza
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
mendozae@econ.umd.edu

Marco E. Terrones
Research Department
International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, N.W.
Washington DC 20431
mterrones@imf.org
1.      Introduction

     Episodes in which credit to the private sector rises significantly above its long-run

trend (i.e. “credit booms”) are often associated with periods of economic turbulence. To

date, however, efforts at developing methodologies for identifying credit booms and

characterizing the economic fluctuations that accompany them have produced mixed

results. In addition, little is known about the association between economy-wide credit

booms and the financial conditions of individual firms and banks, and about whether the

characteristics of credit booms differ across industrial and emerging economies.

     In this paper, we propose a “thresholds method” for identifying credit booms, and

implement it to study the microeconomic and macroeconomic characteristics of credit

booms in industrial and emerging economies. This method splits real credit per capita in

each country into its cyclical and trend components, and identifies a credit boom as an

episode in which credit exceeds its long-run trend by more than a given “boom”

threshold, with the duration of the boom set by “starting” and “ending” thresholds. A key

feature of this method is that boom and duration thresholds are proportional to each

country’s standard deviation of credit over the business cycle. Hence, credit booms

reflect country-specific “unusually large” cyclical credit expansions.

     We apply our method to data for 48 countries over the 1960-2006 period and find 27

credit booms in industrial countries and 22 in emerging economies. We then take the

peak dates of these booms and construct seven-year event windows around them to

examine the dynamics of macro aggregates and firm- and bank-level financial indicators

during credit booms. The results show that credit booms are associated with periods of

economic expansion, rising equity and housing prices, real appreciation and widening




                                               1
external deficits in the build-up phase of the booms, followed by the opposite dynamics

in the downswing. Credit booms also feature similar pro-cyclical movements in firm-

level indicators of leverage, firm values, and use of external financing, and in bank-level

indicators of credit issuance and asset returns. The banks’ ratios of capital adequacy and

non-performing loans show the opposite pattern (rising in the upswing and falling in the

aftermath). Moreover, credit booms tend to be synchronized internationally and centered

on “big events” like the 1980s debt crisis, the 1992 ERM crisis, and the 1990s Sudden

Stops in emerging economies. In addition, splitting our sample into financial crisis vs.

non-crisis cases, we find that booms in the crisis group were larger.

   Credit booms in industrial and emerging economies differ in three key respects: First,

the fluctuations that macro aggregates and micro indicators display during credit booms

are larger, more persistent, and asymmetric in emerging economies, and this pattern is

particularly strong in the nontradables sector. Second, not all credit booms end in crisis,

but many of the recent emerging market crises were associated with credit booms. Third,

the frequency of credit booms in emerging markets is higher when preceded by periods of

large capital inflows but not when preceded by domestic financial reforms or gains in

total factor productivity (TFP), while industrial countries show the opposite pattern

(credit booms are more frequent after periods of high TFP or financial reforms, and less

frequent after large capital inflows). In contrast, credit booms in both industrial and

emerging economies are far more frequent in the presence of fixed or managed exchange

rates, than under floating or dirty floating regimes.

   Our work is related to the empirical literature that identifies booms in macro variables

using threshold methods and event-study techniques. Montiel’s (2000) analysis of




                                              2
consumption booms was one of the first studies in this vein. Gourinchas, Valdes, and

Landerretche (2001), henceforth GVL, introduced threshold methods to the analysis of

credit booms, followed by several recent studies including Cottarelli, et. al. (2003),

International Monetary Fund (2004), Hilberts, et. al. (2005), and Ottens, et. al. (2005).1

    The majority of these studies measure credit booms using GVL’s method. There are

three important differences between their method and the one we propose in this paper:

(1) we use real credit per capita instead of the credit-output ratio as the measure of credit;

(2) we construct the trend of credit using the Hodrick-Prescott (HP) filter in its standard

form, instead of using an “expanding HP trend” (see Section 2 for details); and (3) we use

thresholds that depend on each country’s cyclical variability of credit, instead of a

threshold common to all countries.2

    These differences have major quantitative implications. An example of both methods

applied to Chilean data shows that the GVL method is not robust to the choice of credit

measure, and that it treats each period’s credit observation as unduly representative of its

trend (because it models the long-run trend of credit as a smoothed, lagged approximation

of the actual data). Moreover, the two methods yield sharply different predictions about

the association between macro variables and credit booms. In particular, we find that

output, consumption and investment rise significantly above trend during the

expansionary phase of credit booms, and fall below trend during the contractionary

phase. In contrast, GVL found weak evidence of cycles in output and absorption

associated with credit booms. We also find a clear association between credit booms and

1
  Other studies examine linkages between credit and macro variables without measuring credit booms (for
example Collyns and Senhadji (2002), Borio, et. al. (2001), and Kraft and Jankov (2005)).
2
  Our study also differs from GVL’s in that we examine credit booms in industrial countries, study
differences in the dynamics of the tradables v. nontradables sectors, and contrast the macro dynamics of
credit booms with evidence from micro-level data.


                                                    3
financial crises, while they found that the likelihood of financial crises does not increase

significantly when credit booms are present.

    Our work is also related to the analysis of the credit transmission channel in twin

banking-currency crises by Tornell and Westermann (2005).3 These authors document

that twin crises are preceded by rising credit-GDP ratios, increases in output of

nontradables relative to tradables, and real appreciations, followed by declines in all of

these variables. In addition, they used the World Bank’s World Business Economic

Survey (WBES) to document asymmetries in the access to credit markets of firms in the

tradables v. non-tradables sectors. We also look at sectoral differences in the evolution of

output dynamics and firm-level financial indicators, but our approach differs in that we

examine these dynamics conditional on credit boom episodes, rather than conditional on

being on a twin-crises event. Also, we use actual balance-sheet and cash-flow-statement

data to measure firm-level financial indicators for all publicly listed corporations, instead

of using the survey data of more limited coverage in the WBES.

    Our frequency analysis of the association of credit booms with capital inflows,

financial reforms, and TFP gains is related to theoretical and empirical studies on the

mechanisms that drive credit booms. These include theories in which excessive credit

expansion is due to herding behavior by banks (Kindleberger (2000)); information

problems that lead to bank-interdependent lending policies (Rajan (1994) and Gorton and

He (2005)), the underestimation of risks (Borio, et. al. (2001)) and the lowering of

lending standards (Dell’Ariccia and Marquez (2006)); the presence of explicit or implicit

government guarantees (Corsetti, et. al. (1999)); or limited commitment on the part of


3
 Tornell and Westermann also study the extent financial market imperfections influences the cycle in the
middle income countries during tranquil times. See also Scheneider and Tornell (2004).


                                                    4
borrowers (Lorenzoni (2005)). Similarly, our analysis of the connection between credit

booms and macroeconomic activity is related to the literature on business cycle models

that incorporate “financial accelerators,” by which shocks to asset prices and relative

good prices are amplified through balance sheet effects (see, for example, Fisher (1933),

Bernanke and Gertler (1989), Bernanke, Gertler and Gilchrist (1999), Kiyotaki and

Moore (1997), and Mendoza (2005) and (2006)).

      The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes our method for

identifying credit booms, implements it on a sample of 49 countries, and examines the

main characteristics of credit booms in industrial and emerging economies. Sections 3

and 4 study the credit-boom dynamics of macro aggregates and micro-level data,

respectively. Section 5 concludes.

2.       Credit Booms: Methodology and Key Features

2.1      Methodology

      A credit boom is defined in general as an episode in which credit to the private sector

grows by more than during a typical business cycle expansion. We formalize this

definition as follows. Denote the deviation from the long-run trend in the logarithm of

real credit per capita in country i, date t as lit, and the corresponding standard deviation of

this cyclical component as σ (li ) . The long-run trend is calculated using the Hodrick-

Prescott (HP) filter with the smoothing parameter set at 100, as is typical for annual data.

Country i is defined to have experienced a credit boom when we identify one or more

contiguous dates for which the credit boom condition li ,t ≥ φσ (li ) holds, where φ is the

boom threshold factor. Thus, during a credit boom the deviations from trend in credit

exceed the typical expansion of credit over the business cycle by a factor of φ or more.



                                               5
We used a baseline value of φ = 1.75, and conducted sensitivity analysis for φ = 1.5, 2

(which confirmed that our main results are robust to the value of φ).

      The date of the peak of the credit boom ( tˆ ) is the date that shows the maximum

difference between lit and φ σ (li ) from the set of contiguous dates that satisfy the credit

boom condition. Given tˆ , the starting date of the credit boom is a date ts such that ts < tˆ

and ts yields the smallest difference | li ,t − φ sσ (li ) | , and the ending date te is a date te > tˆ

that yields the smallest difference | li ,t − φ eσ (li ) | , where φs and φe are the start and end

thresholds.4 We use baseline values φs=φe =1, and we also tried other values including 0,

¼, ½ and ¾.5 Once the starting and ending dates are set, the duration of the credit boom is

given by the difference te – ts.

2.2      Credit boom episodes and their main features

      We use data on credit from the financial sector to the private non-financial sector

obtained from the IMF’s International Financial Statistics for a sample of 49 countries,

21 industrial and 28 emerging economies (see Appendix 1), for the 1960-2006 period.

Our measure of credit is the sum of claims on the private sector by deposit money banks

(IFS line 22d) plus, whenever available for the entire sample period for a given country,

claims on the private sector by other financial institutions (IFS line 42d). Because credit

is a year-end stock variable that we are going to compare with flow variables like output

and expenditures, real credit per capita is calculated as the average of two contiguous

end-of-year observations of nominal credit per capita deflated by their corresponding


4
  These threshold conditions are set to minimize the absolute values of differences of lit relative to targets
because the data are discrete, and hence in general lit does not match the targets with equality.
5
  We use thresholds such that φs =φe < φ, but notice that in principle φs and φe could differ, and one or both
could be set equal to φ.


                                                       6
end-of-year consumer price index. Data sources for these and all other variables used in

the paper are listed in Appendix 2.

    We identified 49 credit booms in our data, 27 in industrial countries and 22 in

emerging economies.6 Figure 1 provides a summary view of these credit booms by

plotting the cross-country mean and median of the cyclical components of real credit per

capita in seven-year event windows centered at the peak of credit booms for the two

groups of countries. These graphs show that credit booms in emerging economies are

larger than in industrial countries in absolute terms: At the peak of the booms, the

average expansion in real credit per capita reached almost 30 percent above trend in

emerging economies, twice what is observed in industrial countries. In relative terms

(i.e. in multiples of the standard deviation of credit in each country), however, credit

booms in industrial countries are similar to those in emerging economies (see Figure 2).

This is because the cyclical variability of credit is larger in the latter.

    Table 1 shows the duration of credit booms for different starting and ending

thresholds, and the length of the corresponding upswing and downswing phases. In

general, the results based on medians indicate that EMs and ICs show booms with

similar duration of about 6-7, years and upswings that last longer than downswings.

Using means, however, EMs seem to show longer and more asymmetric booms, but this

result is driven largely by the countries that experienced Sudden Stops.

    Credit booms tend to be clustered geographically and not limited to a single region:

40 percent of the booms experienced by emerging economies were observed in East Asia

and 32 percent in Latin America. Likewise, 33 percent of the credit booms in industrial

6
 There are also four emerging economies (India, South Africa, Turkey, and Venezuela) that were identified
as experiencing credit booms in 2006, the end of the sample period, but they were excluded from the event
analysis because they have yet to be completed (i.e. the ending thresholds have yet to be crossed).


                                                   7
countries were observed in the G7 and 18 percent in the Nordic countries (Denmark,

Finland, Norway, and Sweden). In addition, Figure 3 shows that credit booms tend to be

synchronized internationally and centered around big events—e.g. the Bretton Woods

collapse of the early 1970s, the petro dollars boom in the prelude to the 1980s debt crisis,

the ERM and Nordic country crises of the early 1990s, and the recent Sudden Stops. The

Figure also suggests that the frequency of credit booms in industrial countries seems to

have declined over time, but this may in fact reflect the pattern of financial deepening

away from banks and into non-bank financial intermediaries, rather than an actual

reduction in the occurrence of credit booms.7 A credit boom driven by non-bank

financial intermediaries would not be captured in the IFS data that we used. 8

2.3      Differences with the method of Gourinchas, Valdes and Landerretche

      As noted in the Introduction, several recent studies of credit booms use the thresholds

method proposed by GVL, but their method yields results that differ markedly from ours.

Hence, it is important to explain why the two methodologies produce different results.

Both methods are threshold methods: They define credit booms by identifying periods in

which credit is deemed to have expanded “too much” relative to a long-run trend.

However, the two methods differ in three key respects:

(1)      Measure of credit: We use real credit per capita, while GVL use the ratio of

         nominal credit to nominal GDP. The latter has three limitations. One is that it

         does not allow for the possibility that credit and output could have different

         trends, which is important if countries are undergoing a process of financial


7
  For example, Rajan (2005) argues that technical change, deregulation, and institutional change have
resulted in an increasing number of arm’s length transactions away from banks in the financial system.
8
  Indeed, the growing securitization of subprime mortgages in the United States in recent years was
accompanied by an increase in the off-balance sheet operations of bank entities.


                                                    8
         deepening, or if for other reasons the trend of GDP and that of credit are

         progressing at different rates. Second, there can be situations when both nominal

         credit and GDP are falling and yet the ratio increases because GDP falls more

         rapidly. Lastly, when inflation is high, the fluctuations of the credit to GDP ratio

         could be misleading because of improper price adjustments.

(2)      Detrending procedure: We detrend the credit data using a standard application of

         the HP filter to our full sample period 1960-2006 with the value of the HP

         smoothing parameter commonly used with annual data (100). In contrast, GVL

         used an expanding HP trend with a smoothing parameter of 1000. This expanding

         trend extends the sample over which the trend is computed by one year as each

         successive year in the sample is added (see Appendix 3 for details).

(3)      Definition of thresholds: Our thresholds are defined as multiples of the country-

         specific standard deviation of credit over the business cycle, which changes the

         threshold level of credit needed to define a boom (i.e. the product φσ (li ) ) with

         each country’s cyclical variability of credit. This ensures that a credit boom is a

         situation in which the deviation from trend in credit is “unusually large” relative

         to a country’s typical credit cycle. In contrast, GVL use a boom threshold that is

         invariant across countries, regardless of whether it represents a small or large

         change relative to a country’s historical cyclical variability of credit.

      These differences have significant quantitative implications. To illustrate these

differences, we apply the two methods to the case of Chile, which is also the case that

GVL used to illustrate their method. Figure 4 shows the results of applying our method to

Chilean data. Panel 1 shows results using our method exactly as described in 2.1. It



                                                9
shows the actual data for the log of real credit per capita, the HP trend, and the boom and

start/end thresholds.9 Panel 2 changes the smoothing parameter from 100 to the value

used by GVL (1000). Panel 3 changes the measure of credit from real credit per capita to

GVL’s ratio of credit to GDP. Panel 4 changes both the smoothing parameter and the

definition of credit for the ones used in GVL, but retains our country-specific thresholds.

       Our baseline results in Panel 1 indicate that Chile experienced a credit boom that

peaked in 1981 and lasted five years (from 1979 to 1983). Panel 3 shows that if we use

the credit-GDP ratio as the measure of credit, the boom peaks in 1984 and also lasts five

years (from 1981 to 1985). Thus, under our method the choice of credit variable affects

the timing of the boom but not its duration. In contrast, Panels 2 and 4 show that

increasing the smoothing parameter from 100 to 1000 affects the timing of the boom, and

increases both the size of its peak and its duration. This occurs because a larger

smoothing parameter produces a smoother trend with larger and more persistent

deviations from trend.

       Figure 5 conducts a similar experiment as Figure 4 but now starting in Panel 1 with

the results produced by applying the GVL method as proposed in their paper. Panel 2

lowers the smoothing parameter to 100. Panel 3 changes the measure of credit from the

credit-GDP ratio to real credit per capita. Panel 4 changes both the measure of credit and

the smoothing parameter to the ones we used, but retains the country-invariant threshold

proposed by GVL.

       The results in Panel 1 of Figure 5 are nearly identical to those obtained by GVL (see

Figure 2b in their paper), confirming that our implementation of their methodology is

accurate. The GVL method indicates that Chile experienced a credit boom that peaked in
9
    We set the start and end thresholds equal to 1.


                                                      10
1982 and lasted fourteen years (from 1971 to 1984).10 Panels 3 and 4 show that if we

change the credit measure to real credit per capita, the GVL method cannot identify a

credit boom in Chile in the sample period, regardless of the value of the smoothing

parameter. This is because deviations from trend in real credit per capita at least as large

as 19.5 percent were not observed in Chile, and indeed are extremely large relative to the

Chilean history of deviations from trend in real credit per capita. In contrast, our method

adjusts the boom threshold to the observed country cyclical variability of credit. As a

result, our methodology is robust to the choice of measuring credit in real per capita

terms v. as a share of GDP.

     Panel 2 of Figure 5 shows that when the expanding HP trend is calculated using a

smoothing parameter equal to 100, the GVL method does identify a credit boom in the

early 1980s, but one that lasted only three years instead of fourteen—again because a

larger smoothing parameter produces a smoother trend with larger and more persistent

deviations from trend. Thus, the higher smoothing parameter used in GVL’s calculations

is the key factor behind the long duration of the credit boom they identified (compare

Panels 1 and 2).

     One key additional feature that affects the quantitative implications of the two

methods is that the expanding trend with high smoothing parameter of the GVL method

results in a trend that approximates a smoothed version of the actual time series of credit

with some lag (see Figure 6). The standard HP trend used in our method and GVL’s

expanding HP trend are very similar at the beginning and at the end of the sample, but in

most of the “internal” periods (and particularly during the period of fast credit growth)

10
  GVL dated the peak in the same year and found the boom to be of about the same magnitude, but
estimated its duration at 10 years. This difference is due to the longer sample in our data (which ends in
2006 instead of 1996), and because of data revisions in the credit-to-GDP data relative to our sample.


                                                     11
the expanding trend resembles a smoothed lagged transformation of the data. Hence, in

these periods the expanding trend treats actual observations of high credit-GDP ratios as

being largely part of the long-run trend of credit, when in reality they are not.

3.         Credit Booms and Macroeconomic Dynamics

       This Section examines the business cycle behavior of the economy during credit

boom events, and conducts a frequency analysis of the association between credit booms

and financial crises, and between credit booms and some of their potential determinants.

3.1        Event analysis

       We construct seven-year event windows of the cyclical components of macro

aggregates centered on the peak of credit booms (i.e. tˆ is normalized to date t=0). The

windows show the cross-country means and medians of output (Y), private consumption

(C), public consumption (G), investment (I), the output of nontradables (YN), the real

exchange rate (RER), the current account-output ratio (CAY) and total capital inflows as

share of output (KI). All these variables are at constant prices, expressed in per-capita

terms and detrended with the HP filter setting the smoothing parameter at 100, except for

RER (which is not in per-capita terms) and the current account-output and capital

inflows-output ratios (which are at current prices and not expressed in per capita terms).11

       Figures 7-10 illustrate business cycle dynamics around credit boom episodes in

emerging and industrial economies. Except for RER and KI, there is little difference in

the dynamics produced by country means and medians, indicating that the results are not

driven by outliers. Consider first the plots for emerging economies in the right-side of the

Figures. Y, C and G rise 2 to 4 percentage points above trend in the build up phase of the



11
     Due to data limitations we exclude Jordan from the event analysis.


                                                      12
credit boom, and drop to between 3 to 4 percent below trend in the recessive phase. I, YN

and RER follow a similar pattern but display significantly larger expansions and

recessions. Investment rises up to 18 percent above trend at t=-1 and drops below trend

by a similar amount by t=2. YN rises to about 6½ percent above trend by t=0 and then

drops to almost 3 percent below trend by t=3. The median RER appreciates 9 percent

above trend at t=-1, and drops to a low of about 4 percent below trend when the credit

boom unwinds. CAY displays the opposite pattern: it declines to a deficit of about 2½

percentage points of GDP in the expanding phase of the boom and then rises to a surplus

of 1½ percentage points of GDP in the declining phase. In line with these current account

dynamics, KI rises by up to 3½ percentage points of GDP by t=-1 and then drops by 2¼

percentage points of GDP by t=3.

   The plots for industrial countries in the left-side panels of Figures 7-10 show several

similarities with those for emerging economies, but also some important differences.

Output, expenditures and the current account in the industrial countries follow a cyclical

pattern similar to that observed in the emerging economies, but the amplitude of these

fluctuations is smaller, and government consumption shows the opposite pattern (slightly

below trend in the expanding phase and slightly above trend in the contraction phase).

   Two important caveats apply to the event study graphs. First, they illustrate the

cyclical dynamics of macro variables, but do not show if these variables themselves are

undergoing a boom (i.e. an unusually large expansion as defined by our thresholds

method). Table 2 provides evidence to examine this issue by listing the fraction of credit

booms associated with booms in output and expenditures that occur in any year inside the

seven-year window of the credit boom events. The results show that between 30 to 60




                                            13
percent of the credit booms are associated with booms in Y, YN, C, I, and G, and this

holds for emerging and industrial countries, as well as for all the countries together.

   The second caveat of the event study graphs is that they show point estimates of

measures of central tendency (means and medians), but do not demonstrate if these

moments are statistically significant. To explore this issue, we run cross-section

regressions of each macro variable for each date of the event window on a constant. The

standard error for the median (mean) is obtained using quintile (OLS) regressions. As

Table 3 shows, the majority of the mean and median estimates shown in the event study

plots for Y, YN, C, and I are statistically significant at the 1 percent confidence level for

industrial and emerging economies. For G, RER and CA/Y, however, many of the

coefficients have large standard errors.

   Another potential caveat of the event analysis is that the relationships it captures

between credit booms and macro variables may not be particular to credit booms, but

may reflect overall business cycle patterns. In particular, one could ask if the results

would be any different if instead of identifying credit booms and using them to condition

the event analysis, we were to identify output booms and use them as the conditioning

variable (defining output booms with the same thresholds method we applied for credit

booms). We explored this possibility by constructing seven-year event windows of

fluctuations in macro variables (including private sector credit) centered on the peak

dates of output booms. In the case of the emerging economies, there is no discernible

cyclical pattern in the behavior of credit. Thus, there is an output cycle associated with

credit booms, but there is no credit cycle associated with output booms. For industrial

countries, we found that there is a cyclical pattern in the behavior of credit during output




                                              14
booms, but one that is much less pronounced than during credit booms, and some features

of the boom-bust dynamics we identified during credit booms are not present during

output booms (housing prices, in particular, do not fall in the aftermath of output booms).

   We now study the behavior of inflation, equity prices and housing prices during credit

booms (see Figure 11). Industrial countries show negligible changes in inflation, and

rising (falling) equity and housing prices in the build up (declining) phase of credit

booms. In emerging economies, inflation tends to spike after the credit booms peak, but

this result is driven by outliers because the mean inflation at t=1 exceeds the median

inflation by a large margin. The median inflation rises only 2 percent above trend. Hence,

credit booms are generally not associated with surges in inflation in either industrial or

emerging economies. Stock and housing prices show the same pattern in emerging

economies as in industrial countries, but note that the rise in equity prices in the upswing

and the decline in housing prices in the downswing are larger in the former.

   The event windows for industrial and emerging economies mask important variations

across country regions. In industrial countries, the Nordic countries show larger

fluctuations in credit and in the macro variables than the G7 (Table 4, Panel A). In

addition, some of the macro variables in the Nordic countries peak earlier than credit. In

the case of the emerging economies (Table 4, Panel B), output and investment

fluctuations in Asia and Latin America are similar, but credit expansions and the

fluctuations in consumption are much larger in the latter. In contrast, the current account

reversals when the credit booms revert are larger in Asia.

   In summary, the macro event study shows that credit booms across emerging and

industrial economies are associated with a well-defined pattern of economic expansion in




                                             15
the build-up phase of the booms, followed by contraction in the declining phase. Output,

expenditures, stock prices, housing prices, and the real exchange rate move above trend

in the first phase, and drop below trend in the second phase, and the current account falls

first and then rises. All of this happens without major changes in inflation. Beyond these

similarities, credit booms in emerging and industrial economies differ in four key

respects: (1) the amplitude of the macroeconomic fluctuations is smaller in industrial

countries; (2) government consumption in industrial countries fluctuates very little and

shows the opposite pattern of that in emerging economies; (3) the current account-output

ratio and the (median) capital inflows-output ratio also display smaller changes in

industrial countries, and their timing differs sharply (CAY does not hit its trough in the

build up phase of the credit boom); and (4) fluctuations in the nontradables sector of

industrial countries are much smaller, and RER actually depreciates slightly, instead of

appreciating sharply, in the expansionary phase of credit booms.

   These differences in the macro features of credit booms across industrial and

emerging economies are consistent with three well-known facts in international business

cycle studies: First, the larger amplitude of the fluctuations displayed by emerging

economies is in line with well-established evidence showing that business cycles are

larger in developing countries (see Mendoza (1995), Kose, Prasad and Terrones (2003),

Neumeyer and Perri (2005)). Second, the striking difference in the behavior of

government purchases is consistent with the evidence produced in the literature on the

procyclicality of fiscal policy in developing countries (see Kaminski, Reinhart, and Vegh

(2005)). Third, the widening current account deficits followed by reversals, and the

booms followed by collapses in the price and output of the nontradables sector, are




                                             16
consistent with observations highlighted in the Sudden Stops literature (e.g. Calvo

(1998), Mendoza (2007), Caballero and Krishnamurty (2001)). However, it is important

to note that generally these facts have been documented by examining macroeconomic

data without conditioning for credit booms. In contrast, our results apply specifically to

fluctuations associated with credit boom episodes. This is particularly relevant for the

Sudden Stop facts (i.e. the reversals in CAY and the boom-bust cycles in RER and YN),

because most of the Sudden Stops literature emphasizes the role of credit transmission

mechanisms in explaining Sudden Stops.

      Our finding that credit booms are associated with a well-defined cyclical pattern in

output and expenditures contrasts sharply with the findings of GVL showing only

ambiguous evidence of this association. Figure 6 in their paper shows a small cycle in

GDP, a decline in GDP growth below trend for the entire duration of credit booms, and

no cycle in consumption.

3.3      Frequency analysis

      We conduct next a frequency analysis to examine three issues: (1) the association

between credit booms and financial crises; (2) the role of capital inflows, productivity

gains, financial reforms and exchange rate regimes as preconditions of credit booms; and

(3) the probability of experiencing a credit boom once the starting threshold is crossed.

      Credit booms are often cited as the culprit behind financial crises, particularly in

emerging economies (see Eichengreen and Arteta, 2002). If this is the case, credit booms

should be closely associated with financial crises. Table 5 shows the percent of banking

crises, currency crises and Sudden Stops that occurred during the seven-year window of

the credit boom events in emerging economies, industrial countries and all countries




                                               17
combined. The percent of crises that occurred before, after and at the peak of the credit

booms are listed in separate columns. The dates identifying the occurrence of these crises

were obtained from sources in the empirical literature (Demirguic-Kunt and Detragiache

(2006) for banking crises, Eichengreen and Bordo (2002) for currency crises, and Calvo,

Izquierdo, and Mejia (2004) for Sudden Stops).

   Table 5 yields an important result: Credit booms in emerging economies are often

associated with currency crises, banking crises, and Sudden Stops. About 68 percent of

the credit booms in emerging economies are associated with currency crises, 55 percent

with banking crises, and 32 percent with Sudden Stops. Most of these crises either

preceded or coincided with the peak of the credit booms, suggesting that many of the

booms ended after a country suffered a crisis. These findings are also at odds with the

conclusion in GVL suggesting that there is virtually no association between credit booms

and financial crises in emerging economies.

   Table 5 also shows that, contrary to what we found in emerging economies, credit

booms in industrial countries are only occasionally associated with banking and currency

crises, and there is no association with Sudden Stops. Moreover, industrial countries in a

credit boom are more likely to experience currency crises than banking crises. The

combined frequency of currency crises before, after or at the peak of credit booms is

slightly over 50 percent, while that for banking crises is 15 percent. In contrast with the

emerging economies, currency crises are more frequent after the peak of credit booms.

   We also constructed seven-year event windows that compare the fluctuations in credit

and macro aggregates of countries that experienced a crisis (i.e. banking crisis, currency

crisis, or Sudden Stop) with those that did not. The results (available from the authors on




                                             18
request) show clearly that the macro fluctuations in the countries that experienced crisis

are larger and display more abrupt declines than those of the non-crisis countries.

     Consider now the frequency analysis of the association between credit booms and

large capital inflows, financial reforms, and TFP gains. Capital inflows are measured as

gross liability flows (i.e. foreign direct investment, portfolio flows, and other investments

liabilities) in percent of GDP, using data from IFS (see Appendix 2). We define a state of

large capital inflows as of date t when the preceding three-year average of capital inflows

ranked on the top quartile of its respective country group (i.e. emerging markets,

industrial countries, or both) over the 1975-2006 period.12 Domestic financial reforms are

measured using the index produced by Abiad, Detragiache, and Tressel (2007). This

index takes values between 0 and 21 and includes information on reserve requirements

and credit controls, interest rate controls, barriers to entry, state ownership, policies on

securities markets, banking regulation, and capital account restrictions. We identify a

country undertaking significant financial reforms as of date t if the preceding three-year

change in this index ranks on the top quartile of its respective country group over the

1975-2002 period. Our measure of TFP is based on standard growth accounting methods

(see, for instance, Klenow and Rodriguez (1997) and Kose, Prasad, and Terrones (2008)),

using labor and investment data from PWT 6.2. A country is identified to have

experienced high TFP growth as of date t if the preceding three-year average of TFP

growth ranked on the top quartile of its respective group over the 1975-2006 period.

     Table 6 shows the fraction of credit booms preceded by large capital inflows,

domestic financial reforms, and large TFP gains. Because these factors are often

12
  We focus on the preceding three-year average because we are interested in the role of capital inflows (as
well as TFP and financial reforms) as potential causes of credit booms, so we are interested in studying if
credit booms are preceded by these developments as a form of statistical causality.


                                                    19
interconnected and may interact with each other, we compute the frequency of credit

booms that coincided with each factor individually as well as jointly with pairs of two

factors or with all three factors together. For industrial countries, the results indicate that

40 percent of the credit booms followed large TFP gains and 33 percent followed

significant financial reforms. In contrast, in emerging economies we find that over 50

percent of credit booms were preceded by large capital inflows, while TFP gains and

financial reforms play a small role. Thus, credit booms in industrial countries are

preceded by TFP gains and/or domestic financial reforms and to a much lesser extent by

surges in capital inflows, while the opposite is observed in emerging economies.

    Table 7 shows the results of a similar frequency analysis but now aimed at examining

the association between the peak of credit booms and the exchange rate regimes in place

the preceding three years. We use Reinhart and Rogoff’s (2004) classification of

exchange rate regimes to create the following four regime groupings: fixed and managed,

dirty floating, floating and mixed (see the footnote to Table 6 for details). The mixed

regime includes countries that switched across the other regimes in any of the three years

prior to the peak of the credit boom. The results shown in Table 6 are striking: about ¾ of

the credit booms occur in countries with managed or fixed exchange rate regimes, and

this holds for industrial countries, emerging economies, and all countries combined.

    Finally, we use frequency analysis to determine the probability that a country will

experience a credit boom once it has crossed the starting threshold. This probability can

be a useful “early warning” indicator for surveillance of credit market conditions. We

considered starting thresholds of ½ and 1 standard deviations of the cyclical component

of our credit measure, and computed the probabilities for industrial countries, emerging




                                              20
economies and all countries combined. Once a starting threshold of 1 (½) standard

deviations is crossed, the probability of a credit boom is 16 (9) percent for emerging

economies, 22 (14) percent for industrial countries, and 18 (11) percent for all countries

combined. Naturally, these probabilities are lower with the lower starting threshold, as it

is less likely that the cyclical expansion of credit turns into a credit boom. The

probabilities are higher for industrial than for emerging economies, indicating that having

crossed the starting threshold is a more precise predictor of credit booms in the former

than in the latter.

4.      Credit Booms and Firm Level Data

     Section 3 showed that credit booms are accompanied by a synchronized pattern of

economic expansion followed by contraction. This finding raises an important question:

Are the credit booms and the macro business cycles that accompany them reflected in the

financial conditions of firms and banks at the microeconomic level? To answer this

question, we use the credit boom events identified in Section 2 to construct seven-year

event windows of the evolution of firm- and bank-level financial indicators centered on

the years in which credit booms peaked.

     The firm-level data correspond to nonfinancial, publicly-traded firms as reported in

Worldscope and Datastream. The sample period is 1980 to 2005 for the industrial

countries and 1991 to 2005 for the emerging markets. This restricts our analysis to credit

booms dated after 1991 in the emerging markets. Moreover these data have the

drawbacks that the coverage is limited to corporations listed in stock exchanges, and that




                                             21
they are reported on a fiscal year basis, rather than calendar year. Note, however, that

there is no other firm-level, cross-country database with wider coverage available.13

      The bank-level data was obtained from Bankscope and it covers the 1995-2005

period.14 These data include balance sheet information for commercial banks, saving

banks, cooperative banks, mortgage banks, medium- and long-term credit banks, and

bank holding companies. The coverage varies from country to country, and since the

sample starts in 1995 our analysis of banking behavior around credit booms is limited to

the last decade. In the analysis below, we do not report bank indicators for the industrial

countries because these countries have experienced only three credit booms since 1995.

It is worth noting, however, that the behavior of these indicators is broadly in line with

that observed in the emerging market economies.

      We construct financial indicators for each firm and bank in each country, and focus

on the median firm or bank as country aggregate. Aggregates for emerging and industrial

countries are then generated as medians of the country aggregates. For the firm-level

data, we also construct the breakdown across tradables and nontradables sectors, and

measure sectoral aggregates using the median firm of the corresponding sector.15

4.1      Firm-level indicators

      We construct seven firm-level financial indicators: (1) two measures of Tobin’s Q

(the ratio of market to book value of equity, Q1, and the ratio of market value plus total

13
   The data are corrected for the presence of multiple listings (firms with multiple country listings are
assigned only to the country of primary listing), dead stocks (companies that go out of business are taken
out from the sample), and outliers (which can be due to either inadequate accounting, as in the case of firms
listed with negative market capitalizations, or statistical outliers, observations that are in excess of two
standard deviations from the mean observation).
14
   The data are corrected for the presence of the central bank and government and multilateral institutions
as well as for outliers (either because of inadequate accounting or extreme values).
15
   The nontradables sector includes the following industries: construction, printing and publishing,
recreation, retailers, transportation, utilities, and miscellaneous. The tradables sector includes aerospace,
apparel, automotive, beverages, chemical, electrical, electronics, metals, and all others in the database.


                                                     22
debt to book value, Q2); (2) effective interest rate (the ratio of total debt service to total

debt obligations, ER); (3) profitability (the return on assets in percent, PR) ; (4) total

leverage (total debt as a percent of book value of assets, LBV, or market value of assets,

LMV); (5) short-term leverage (short-term debt as a percent of market value of assets,

SLMV); (6) working capital leverage (current liabilities in percent of sales, LWK); and (7)

the Rajan-Zingales index of dependence on external financing for investment (RZ), which

is equal to 1 minus the ratio of cash flow from operations to capital expenditures (with

the former adjusted for changes in inventories, payables, and receivables).

    Figures 12-17 show the event windows for the financial indicators of firms in

industrial and emerging economies. Figure 12 shows that all leverage ratios rise in the

build up phase of the credit booms and collapse in the declining phase. As in the case of

the macro variables, the amplitude of the fluctuations is much larger for emerging

economies than for industrial countries. Note, however, that the increases in LMV are

particularly large because LMV includes the effect of equity price declines that coincide

with credit boom peaks. Still, the boom-bust cycles in leverage synchronized with credit

booms are also evident in LBV and LWK, which do not use the market value of equity. In

emerging economies, LBV rises about 20 percentage points from its minimum in the

upswing of the boom to the peak (compared with 12 percentage points in industrial

countries) and LWK rises almost 12 percentage points (compared with 2 percentage

points in industrial countries).

    The Tobin Q and profitability measures shown in Figure 13 indicate that corporations

in both industrial and emerging economies start the expanding phase of credit booms

from high ratios of asset valuation and profitability, which decline as the credit boom




                                               23
peaks and then remain depressed in the aftermath. Again the magnitude of these

fluctuations is much larger in emerging economies. In contrast, the dynamics of the

effective interest rate are very different in the two groups of countries. In emerging

markets, ER is low in the expansionary phase of the credit booms, and then jumps about

500 basis points one year after the booms peak. In industrial countries, ER is significantly

more stable, and in fact drops slightly after the credit booms peak.

   Figure 14 shows the evolution of the RZ index. Corporations are significantly more

dependent on external financing in the build up phase of credit booms than in the

downswing. The size of the correction in the downswing is much larger in emerging

economies than in industrial countries. This evidence is consistent with the argument of

Calvo et al. (2003) suggesting that “creditless recoveries” after Sudden Stops are possible

in emerging economies because firms adjust to the loss of credit so as to provide internal

financing for operational expenses that were previously financed with outside credit.

   Figure 15 illustrates important similarities and differences in the evolution of

corporate financial indicators across regions of emerging economies. Firms in Asia are

significantly more leveraged than their Latin American counterparts, and their leverage

ratios fluctuate more sharply during credit booms. Moreover, Tobin’s Q in Asia falls

sharply in a continuous decline during the entire seven-year window, while in Latin

America it shows an ambiguous pattern and a more modest overall decline. Dependence

on external financing falls sharply in both regions in the downswing of credit booms, but

the correction is larger in Latin America than in Asia.

   Figure 16 shows the evolution of the financial indicators of emerging economies for

which the tradables and nontradables sectors behave differently (LBV, LMV , LWK and




                                             24
RZ).16 We also include the real exchange rate as a proxy for the relative price of

nontradable goods relative to tradables. The cycles in leverage (LBV, LMV and LWK)

synchronized with the credit booms are again observable in the sectoral aggregates, but

now we can also observe that they are significantly larger for firms in the nontradables

sector and that they are synchronized with the sharp boom-bust cycle of the real exchange

rate. Moreover, the RZ index shows that firms in the tradables sector are slightly more

dependent on outside financing in the expansionary phase of credit booms, and that

dependence on outside financing falls sharply for firms in both sectors, but significantly

more for firms in the nontradables sector. These results are consistent with the Sudden

Stops literature that emphasizes the ability of firms in the tradables sector to have more

stable access to credit than firms in the nontradables sector (e.g. Caballero and

Krishnamurty (1998), Tornell and Westernmann (2005)).

4.2      Bank-level indicators

      We constructed four financial indicators using bank data: (1) profitability, measured

by the ratio of net income to average assets (ROA), where average assets are calculated as

the mean of end-of period assets in year t and t-1; (2) non-performing loans, NPL, as a

measure of asset quality; (3) a measure of lending activity as proxied by the ratio of bank

loans to total assets, LAR; and (4) a “capital adequacy” measure, CAR, that measures a

bank’s capital as a ratio of its risk-weighted assets.17 The minimum CAR recommended

by the Basel Committee in Banking Supervision is 8 percent, however, bank supervisors



16
   The rest of the financial ratios display very similar dynamics across sectors as in the total aggregates
shown already in Figures 12-14.
17
    This measure combines “Tier I capital,” which includes stock issues and disclosed reserves, and “Tier II
capital,” which includes subordinated debt, perpetual securities, expressed as a percentage of risk-weighted
assets and off-balance-sheet risks (see Dewatripont and Tirole (1993)).


                                                    25
in the more vulnerable economies, such as EMs, are encouraged to set higher minimum

CARs (often in the 8-12 percent range).

   Figure 17 shows the event study window for the financial indicators of banks in

emerging economies. Lending activity is high in the expanding phase of the credit boom,

but at the same time the quality of the banks’ assets deteriorates sharply as non-

performing loans rise from 2.5 percent a year before the peak to 10 percent two years

after the peak of the boom. This evidence is consistent with Dell’ Ariccia and Marquez’s

(2006) argument that the banks’ lowering of lending standards in a boom increases

lending to more risky clients, and hence leads to a subsequent weakening of the quality of

bank’s assets.

   The profitability measure indicates that banks yield high profits in the expanding

phase of credit booms. ROA reaches its highest level at 1.5 percent a year before the peak

of the boom, followed by a collapse in the ending phase of the boom. Finally, bank

capital adequacy shows v-shaped dynamics—it drops sharply late in the expanding phase

of credit booms and then rebounds early in the ending phase of the boom, ending at

higher levels than when the booms start. Interestingly, CAR at its trough was just below

12 percent which points to vulnerabilities in the banking system of these economies.

5. Conclusions

   This paper proposed a new thresholds method for measuring credit booms, used this

method to identify credit booms in industrial and emerging economies, and conducted an

event study analysis of the dynamics of macro aggregates and micro-level financial

indicators during credit booms. We identified 27 credit booms in industrial countries and

22 in emerging economies during the 1960-2006 period. The build up phase of these




                                             26
booms is associated with economic expansions, rising equity and housing prices, real

currency appreciation, and widening external deficits, followed by the opposite dynamics

in the downswing. Similar dynamics are observed in firm-level indicators of leverage,

firm values, and dependence on external financing, and in bank-level indicators of asset

quality, profitability and lending activity. Moreover, credit booms tend to be

synchronized internationally and centered on “big events” like the 1980s debt crisis, the

1992 ERM crisis, and Sudden Stops in emerging economies.

   Despite the similarities in the features of credit booms across industrial and emerging

economies, there are also three major differences: (1) Fluctuations in macroeconomic

aggregates and micro-level indicators during credit booms are larger, more persistent, and

asymmetric in the emerging economies, and this pattern is particularly strong in the

nontradables sector; (2) not all credit booms end in crisis, but many of the recent

emerging markets crises were associated with credit booms; (3) credit booms in emerging

economies tend to be preceded by large capital inflows and not by domestic financial

reforms or TFP gains, while credit booms in industrial countries tend to be preceded by

high TFP or financial reforms. In contrast, the frequency of credit booms in both

emerging and industrial economies is much higher in economies with fixed or managed

exchange rates. These results differ significantly from previous findings in the literature

on credit booms suggesting an ambiguous relationship between credit booms and

economic expansions, and little or no association between financial crises and credit

booms (see Gourinchas et al. (2001)).

   The results of our study have important implications for the analysis of macro-finance

linkages, and for surveillance of financial systems and their macroeconomic effects.




                                             27
From the policy perspective, the thresholds method we proposed provides a tractable

framework for measuring and identifying credit booms that are closely associated with

cyclical fluctuations in macro aggregates and key financial indicators of corporations and

banks. Our results show that credit booms can be identified by the size of a credit

expansion relative to trend, and that this information can be supplemented with other

indicators of excessive credit growth: such as booms in output and expenditures,

excessive real appreciation and/or expansion of the nontradables sector, large inflows of

foreign capital (in EMs) and fast TFP growth or domestic financial reforms (in ICs), as

well as increases in the leverage and profitability ratios of corporations and weakening in

the quality of banks’ assets. Moreover, our results also highlight the importance of using

corrective policy actions to prevent credit booms, because the declining phase of credit

booms is associated with recessions and a higher incidence of financial crises.

   From the perspective of research on macro-finance linkages, our results provide a set

of robust empirical regularities that can guide research on models of “credit transmission”

by providing the set of facts that these models should aim to explain. These empirical

regularities can be subsumed into two sets of stylized facts: First, the strong association

of credit booms with booms in output and expenditures, rising asset prices, widening

external deficits and sharp real appreciations. Second, the close relationship between

these macro features of credit booms and a similar cyclical pattern in the financial

indicators of corporations and banks.




                                             28
                                     REFERENCES

Abiad, Abdul, Enrica Detragiache, and Thierry Tressel (2007). “A New Database of
       Financial Reforms.” Mimeo, Research Department, IMF.

Bernanke, Ben and Mark Gertler (1989). “Agency Costs, Net Worth, and Business
      Fluctuations,” American Economic Review, Vol. 79, pp. 14-31.

Bernanke, Ben, Mark Gertler, and Simon Gilchrist (1999). “The Financial Accelerator in
      and Quantitative Business Cycle Framework.” In Handbook of Macroeconomics,
      Vol. 1C, ed. by John Taylor and Michael Woodford (Amsterdam: North-Holland),
      pp. 1531-1614.

Borio, Claudio, C. Furfine, and P. Lowe (2001). “Procyclicality of Financial Systems
       and Financial Stability.” BIS Papers No.1, Bank for International Settlements.

Caballero, Ricardo and Arvind Krshnamurthy (1998). “Emerging Market Crises: An
       Asset Markets Perspective.” NBER Working Paper No. 6843. (Cambridge, MA:
       National Bureau of Economic Research).

Calvo, Guillermo A., Alejandro Izquierdo, and Ernesto Talvi (2003). “Sudden Stops, the
       Real Exchange Rate, and Fiscal Sustainability: Argentina’s Lessons.” NBER
       Working Paper 9828. (Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research).

Calvo, Guillermo A., Alejandro Izquierdo, and Luis Mejia (2004). “On the Empirics of
       Sudden Stops: The Relevance of Balance-Sheet Effects.” NBER Working Paper
       10520. (Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research).

Collyns, Charles and Abdelhak Senhadji (2002). “Lending Booms, Real Estate Bubbles,
       and the Asian Financial Crisis.” IMF Working Paper 02/20 (Washington:
       International Monetary Fund).

Corsetti Giancarlo, Paolo Pesenti, and Nouriel Roubini (1999). “What Caused the Asian
       Currency & Financial Crisis?” Japan & the World Economy, V. 11, pp 305-373,

Cottarelli, Carlo, Giovanni Dell’Ariccia, and I. Vladkova-Hollar (2003). “Early Birds,
       Late Risers, and Sleeping Beauties: Bank Credit Growth to the Private Sector in
       Central and Eastern Europe and the Balkans.” IMF Working Paper 03/213
       (Washington: International Monetary Fund).

Dell’Ariccia, Giovanni, and Robert Marquez (2006). “Lending Booms and Lending
       Standards.” The Journal of Finance, Vol. 51, No. 5, pp. 2511-2546.

Demirguc-Kunt, Asli and Enrica Detragiache (2005). “Cross-Country Empirical Studies
      of Systemic Bank Distress: A Survey.” IMF Working Paper 05/96. (Washington:
      International Monetary Fund).



                                           29
Dewatripont, Mathias and Jean Tirole (1993). The Prudential Regulation of Banks.
      (Cambridge, Massachusetts: The MIT Press).

Eichengreen, Barry and Michael D. Bordo (2002). “Crises Now and Then: What Lessons
      from the Last Era of Financial Globalization?” NBER Working Paper 8716.
      (Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research).

Eichengreen, Barry and Carlos Arteta (2002). “Banking Crises in Emerging Markets:
      Presumptions and Evidence,” in Mario Blejer and Marko Skreb (eds.) Financial
      Policies in Emerging Markets. MIT Press. (Cambridge, Massachusetts).

Fisher, Irving (1933). “The Debt-Deflation Theory of the Great Depressions.”
        Econometrica, Vol.1, pp. 337-357.

Gorton, Gary and Ping He (2005). “Bank Credit Cycles.” Review of Economic Studies,
       forthcoming.

Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, Rodrigo Valdes, and Oscar Landerretche (2001). “Lending
      Booms: Latin America and the World.” Economia, Spring, pp. 47-99.

Hilbers, Paul, Inci Otker-Robe, Ceyla Pazarbasioglu, and Gudrun Johnsen (2005).
       “Assessing and Managing Rapid Credit Growth and the Role of Supervisory and
       Prudential Policies.” IMF Working Paper 05/151. (Washington: International
       Monetary Fund).

International Monetary Fund (2004). “Are Credit Booms in Emerging Markets a
        Concern?.” World Economic Outlook, pp. 148-166.

Kaminsky, Graciela, Carmen Reinhart, and Carlos Vegh (2005). “When it Rains it
      Pours: Procyclical Capital Flows and Macroeconomic Policies,” in Mark Gertler
      and Kenneth Rogoff (eds.) NBER Macroeconomic Annual, pp. 11-53.

Kindleberger, Charles (2000). Manias, Panics, and Crashes: A History of Financial
       Crises. (New York: Harcourt, Brace and Company).

Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro, and John Moore (1997). “Credit Cycles.” Journal of Political
       Economy, Vol. 105, pp. 211-248.

Klenow, Peter and Andres Rodriguez-Clare (1997). “The Neoclassical Revival in Growth
      Economics: Has It Gone Too Far?” in B. Bernanke and J. Rotemberg (eds.)
      Macroeconomics Annual 1997, pp. 73-102.

Kose, Ayhan, Eswar Prasad, and Marco Terrones (2003). “Financial Integration and
       Macroeconomic Volatility.” IMF Staff Papers, Vol. 50, pp. 119-143.




                                          30
Kose, Ayhan, Eswar Prasad, and Marco Terrones (2008). “Does Financial Globalization
       Contribute to Productivity Growth?” Mimeo, Research Department, IMF.

Kraft, Evan and Ljubinko Jankov (2005). “Does Speed Kill? Lending Booms and their
        Consequences in Croatia,” Journal of Banking and Finance, Vol 29, pp. 105-121.

Lorenzoni, Guido (2005). “Inefficient Credit Booms.” Manuscript. Department of
      Economics, MIT.

Mendoza, Enrique G. (1995). “The Terms of Trade, the Real Exchange Rate, and
     Economic Fluctuations.” International Economic Review. Vol. 36, pp. 101-137.

——— (2005). “Real Exchange Volatility and the Price of Nontradables in Sudden-Stop
   Prone Economies.” Economia, Fall, pp.103-148.

——— (2006). “Endogenous Sudden Stops in a Business Cycle Model with Collateral
   Constraints: A Fisherian Deflation of Tobin’s Q.” NBER Working Paper No.
   12564; Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.

Montiel, Peter (2001). “What Drives Consumption Booms?.” The World Bank Review,
      Vol. 14, No. 3 , pp. 457-480.

Neumeyer, Pablo and Fabrizio Perri (2005). “Business Cycles in Emerging Economies:
     The Role of Interest Rate.” Journal of Monetary Economics, V. 52, pp. 345-380.

Ottens, Daniel, Edwin Lambregts, and Steven Poelhekke (2005). “Credit Booms in
        Emerging Market Economies: A Recipe for Banking Crises?.” Manuscript, De
        Nederlandsche Bank.

Rajan, Raghuram G. (1994). “Why Bank Credit Policies Fluctuate: A Theory and Some
       Evidence,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 109, pp. 399-441.

Rajan, Raghuram G. (2005). “Has Financial Development Made the World Riskier?” In
       The Greenspan Era: Lessons for the Future, pp. 313-369. Federal Reserve Bank
       of Kansas City

Reinhart Carmen M. and Kenneth S. Rogoff (2004), “The Modern History of Exchange
      Rate Arrangements: A Reinterpretation,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, v
      119(1), pp. 1-48.

Scheneider, Martin and Aaron Tornell (2004). “Bailout Guarantees, Balance Sheet
      Effects and Financial Crises.” Review of Economic Studies.

Tornell, Aaron, and Frank Westermann (2005). Boom-Bust Cycles and Financial
       Liberalization. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.




                                         31
                                      Appendix 1
                                SAMPLE OF COUNTRIES


The sample of countries we studied includes the 21 industrial countries and 28 emerging
economies listed below. The dates of the peaks of credit booms identified for each
country are shown in parenthesis.


Industrial countries

Australia (AUS, 1989), Austria (AUT, 1972 and 1980), Belgium (BEL, 1980 and 1990),
Canada (CAN, 1967), Denmark (DNK, 1987 and 1991), Finland (FIN, 1991), France
(FRA, 1991), Germany (DEU, 1973), Greece (GRC, 1972), Ireland (IRL, 1979 and
2000), Italy (ITA, 1973 and 1992), Japan (JPN, 1973), Netherlands (NLD, 1979), New
Zealand (NZL, 1974), Norway (NOR, 1988), Portugal (PRT, 1973 and 2001), Spain
(ESP), Sweden (SWE, 1990), Switzerland (CHE, 1990), United Kingdom (GBR, 1974
and 1990), and United States (USA, 1999).


Emerging Market Economies

Algeria (DZA), Argentina (ARG, 1982), Brazil (BRA), Chile (CHL, 1981), Colombia
(COL, 1997), Costa Rica (CRI, 1979), Côte d'Ivoire (CIV, 1978), Ecuador (ECU), Egypt
(EGY,1982), Hong Kong (HKG, 1998), India (IND,*), Indonesia (IDN, 1997), Israel
(ISR, 1979), Jordan (JOR, 1970), Korea (KOR, 1998), Malaysia (MYS, 1997), Mexico
(MEX, 1994), Morocco (MAR, 1977), Nigeria (NGA, 1982), Pakistan (PAK, 1986), Peru
(PER), Philippines (PHL, 1983 and 1997), Singapore (SGP, 1984), South Africa (ZAF,
*), Thailand (THA, 1997), Turkey (TUR, 1997 and *), Uruguay (URY, 1981), and
Venezuela, Rep. Bol. (VEN, *).

(*) Ongoing credit booms.




                                           32
                                                                        Appendix 2: Data Definitions and Sources


                    Variable                                                         Definition                                                                 Source


A. Macroeconomic and financial data.
Credit to the non-financial                 Sum of claims on the private sector by deposit money banks (IFS line 22d) plus,              IFS . For some industrial countries data were
private sector                              whenever available for the entire sample period by other financial institutions              completed using the OECD Analytic Database.
                                            (IFS line 42d).                                                                              Datastream and Heaver Analytics .
Consumer price index                        Consumer price index (both average and end-of-period).                                       IFS
Nominal GDP                                 GDP in current prices, local currency.                                                       WDI
Population                                  Population                                                                                   WDI
Real GDP                                    Real GDP per-capita, in international prices                                                 PWT 6.2
Private consumption                         Real private consumption per-capita, in international prices                                 PWT 6.2
Government consumption                      Real government consumption per-captia, in international prices                              PWT 6.2
Investment                                  Real investment per-capita, in international prices                                          PWT 6.2
Non-tradable GDP                            Sum of the value added in services plus the value added in industry minus manufacture.       WDI
Current account balance                     Current account balance as percent of GDP                                                    WDI
Real exchange rate                          Real effective exchange rate, index                                                          INS (IMF)
Capital inflows                             Capital inflows (proxied as the flow of total external liabilities) as percent of GDP.       IFS
Real stock prices                           Equity price indices deflated using consumer price indeces.                                  Authors' calculation with data from IFS .
Real house prices                           House price indices deflated using consumer price indeces.                                   Authors' calculation with data from several
                                                                                                                                         country sources, Haever Analytics and
                                                                                                                                         Bloomberg .
Total factor productivity                   Total factor productivity calculated using the PWT6.2 dataset                                Kose, Prasad, and Terrones (2008).

B. Microeconomic and financial data.
Tobin's Q                                   Measured by:
                                            (1) The ratio of the market value of a firm's equity to the current replacement              Author's calculations with data from Worldscope .
                                            cost of assets.
                                            (2) The ratio of the market value of a firm's equity and debt to the current replacement     Author's calculations with data from Worldscope .
                                            cost of assets.
Leverage                                    Measured by:
                                            (1) The ratio of total debt to book value of equity of the firm.                             Author's calculations with data from Worldscope .
                                            (2) The ratio of total debt to market value of equity of the firm.                           Author's calculations with data from Worldscope .
                                            (3) The ratio of short term debt to market value of equity of the firm.                      Author's calculations with data from Worldscope .
                                            (4) The ratio of current liabilities to sales of the firm.                                   Author's calculations with data from Worldscope .
Effective interest rate                                                                                                                  Author's calculations with data from Worldscope .
Return on assets                            The ratio of net income to total assets.                                                     Author's calculations with data from Worldscope .
Rajan-Zingales index                        The ratio of a firm's capital expenditures minus cash flow from operations to                Author's calculations with data from Worldscope .
                                            capital expenditures. This ratio measures a firm's dependence on extenal finance.
Non-performing loans to gross loans ratio   The ratio of non-performing loans to gross loans. This is a measure of asset quality.        Author's calculations with data from Bankscope .
Loan to asset ratio                         The ratio of bank loans to total assets. Proxies the percentage of assets assigned to        Author's calculations with data from Bankscope .
                                            loans.
Return on average assets                    Ratio of net income to average assets. This ratio measures the efficiency and                Author's calculations with data from Bankscope .
                                            operational performance of a bank.
Capital adequacy ratio                      Total capital adequacy ratio under the Basle rules. This ratio measures a bank's             Bankscope .
                                            capital as a ratio of its risk weighted assets.

C. Crises definitions
Banking Crises                              A situation in which at least one of the following conditions holds: (1) the ratio of non-   Demirguic-Kunt and Detragiache (2006)
                                            performing assets to total asses of the banking sector exceeds 10 percent; (2) the cost
                                            of banking system bailouts exceeds 2 percent of GDP; (3) there is a large scale bank
                                            nationalization as result of banking sector problems; and (4) there are bank runs or new
                                            important depositor protection measures.
Currency Crises                             A situation in which a country experiences a forced change in parity, abandons a             Eichengreen and Bordo (2002)
                                            currency peg or receives a bailout from an international organization, and at the same
                                            time an index of exchange rae market pressure (a weighted average of the depreciation
                                            rate, change in short-term interest rate, and percentage change in reserves) rises
                                            1.5 standard deviations above its mean.
Sudden Stops                                A situation in which a country experiences a year-on-year fall in capital flows that         Calvo, Izquierdo, and Mejia (2004)
                                            exceeds 2 standard deviations relative to the mean.

D. Other variables
Financial reform index                        The index captures changes in seven financial policy dimensions:                       Abiad, Detragiache, and Tressel (2007)
                                              (1) credit controls and reserve requirements; (2) Interest rate controls; (3) Entry
                                              barriers; (4) State ownership in the banking sector; (5) Capital account restrictions;
                                              (6) Prudential regulations and supervision of the banking sector; and (7) Securities
                                              market policy. The index is just the sum of these seven dimensions(each of wich can
                                              take values between 0 and 3) and takes values between 0 (the lowest) and 21
                                              (the highest).
Key to sources: IFS=International Financial Statistics, IMF. WDI=World Development Indicators, World Bank, PWT=Penn World Tables, Center for International Comparisons, Univ. of
Pennsylvania, INS=Information Notice System, IMF


                                                                                           33
                                     Appendix 3
               THE GOURINCHAS-VALDES-LANDERRETCHE THRESHOLDS METHOD

    The thresholds method proposed by GVL uses the ratio of nominal credit to the
private sector to nominal GDP ( L / Y )i ,t as the measure of credit.18 They define the long-
run trend of credit using an “expanding trend” by applying the HP filter as follows: Given
a sample of data for dates t=1,…,T, denote ( L / Y )i ,t as the expanding HP trend of the
                                                    EHP


credit-GDP ratio in country i at date t, for 1≤ t ≤ T. This expanding trend is the trend
                                                                                     j =t
component of the HP filter applied to the sequence of data ⎡⎣ ( L / Y )i , j ⎤⎦        , where k is a
                                                                                j =− k

positive integer that defines the length of a sample of “initial data.” In particular, GVL
used a sample for 1960-1996 and set k=5, so their expanding trend starts in 1965 with
( L / Y )i ,1965 as the 1965 value of the HP trend computed using data from 1960 to 1965,
         EHP



( L / Y )i ,1966
          HP
                   is the 1966 value of the HP trend computed using data from 1960 to 1966,
and so on. Thus, the sample over which the trend is computed expands by one year as
each successive year in the sample is added. GVL compute all these trends setting the HP
smoothing parameter to 1000. 19

    GVL identify a country to have experienced a credit boom when one or more
contiguous dates satisfy the following condition: ⎡ ( L / Y )i ,t − ( L / Y )i ,t ⎤ ( L / Y )i ,t ≥ φ .
                                                                             EHP             EHP
                                                    ⎣                             ⎦
That is, the deviation from the expanding trend in the credit-GDP ratio must be at least as
large as a boom threshold φ .20 The peak of the credit boom occurs on the date within the
set included in the credit boom that shows the largest deviation from the expanding HP
trend, and the starting (ending) date is the date earlier (later) than the peak date at which
the credit-GDP ratio is higher (lower) than a “limit threshold.”21 GVL conduct their event
analysis using φ =19.5 percent and a limit threshold of 5 percent.




18
   Since credit is a stock variable, GVL proxy Yit as the geometric average of nominal GDP in t and t+1.
19
   GVL justify the expanding trend by arguing that it reflects the credit information available to
policymakers at a given time. As our comparison of the two methods showed, however, the expanding
trend yields a trend process that is close to a smoothed, one-period lagged transformation of the original
credit series, suggesting that the policymaker would tend to misinterpret the most recent credit observations
as part of a trend rather than a boom. Moreover, the credit data themselves are frequently revised, making
the expanding trend difficult to justify on the basis of representing the information available to
policymakers.
20
   GVL refer to this threshold as the “relative deviation threshold.” They also measured credit booms using
an “absolute deviation threshold,” which measures credit booms relative to the size of the economy instead
of the relative size of the banking sector. Their macro event analysis is based on the relative threshold.
21
   Notice that this limit threshold does not correct for the discrete nature of the data, as we did in our
method by defining the starting and ending thresholds using an absolute-value metric.


                                                     34
                               Figure 1. Credit Booms: Seven-Year Event Windows
                              (Deviations from HP-trend in Real Credit Per-Capita)
35                                                        35
       Industrial Countries                                     Emerging Economies
30                                                        30


25
                                                          25

20
                                                          20

15
                  Mean                                    15

10
                                                          10
                          Median
 5

                                                           5                                        Median
 0

                                                           0
 -5


-10                                                       -5                                 Mean


-15                                                      -10
      -3     -2      -1        0     1      2      3            -3     -2     -1     0   1     2        3
                                           CO                                                                                              D
                                               L                                                                                             N
                                                                                                                                               K




                    1/
                                                            1.50
                                                                   1.75
                                                                          2.00
                                                                                 2.25
                                                                                        2.50
                                                                                               2.75
                                                                                                      3.00
                                                                                                                               3.25
                                                                                                                                                            1.50
                                                                                                                                                                   1.75
                                                                                                                                                                          2.00
                                                                                                                                                                                 2.25
                                                                                                                                                                                        2.50
                                                                                                                                                                                               2.75
                                                                                                                                                                                                      3.00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         3.25
                                           PA _19                                                                                          BE _19
                                               K 97                                                                                            L_ 9 1
                                           TU _19                                                                                           IT 1 9 9
                                               R_ 86                                                                                           A 0
                                            ID 199                                                                                         A _19
                                               N 7                                                                                            U 9
                                                                                                                                               S 2
                                           N _19                                                                                           A _19
                                             G                                                                                               U 8
                                                                                                                                               T 9
                                               A 97
                                           ZA _19                                                                                          U _19
                                                                                                                                              SA 7
                                               F 82                                                                                                     2
                                           M _2                                                                                            BE _19
                                             A 00
                                               R 6                                                                                         A 19
                                                                                                                                               L_ 9 9
                                           CH _19                                                                                            U 8
                                               L 77                                                                                            T_ 0
                                           A _19                                                                                            IT 1 9 8
                                             RG 8                                                                                              A 0
                                                        1                                                                                        _
                                           P H _19                                                                                          IR 197
                                               L_ 8 2                                                                                          L_ 3
                                                                                                                                           G 19
                                           U 19                                                                                              BR 7
                                             RY 9
                                                        7                                                                                               9
                                                                                                                                           D _19
                                           EG _ 1 9                                                                                          EU 9
                                               Y 81                                                                                             _ 0
                                                 _                                                                                          IR 1 9 7
                                            CI 198                                                                                             L_ 3




Ongoing credit booms are shown in green.
                                               V 2
                                                 _                                                                                         P R 20
                                            S G 19                                                                                             T 00
                                                                                                                                           D _20
                                               P_ 78                                                                                         N
                                            JO 19                                                                                              K 01
                                               R 84                                                                                        FR _19
                                           H _19
                                             K                                                                                                 A 87
                                               G 70                                                                                        N _19
                                                                                                                                             O
                                           TU _19                                                                                              R 91
                                               R 98                                                                                        CA _19
                                           K _20                                                                                               N 88
                                             O
                                                                                                                                                                                                             INDUSTRIAL COUNTRIES




                                               R 06                                                                                        G _19
                                                                                                                                             RC 6
                                           P H _19                                                                                              _ 7
                                               L_ 9 8                                                                                       F I 197




                                                                                                             EMERGING MARKET ECONOMIES1/
                                            IN 1 9 8                                                                                           N 2
                                                                                                                                           N _19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Figure 2. Relative Credit Booms




                                               D 3
                                                 _                                                                                           LD 9
                                                                                                                                                        1
                                            CR 200                                                                                         N _19
                                                I_ 6                                                                                          ZL 7
                                                                                                                                                        9
                                           TH 1 9
                                               A 79                                                                                        P R _19
                                           M _19                                                                                               T_ 7 4
                                              Y 9                                                                                          CH 19
                                               S 7                                                                                             E 73
                                           M _19                                                                                           SW _19
                                              EX 9
                                                 _ 7                                                                                           E 90
                                             IS 199                                                                                        G _19
                                               R 4                                                                                           BR 9
                                           V _19                                                                                                _ 0
                                              EN 7                                                                                          J P 197
                                                 _2 9                                                                                          N 4
                                                                                                                                                _1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (Deviation from trend at peak of credit boom as a ratio of the std deviation of credit)




                                                   0                                                                                               9
                                               M 06                                                                                            M 73
                                                  ed                                                                                              ed
                                                     ia                                                                                              ia
                                                       n                                                                                               n
                                             Figure 3. Frequency of Credit Booms1/

 7
                                                                                                              Sudden
                 IND     EMEs                                                                                  Stops

 6



                                                                                       ERM and
 5                                                                                      Nordic                                                 ?
                                             Petro-dollar Recycling
                                                 and Debt Crises                        Crises
                       Bretton Woods
                          Collapse
 4




 3




 2




 1




 0
  67

            69

                   71

                          73

                                 75

                                        77

                                               79

                                                      81

                                                             83

                                                                    85

                                                                           87

                                                                                  89

                                                                                         91

                                                                                                93

                                                                                                       95

                                                                                                              97

                                                                                                                     99

                                                                                                                            01

                                                                                                                                   03

                                                                                                                                          05
19

          19

                 19

                        19

                               19

                                      19

                                             19

                                                    19

                                                           19

                                                                  19

                                                                         19

                                                                                19

                                                                                       19

                                                                                              19

                                                                                                     19

                                                                                                            19

                                                                                                                   19

                                                                                                                          20

                                                                                                                                 20

                                                                                                                                        20
     1/
          Ongoing credit booms are shown in green.
                    Figure 4. Credit Booms in Chile: the Mendoza-Terrones Method


     Panel 1                                            Panel 2
18                                                 18
       Real Credit, per capita                           Real Credit, per capita
       (Log, Lambda=100)                                 (Log, Lambda=1000)


16                                                 16
                                                                                                Boom
                                      Boom                                                    Threshold
                                    Threshold

14                                                 14


                                                          Duration
       Duration          HP Trend                        Threshold
12    Threshold                                    12                          HP Trend




10                                                 10




 8                                                  8
  1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005       1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005

     Panel 3                                            Panel 4
90                                                 90
       Credit to GDP ratio                               Credit to GDP ratio
       (Lambda=100)                                      (Lambda=1000)
80                                                 80
                                                                                           Duration
                                  Duration                                                Threshold
70                               Threshold         70


60                                                 60


50                      HP Trend                   50
                                                          Boom
                                                                               HP Trend
40                                                 40   Threshold
       Boom
     Threshold
30                                                 30


20                                                 20


10                                                 10


0                                                   0
 1967 1972 1977 1982 1987 1992 1997 2002             1967 1972 1977 1982 1987 1992 1997 2002
                     Figure 5. Credit Booms in Chile: the Gourinchas, Valdes, and
                                     Landerretche (GVL) Method
      Panel 1                                                 Panel 2
100                                                     100
        Credit to GDP ratio                                     Credit to GDP ratio
        (Lambda=1000)                                           (Lambda=100)
90                                                      90
                                                                                                    Boom
                                         Boom
80                                     Threshold        80                                                 Limit

70                                                      70


60                                                      60


50                                            Limit     50
                                            Threshold
40                                                      40


30                       HP Expanding                   30                        HP Expanding
                            Trend                                                    Trend

20                                                      20


10                                                      10


 0                                                       0
  1967 1972 1977 1982 1987 1992 1997 2002                 1967 1972 1977 1982 1987 1992 1997 2002

      Panel 3                                                 Panel 4
18                                                      18
      Real Credit, per capita                                  Real Credit, per capita
      (Log, Lambda=1000)               Boom
17                                                      17     (Log, Lambda=100)


16                                                      16
                                            Limit
15                                                      15                                  Limit

14                                                      14
                                                               Boom
13                                                      13


12                                                      12
                        HP expanding
                                                                              HP
                           Trend
11                                                      11                    Expanding
                                                                              Trend

10                                                      10


9                                                       9


8                                                       8
 1967 1972 1977 1982 1987 1992 1997 2002                 1967 1972 1977 1982 1987 1992 1997 2002
                                  Figure 6. Credit Booms in Chile: Expanding
                                            vs. Conventional Trend
100
            Credit to GDP Ratio
90


80


70


60


50


40
                          HP Trend           HP Expanding
30                                              Trend


20


10


 0
      1967 1969 1971 1973 1975 1977 1979 1981 1983 1985 1987 1989 1991 1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005


16
        Real Credit, per capita
        (Log)




14




12
                    HP Trend

                                          HP
                                       Expanding
                                         Trend
10




8
     1967 1969 1971 1973 1975 1977 1979 1981 1983 1985 1987 1989 1991 1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005
                                    Figure 7. Credit Booms and Economic Activity
                            (Cross-country means and medians of cyclical component of real GDP)
     Industrial Countries                                             Emerging Economies
5                                                               5
     Output (Y)                                                     Output (Y)
4                                                               4
                                                                              Mean

3                                                               3


2                                                               2


1                                                               1
                                   Mean

0                                                               0

                                                   Median
-1                                                             -1                                             Median


-2                                                             -2


-3                                                             -3


-4                                                             -4


-5                                                             -5
       -3         -2   -1      0          1    2        3             -3      -2       -1         0   1   2            3
                                Figure 8. Credit Booms and Domestic Demand
                           (Cross-country means and medians of cyclical components)
         Industrial Countries                                           Emerging Economies
5                                                              5
                                        Consumption (C)                                              Consumption (C)
4                                                              4
                                 Mean
3                                                              3
2                                                              2
1                             Median                           1
0                                                              0
-1                                                             -1                                              Median

-2                                                             -2
-3                                                             -3
                                                                                                           Mean
-4                                                             -4
-5                                                             -5
          -3       -2    -1        0       1     2         3             -3    -2     -1       0      1       2         3

5                                                              5
4                        Government Consumption (G)            4                      Government Consumption (G)
3                                                              3
                                                                                                   Mean
2                                                              2
1                                                              1                      Median
0          Mean                                                0
-1                                                             -1
                Median
-2                                                             -2
-3                                                             -3
-4                                                             -4
-5                                                             -5
          -3       -2    -1        0       1     2         3             -3    -2     -1       0      1       2         3

25                                                             25
                                          Investment (I)                                                   Investment (I)
20                                                             20

15                                 Mean                        15

10                                                             10

     5                     Median                                   5

     0                                                              0

 -5                                                             -5                                          Median

-10                                                            -10

-15                                                            -15                                  Mean

-20                                                            -20
           -3       -2    -1        0      1      2        3              -3    -2    -1       0      1        2        3
                      Figure 9. Credit Booms and the Non-tradables Sector
                         (Cross-country means and medians of cyclical components)
     Industrial Countries                                  Emerging Economies
8                                                     8
                                                           Non-tradables Output (YN)
       Non-tradables Output (YN)

6                                                     6



4                                                     4

                     Median
2                                                     2

                     Mean
0                                                     0

                                                                                                  Median

-2                                                   -2

                                                                                       Mean

-4                                                   -4



-6                                                   -6
      -3        -2     -1      0       1   2    3          -3     -2    -1      0      1      2       3


12                                                   12
            Real Exchange Rate (RER)                       Real Exchange Rate (RER)
10                                                   10


 8                                                    8


 6                                                    6

                                                                       Mean
 4                            Mean                    4


 2                                                    2

                              Median
 0                                                    0


-2                                                    -2

                                                                                           Median
-4                                                    -4


-6                                                    -6
       -3       -2      -1     0       1   2    3           -3    -2    -1      0      1      2       3
             Figure 10. Credit Booms, Current Account, and Capital Inflows
                          (Cross-country means and medians of cyclical component)
       Industrial Countries                                  Emerging Economies
2.0                                                    2.0
        Current Account-GDP ratio (CAY)                           Current Account-GDP ratio (CAY)


1.0                                                    1.0




0.0                                                    0.0
                                                             Mean


                            Median
-1.0                                                  -1.0
                                                             Median
                     Mean

-2.0                                                  -2.0




-3.0                                                  -3.0
        -3     -2      -1      0      1    2     3            -3       -2    -1    0       1      2    3


5                                                      5
        Capital Inflows-GDP ratio (KI)                       Capital Inflows-GDP ratio (KI)

4                                                      4


3                                                      3
                                   Mean
2                                                      2
                                                                                                Mean

1                                                      1
                    Median

0                                                      0


-1                                                    -1
                                                                                       Median

-2                                                    -2


-3                                                    -3
       -3     -2     -1       0       1   2      3           -3       -2    -1    0        1     2     3
                                                 Figure 11. Credit Booms and Prices
                                    (Cross-country means and medians of cyclical components)
         Industrial Countries                                               Emerging Markets
8                                                                       8
                                                                            Inflation rate
         Inflation rate
6                                                                       6

4                                         Mean                          4                            Mean

2                                                                       2
                                           Median
0                                                                       0

-2                                                                                                                      Median
                                                                       -2

-4                                                                     -4

-6
                                                                       -6
          -3         -2       -1     0           1      2        3
                                                                             -3       -2        -1      0       1       2        3

40                                                                    40
               Real stock prices                                            Real stock prices
30                                                                    30

20                                                                    20

10                                                                    10
                                                     Median
     0                                                                  0
                                                                                                               Median
-10                                                                   -10
                                             Mean

-20                                                                   -20
                                                                                                        Mean
-30                                                                   -30
           -3         -2       -1     0          1       2        3          -3       -2        -1      0       1       2        3

20                                                                    20
           Real house prices                                                Real house prices
15                                                                    15

10                                                                    10

     5                                                       Median    5

     0                                                                 0
                                                                                                                            Median
                                                     Mean
 -5                                                                    -5

-10                                                                   -10                                      Mean

-15                                                                   -15
           -3         -2       -1    0           1       2        3         -3        -2        -1      0       1       2        3
                            Figure 12. Credit Booms: Corporate Leverage

90                                                   90
          Total Debt to Book Value of Equity               Total Debt to Market
                        (LBV)                             Value of Equity (LMV)
80                                                   80


          Industrial
70        Countries                                  70



60                                                   60



50                                                   50
                                                           Industrial
                                                           Countries
40                                                   40


                Emerging Markets
30                                                   30
                                                                               Emerging Markets

20                                                   20
     -3       -2       -1       0   1       2    3        -3       -2     -1     0        1       2   3


40                                                   60
          Short Term Debt to Market Value of                   Current Liabilities to Sales (LWK)
                    Equity (SLMV)
35


                                                     50   Emerging Markets
30
             Emerging Markets

25

                                                     40

20
                                                                                 Industrial
                                                                                 Countries

15
                                                     30


10                                  Industrial
                                    Countries


 5                                                   20
     -3        -2      -1       0   1       2    3        -3       -2     -1     0        1       2   3
                         Figure 13. Credit Booms: Tobin's Q, Interest Rate,
                                         and Profitability
2.00                                                        1.60
                         Tobin's Q (Q1)                                            Tobin's Q (Q2)
1.80
                                                            1.40

1.60
                                       Industrial
                                       Countries            1.20           Emerging Markets
1.40


1.20                                                        1.00
                                                                                                  Industrial
                                                                                                  Countries
1.00
                                                            0.80

0.80

            Emerging Markets                                0.60
0.60


0.40                                                        0.40
        -3         -2     -1       0       1        2   3           -3      -2     -1        0      1          2   3


14                                                          8.5
               Effective Interest Rate (ER)                               Return on Assets (PR)


                                                            7.5
12                                                                                     Emerging Markets

            Industrial
            Countries
                                                            6.5


10


                                                            5.5    Industrial
                                                                   Countries


 8
                                                            4.5
                               Emerging Markets




 6                                                          3.5
       -3        -2      -1       0       1         2   3          -3      -2     -1        0      1           2   3
             Figure 14. Credit Booms: Corporate External Financing


0.75
                                  Rajan-Zingales Index (RZ)

0.50
                                                        Emerging Markets

0.25

                           Industrial
0.00                       Countries


-0.25


-0.50


-0.75


-1.00
        -3          -2          -1            0               1            2   3
                           Figure 15. Credit Booms: Financial Indicators
                                            Regional Differences

160                                                     100
       Total Debt to Market Value (LMV)                        Current Liabilities to Sales (LWK)


                                                         80
                   Asia
120



                                                         60
                                                                             Asia
 80


                                                         40
                                                                                         LA


 40
                                       LA
                                                         20




  0                                                        0
       -3    -2       -1      0    1        2    3             -3       -2      -1   0             1       2       3


1.60                                                   1.00
        Tobin's Q (Q1)                                             Rajan-Zingales Index of External
                                                                   Financing (RZ)
1.40
                                                       0.50          Asia
                                                                                          LA

1.20

                                                       0.00
                   Asia

1.00


                                                       -0.50

0.80                              LA



                                                       -1.00
0.60




0.40                                                   -1.50
        -3    -2      -1      0    1        2    3             -3       -2      -1   0         1       2       3
                   Figure 16. Credit Booms: Corporate Leverage and External
                            Financing in Emerging Market Countries
65                                                         20    110                                                               20
            Total Debt to Book Value of                                Total Debt to Market Value of Equity
60                 Equity (LBV)                                  100                  (LMV)
                                                           15                                                                      15
                                     Tradable                     90
55
                                      Sector
                                                                  80
50                                                         10                                                                      10

                                                                  70
45
                                                           5      60                                                               5
40
                    Non-                                          50          Tradable
                   Tradable                                                    Sector
35                                                         0                                                                       0
                    Sector
                                                                  40

30
                                                                  30
                                                           -5                                                                      -5
25                                           RER (Right                                                           RER (Right
                                                                  20
                                               Axis)                           Non-Tradable                         Axis)
                                                                                  Sector
20                                                         -10    10                                                               -10
     -3      -2       -1      0       1         2     3                  -3       -2       -1       0   1          2       3


60                                                         20    1.50                                                                  20

          Current Liabilities to Sales (LWK)                                   Rajan-Zingales Index of External
                                                                                       Financing (RZ)
                                                                 1.00
55                                                         15                                                                          15


                                                                 0.50
50                                                         10                                                                          10
                                           Non-Tradable
                                              Sector
                                                                 0.00
                                                                                                                Tradable
45                                                         5                              Non-                                         5
                                                                                                                 Sector
                                                                                         Tradable
                                                                 -0.50                    Sector
                                                Tradable
40                                               Sector    0                                                                           0
                                                                 -1.00
                        RER (Right
                          Axis)
35                                                         -5                                                                          -5
                                                                 -1.50
                                                                                                                 RER (Right
                                                                                                                   Axis)
30                                                         -10 -2.00                                                                   -10
     -3       -2       -1     0        1        2     3                   -3       -2       -1      0       1          2       3
                                 Figure 17. Credit Booms: Bank Level Data
                                        Emerging Market Economies
12                                                       65
      Asset Quality                                            Credit Operations


10




 8                                                       60




 6
                                                                                       LAR

                               NPL
 4                                                       55




 2




 0                                                       50
      -2        -1         0         1       2       3        -2    -1     0       1         2   3


1.6                                                      15
           Profitability                                      Capital Adequacy


1.4
                                                         14


                                                                                   CAR
1.2


                                                         13
                               ROA
 1



                                                         12
0.8




0.6                                                      11
      -2        -1         0         1   2       3            -2    -1     0       1         2   3
                         Table 1. Credit Booms: Duration
 Starting and     Emerging Market Economies              Industrial Countries
   Ending                    Fraction spent in                   Fraction spent in
 Thresholds     Duration   Upswing Downturn       Duration    Upswing Downturn

A. Mean
    0.00         7.76       0.47       0.40         6.93       0.41        0.45
    0.25         7.00       0.47       0.39         6.30       0.41        0.44
    0.50         6.05       0.46       0.38         5.63       0.39        0.43
    0.75         5.24       0.43       0.38         5.00       0.40        0.40
    1.00         4.62       0.41       0.37         4.67       0.39        0.40

B. Median
    0.00         7.00       0.57       0.43         7.00       0.43        0.43
    0.25         7.00       0.43       0.29         6.00       0.50        0.33
    0.50         6.00       0.50       0.33         6.00       0.33        0.33
    0.75         5.00       0.40       0.40         5.00       0.40        0.40
    1.00         5.00       0.40       0.40         4.00       0.50        0.50
                      Table 2. Coincidence of Credit Booms with
                             Output and Demand Booms1/
                                     (Frequency)

                                                         Emerging
                                         Industrial
                                                          Market              All
                                         Countries
                                                         Economies

Output                                      0.56             0.32             0.45
Non-tradable Output                         0.33             0.55             0.43

Consumption                                 0.56             0.36             0.47
Investment                                  0.59             0.55             0.57
Government Expenditures                     0.33             0.41             0.37


1/
  The figures reported in this Table are fractions of credit booms that coincide
with output/demand boom, within the seven-year window of the credit boom.
The output/demand boom has been determined using a similar method to the one
employed to determine credit booms, with a boom threshold factor of 1.75.
                                                                    Table 3. Credit Booms: Statistical Significance of Event-Window Coefficients.


                                                                        Industrial Countries                                                                   Emerging Market Economies
                                         t-3          t-2         t-1            t-0         t+1         t+2          t+3              t-3          t-2         t-1       t-0       t+1                   t+2      t+3


1. Mean Values

Real credit                           -0.027**     0.026**     0.103***      0.141***    0.098***       0.032**      -0.012           0.004      0.081**     0.202***     0.283***     0.224***        0.058      -0.064*
                                       (0.013)     (0.013)      (0.012)       (0.012)     (0.012)       (0.013)     (0.013)         (0.034)      (0.034)      (0.033)      (0.032)      (0.035)       (0.036)     (0.036)
Output                                  0.007     0.016***     0.030***      0.031***    0.012***      -0.012**    -0.019***         0.007       0.022**     0.037***     0.032***       -0.011     -0.026***   -0.025***
                                       (0.005)     (0.005)      (0.005)       (0.005)     (0.005)       (0.005)     (0.005)         (0.009)      (0.009)      (0.009)      (0.009)       (0.01)        (0.01)      (0.01)
Non-tradable Output                     0.008        0.012      0.018**      0.029***    0.022***         0.003      -0.011           0.011     0.044***     0.057***     0.069***        0.016      -0.028**    -0.028**
                                       (0.009)     (0.008)      (0.008)       (0.008)     (0.008)       (0.008)     (0.008)         (0.011)      (0.011)      (0.011)      (0.011)      (0.012)       (0.011)     (0.011)
Consumption                             0.005     0.018***     0.030***      0.027***    0.013***        -0.005    -0.018***         0.003       0.024**     0.046***     0.041***       -0.011      -0.027**   -0.032***
                                       (0.005)     (0.005)      (0.005)       (0.005)     (0.005)       (0.005)     (0.005)         (0.011)      (0.011)      (0.011)      (0.011)      (0.012)       (0.012)     (0.012)
Government Consumption                 -0.007*      -0.002       0.004         0.007*     0.009**       0.009**       0.002          -0.001        0.012     0.036***      0.031**        0.010        0.002       -0.014
                                       (0.004)     (0.004)      (0.004)       (0.004)     (0.004)       (0.004)     (0.004)         (0.013)      (0.013)      (0.013)      (0.013)      (0.014)       (0.014)     (0.014)
Investment                              0.026     0.063***     0.112***      0.121***      0.024      -0.064***    -0.075***          0.015     0.129***     0.191***     0.177***       -0.039     -0.153***    -0.095**
                                       (0.017)     (0.017)      (0.017)       (0.016)     (0.017)       (0.017)     (0.017)         (0.034)      (0.034)      (0.034)      (0.034)      (0.037)       (0.037)     (0.037)
REER                                   -0.024*      -0.013       0.004        0.031**      0.015          0.002      -0.005          0.035         0.033      0.060**       0.039         0.005        0.039        0.013
                                       (0.014)     (0.014)      (0.014)       (0.014)     (0.014)       (0.013)     (0.012)         (0.031)      (0.029)      (0.027)      (0.027)       (0.03)       (0.029)     (0.028)
Current Account Balance                 0.003       -0.003     -0.009***     -0.021***   -0.011***       -0.001      0.005          -0.003        -0.003     -0.019***    -0.021***      0.012         0.007       0.003
                                       (0.004)     (0.004)      (0.004)       (0.003)     (0.003)       (0.003)     (0.003)         (0.007)      (0.007)      (0.007)      (0.007)      (0.008)       (0.008)     (0.008)

2. Median Values

Real credit                             -0.015      -0.015       -0.015        -0.015      -0.015       -0.015       -0.015          0.010       0.048**     0.157***     0.260***     0.212***       0.052**     -0.019
                                       (0.015)     (0.015)      (0.013)       (0.013)     (0.013)      (0.014)      (0.015)         (0.022)      (0.023)      (0.023)      (0.023)      (0.025)       (0.024)    (0.024)
Output                                   0.009    0.017***     0.031***      0.028***    0.016***      -0.010*     -0.015***         0.004       0.023**     0.027***     0.036***       -0.011       -0.014*   -0.032***
                                       (0.006)     (0.006)      (0.006)       (0.005)     (0.006)      (0.006)      (0.006)         (0.009)      (0.009)      (0.009)      (0.009)       (0.01)       (0.008)    (0.008)
Non-tradable Output                      0.007       0.013     0.023***      0.029***       0.011       -0.004       -0.009          0.010      0.054***     0.052***     0.066***        0.013       -0.016*   -0.025***
                                       (0.009)     (0.008)      (0.008)       (0.008)     (0.008)      (0.008)      (0.008)         (0.009)      (0.008)      (0.008)      (0.008)      (0.009)       (0.009)     (0.01)
Consumption                              0.005     0.011**     0.031***      0.022***      0.009*       -0.004     -0.017***         0.003      0.035***     0.042***     0.041***       -0.009      -0.023**   -0.026***
                                       (0.006)     (0.006)      (0.006)       (0.005)     (0.005)      (0.006)      (0.005)         (0.009)      (0.009)      (0.009)      (0.009)       (0.01)        (0.01)     (0.01)
Government Consumption                -0.010**    -0.012***      0.003        0.009**     0.010**        0.005        0.006          0.015         0.015      0.029**     0.031***        0.017         0.009    -0.022*
                                       (0.004)     (0.004)      (0.005)       (0.005)     (0.005)      (0.005)      (0.005)         (0.012)      (0.012)      (0.012)      (0.012)      (0.012)       (0.012)    (0.012)
Investment                             0.025*     0.045***     0.111***      0.101***      0.027*     -0.067***    -0.076***         0.035      0.128***     0.173***     0.169***      -0.046*     -0.134***    -0.051*
                                       (0.014)     (0.014)      (0.016)       (0.016)     (0.015)      (0.013)      (0.014)         (0.027)      (0.025)      (0.027)      (0.026)      (0.028)       (0.029)    (0.029)
REER                                    -0.006      -0.015       0.001         0.026*       0.014       -0.011       -0.006          0.028       0.056**     0.067***       0.020         0.022        -0.008     -0.038
                                       (0.012)     (0.013)      (0.012)       (0.014)     (0.012)       (0.01)       (0.01)         (0.028)      (0.026)      (0.025)      (0.025)      (0.026)       (0.026)    (0.025)
Current Account Balance                 0.003       -0.001     -0.009**      -0.018***   -0.009***      -0.001       0.003          -0.007        -0.007     -0.024***    -0.022***     0.015**        0.006      0.002
                                       (0.003)     (0.003)      (0.003)       (0.003)     (0.003)      (0.003)      (0.003)         (0.005)      (0.004)      (0.005)      (0.005)      (0.006)       (0.005)    (0.005)

Note: Standard errors are in brackets. The coefficients are obtained by regressing each macroeconomic aggregate on a constant. The symbols *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%,
5%, and 1% level, respectively.
                                             Table 4. Credit Booms: Regional Features
                                            (Cross-country median of cyclical components)


                  Variable                Region                                            Date
                                                           t-3         t-2          t-1      t-0     t+1      t+2      t+3


                                          A. Industrial Countries: G7 vs Nordic Countries

                                   G7                     -0.76       3.89         7.76     10.82    9.09    3.26      -1.26
Real credit
                                   Nordic                 -1.05       7.68        13.54     17.77   14.67    7.77      1.29
                                   G7                     0.88        1.84         2.78      1.87   -0.33    -1.98     -1.35
Output (Y )
                                   Nordic                 2.07        3.55         3.89     -0.49   -1.48    -2.64     -2.34
                                   G7                     1.46        1.70         1.80      1.55   -0.05    -1.64     -0.45
Non-tradables Output (YN )
                                   Nordic                 3.11        4.83         5.78      3.75    0.63    0.79      -2.74
                                   G7                     1.04        2.08         2.77      1.77    0.26    -1.06     -1.76
Consumption ( C )
                                   Nordic                 4.22        5.22         4.92      2.06   -0.81    -2.81     -2.54
                                   G7                     3.62        7.67         9.48      7.08   -2.07    -7.50     -5.14
Investment (I )
                                   Nordic                 4.35        9.20        19.64      6.46   -0.58    -7.61    -12.31
                                   G7                     -2.89       -0.63        2.87      3.87    2.48    3.75      -1.99
Real Exchange Rate (RER )
                                   Nordic                 -0.77       -2.46        0.18      3.60    1.44    0.77      -0.18
                                   G7                     0.09        -0.31       -0.88     -1.09    0.05    0.05      0.06
Current Account-GDP ratio (CAY )
                                   Nordic                 0.08        -2.10       -2.71     -1.42   -0.78    -0.31     0.82

                                      B. Emerging Economies: Latin America (LA) vs Asia

                                   LA                     13.22       29.52       43.14     48.14   39.64    12.61     -6.30
Real credit
                                   Asia                    1.09        4.90       12.22     24.68   21.10     1.34     -3.97
                                   LA                      1.10        5.50        4.64      5.73    1.06     -2.32    -5.19
Output (Y )
                                   Asia                    3.78        3.38        4.41      3.55    -3.89    -1.48    -3.19
                                   LA                      0.98        6.35        6.02      6.90    1.81     0.28     -2.90
Non-tradables Output (YN )
                                   Asia                    4.15        5.39        6.77      6.51    -0.36    -3.08    -2.00
                                   LA                      0.88        5.50        7.21      8.78    2.10     -4.65    -5.41
Consumption ( C )
                                   Asia                    2.99        3.93        6.18      1.12    -5.23    -2.22    -1.56
                                   LA                      8.95       23.02       17.84     20.62    3.26    -17.89   -22.12
Investment (I )
                                   Asia                   12.08       14.29       20.70     17.00   -11.58   -11.13    -4.76
                                   LA                     10.40       16.50       13.71     16.85   12.83     -2.36    -3.74
Real Exchange Rate (RER )
                                   Asia                    4.22        7.05       10.97      8.96    -6.71    -1.30    -6.88
                                   LA                     -0.84       -1.68       -2.41     -2.96    -0.86    1.46     0.24
Current Account-GDP ratio (CAY )
                                   Asia                   -2.50       -3.24       -3.22     -2.37    3.40     0.40     0.66
                                                                      Table 5. Credit Booms and Crises1/
                                                                                      (Frequency)



                                                 Banking crises2/                                    Currency crises3/                     Sudden Stops4/
                                    Before      Peak        After       Total           Before       Peak       After    Total   Before   Peak       After   Total
                                                Boom                                                 Boom                                 Boom


All countries                        0.15        0.15       0.04        0.33             0.23        0.15        0.23    0.60    0.06     0.06       0.04    0.17

Industrial Countries                 0.08        0.08       0.00        0.15             0.15        0.08        0.31    0.54    0.00     0.00       0.04    0.04

Emerging Market Economies            0.23        0.23       0.09        0.55             0.32        0.23        0.14    0.68    0.14     0.14       0.05    0.32



1/
   Coincidence of credit booms and financial crises in the seven-year window around the boom.
2/
   Banking crises as defined by Demirguic-Kunt and Detragiache (2006). See Appendix 2 for details.
3/
   Currency crises as defined by Eichengreen and Bordo (2002). See Appendix 2 for details.
4/
   Sudden Stops as defined by Calvo, Izquierdo and Mejia (2004). See Appendix 2 for details.
                      Table 6. Credit Booms: Potential Triggering Factors1/.
                                             (Frequency distribution)

                                                                                   Emerging
                                                                  Industrial
                                                                                    Market              All
                                                                  Countries
                                                                                   Economies

Large Capital Inflows (A) 2/                                         0.27             0.50              0.52
Significant Productivity Gains (B) 3/                                0.40             0.17              0.33
Large Financial Sector Changes (C ) 4/                               0.33             0.22              0.27
Other                                                                0.27             0.39              0.30

Memo items:
(A) & (B)                                                            0.07             0.00              0.09
(A) & (C )                                                           0.00             0.06              0.12
(B) & (C )                                                           0.07             0.11              0.09
(A) & (B) & (C )                                                     0.07             0.06              0.06


1/
   Because of data availability we have used the 1975-2005 period only.
2/
   The three-year average of capital inflow before the peak of the boom ranks in the top quartile of
their corresponding country group.
3/
   The three-year average of the annual growth rate of TFP before the peak of the boom ranks in the
top quartile of their corresponding country group.
4/
   The three-year change before the peak of the boom in the financial reform index ranks in the top
quartile of their corresponding country group.


                         Table 7. Credit Booms and exchange rate regimes
                                             (Frequency distribution)

                                                                                   Emerging
                                                                  Industrial
                                                                                    Market              All
                                                                  Countries
                                                                                   Economies

Fixed and managed1/                                                 77.78             73.91            76.00
Dirty Floating2/                                                     7.41             17.39            12.00
Floating3/                                                           7.41              0.00             4.00
Mixed                                                                7.41              8.70             8.00



1/
  Fixed and managed includes the following regimes from the Reinhart-Rogoff (2004) classification: no separate
legal tender, pre-announced peg or currency board arrangement, pre-announced horizontal band that is narrower
than or equal to +/- 2%, de facto peg, pre-announced crawling peg, pre-announced crawling band that is narrower
than or equal to +/-2%, de facto crawling peg, and de facto crawling band that is narrower than or equal to +/-2%.
2/
   Dirty floating includes the following regimes from the Reinhart-Rogoff (2004) classification: pre-announced
crawling band wider than or equal to +/-2%, de facto crawling band narrower than or equal to +/-5%, moving
band that is narrower than or equal to +/- 2%, and managed floating.
3/
   Freely floating regimes from the Reinhart-Rogoff (2004) classification.
