NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CONSISTENT TRADE POLICY AGGREGATION
James E. Anderson
Working Paper 14046
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14046

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2008

I am grateful to Will Martin for suggesting the topic of this paper to me, and for helpful comments,
to G. Chris Rodrigo for assistance with preparing the data and for helpful comments. I am also grateful
to the World Bank for research support. I thank the referees for their helpful comments. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by James E. Anderson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Consistent Trade Policy Aggregation
James E. Anderson
NBER Working Paper No. 14046
May 2008
JEL No. C43,D58,F10,F13,F17
ABSTRACT
Most empirical policy work requires the aggregation of policies. Trade policy aggregation exemplifies
the aggregation problem poignantly, with thousands of highly dispersed trade barriers. This paper
provides methods of policy aggregation that are consistent with two common objectives of empirical
work. One is to preserve real income. The other is to preserve the real volume of activity in the parts
of the economy being aggregated. Both objectives must be achieved for consistent multi-country policy
modeling. An application to India shows that the standard atheoretic method of aggregation overstates
India's real income by around 3 times the global gains from free trade.

James E. Anderson
Department of Economics
Boston College
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
and NBER
james.anderson.1@bc.edu

Aggregation of policy variables is unavoidable in empirical work. Data limitations and
computational burdens dictate that extremely detailed policies must be combined into
summary indexes. The focus of this paper is on trade policy aggregation, a particularly
poignant form of the problem,1 but the discussion applies to other policy aggregation
problems as well. The dirty little secret of trade policy empirical work is that atheoretic
policy aggregation contaminates the results. How much could not previously be even
guessed at because no consistent aggregation concept existed against which to measure
standard practice.
This paper develops aggregation methods that are consistent with two common
intermediate objectives of empirical work: to preserve the relationship between the policy
and real income and to preserve the relationship between the policy and the real volume
of activities in sectors of the economy that are relevant to the purpose of the work. An
application of the methods of this paper to evaluation of Indian trade policy shows that
aggregation bias is large.
“Getting the policy wedges right” is important for getting real income right, as
suggested by intuition based on dead weight loss triangles: the loss is roughly
proportional to the square of the policy wedge. Reasoning developed below shows that

1

Tariffs are typically levied on some 10,000 product lines, and are discriminatory

across some 200 countries. It is infeasible to build disaggregated models at the level of
the 2 million categories implied by the tariff line data, particularly since information on
production and consumption is only available at much higher levels of aggregation.
Aggregation up to a level consistent with the available information on production and
consumption allows modeling to take advantage of the detailed information on
protection, while using the available information on production and consumption.

the aggregated wedges are too small by significant amounts, so welfare effects are too
small in absolute value.
Getting the policy wedges right is also important for getting trade volume and
domestic economic activity right. The wedges act on volume directly through the
substitution effect and indirectly through the income effect. In simulation models the bias
is difficult to determine a priori because there are offsetting effects in general
equilibrium. In econometric models, the bias is unknown, since it depends on the
correlation between the aggregation error and the dependent variables of the analysis.
Low or negative correlation between consistent and standard aggregates is sometimes
plausible, which suggests substantial bias.
The aggregation methods of this paper supply the right aggregate wedges for
getting real income right and a different set of correct aggregate wedges for getting
sectoral volumes right. These two distinct aggregates are required for both policy
simulation models and econometric models. Using the methods, investigators can
consistently aggregate tariffs or tariff equivalents of quotas from the thousands of lines
found in the tariff data to the dozens of separate lines used in standard policy simulation
models or the hundreds of lines (sometimes) used in econometric models of trade flows.
The exposition concentrates on tariffs, noting the changes needed to treat the tariff
equivalents of quotas in an appendix.
Consistent aggregation is only possible within a restrictive class of model
structures. Start from a multi-good multi-country representative agent general equilibrium
model with convex structure. All problems due to the heterogeneous response of

2

individual agents to specific policies are thus assumed away.2 Even so, without
separability in preferences and technology, consistent aggregation with respect to prices
or quantities is impossible, as Leontief and others showed long ago. Assuming
separability and homotheticity at the lower level of aggregation, two (or multi-) stage
budgeting characterizes both demand and supply. Exact aggregate price indexes can then
be defined that maintain consistency with exact aggregate quantities.3 These enter the
simulation or econometric model as if the indexes characterized single goods. While the
separable setup is highly restrictive, it includes most applied general equilibrium models.
Section 1 presents the basic description of the economy.
Consistent tariff aggregation is developed starting in Section 2 with the small
country case where world prices are constant. The aggregation problem with respect to
real income is to aggregate tariffs on a product group (e.g., clothing) over its member
product varieties (e.g., men’s shirts, men’s trousers) such that real income is preserved in
the general equilibrium of the economy. The aggregation problem with respect to trade
volume is to aggregate tariffs such that group trade volume is preserved in the general
equilibrium. The procedure developed below utilizes two indexes. The trade weighted
average tariff is needed to get tariff revenue right and hence to get real income right. The
‘true average tariff’4 is needed to get the volume of activities right for given real income.

2

See Blundell and Stoker (2005) for a good survey of work on the heterogeneous

agents problem.
3

See for example Diewert (1981).

4

Anderson and Neary (2005) use this term, by analogy with the ‘true cost of

living index’.
3

The true average tariff is the tariff aggregator that consistently generates
aggregate trade volume and aggregate prices in the separable product group at given real
income. The concept is familiar, from index number theory, but it is not consistent with
general equilibrium real income unless combined in the model with the trade weighted
average tariff in exactly the right way shown below.
Bach and Martin (2001) first called attention to the problem of consistent sectoral
tariff aggregation in general equilibrium. Their solution was to use a revenue constant
uniform tariff along with the true average tariff (which they called the tariff aggregator
for expenditure) as the basis of a compensating variation approach to consistent
aggregation. While the Bach and Martin approach works for welfare analysis in a single
country model, they point out that it breaks down in a global model because global
payments do not balance. This paper solves the global balance problem along with the
problem of preserving real income with a readily operational method.
With the methods of this paper, both the true and trade weighted sectoral tariff
averages are required to consistently determine real income. In contrast, the Trade
Restrictiveness Index of Anderson and Neary (2005) preserves real income in shifting
from the actual vector of tariffs to a single uniform welfare equivalent tariff.5 This
suggests a relationship between the welfare equivalent uniform tariff on the one hand and
the pair of tariff averages used here, an issue explored below.

5

Their focus is mainly on an overall TRI, but they also apply it to a separable

product group: the uniform tariff on all members of the group that yields in equilibrium
the same real income as the differentiated tariff structure of clothing.
4

In a broader context, the paper is related to Goulder and Williams (2003). They
propose an approximation to the measurement of excess burden in general equilibrium
that improves on the standard Harberger triangle while avoiding the heavy information
requirements of the theoretically correct formula. By taking account of substitution
between leisure and the good subject to tax reform, much of the general equilibrium
impact of the tax reform can be captured and added to the Harberger triangle. Moreover,
the bias from standard practice is substantial. Similarly, this paper argues that imposing
separability permits operational trade policy aggregates to be constructed that improve on
the atheoretic aggregates that are commonly used, and that the bias from standard
practice is substantial.
Section 3 analyzes an interdependent world economy comprised of two
countries.6 General economic equilibrium requires market clearance, with the mechanism
of adjustment being world prices. The supply side of the model is simplified to a
Ricardian technology within each sector to be aggregated. With separability on the
demand side there is a natural price aggregate in terms of world prices for each product
group. The same tariff aggregation methods apply as in Section 2. Domestic price
aggregates are wedged away from the world price aggregate by the consistent tariff
aggregator. The consistent aggregator for trade volume purposes is the true average tariff.
A key contribution of this paper is to provide a consistent conversion of aggregated trade
volume measured in internally consistent units (utilizing the true average tariff) into
aggregated trade volume measured in externally consistent units (utilizing both the true

6

The extension to more countries is cumbersome but the principles are the same.

5

average tariff and the trade weighted average tariff). This conversion is necessary for
global modeling in which world markets must clear and global payments must balance.
The methods of this paper evade an existence or uniqueness problem that arises
with aggregation using the TRI in the large country case. Anderson and Neary (2005,
Chapter 9) and Dakhlia and Temimi (2006) note that the TRI may not exist in the large
country case and where it exists it need not be unique. Essentially, the present methods,
by using two different indexes, are able to get both the domestic price aggregate (and
hence quantity aggregate, the trade volume) right and the tariff revenue right (and hence
real income right). In contrast, the uniform welfare equivalent tariff (the TRI) is subject
to the tension between the revenue (and hence real income) effects of terms of trade
changes and the real income effect of higher tariffs at constant terms of trade, hence the
single welfare equivalent uniform tariff may not be able to get both right in the large
country case.
Section 4 presents an application to India in 1991 and 2004 using a simple
computable general equilibrium model of India and the rest of the world. Tariffs at the 4
digit level for 1991 (around 1200 items) and 6 digit level for 2004 (around 5500 items)
are aggregated to form two composites, final goods imports and intermediate goods
imports. Aggregation bias is large, using trade weighted as opposed to consistently
aggregated tariffs overstates real income for India by nearly 1%. More significantly,
aggregation bias is very large relative to the gains from liberal trade. For this comparison
it is necessary to control for the terms of trade effect. Simulating the effects of unilateral
free trade for India at constant world prices using both trade weighted and consistent
aggregation shows that the gain is understated by a factor ranging from 4 (in 1991) to 50

6

(in 2004). Alternatively scaled, the initial overstatement of real income is around 3
times the global gains from multilateral free trade. The bias results from the dispersion of
the underlying tariffs that pushes apart the true average tariff and the trade weighed
average tariff. Cutting the dispersion in half still leaves considerable bias, with the
estimates converging only as the dispersion of the tariff structure disappears.
Section 5 examines the relationship between the various tariff aggregates, with
emphasis on the role of dispersion in connecting the TRI (the real income equivalent
aggregator) to the trade weighted average tariff. Section 6 concludes.
Appendix A examines policy aggregation with quotas. Appendix B sets out
details of the application to India in 1991. An appendix available on request provides
further guidance for policy modelers who may apply the methods advocated in this
paper.7

7

The treatment steps through the creation of true average and trade weighted

average tariffs at the sectoral level and their input into the global trade simulation model.
Then consistent aggregation is illustrated with a very simple 2 country global trade model
(even simpler than the India application) that has the virtue of permitting a decomposition
of the effects of trade reform into efficiency effects and terms of trade effects. Here too,
the real income loss due to protection using consistent aggregation is more than three
times the real income loss estimated using trade weighted average sectoral tariffs.

7

1. The Basic Model
Trade policy affects the domestic price vectors of tradable goods ( p, π ) relative
to a non-taxed numeraire good. The vector of goods with price vector p is to be
aggregated consistently. In the background, the equilibrium prices of nontraded goods
and factors are determined by market clearance as functions of the prices of traded goods
and real income u, as explained further below. World prices are given by ( pW , π W )
where the bar denotes that these prices are constant by the small country assumption. In
Section 3 the bar is removed and world prices become endogenous. Domestic prices are
wedged away from world prices by a vector of trade taxes or subsidies, p − p W , π − π W .
The trade expenditure function summarizes demand and supply behavior of the
representative agent economy. Trade expenditure E( p, π ,u) is the difference between the
expenditure function e( p, π ,u) and the gross domestic product function g( p, π ) , each
function having standard properties. The excess demand vectors are equal to
E p = e p − g p and Eπ = eπ − gπ , by Shephard’s and Hotelling’s Lemmas. Trade tax
revenue is given by ( p − p W )' E p + (π − π W )' Eπ . Assume for simplicity that the only
source of tax or subsidy activity comes on traded goods. No essential qualitative
difference arises from this simplification: the aggregation problem remains the same
when nontraded goods and factors are taxed.8

8

The policy aggregation problem for nontraded goods and factor taxes resembles

that for trade policies and will have very similar solutions. It is perhaps less ubiquitous a
problem because nontraded goods and factor taxes appear to be less highly differentiated
8

The equilibrium level of real income is determined by the international budget
constraint, the value of imports at world prices cannot exceed the value of exports at
world prices by more than the given international transfer b. The international budget
constraint is conveniently rewritten as:
B( p, π ,u; p W , π W ) ≡ E( p, π ,u) − ( p − p W )' E p − (π − π W )' Eπ − b ≤ 0.

(1.1)

The middle expression sets out the structure of the balance of trade function,
B( p, π ,u; pW , π W ,b) . The equilibrium condition is
B( p, π ,u; pW , π W ,b) = 0.
Real income u is determined by trade policies and world prices using all the
information embedded in the above reduced form equation. In general, no aggregation of
the prices and trade policies of the p group can do the job. Also, the determination of
trade volumes eπ − gπ and ‘market access’ p W '(e p − g p ) for given real income requires
all the details of the dependence of ep − g p on the vector p. In contrast, in the special case
of separability, consistent aggregation is possible.
Specifically, the set of goods with prices p are assumed to enter preferences or
production separably (weak separability is assumed) and homothetically (at the lower
level of the separable preferences). Thus the price aggregator φ ( p ) , concave and
homogeneous of degree one in p , enters either as a preference aggregator ( gφ = 0 ) or a
technology aggregator ( eφ = 0 ), with the latter representing either outputs (exports) or
inputs (imported intermediates). Besides the traded goods, each country produces a

than trade taxes. The appearance may be deceptive, however, because income tax codes
in many OECD countries are complex.
9

vector of nontraded goods with price vector h. In the background, the gross domestic
product function embeds the nontraded primary factors of production.
The trade expenditure function is defined by
E[φ ( p), π ,u] ≡ max e[δφ ( p), π , h,u] − g[(1 − δ )φ ( p), π , h] ,
h

where h is the price vector of nontraded goods and δ is equal to either zero or one
depending on whether the tariffs being aggregated are either intermediate goods or final
goods. Note that the first order condition is implied by market clearance for nontraded
goods while the concavity of e-g guarantees a unique global maximum. While the trade
expenditure function pushes nontraded goods into the background, it remains concave
and homogeneous of degree one in the traded goods prices and retains separability.
Note that this setup imposes the Armington assumption: domestically produced
traded goods are not perfect substitutes for domestic products consumed at home. On top
of this, it imposes two levels of separability --- between product class i and all other
product classes, and between domestic and all imported varieties of product class i. To
illustrate, this means that domestic peanuts (with a price that enters the vector π ) are a
different good from imported peanuts (with price vector p covering the varieties of
peanuts imported from all the other countries in the world).9 The imperfect substitutes
assumption is ubiquitous in empirical work because the perfect substitutes case yields
predictions that are wildly far from the observable trade patterns. The extra restriction of

9

Manole and Martin (2006) point out that this setup is more restrictive than

Armington’s original assumptions where there is a single CES aggregator over domestic
and imported goods.
10

separability is widely used in computable general equilibrium models. This separability
also permits consistent aggregation.10
By assumption, the price aggregator φ will consistently yield the correct trade
volumes for given levels of real income. Thus, by Shephard’s Lemma, the trade vector
for the unaggregated goods is given by Eπ (φ , π ,u) while the aggregate volume of trade
for the p group is given by Eφ (φ , π , u ). The individual volumes within the p group are
given by Eφφ p . Note, however, that the balance of trade function defined by the left hand
side of (1.1) does not similarly reduce its dependence on p to the price aggregator φ .

2. Trade Policy Aggregation
Let T a denote the trade weighted (on the domestic price base) average tariff:

T a ≡ ∑ wiTi where Ti ≡ ( pi − piW ) / pi and wi ≡ pi E pi / ∑ pi E pi . Let T δ denote the ‘true
i

i

average tariff’ defined by

10

It may be possible to relax the aggregation restrictions somewhat, but this must

await further work. To see the issue involved, suppose that one element of p was an
argument of the gross domestic product function while still appearing in the expenditure
function aggregator φ . Try to work through the various steps taken below to achieve
consistent aggregation, and notice that it is not possible. Bach and Martin show that a
closed form solution is feasible for the CES case but not for their tariff revenue
aggregator.
How much bias is due to imposing separability on various non-separable
structures is an important issue for future work.
11

T δ = 1 − φ ( pW ) / φ ( p).
The true average tariff, applied to the world price vector, yields the same aggregate
volume of trade as the actual differentiated tariff vector.
The balance of trade constraint can be consistently solved for real income in terms
of (T a ,T δ ) and the other parameters of trade policy, transfers b and factor endowments:
E[φ ( pW ) / (1 − T δ ), π ,u] − T a Eφφ ( pW ) / (1 − T δ ) − (π − π W )' Eπ = b.

(2.1)

This equation follows from (1.1) using the implications of separability:
Eφφ p '( p − pW ) = Eφφ ( p)T a where T a = ∑ φ pi ( p) piTi / φ ( p) and φ ( p) = φ ( pW ) / (1 − T δ ) .
i

The trade volume function is given by the derivative of E with respect to φ , Eφ .
A very important subtlety is that this aggregate is in terms of quantity units that apply
internally to the home economy. Externally, the appropriate quantity units for import
volume in a world market clearance equation are in terms of world prices.11 It is
necessary to convert from domestic to external units by multiplying Eφ by

φ / φ a where φ a ≡ φ W / (1 − T a ) . This follows because the world market equilibrium
condition implies −Eφ*W φ W / (1 − T a ) = Eφφ W / (1 − T δ ) , the foreign export volume
evaluated with the average home markup must be equal to the domestic expenditure on
the aggregated good. Then:
Eφφ / φ a = sφ (φ , π )e / φ a where
sφ (φ , π ) ≡ eφφ / e.
11

A more technical treatment helps to clarify the issue. The definition of the

expenditure function in the separable homothetic case yields

e( p, π )u = min{p ' x + π ' z | ψ (x, z) ≥ u} = min{φ y + π ' z | ψ [ f (x), z] ≥ u} = e(φ , π )u.
x,z

y,z

Here y = f (x) is the quantity aggregator for domestic purposes, dual to the price
aggregator φ ( p) . In world markets, however, the quantities in the vector x must be
aggregated with world relative prices. In the perfect substitutes case of our applications,
the quantity at world prices is a simple (unweighted) sum and the world price value is the
product of that sum and the single world price for the aggregate.

12

Notice that the aggregators (T a ,T δ ) can be calculated in a preliminary step,
independently of the rest of the general equilibrium structure. This is a great advantage
when some 10,000 tariffs are to be aggregated into a few dozen indexes.
Insight into why consistent aggregation requires two tariff indexes follows from
the analytics of small tariff reforms. Differentiating the right hand side of (1.1) with
respect to p and using the properties of the balance of trade function (for more details see
Anderson and Neary, 2005) yields

μ −1Eu du = ( p − pW )' E pp dp + (π − π W )' Eπ p dp where
−1

μ = ⎡⎣1 − ( p − pW )' E pu / Eu − (π − π W )' Eπ u / Eu ⎤⎦ .
Taking account of separability (i.e., differentiating (2.1)) yields

μ −1eu du = T aφ Eφφ dφ + (π − π W )' Eπφ dφ where
−1

μ = ⎡⎣1 − T a sφ − (π − π W )' Eπ u / Eu ⎤⎦ .
Notice that both the true average tariff (represented by dφ and by the φ argument of the
share and derivative functions) and the trade weighted average tariff are required for a
consistent analysis. The former is required because of its influence on the change in trade
volume and the latter is required because it controls how that change in trade volume
changes tariff revenue.

Relation to the TRI Aggregator
It is helpful to relate the consistent aggregation proposed above to the sectoral
TRI aggregator previously proposed by Anderson and Neary. Let the TRI uniform tariff
factor be given by 1 + τ Δ . This exact aggregator is implicitly defined by
B[ pW (1 + τ Δ ), π ,u; pW , π W ) = B( p, π ,u; pW , π W ) = b.

(2.2)

See Anderson and Neary (2005) for details.

13

The TRI uniform tariff on the domestic price base is T Δ = τ Δ / (1 + τ Δ ) . The
uniform tariff equivalent factor on the foreign price base is given by 1 + τ Δ = 1 / (1 − T Δ ) .
The balance of trade function in the separable case reduces to
B( p, π ,u; pW , π W ,b) = B[φ , π ,u; φ ( pW ), π W ,b] . The TRI aggregate is defined implicitly by
B[φ ( pW ) / (1 − T Δ ), π ,u;⋅] = B[φ ( p), π ,u;⋅] .
Computation of the TRI uniform tariff for each sector to be aggregated remains
computationally burdensome in that it must be calculated using the full general
equilibrium structure, even as simplified by the assumption of separability. The
computationally simpler alternative developed here takes further advantage of
separability.

A Concrete Example
The implications of consistent aggregation are usefully illustrated by a concrete
example (further developed and simulated in an appendix available on request12). The
relationship of the TRI to the true and trade weighted average tariffs is cleanly illustrated
by the example.
Suppose that the tariff ridden group to be aggregated is a final goods group while
the only other tariffs are on final goods as well. The upper level expenditure function is
Cobb-Douglas with parametric share parameters s j . The lower level expenditure
function is a homogeneous of degree one and concave function φ ( p) , such as the CES
function. The budget constraint combined with the expenditure function assumption
implies that:

12

See www2.bc.edu/~anderson/AggregationAppendix.pdf.
14

e=
u=

g+b
1 − s T a − s π 'T π
e
φ

φs

φ

∏π

sj
j

j

φ = φ / (1 − T δ ).
W

The TRI uniform tariff is solved from
φ

φ

(1 − T Δ )s
(1 − T δ )s
=
.
1 − sφT a − s π 'T π 1 − sφ T Δ − s π 'T π

(2.3)

Notice that both the true average tariff and the trade weighted average tariff (on the
domestic price base) are needed to correctly solve the model for real income. The TRI
uniform tariff is implicitly a function of these same two indexes in (2.3).
As for trade volume, eφ is the volume at internal prices. For use in a global model
this volume must be converted to external units, eφ

φ
= sφ e(1 − T a ) / φ W in order to
a
φ

ensure that the budget constraint in terms of world prices obtains:
eφ (φ / φ a )φ W + eπ π W = g + b . This conversion is irrelevant for the small country, but it is

crucial in a global model.
The method of aggregation extends straightforwardly to any number of separable
groups to be aggregated. In terms of the Cobb-Douglas upper level example presented
previously, think of each π j as a composite price index similar to φ . The analyst
typically imposes separability for groups such as clothing, food, consumer durables, and
the like. Similarly on the intermediate goods demand structure one might impose
separability on energy products, metal products and so forth. This may be less plausible
than on the final demand side.
The method of aggregation also extends straightforwardly to any separable
homothetic preferences at the upper level. The parametric shares such as sφ become

15

functions sφ (φ , π ) with functional forms given by such well-known structures as the CES
or the translog.
Finally, the method of aggregation extends straightforwardly to tariffs on
intermediate inputs, assuming that these enter the gross domestic product function
separably. (Separability is a very strong restriction on the underlying technology.)
Intermediate input demand is given by −gφφ p . The equilibrium nominal expenditure is
given by e = [g + b − (gφφ )T a ] / (1 − s π 'T π ) where φ = φ W / (1 − T δ ) and
T δ = 1 − φ W / φ ( p) . Real income is given by e / ∏ π s .
i

i

Non-separable Structures
What can be done if separability does not obtain? In that case there is no
consistent aggregation. How much error is caused by the failure of consistent
aggregation? This can only be determined by simulation analysis of a (set of) maintained
non-separable structures relative to an erroneously imposed separable structure. By
analogy with bootstrapping, draw random shocks to the maintained equilibrium system
and compare the results of the true equilibrium with the approximation when separability
is erroneously imposed. Separability is inescapable, but some sense of the error it entails
might one day be part of reporting simulation results.

3. The Global Economy
A similar characterization of the foreign economy gives rise to functions and
variables denoted with a *. Each economy distorts its domestic relative prices away from

16

world prices ( p w , π w ) using border taxes or subsidies on either exports or imports. There
is a vector of untaxed goods with price vector r.
For simplicity, the goods to be aggregated are supplied by the foreign economy
only. In scaling this assumption up for many countries and goods, the vector of exported
goods to be aggregated is differentiated from the goods produced for sale in the home
market and also from goods produced in the export market --- the Armington assumption.
The general equilibrium of the economies is described by a system of two balance
of trade conditions and four subsystems of market clearing equations:
E(φ , π ,r,u) − ( p − p w )' Eφφ p − (π − π W )' Eπ = 0
E * (φ * , π * ,r,u * ) − ( p* − p w )' Eφ** φ *p* − (π * − π W )' Eπ** = 0
Eφφ p − g*p = 0
Eφ** φ *p* − g p* = 0
Eπ + Eπ** = 0
Er + Er* = 0.
Separable structure in either final or imported input demand is imposed by the
notation Eφ and this demand is supplied from the foreign economy only. The last two
subsystems of market clearance equations do not impose this separable structure on the
other taxed goods and the untaxed goods denoted by the subscript r.
Consistent aggregation in a global model requires a further restriction on supply.
The simplest case arises when relative supply prices (the vector pW ) are independent of
trade policies. A Ricardian technology among the goods to be aggregated is sufficient, as
was the small country assumption of the preceding section. Weaker supply side
separability assumptions (see below) will also permit aggregation though posing a small
added computational burden.

17

The preceding section shows that the true average tariff is the consistent aggregate
for trade volumes given real incomes while in combination with the trade weighted
average tariff in the balance of trade function it provides the consistent aggregate for real
incomes. The analyst needs two aggregate wedges for each country, based on which the
aggregated model can be solved. The methods of the preceding section reveal how to
calculate the aggregate wedges for given world prices. These wedges can be inserted into
the multi-country general equilibrium model above. The solution will generate a vector of
world prices, including an aggregate price for the p group.
Notice that the two balance of trade equations and the system of market clearance
equations for the π goods require only the price aggregates φ ( pW ) = φ W evaluated at
world prices and the aggregate tariff wedges for each country:
E[φ W / (1 − T δ ), π ,u] − T a Eφφ W / (1 − T δ ) − (π − π W )' Eπ = b
E * [φ *W / (1 − T *δ ), π * ,u * ] − T *a E ** φ * ( pW ) / (1 − T *δ ) − (π * − π W )' Eπ** = −b.
φ

Eπ [φ / (1 − T δ ), π ,u] + Eπ** [φ *W / (1 − T *δ ), π * ,u * ] = 0
W

Eφ [⋅](1 − T a ) / (1 − T δ ) − gφ*W = 0
Eφ** [⋅](1 − T *a ) / (1 − T *δ ) − gφ*W = 0
Er + Er** = 0.
The system of equations determines world prices φ W , φ *W , r, r * and π W along with real
incomes (u,u * ) as functions of the trade policy aggregators (the trade weighted average
tariff and the true average tariff) for each country.
The fourth and fifth equation systems represent the implications of the
separability assumption applied to the aggregates. First, each country’s excess demand is
met from the other country’s supply only, with the notation Eφ denoting either final or

18

intermediate input demand. φ W denotes the world supply price of the aggregated good
sold into the home market.

Supply Side Separability
The preceding aggregation scheme allows no relative price changes on the supply
side in the group being aggregated. If this is false, then in applying simulation models to
trade reform, a potential inconsistency arises between the initial wedges T δ , T a and the
equilibrium generated from the aggregated model. The initial world price vector pW 0
used to form the wedges may not be proportional to the equilibrium price vector pW 1 ,
causing shifts in the appropriate tariff aggregators.
Under a commonly used restriction in applied general equilibrium modeling, there
is a simple solution. Suppose that the supply side is separable such that in the foreign
economy a price aggregator η( p* ) exists. η is increasing, convex, homogeneous of
degree one and differentiable in the price vector p* . A sufficient condition is for the
goods in the aggregate to be jointly produced.13 The general equilibrium of production
implies that the gross domestic product function is increasing and convex in η , reflecting
the increasing opportunity cost of resources used to produce the joint product.
Market clearance of the home country’s imported goods in the disaggregated
model requires:
Eφφ p − gφ** η*p* = 0.
Trade reform changes elements of the tariff schedule and this causes changes in the world
13

Previously, the assumption was that η was a Leontief function (reflecting

infinitely elasticity of transformation among the members of the group).
19

relative prices that clear the disaggregated markets for aggregate summary indexes
(T a ,T *a ,T δ ,T *δ ) based on initial relative prices. These changes in world prices and the
associated changes in disaggregated shares lead the aggregated model to be inconsistent
with the ‘true’ outcomes. In principle it is possible to achieve consistency iteratively by
using the market clearing sub-aggregate module above to update the shares used to
calculate the tariff aggregates. Alternatively, it may be possible to develop simulationbased evidence that the share change problem is unimportant.
More generality than this means that no consistent aggregation is possible.
Nevertheless, it may be possible to develop some bounds on the inaccuracy of ‘consistent
aggregation’ of the type explored here.

4. Application
India in 1991 and 2004 had relatively high tariffs on average, and notably high
dispersion of tariffs, especially in 1991. This assessment does not reflect India’s
important liberalization of non-tariff barriers (NTBs) between 1991 and 2004 except
insofar as the rise in tariffs replaces highly restrictive NTBs with less restrictive tariffs.
Table 1 summarizes the picture with trade weighted average tariffs, true average tariffs
and the coefficient of variation of (trade-weighted) tariffs for final goods and
intermediate goods. The source data uses trade weighted average tariffs and imports for
1991 at the 4 digit CCCN level (the predecessor to the 4 digit Harmonized System
classification), and at the 6 digit HS level for 2004.14 Data are taken from TRAINS with
subsequent manipulation by the author. The true average tariff is calculated based on a
CES aggregator with elasticity of substitution equal to 5.
Table 1. Tariff Indexes for India, 1991 and 2004
Intermediate Goods
Ta

14

Tδ

CV

Final Goods
Ta

Tδ

CV

This procedure suppresses tariff line dispersion at a still lower level as well as

cross-country variation in tariffs due to trade preferences, presumptively biasing
downward the measure of aggregation bias reported below.
20

2004

.170

.185

.421

.212

.307

.687

1991

.122

.218

1.351

.208

.269

.713

The model used to simulate various policy experiments is that of Anderson and
Neary (2005) extended to a two country world. See Appendix C for further details here.
There is an aggregate export good produced by each country. On the importer’s side of
the market the aggregate export is broken into many forms resulting in the 4 or 6 digit
flows of final and intermediate goods imports. (There are around 600 goods in each
category at the 4 digit level, with the classification followed by Anderson and Neary,
2005. There are around 2800 goods in each category at the 6 digit level.) Each country
also produces a nontraded good jointly with the exported good with a Constant Elasticity
of Transformation (CET) technology. The level of activity that feeds into the CET
technology is produced by a CES technology that uses a single primary factor (labor) and
a composite imported intermediate input. On the demand side of each economy there is a
CES expenditure function that allocates expenditure between the nontraded good and the
composite final import. Finally, the composite imports, both final and intermediate, are
CES aggregates of the 4 digit disaggregated imports.
The parameters of the model are the various elasticities, the distribution or share
parameters, the supplies of the primary factor for each country, the tariffs and the
international transfer. The distribution parameters are benchmarked to 1991 or 2004 trade
and national income accounts data, as are the labor supplies. The assumed values of the
elasticities are presented in Table 2.
Table 2. Assumed Elasticities
Demand

Joint Supply

Production

Upper Level

2

2

0.7

Lower Level

5

---

5

The rest of the world is highly simplified to a single country, Rest of World
(ROW). In 1991 the ROW has a uniform 5% tariff (on the foreign price base), set up to
export the amount that India imports in total (in external prices). In 2004, it was possible
to construct ROW tariffs facing India from TRAINS data using the World Bank’s WITS
software. All results for India turn out to be quite insensitive to the level of ROW tariffs.

21

All the action in the simulations comes from trade reform in India. Unilateral free
trade, free trade in final goods and free trade in intermediate goods are simulated. A final
simulation benchmarks the results by comparison with multilateral free trade. The chief
virtue of the model is its focus on the consequences of the dispersion of tariffs, a matter
that is essentially swept under the rug with the standard CGE modeling method of using
trade weighted average tariffs everywhere. The results from 1991 and 2004 for India
provide two examples of aggregation bias based on high dispersion tariff structures that
differ significantly from each other.
India’s 1991 GDP comprised about 1% of world GDP, rising to around 1.7% by
2004. Nevertheless, the structure of the model implies that no country is small; it is the
only source of its exports to the rest of the world. Thus there are important terms of trade
consequences of tariff reform that can offset or swamp the efficiency effects.
Table 3 presents the results of several policy simulations. The cell entries are
indexes of India’s real income under the various scenarios.

22

Table 3. India’s Real Income and Trade Policy, 1991 and 2004
1991

2004

Initial Conditions
Consistent Aggregation

.8931

.9598

Sectoral T a Aggregation

.9008

.9687

Unilateral Free Trade Experiments
Free Trade

.8900

.9353

Final Trade

.8961

.9597

Intermediate Trade

.8866

.9341

Free Trade at Constant

.9009

.9717

World Prices
Multilateral Free Trade
India’s real income index

.8967

.9436

The experiments reported in Table 3 provide the basis for analyzing the importance of
aggregation bias relative to the gains from unilateral free trade for India. Table 4 collects
several ways of scaling the aggregation bias that are illuminating. The most important
conclusion to draw from the table is that the bias from using inconsistent aggregation is
large.
Table 4. Aggregation Bias for India

Per cent of Real Income
Multiple of Gains from Free

1991

2004

0.86%

0.93%

0.75

0.98

2.5

3.2

Trade, constant world prices
Multiple of Global Gains
from Free Trade

The first row scales the aggregation bias (the difference between the first and second
rows of Table 3) by national income. For 1991, the bias is 0.86% of national income,
rising in 2004 to 0.93% of real income. The next two rows of Table 4 relate the
aggregation bias to the gains from free trade. In doing so, it is necessary to control in
23

some appropriate way for the effect of terms of trade changes. In the second row, the
model is solved for equilibrium15 with the world prices of India’s imports and exports
frozen (the small country case). Aggregation bias ranges from 75% to 98% of the
efficiency gains from unilateral free trade for India. More dramatically, the efficiency
gains inconsistently measured from the trade weighted average base are only 1/4 as large
as the true gains in 1991 and only 1/50 as large as the true gains in 2004. The third row
nets out the terms of trade effect by imposing a utilitarian global welfare function, equal
to u + u * . For this comparison it is also more relevant to simulate multilateral free trade
(to damp down the terms of trade effects). For 2004, the aggregation bias is 3.2 times the
global gains from multilateral free trade. For 1991, the aggregation bias is 2.5 times the
global gains.
The second conclusion to draw from the simulations is that terms of trade effects
are important. India has higher tariffs than the rest of the world, with cuts in these tariffs
generating negative terms of trade effects that are large enough to offset the positive
efficiency effect that is isolated in the sixth row of Table 3. Even going to multilateral
free trade does not help much, and in fact India loses in 2004 while achieving a modest
gain in 1991. The size of the terms of trade effect may be too large due to the
assumptions of the model. (The ROW has an elasticity of supply of exports essentially
equal to elasticity of transformation due to the CET structure of the model acting in
combination with the tiny share that exports to India form of the ROW production.)
The decomposition of the liberalization into final and intermediate goods tariffs in
Table 3 reveals that a cut in the higher tariff, on the more elastically demanded good, will
raise real income even though it has negative terms of trade effects. In contrast, unilateral
free trade in intermediates cuts the lower average tariffs to zero on the inelastically
demanded good. This has negative efficiency effects as well as negative terms of trade
effects. These results illustrate a well-known principle of gradual trade reform. At given
terms of trade, real income changes in proportion to t ' dm where t is the vector of

specific tariffs and dm is the compensated change in the vector of imports. It is desirable

15

The solution method allows for changing prices of nontraded goods and factors

as well as real income following the policy change.
24

to raise elements of m where the tariff is largest, and to have the largest increases in m
be associated with the largest tariffs. So, to raise real income, cut high tariffs, especially
where the demand is relatively elastic. Reversing this pattern will lower income.
The chart presents the real income simulation results of an arithmetic mean
preserving contraction of the dispersion of tariffs, applied separately to the final and
intermediate tariff schedules for India in 1991. The formula is given by
n

T λ = ιλ ∑ Ti 0 / n + (1 − λ )T 0 where ι is the vector of ones, λ ∈[0,1] and the initial tariff
i =1

vector is T 0 . (Because the weights in the trade weighted average tariff change, it is
difficult to specify a mean preserving cut in dispersion using T a as the mean.)
Real income and dispersion, India, 1991
0.91

0.908
Trade Weighed Average Aggregates
0.906

0.904
Consistent Aggregates
0.902

0.9

0.898

0.896

0.894
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

dispersion contraction

The effect of this formula on the trade weighted average tariffs is to raise the
intermediate tariff (on the domestic price base) from 12.2% to 15.5% while lowering the
final goods tariff from 20.8% to 11.0%. This improves real income due to the
mechanism discussed above in considering the move to free trade in final and
intermediate goods separately. However, there is another important mechanism at work

25

1

as well: the contraction of dispersion improves efficiency. The consistent aggregation
method picks up this effect while the trade weighted average method misses it entirely.
The gap between the two lines in the chart represents the bias due to inconsistent
aggregation when the underlying trade policy includes important changes in dispersion.
Essentially similar results obtain for India in 2004.
The appendix presents simulations of a different hypothetical world trade model
with simpler structure and made up numbers. The simpler model eliminates nontraded
goods and factors in order to more precisely separate terms of trade effects from
efficiency effects and in order to see how much difference asymmetry of country size
makes. Moreover, the number of tariff lines and their dispersion in the India/ROW model
makes it difficult to get a feel for how dispersion drives the results.

Sensitivity Analysis
It is useful to consider the sensitivity of results to changes in a few key
parameters. First of all, different assumed values of elasticities might be expected to
make a big difference. Obviously the CES aggregator for import composites is sensitive
to the elasticity parameter. Since the elasticity drives the difference between the true
average tariff and the trade weighted average tariff, it will drive the difference in real
income effects of tariff changes due to inconsistent aggregation. In contrast, the other
‘macro-economic’ elasticities have an unknown effect on the effect of inconsistent
aggregation. A second assumption we test below is the sensitivity of the model to the
closure involving international transfers.
The effect of the elasticity on the tariff aggregates of the 1991 data is shown the
chart below. Essentially similar results obtain for 2004. The benchmark results used
elasticity equal to 5. At elasticity equal to 0, the trade weighted average tariff is equal to
the true average tariff.

26

Chart 2. True Average T and Elasticity
0.35

0.3
Final Goods
0.25

0.2

Intermediate Goods

0.15

0.1

0.05

0
0

2

4

6

8

10

12

Elasticity

Now consider the effect on trade policy reforms of raising the elasticity to 8. (This
is an elasticity commonly found in gravity model investigations of cross section trade.)
Table 4 replicates the 1991 portion of Table 3 at the new elasticity value. The bias due to
use of trade weighted average tariffs rises to 1.32% of national income. Notice that at the
higher elasticity, unilateral free trade does pay; the efficiency effects (due basically to the
difference between the trade weighted average and true average tariffs) dominate the
terms of trade effect.
Table 4. India’s 1991 Real Income and Trade Policy (Elasticity = 8)
Initial Conditions, Consistent Aggregation

.8891

Initial Conditions, sectoral T a aggregation

.9008

Unilateral Free Trade

.8900

Unilateral Free Final Trade

.8929

Unilateral Intermediate Free Trade

.8859

Multilateral Free Trade

.8967

Now consider the effect of changes in the other elasticities on the estimate of real
income. The bottom line is that aggregation bias is rather insensitive to the upper level
elasticities.

27

Aggregation Bias and Elasticities, India, 1991
0.03

0.025

0.02

Demand Elasticity Effect
0.015

CET Elasticity Effect

0.01

0.005

0
0

0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

3

3.5

4

CET and Demand Elasticities

Aggregation Bias and Production Elasticity, India, 1991
0.03

0.025

0.02

0.015

0.01

0.005

0
0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

1.2

1.4

Production Elasticity

Finally, consider the treatment of international transfers. The benchmark model
treats the apparent international transfer (the current account surplus plus an inferred net
services balance) as fixed in nominal terms. The net transfer is a couple of percent of

28

4.5

GDP, so the magnitude is non-trivial for India. The alternative tried was to set the
transfer equal to zero and adjust the apparent consumption expenditure accordingly. The
effect of doing so made no qualitative difference to the results.

5. Relationship of Tariff Indexes
The application emphasizes the importance of tariff dispersion as the source of
aggregation bias. Although the TRI is not required to solve global general equilibrium
trade models, it is a useful diagnostic tool for analyzing the results of trade policies and
their reform because it collects in a single index number the real income equivalent
implications of a highly nonlinear function of the other two indexes. There are useful
relationships between the true average tariff, the trade weighted average tariff and the
TRI uniform tariff., along with the trade weighted variance of tariffs.
Unfortunately, the three indexes cannot be ranked except in special cases. See
Anderson and Neary (2005) for a general discussion. Manole and Martin get a ranking in
the CES case under an additional intuitive condition. For a self-contained treatment of the
importance of consistent aggregation, this section reviews (and slightly extends) the
treatment in Anderson and Neary.
From standard substitutability considerations, T δ ≥ T a . The mix of these two
indexes in equation (2.1) makes it awkward to use them for analyzing the effect of
changing tariff structures on welfare. In contrast, the TRI uniform tariff reduces the
complexity of the tariff schedule to a single index number appearing in the balance of
trade function. The TRI uniform tariff links straightforwardly to welfare. From Anderson
and Neary (2005, p. 57), T Δ ≥ T δ if and only if tariff revenue would rise at constant real
income when replacing the true average tariff with the TRI uniform tariff. There is no

29

general relationship possible between the TRI uniform tariff and the other two
aggregates, but consideration of the structure of revenue provides more insight.
In the present model, the difference in tariff revenue evaluated with the two
different uniform tariffs is given by
T δ [φ / (1 − T δ )]Eφ [φ / (1 − T δ ), π , u 0 ] − T Δ [φ / (1 − T Δ )]Eφ [φ / (1 − T Δ ), π , u 0 ] .

Here φ ≡ φ ( pW ) . The derivative of revenue with respect to a uniform tariff is signed by
1+

Eφφφ / (1 − T ) T
.
Eφ
1− T

Revenue is rising in T for small values of T, and eventually turns negative, the well
known Laffer curve. Thus for small values of T, T δ < T Δ while for large values of T,

T Δ < T δ . Note that T / (1 − T ) = τ , the uniform tariff on the world price base. The
critical value of the uniform tariff that separates the rising from the falling portion of the
Laffer curve is given by τ c = Eφ / [Eφφφ / (1 − T )] , the tariff equal to the inverse of the
elasticity of demand for the product group. It is plausible that tariff schedules are usually
located in the rising portion of the Laffer curve, in which case the TRI uniform tariff
exceeds both of the other tariff indexes.

Tariff Averages and Variances
Anderson and Neary (2005) also show that the implications of trade reform for
welfare can be summarized quite generally in terms of two tariff moments, the
generalized mean and the generalized variance. The results are stated in terms of small
changes but suggest that the variance of tariffs has a useful role to play in describing the
welfare implications of tariff structure.

30

Anderson and Neary (2005) show that for the CES case:16
⎡
⎤
σ
dT Δ / (1 − T Δ ) = d ln[1 / (1 − T Δ )] = ψ Δ ⎢T a dT a +
dV a / 2 ⎥ .
1 − eφφ / e
⎢⎣
⎦⎥

Here, ψ Δ is a positive coefficient, V a denotes the trade weighted variance of tariffs, and
the differentials of the moments are evaluated using fixed weights. This expression shows
that mean and variance both matter. For the most clean results, suppose that the upper
level of substitutability is Cobb-Douglas. Then the square bracket term becomes

{(

d T a 1 + C 2 / (1 − eφφ / e)

)

1/2

},

where C ≡ V 1/2 / T a , the generalized coefficient of variation of tariffs.
Practitioners have often calculated the coefficient of variation as a supplement to
average tariffs in the evaluation of trade policy. This idea was more right than theorists
had previously believed. Future work may reveal that these differential expressions do
tolerably well for the smaller changes that typify trade policy. In that case, empirical
work for some purposes might use the formulae to approximate the behavior of the real
income equivalent tariff.

6. Conclusion
Consistent policy aggregation is feasible when the group to be aggregated enters
preferences or technology separably. This paper presents simple operational formulae
that demonstrate the point. It also provides some simulation evidence to show that the
aggregation bias problem from inconsistent aggregation is quantitatively significant.
Future work should apply these methods and more thoroughly examine the biases due to
inconsistent aggregation as well as some of the shortcuts suggested in the paper for
simplifying computation.
16

Their equation is in terms of the TRI uniform tariff on the world price base, τ Δ .

The text expression uses the equivalence dτ Δ / (1 + τ Δ ) = dT Δ / (1 − T Δ ) .
31

References
Anderson, James E. and J. Peter Neary (2005), Measuring the Restrictiveness of

International Trade Policy, Cambridge: MIT Press.
Bach, Christian F. and Will Martin (2001), “Would the right tariff aggregator for
policy analysis please stand up?”, Journal of Policy Modeling, 23, 621-635.
Blundell, Richard and Thomas M. Stoker (2005), “Heterogeneity and
Aggregation”, Journal of Economic Literature, 43, 347-91.
Cox, David and Richard Harris (1985), “Trade Liberalization and Industrial
Organization: Some Estimates for Canada”, Journal of Political Economy, 93, 115-45.
Dakhlia, Sami and Akram Temimi (2006), “An Extension of the Trade
Restrictiveness Index to Large Economies”, Review of International Economics, 14, 678682.
Diewert, W. Erwin (1981), “The Economic Theory of Index Numbers: a Survey”,
in Angus Deaton, ed., Essays in the Theory and Measurement of Consumer Behaviour in

Honor of Sir Richard Stone, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp163-208.
Goulder, Lawrence H. and Roberton C. Williams III ((2003), “The Substantial
Bias from Ignoring General Equilibrium Effects in Estimating Excess Burden, and a
Practical Solution”, Journal of Political Economy, 111, 898-927.
Manole, Vlad and Will Martin (2006), “Keeping the Devil in the Details: A
Feasible Approach to Aggregating Trade Distortions”, World Bank.

32

Appendix A. Quotas
This section treats the complications introduced by trade policy in the form of
quotas, for simplicity returning again to the one country case.
Trade policies prominently include quotas. The most important of these, the
Multi-Fibre Arrangement (MFA), was to have ended in January 2005, but pressure from
the US and EU has extended its restrictions on China. Other quotas are significant in
agriculture. Thus it is significant to extend consideration of consistent aggregation to
cover quotas. Where tariff equivalents of individual quotas are available, the techniques
of the preceding sections can be applied straightforwardly, recognizing that within group
‘tariff equivalent’ changes must be solved from the submodel that describes
disaggregated trade in the quota constrained group.
Quota evaluation is usually plagued with inadequate information about tariff
equivalents, a problem that appears to worsen when, as in this paper, the TRI uniform
tariff is sensitive to the dispersion of the tariff equivalents. More optimism is generated
by considering an important special case in which, at the margin, quota rent goes entirely
to the exporter. As Anderson and Neary (1992) emphasize, only some quota rent
typically accrues to the importer. The MFA for example awards the quota rights to the
exporters. Tariffs on MFA-constrained categories in the US serve to retain a portion of
the rent, the remainder going to exporters and importers. In the limit case, all remaining
rent goes to the exporters (rationalized by their having all the bargaining power).
For each quota line, assume that there is a rent retaining tariff t R and that the rent
over and above this amount is split with ω per cent going to foreigners. The unit rent
retained at home (the tariff equivalent) is given by:

t R + (1 − ω )( p − pW − t R ) = ω t R + (1 − ω )( p − pW ).
Now consider the evaluation of trade policy with quotas. The idea is to convert to
tariff equivalents. The unit rent retained at home takes the place of the specific tariff in
the balance of trade function. However, the relationship of domestic price to the ‘tariff
equivalent’ and the world price is different with quotas. The virtual price (equal to the
equilibrium domestic price with quotas) is given by:

p% = p : E p ( p, π , u ) = q.

(2.4)

Here, q is the quota vector. The balance of trade function with tariff equivalents of quotas
is given by:
B( p%, π ,u; ω ,t R ) = E( p%, π ,u) − [ω t R + (1 − ω )( p%− pW )]' E p − (π − π W )' Eπ − b .

To reduce the quota group to a single tariff, taking advantage of separability,
requires treating the tariff equivalent just like the tariff vector for the p group in
preceding sections, forming the trade weighted and true average tariffs on the domestic
price base.
Changes in trade policy show up in changes in tariff equivalents that are not
parametric. Calculation of the new tariff equivalents uses the model linking quotas and
tariffs π to domestic prices, E p ( p%, π , u ) = q . See Anderson and Neary (1992, 2005) for
details.
In the CES case, the sub-expenditure and sub-utility functions are ‘self-dual’,
CES functions with the same parameters. This makes for particularly convenient versions
of E p ( p%, π , u ) = q .

Appendix B. India and ROW CGE model
The India/ROW model is based on Anderson-Neary (2005), pp 294-303. Assume
that each country produces a composite export and a non-traded good. It imports a CES
composite intermediate import and a CES composite final import. The export good is
effectively produced with Ricardian technology. The joint output technology between
nontraded good and exports is a CET production frontier. The production of the joint
output is a CES function of a single primary factor and a CES composite of imported
inputs. Preferences are CES between the nontraded good and the composite final imports.

Details of the Model
The mathematical representation of the model is as follows. Let the CES price
index for final goods in the home country be given by P ( p, h ) where p is the final import
goods price vector and h is the price of the nontraded final good. The equivalent variables

2

for the foreign country are denoted with *. Let the CES cost function for a unit of activity
be given by C ( m, w ) where m is the imported intermediate goods price vector and w is
the wage rate. Let the CET activity price deflator be given by η(h, r ) where r is the price
of the export good. Let z denote a unit of activity.
The constant returns to scale assumption concerning the technology implies that

η(h, r ) = C ( m, w ) .

(1.1)

Labor market clearance implies that

Cw z = L

(1.2)

where L is the supply of labor. Nontraded goods clearance implies that (using
Shephard’s Lemma)

Ph u = ηh z .

(1.3)

The balance of payments constraint implies that
P( p, h)u − ( p − pW )' Ppu − (m − mW )'Cm z − wL = b.

(1.4)

Here, the W superscript denotes the world price of the goods in question. This system of 4
equations can be solved for the 4 unknowns (h, w,u, z) given the exogenous trade taxes
and world prices and the exogenous supply of labor L and world transfer b.
Now consider consistent aggregation. We first of all impose that the world supply
of the imported goods comes from a technology for exported goods that is Ricardian.
Thus the foreign economy produces an export that has a common price for all the home
economy’s imports:
pW = r *ι p ; mW = r *ιm .

where ι denotes a vector of ones and the subscript denotes that it has the number of
elements of either the vector p or the vector m. This assumption ensures that on the
supply side the aggregation is consistent.
Next, we impose separability within the CES aggregators so that

P( p, h) = P[φ ( p), h] where φ ( p ) is a lower level CES aggregator for the final goods
imports. Similarly, C ( m, w ) = C[ μ ( m ), w ] where μ ( m ) is a CES aggregator for imported
inputs. Then the true average tariff aggregators are defined by

3

T pδ = 1 − φ ( pW ) / φ ( p)
Tmδ = 1 − μ (mW ) / μ (m).
Separability also lets us simplify in the balance of trade constraint to
Pu − T pa Pφφu − Tma Cμ μ z − wL = b ,

where the a superscript denotes the trade weighted average tariff within the group. We
can solve for real income directly as
u=

b + wL
1 − T P φ − Tma Cμ μ
a
p φ

The aggregation scheme allows us to substitute for the price vectors (p,m) that
have dimension in the thousands the scalar true average tariffs and the scalar world prices
that have dimension 4 and the trade weighted average tariffs that have dimension 2.
Now consider closing the world model. The foreign economy is modeled in
exactly parallel fashion, with all variables denoted as foreign with a *. For consistency,
b + b* = 0 . The world markets for traded goods clear.
The subtlety with aggregation is that, while Shephard’s Lemma combined with
separability allows us to define natural volumes, these are in different units when the
prices are different. This leads to a conversion for consistency. Markets clear according
to

ηr z = Pφ u
*

*

*

1 − T p**a
1 − T p**δ

+ Cμ** z *

1 − Tm**a

1 − Tm**δ

.

(1.5)

On the right hand side is the demand for home export goods generated by final
demand and by intermediate demand, with the ratio of the tariff indexes serving to
change units for consistency. On the left hand side is the supply of home export goods.
An analogous expression obtains for market clearance for the export of the foreign
country:

η z = Pφ u
* *
r*

1 − T pa
1 − T pδ

+ Cμ z

1 − Tma
.
1 − Tmδ

(1.6)

Equations (1.5)-(1.6) combine with equations (1.1)-(1.4) and the analogous
equation subsystem for the foreign economy to make a 10 equation system to determine

4

the world prices (r, r * ) along with (h, h* , w, w* , z, z * ,u,u * ) . Homogeneity of degree zero
implies that one price can be set equal to one. It is natural to normalize on the home wage
rate or the foreign price of exports.

Implementation
Take the 1991 India data set utilized in Anderson and Neary (2005). Compute the
ROW data for construction of ROW by taking the 1991 World Development Report
totals. Adjust the export totals for ROW to match the imports of India and similarly
adjust the import totals of ROW to match the export totals of India. For tariffs in ROW,
assume some reasonable uniform tariffs, for example 5%.
In this model there are 4 markets to clear, ultimately. There is a nontraded good
market for each country and there is a world market for the export of each country.

Details of Implementation
Data for India

GDP is the sum of payments to factors located domestically. This is wL in terms
of the theory. Then ηz = wL + μCμ . The second term is the sum of the intermediate
imports evaluated at domestic prices. So, the left hand side can be benchmarked with data
available from the WDR. The value of exports is equal to ηr r . So the value of nontraded
production is equal to wL + μCμ − ηr r = GDP + INTIMPORTS − EXPORTS .
These data are used to form initial shares, which together with elasticity
assumptions are used to create the CES/CET price indexes η(h, r),C( μ,w) .
Expenditure is equal, by the balance of trade condition, to GDP+Tariff
Revenue+Net Transfers. Expenditure is split between FINALIMPORTS and nontraded
goods. Thus nontraded goods expenditure is equal to
GDP+Tariff_Revenue+Net_Transfers-FINALIMPORTS. The nontraded expenditure
share and the final imports expenditure share can be drawn from these data. Then an
elasticity assumption permits us to create the true cost of living index P(φ , h) .

5

The sub-expenditure price index φ and sub-cost function price index μ (m) can
be created from the detailed trade flow data just as in the earlier spreadsheet model,
implementing details laid out in my earlier notes.
The India data for 1991 has about 1200 tariff lines at 4 digit HS level. These are
divided into roughly half intermediates and half final goods. The GDP, Exports and
current account balance data are taken from the WDR. A two level CES structure is used
in calculating true average tariff aggregators, with a lower level elasticity being the key
parameter in aggregation.
Data for ROW
ROW GDP is obtained from WDR data. The ROW exports are set equal to India's
total imports. The net transfer is set equal to the India net transfer times minus one.
The split between final an intermediate import usage in the ROW is problematic.
The simulation uses the India shares.
Tariffs for ROW: Since most of the world’s GDP is produced by low average
tariff rich countries, a low uniform tariff of 5% is utilized. This misses important aspects
of tariff structure in rich countries, but the errors here are unlikely to affect the main
object of the analysis: the bias due to inconsistent aggregation.

6

Appendix. Illustrative Simulations
(Not for publication
A tightly specified smaller scale model reveals the underpinnings of why
consistent aggregation matters. The simulation aggregates a set of 5 tariffs that range
from 3% to 150%, with the largest tariffs falling on the goods with heaviest weight in the
sub-expenditure function. This tariff structure resembles apparel and agriculture
protection in a number of countries. At the upper level of the model, preferences are
Cobb-Douglas, with 25% of expenditure falling on the aggregated good. There is another
tariff-ridden good accounting for 25% of expenditure, paying a 10% tariff . The
remaining 50% of expenditure is not taxed.
All the consumption goods in the economy are imported (an extreme but
inessentially simple assumption). The production of the economy is sold to foreigners,
with proceeds that pay for imports. The set up is a two country general equilibrium
model. The tariff-ridden traded goods (both the consumption aggregate and the other
tariffed good) are perfect substitutes on the supply side. This can be rationalized for
example by Ricardian technology. The tariffed and non-taxed goods are not substitutable
at all on the supply side, effectively constrained by endowments.
The initial tariffs (on the world price base) and their distribution weights in the
group to be aggregated are given in Table A.1. below.
Table A.1 Initial Tariffs and Weights
Weights

Tariffs

0.0149

0.05

0.0583

0.1

0.0778

0.03

0.3538

1.5

0.4953

0.75

The elasticity of substitution is set equal to 5, which is on the low side of elasticities
found from gravity type models of bilateral trade. These parameters and the CES form
result in the home country tariff indexes given in the first line of Table A.2.

The home and foreign country are each assumed to have an endowment of 50 for
the non-taxed good and an endowment of 50 for the tariff-ridden goods. The foreign
economy has a uniform 5% tariff (on the world price base) on the aggregated sector and a
10% tariff on the other tariffed sector. The model is solved for the world prices of the
four goods (the non-taxed good in each country and the aggregate tariffed good on the
supply side.) Homogeneity of degree zero of the world excess demand system implies
that one of the prices may be set at unity.
Formally, the model is described by the following system of equations:
pT*W y + pN*W z
1 − sφ T a − s π T π
pTW y* + pWN z *
*
e =
1 − s *φ T *a − s*π T *π
e=

sπ e
sφ e
1− T a
+
− y* = 0
pTW / (1 − T δ ) 1 − T δ pTW / (1 − T π )
sN e *
−z =0
pWN
pT*W

s *π e*
s *φ e*
+
−y=0
/ (1 − T *a ) pT*W / (1 − T π )
sN* e*
− z = 0.
pN*W

The first two equations make use of the balance of trade equation to solve for
nominal expenditure. The last four equations express market clearance in the (effectively)
four goods with world prices ( pTW , pWN , pT*W , pN*W ) . Real incomes are obtained by deflating
the equilibrium expenditures (e, e* ) by the consumer true cost of living indexes,
φ

π

[ pT*W / (1 − T δ )]s [ pT*W / (1 − T π )]s [ pN*W ]s for the home economy and similarly for the
N

foreign economy.
Solving for equilibrium with the parameter values given above yields the
equilibrium real income listed for the home country in the second line of Table A.2. The
real incomes implied by pretending that the trade weighted or the true average tariff is
correct are listed in columns two and three, while column four presents the correct real
income calculation.
2

Table A. 2 Home Country Sectoral Tariffs and Real Income
Trade Weighted

True Average

TRI Uniform Tariff

Average
Tariff Index

.434

.519

.608

Real Income

98.62

97.54

94.69

These results imply a large amount of bias, amounting to over 4% of real income in the
case where the trade weighted average tariff is used as if it were the right tariff (the
difference between column 2 and column 4 as a proportion of column 4).17 In the present
model, the welfare cost from protection amounts to 5.5%, so the bias is about 75% of the
true welfare cost. Alternatively, measuring welfare costs properly more than triples the
welfare cost obtained when treating the tariff using the trade weighted average. Similar
bias results from using the true average tariff as if it were the proper tariff: the consistent
procedure more than doubles the welfare cost estimate.
Dispersion matters a lot in driving differences between the trade weighted average
tariff and the other two. Indeed, the trade weighted coefficient of variation of the tariff
schedule is 0.71. The influence of dispersion on the bias due to using atheoretic average
tariffs can be traced conveniently with an experiment that shrinks tariff dispersion while
n

preserving the arithmetic mean: T = ιλ ∑ Ti 0 / n + (1 − λ )T 0 where ι is the vector of
λ

i =1

ones, λ ∈[0,1] and the initial tariff vector is T 0 . (Because the weights in the trade
weighted average tariff change, it is difficult to specify a mean preserving cut in
dispersion using T a as the mean.) The chart below shows the effect of dispersion cuts of
this type on the trade weighted average tariff, the TRI uniform tariff (calculated using
(2.3)) and the relative bias in real income. Dispersion is decreased in 10% meanpreserving steps. On the right, all dispersion is wrung out. Even with less than half the
initial dispersion, the bias is still quite significant.
17

The units in which real income is measured are unimportant; what matters is the

bias, a big number by the usual standards of welfare loss from protection.
3

Consistent and Tariff Average Aggregation
0.7

0.6

TRI Uniform Tariff

0.5

0.4

Trade Weighted Average Tariff

0.3

0.2

0.1
Real Income Bias
0
Contraction of Dispersion

The dispersion reduction experiment lowers the TRI uniform tariff monotonically,
as it does the true average tariff (not plotted), but it first raises and then lowers the trade
weighted average tariff, due to the complex nonlinearity of the trade weights.
Real income rises monotonically with the arithmetic mean preserving dispersion
cuts, increasing in total by around 5%. The total real income change can be decomposed
into two parts: the effect of the tariff changes at constant world prices and the terms of
trade effect of the change in world prices. The decomposition is based on the reduced
form formula for real income:
φ

π

pT*W y + pN*W z
(1 − T δ )s (1 − T π )s
u=
φ
π
N .
1 − sφ T a − sπ T π ( pTW )s + s ( pWN )s
The first ratio on the right collects the direct tariff effects. The second term collects the
terms of trade effects. The collapse of dispersion and the reduction in the trade weighted
average tariff combine to worsen the terms of trade of the reforming country, costing it an
additional 6.2% of real income.
The simulation results illustrate that dispersion reduction can confer a secondary
benefit to a large country through a terms of trade improvement. As Anderson and Neary
(2005) have shown, the trade volume (and hence the terms of trade) implications of
generalized variance reduction and of generalized mean tariff reduction run in opposite
directions. In the CES case, the generalized mean is the trade weighted average while the
4

generalized variance is the trade weighted variance divided by the share of expenditure
on other goods. The decomposition of the real income changes over the interval of
arithmetic-mean-preserving contractions of dispersion reveals that the terms of trade
effects are at first positive and only later become significantly negative. The arithmeticmean preserving tariff dispersion cut rule interacts with the structure of demand in this
model such that the reform at first lowers trade volume and thereby improves the terms of
trade. This arises because the generalized dispersion cut at first raises the generalized
mean, as Chart 1 shows. Eventually the dispersion cut becomes less important than the
mean cut to trade volume and the terms of trade are harmed by the trade reform.
Chart 2. Real Income and Dispersion
110

105

Real Income at Constant World Prices

Real Income

100

95

90

85

80
Contraction of Dispersion

5

6

