NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DO PESO PROBLEMS EXPLAIN THE RETURNS TO THE CARRY TRADE?
A. Craig Burnside
Martin S. Eichenbaum
Isaac Kleshchelski
Sergio Rebelo
Working Paper 14054
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14054

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2008

This paper is a substantially revised version of NBER Working Paper 12489 titled "The Returns to
Currency Speculation." We thank the editor, Geert Bekaert, two anonymous referees, John Cochrane,
John Heaton, Jakub Jurek, and Ravi Jagannathan for very useful comments. We also thank the Chicago
Mercantile Exchange for providing us with the currency-options data used in this paper. Burnside
is grateful to the National Science Foundation for financial support (SES-0516697). The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by A. Craig Burnside, Martin S. Eichenbaum, Isaac Kleshchelski, and Sergio Rebelo. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Do Peso Problems Explain the Returns to the Carry Trade?
A. Craig Burnside, Martin S. Eichenbaum, Isaac Kleshchelski, and Sergio Rebelo
NBER Working Paper No. 14054
June 2008, Revised September 2010
JEL No. F31
ABSTRACT
We study the properties of the carry trade, a currency speculation strategy in which an investor borrows
low-interest-rate currencies and lends high-interest-rate currencies. This strategy generates payoffs
which are on average large and uncorrelated with traditional risk factors. We argue that these payoffs
reflect a peso problem. The underlying peso event features high values of the stochastic discount factor
rather than very large negative payoffs.
A. Craig Burnside
Department of Economics
Duke University
213 Social Sciences Building
Durham, NC 27708-0097
and NBER
burnside@econ.duke.edu
Martin S. Eichenbaum
Department of Economics
Northwestern University
2003 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
eich@northwestern.edu

Isaac Kleshchelski
Olin Business School
Washington University in St. Louis
1 Brookings Drive
St. Louis, MO 63130-4899
KLESHCHELSKI@WUSTL.EDU
Sergio Rebelo
Northwestern University
Kellogg School of Management
Department of Finance
Leverone Hall
Evanston, IL 60208-2001
and NBER
s-rebelo@northwestern.edu

1

Introduction

The forward exchange rate is a biased forecaster of the future spot exchange rate. This fact
is often referred to as the ‘forward-premium puzzle.’ We study the properties of a widelyused currency speculation strategy, known as the carry trade, that exploits this puzzle.
This strategy involves selling currencies forward that are at a forward premium and buying
currencies forward that are at a forward discount. Transaction costs aside, this strategy
is equivalent to borrowing low-interest-rate currencies in order to lend high-interest-rate
currencies, without hedging the associated currency risk. Consistent with results in the
literature, we …nd that the carry-trade strategy applied to portfolios of currencies yields high
average payo¤s, as well as Sharpe ratios that are substantially higher than those associated
with the U.S. stock market.
The most natural explanation for the high average payo¤ to the carry trade is that it
compensates agents for bearing risk. However, we show that linear stochastic discount factors
built from conventional measures of risk, such as consumption growth, the returns to the
stock market, and the Fama-French (1993) factors, fail to explain the payo¤s to the carry
trade. This failure re‡ects the absence of a statistically signi…cant unconditional correlation
between the payo¤s to the carry trade and traditional risk factors. Our results are consistent
with previous work documenting that one can reject consumption-based asset-pricing models
using data on forward exchange rates (e.g. Bekaert and Hodrick (1992) and Backus, Foresi,
and Telmer (2001)). More generally, it has been di¢ cult to use structural asset-pricing
models to rationalize the risk-premium movements required to account for the time-series
properties of the forward premium (see Bekaert (1996)).
The most natural alternative explanation for the high average payo¤ to the carry trade
is that it re‡ects the presence of a peso problem. We use the term ‘peso problem’to refer to
the e¤ects on inference caused by low-probability events that do not occur in sample.1 Peso
1
In related work Farhi and Gabaix (2008) and Brunnermeier, Nagel, and Pedersen (2008) emphasize the
importance of rare in-sample events. There are some moderately large negative payo¤s to the unhedged carry
trade in our sample. While these payo¤s a¤ect the pro…tability of the strategy, the average risk-adjusted

1

problems can in principle explain the positive average payo¤ to the carry trade. To understand the basic argument, suppose that a foreign currency is at a forward premium so that
a carry-trade investor sells this currency forward. Assume that a substantial appreciation of
the foreign currency occurs with small probability. The investor must be compensated for
the negative payo¤ to the carry trade in this state of the world. So, the average risk-adjusted
payo¤ to the carry trade is positive in non-peso states.
In this paper we address the question of whether or not the large average payo¤ to the
unhedged carry trade is compensation for peso-event risk. Our approach to answering this
question relies on analyzing the payo¤s to a version of the carry-trade strategy that does not
yield high negative payo¤s in a peso state. This strategy works as follows. When an investor
sells the foreign currency forward, he simultaneously buys a call option on that currency. If
the foreign currency appreciates beyond the strike price, the investor can buy the foreign
currency at the strike price and deliver the currency in ful…llment of the forward contract.
Similarly, when an investor buys the foreign currency forward, he can hedge the downside
risk by buying a put option on the foreign currency. By construction this ‘hedged carry
trade’is immune to large losses such as those potentially associated with a peso event.
We use data on currency options to estimate the average risk-adjusted payo¤ to the
hedged carry trade. We …nd that this payo¤ is smaller than the corresponding payo¤ to the
unhedged carry trade. This …nding is consistent with the view that the average payo¤ to
the unhedged carry trade re‡ects a peso problem. Given this result, an obvious question is:
what is the nature of the peso event for which agents are being compensated? It is useful to
distinguish between two extreme possibilities. The …rst possibility is that the salient feature
of a peso state is large carry-trade losses.2 The second possibility is that the salient feature
of a peso state is a large value of the stochastic discount factor (SDF). A key contribution
of this paper is to assess the relative importance of these two possibilities. We …nd that a
payo¤ to the carry trade is positive.
2
See Bates (1996a) for a related argument that exchange rate jumps can explain the volatility smile
present in currency options.

2

peso event re‡ects high values of the SDF in the peso state rather than very large negative
payo¤s to the unhedged carry trade in that state.
The intuition for why the losses to the unhedged carry trade are small in the peso state
is as follows. Any risk-adjusted payo¤s associated with the carry trade in the non-peso
states must on average be compensated, on a risk-adjusted basis, for losses in the peso state.
According to our estimates, the average risk-adjusted payo¤s of the hedged and unhedged
carry trade in the non-peso states are not very di¤erent. Consequently, the risk-adjusted
losses to these two strategies in the peso state cannot be very di¤erent. Since the value of the
SDF in the peso state is the same for both strategies, the actual losses of the two strategies
in the peso state must be similar. By construction there is an upper bound to the losses of
the hedged carry trade. This upper bound tell us how much an agent loses in the peso state
if he is pursuing the hedged carry trade. Since these losses turn out to be small, the losses
to the unhedged carry trade in the peso state must also be small.
The rationale for why the SDF is much larger in the peso state than in the non-peso
states is as follows. We just argued that the unhedged carry trade makes relatively small
losses in the peso state. At the same time, the average risk-adjusted payo¤ to the unhedged
carry trade in the non-peso states is large. The only way to rationalize these observations is
for the SDF to be very high in the peso state. So, even though the losses of the unhedged
carry trade in the peso state are moderate, the investor attaches great importance to those
losses.
A possible shortcoming of our methodology is that we can always produce values of
the SDF and the carry-trade payo¤ in the peso state that rationalize the observed average
payo¤s to the carry trade. The skeptical reader may conclude that we have documented
an interesting puzzle without providing a credible resolution of that puzzle. So, we bring
additional data to bear on the plausibility of our estimates. We consider two versions of an
equity strategy that involve borrowing one dollar at the Treasury-bill rate and investing it in
the stock market. In the …rst version the agent does not hedge against adverse movements

3

in the stock market. In the second version the agent buys at-the-money put options which
compensate him for a fall in the stock market. We …nd that, in sharp contrast to the carry
trade, the hedged stock market strategy yields large, negative average payo¤s. Using the
average risk-adjusted payo¤ to the two stock market strategies we generate an independent
estimate of the value of the SDF in the peso state. Remarkably, this estimate is similar to
the estimate of the peso state SDF that rationalizes the average risk-adjusted payo¤s to the
carry trade. We interpret these …ndings as supportive of the view that the positive average
payo¤ to the unhedged carry trade re‡ects the presence of a peso problem.
Our paper is organized as follows. In section 2 we describe the carry-trade strategy and
discuss our method for estimating carry trade losses and the value of the SDF in the peso
state. We describe our data in Section 3. In Section 4 we study the covariance between the
payo¤s to the carry trade and traditional risk factors, using both time series and panel data.
In Section 5 we study the properties of the hedged carry trade. In Section 6 we report our
estimates of the payo¤s to the carry trade and stock market strategies in the peso state, and
our estimates of the SDF in the peso state. We also generalize the analysis to multiple peso
states. Section 7 concludes.

2

Peso problems and the carry trade

The failure of uncovered interest rate parity (UIP) motivates a variety of speculative strategies. We focus on the carry trade, the strategy most widely used by practitioners (see
Galati and Melvin (2004)). In this section we describe a procedure for analyzing peso-event
explanations for carry-trade payo¤s.
The carry trade consists of borrowing a low-interest-rate currency and lending a highinterest-rate currency. Abstracting from transactions costs, the payo¤ to the carry trade,
denominated in dollars, is:
yt (1 + rt )

St+1
St

(1 + rt ) :

(1)

The variable St denotes the spot exchange rate expressed as dollars per foreign currency unit
4

(FCU). The variables rt and rt represent the domestic and foreign interest rate, respectively.
We normalize the amount of dollars bet on this strategy to one. The amount of dollars
borrowed, yt , is given by:
+1 if rt < rt ,
1 if rt
rt .

yt =

(2)

Consider the case in which St is a martingale:
Et St+1 = St ;

(3)

where Et denotes the time-t conditional expectations operator. This martingale property
is not an implication of market e¢ ciency, but it is a reasonable description of the data.
Equation (3) implies that the expected payo¤ to the carry trade is positive and equal to the
di¤erence between the higher and the lower interest rate:
yt (rt

rt ) > 0:

The carry-trade strategy can also be implemented by selling the foreign currency forward
when it is at a forward premium (Ft

St ) and buying the foreign currency forward when

it is at a forward discount (Ft < St ). The value of wt , the number of FCUs sold forward, is
given by:
wt =

+1=Ft if Ft St ,
1=Ft if Ft < St .

(4)

This value of wt is equivalent to buying/selling one dollar forward. The dollar-denominated
payo¤ to this strategy at t + 1, denoted zt+1 , is
St+1 ) .

(5)

Ft
(1 + rt ) .
St

(6)

zt+1 = wt (Ft
Covered interest rate parity implies that:
(1 + rt ) =

When equation (6) holds, the payo¤s to the strategies de…ned by equations (4) and (2) are
proportional to each other. In this sense the strategies are equivalent. We focus our analysis
on strategy (4) because of data considerations.
5

The impact of peso problems Since the carry trade is a zero net-investment strategy,
the payo¤, zt , must satisfy:
Et (Mt+1 zt+1 ) = 0.

(7)

Here Mt+1 denotes the SDF that prices payo¤s denominated in dollars. Equation (7) implies
that:
E (zt+1 ) =

cov (Mt+1 ; zt+1 )
.
E (Mt+1 )

(8)

In light of equation (8) a natural explanation for the positive average payo¤s to the carry
trade is that these payo¤s compensate agents for the risk resulting from negative covariance
between M and z. In our empirical work (see Section 4) we document that the covariance
between the payo¤s to the carry trade and a host of traditional risk factors is not statistically
di¤erent from zero.3 This …nding implies that traditional risk-based explanations are not a
plausible rationale for the positive average payo¤s to the carry trade.
An alternative explanation relies on the existence of peso events. To pursue this explanation we use the following notation. Let ! t 2

denote the state of the world at time t,

let z(! t ) denote the payo¤ to the carry trade in state ! t , and M (! t ) denote the value of the
SDF in state ! t . We partition
N

, the set of possible states, ! t , into two sets. The …rst set,

, consists of those values of ! t corresponding to non-peso events. The second set,

P

,

consists of those values of ! t corresponding to a peso event. For simplicity, we assume that
for all ! t 2

P

, z(! t ) = z 0 < 0 and M (! t ) = M 0 .

We denote by F N (! t+1 ) the unconditional distribution of ! t+1 in non-peso states. For
future reference we de…ne F N (! t+1 j! t ) as the conditional distribution of ! t+1 given ! t , where
both ! t+1 and ! t are in

N

. To simplify, we assume that the conditional and unconditional

3

See Villanueva (2007) for additional evidence on this point. Lustig and Verdelhan (2007) argue that a
consumption-based SDF explains the cross-sectional variation in the excess returns to going long on currency
portfolios that are sorted by their interest rate di¤erential with respect to the U.S. Burnside (2007) challenges
their results based on two …ndings. First, the time-series covariance between the excess returns to the
Lustig-Verdelhan portfolios and standard risk factors, including consumption-based SDFs, is not signi…cantly
di¤erent from zero. Second, imposing the constraint that a zero beta asset has a zero excess return leads
to a substantial deterioration in the ability of their model to explain the cross-sectional variation in excess
returns to the portfolios.

6

probability of the peso state is p. The unconditional version of equation (7) is:
(1

p)E N (M z) + pM 0 z 0 = 0,

(9)

where E N ( ) denotes the expectation over non-peso states,
N

E (M z) =

Z

M (! t+1 )z(! t+1 )dF N (! t+1 ).
N

Since z 0 is negative, equation (9) implies that the average risk-adjusted payo¤ over nonpeso states, E N (M z), is positive. This observation captures the conventional view that a
peso problem can rationalize positive average payo¤s to the carry trade.
We focus on whether or not the existence of peso events provides a plausible rationale
for our estimate of the average payo¤ to the carry trade in non-peso states. To study this
question we develop a version of the carry-trade strategy that does not yield large losses
when a peso event occurs. We call this strategy the ‘hedged carry trade.’Below we describe
this strategy in detail.
The hedged carry trade We begin by de…ning notation for options contracts. A call
option gives an agent the right, but not the obligation, to buy foreign currency at a strike
price of Kt dollars per FCU. We denote the dollar price of this option by Ct . The payo¤ to
the call option in dollars, net of the option price, is:
C
zt+1
= max (0; St+1

Kt )

Ct (1 + rt ) .

(10)

A put option gives an agent the right, but not the obligation, to sell foreign currency at a
strike price of Kt dollars per FCU. We denote the dollar price of this option by Pt . The
payo¤ to the put option in dollars, net of the option price is:
P
zt+1
= max (0; Kt

St+1 )

Pt (1 + rt ) .

(11)

Suppose that an agent sells one FCU forward. Then, the worst case scenario in the
standard carry trade arises when there is a large appreciation of the foreign currency. In
7

this state of the world the agent realizes large losses because he has to buy foreign currency
at a high value of St+1 to deliver on the forward contract. Suppose that the agent buys, at
time t, a call option on the foreign currency with a strike price Kt . So, whenever St+1 > Kt ,
the agent buys FCUs at the price Kt . In this case the minimum payo¤ to the hedged carry
trade is:
(Ft

St+1 ) + (St+1

Kt )

Ct (1 + rt ) = Ft

Kt

Ct (1 + rt ) .

(12)

Similarly, suppose that an agent buys one FCU forward. Then, the worst case scenario in
the standard carry trade arises when there is a large depreciation of the foreign currency. In
this state of the world the agent sells the foreign currency that he receives from the forward
contract at a low value of St+1 . Suppose that the agent buys, at time t, a put option on the
foreign currency with a strike price Kt . So, whenever St+1 < Kt , the agent sells FCUs at a
price Kt . In this case the minimum payo¤ to the hedged carry trade is:
(St+1

Ft ) + (Kt

St+1 )

Pt (1 + rt ) = Kt

Ft

Pt (1 + rt ) .

(13)

In order to normalize the size of the bet to one dollar, we set the amount of FCUs traded
equal to 1=Ft . We de…ne the hedged carry-trade strategy as:
If Ft

St , sell 1=Ft FCUs forward and buy 1=Ft call options,

If Ft < St , buy 1=Ft FCUs forward and buy 1=Ft put options.
The dollar payo¤ to this strategy is:
H
zt+1
=

C
zt+1 + zt+1
=Ft if Ft St ,
P
zt+1 + zt+1 =Ft if Ft < St ,

(14)

C
P
where zt+1 , zt+1
, and zt+1
are the carry-trade payo¤s de…ned in equations (5), (10) and (11),

respectively.
An alternative way to implement the hedged carry trade is to use only options, instead
of using a combination of forwards and options. Under this alternative implementation we
buy 1=Ft call options on the foreign currency when it is at a forward discount and 1=Ft put
8

options on the foreign currency when it is at a forward premium. Using the put-call-forward
parity condition,
(Ct

Pt ) (1 + rt ) = Ft

Kt ,

(15)

it is easy to show that this strategy for hedging the carry trade is equivalent to the one
described above as long as the strike price of the options is the same in the two strategies.
The minimum payo¤ to the hedged carry trade, ht+1 , is negative. To see this property,
use the put-call-forward parity condition, (15), and equations (12) and (13) to write the
minimum payo¤s as follows:
ht+1 =

Pt (1 + rt )=Ft if Ft St ,
Ct (1 + rt ) =Ft if Ft < St .

(16)

Since option prices are positive, ht+1 is negative.
We summarize the realized payo¤s to the hedged carry trade as follows:
ht+1
zt+1

H
zt+1
=

ct (1 + rt )=Ft

if the option is in the money,
if the option is out of the money.

The variable ct denotes the cost of the put or call option. Note that the option is in the
money in the peso state as well as in some non-peso states.
Using options to assess the e¤ect of peso problems Since the hedged carry trade is
a zero net-investment strategy, the payo¤, z H (! t+1 ), must satisfy:
(1

p)

Z

N

M (! t+1 )z H (! t+1 ) dF N (! t+1 j! t ) + pM 0 h(! t ) = 0.

Taking expectations over all non-peso states we obtain:
(1

p)E N (M z H ) + pM 0 E N (h) = 0.

(17)

Using equation (17) to solve for pM 0 and replacing this term in equation (9), we obtain:
z 0 = E N (h)

E N (M z)
.
E N (M z H )

9

(18)

We can estimate the variables on the right-hand side of equation (18) and compute an
estimate of z 0 . In estimating z 0 we do not have to take a stand on the values of p or M 0 .
Given our estimate of z 0 and a value of p we can use equation (9) to estimate M 0 ,
M0 =

(1

p)E N (M z)
.
p ( z0)

(19)

There are two possible outcomes of these calculations. The …rst possible outcome is that
our estimate of z 0 is a large negative value, consistent with the conventional view about the
payo¤s to the carry trade in the peso state. The second possible outcome is that our estimate
of z 0 is a small negative value. In this case a peso event can still explain the average payo¤
to the carry trade but only if M 0 is large. So, in this case, the carry trade makes relatively
small losses in the peso event, but traders value those losses very highly.
A natural question is whether the implied value of M 0 is empirically plausible. To answer
this question we consider an equity strategy whose payo¤ is also potentially a¤ected by the
peso event. Using hedged and unhedged versions of this strategy we obtain an alternative
estimate of M 0 . We then assess whether this estimate of M 0 is consistent with the one implied
by equation (19). The equity strategy involves borrowing one dollar at the Treasury-bill rate,
rt , and investing it in the S&P 100 index.4 We denote the ex-dividend price of the index
and the associated dividend yield by Vt and dt , respectively. The payo¤ to this strategy is
given by:
xt+1 = Vt+1 =Vt + dt

(1 + rt ).

Now consider the following hedged version of the equity strategy: borrow at the Treasurybill rate to invest in the S&P 100 index and buy at-the-money put options on the S&P 100
index. These put options compensate an investor for a fall in the S&P 100. It follows that,
any time the S&P 100 index falls, the payo¤ to the hedged equity strategy is the dividend
yield of the index minus the dollar interest rate and the price of the option, cxt (1 + rt ). By
assumption the stock index falls in the peso state as well as in some non-peso states. In
4

The choice of this index is driven by data considerations.

10

these states the payo¤ to the hedged stock strategy is dt

rt

cxt (1 + rt ). In summary, the

payo¤ to the hedged equity strategy net of the options cost is given by:
xt+1 cxt (1 + rt )
if Vt+1 Vt ,
dt rt cxt (1 + rt ) if Vt+1 < Vt :

xH
t+1 =

The payo¤ to the unhedged equity strategy in the peso state is x0 . The payo¤s to the
unhedged and hedged equity strategies must satisfy:
(1
(1

p)E N (M x) + pM 0 x0 = 0:

p)E N (M xH ) + pM 0 E N [d

r

cx (1 + r)] = 0.

(20)
(21)

Combining these two equations we obtain:
x0 = E N [d

r
0

M =

(1

cx (1 + r)]

E N (M x)
.
E N (M xH )

p)E N (M x)
.
p( x0 )

Given estimates of E N (M x) and E N M xH

(22)

(23)

we can use equations (22) and (23) to

estimate M 0 and x0 . Given a value of p we then estimate x0 and M 0 . A test of the second
interpretation of the peso event is whether the value of M 0 that emerges from this procedure
is consistent with the value of M 0 implied by equation (19).
The procedure just described assumes that a peso-based explanation of the positive average payo¤ to the carry trade is required. After describing the data we motivate this
assumption in Sections 4 and 5, at least in the context of linear asset pricing models. In
Section 6 we report the results of implementing the procedure described in this section.

3

Data

In this section we describe our data sources for spot and forward exchange rates and interest
rates. We also describe the options data that we use to analyze the importance of the peso
problem.

11

Spot and forward exchange rates Our data set on spot and forward exchange rates,
obtained from Datastream, covers the euro and the currencies of 20 countries: Australia,
Austria, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the UK,
and the U.S.
The data consist of daily observations for bid and ask spot exchange rates and one-month
forward exchange rates. We convert daily data into non-overlapping monthly observations
(see Appendix A for details).
Our data span the period January 1976 to July 2009. However, the sample period varies
by currency (see Appendix A for details). Exchange rate quotes (bid, ask, and mid, de…ned
as the average of bid and ask) against the British pound (GBP) are available beginning as
early as 1976. Bid and ask exchange rate quotes against the U.S. dollar (USD) are only
available from January 1997 to July 2009. We obtain mid quotes over the longer sample
against the dollar by multiplying GBP/FCU quotes by USD/GBP quotes.
Interbank interest rates and covered interest parity We also collected data on interest rates in the London interbank market from Datastream. These data are available
for 17 countries/currencies: Australia, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, France, Germany, Italy,
Japan, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, South Africa, Sweden, Switzerland, the UK,
the U.S. and the euro.
The data consist of daily observations for bid and ask eurocurrency interest rates. We
convert daily data into non-overlapping monthly observations. Our data spans the period
January 1976 to July 2009, with the exact sample period varying by currency.
To assess the quality of our data set we investigate whether covered-interest parity (CIP)
holds taking bid-ask spreads into account. We …nd that deviations from CIP are small and
rare. We provide details of our interest rate data and analysis of CIP in the online appendix
(www.duke.edu/~acb8/bekr_app.pdf).

12

Option prices We use two options data sets. Our …rst data set is from the Chicago
Mercantile Exchange (CME). These data consist of daily observations for the period January
1987 to April 2009 on the prices of put and call options against U.S. dollar futures for the
Australian dollar, the Canadian dollar, the euro, the Japanese yen, the Swiss franc, and the
British pound. Appendix B speci…es the exact period of availability for each currency. When
a futures contract and an option contract expire on the same date, an option on currency
futures is equivalent to an option on the spot exchange rate. This equivalence results from
the fact that the price of a futures contract coincides with the spot exchange rate at maturity.
In practice the expiration dates of the two contracts do not generally coincide in our data set.
In Appendix B we describe how to modify our hedging strategy to take this fact into account.
This modi…cation involves adjusting both the number of options purchased and their strike
price. Our modi…ed hedging strategy is exactly equivalent to the hedging strategy described
in Section 2 whenever interest rates are constant over the period between the expiration of
the option and the expiration of the futures contract.
Since we compute carry-trade payo¤s at the monthly frequency, we use data on options
that are one month from maturity (see Appendix B for details). We work exclusively with
options expiring near the beginning of each month (two Fridays prior to the third Wednesday). We measure option prices using settlement prices for transactions that take place
exactly 30 days prior to the option’s expiration date. We measure the time-t forward, spot,
and option strike and settlement prices on the same day, and measure the time t + 1 futures
price on the option expiration date. To compute net payo¤s we multiply option prices by the
gross 30-day eurodollar interest rate obtained from the Federal Reserve Board. This 30-day
interest rate is matched to the maturity of the options in our data set.
Our second options data set is from J.P. Morgan. These data consist of daily observations
of one-month at-the-money-forward implied volatility quotes and forward and spot exchange
rates for the following currencies: the Australian dollar, the Canadian dollar, the Danish
krone, the euro, the Japanese yen, the Swiss franc, the British pound, the New Zealand

13

dollar, the Norwegian krone, and the Swedish krone. Our sample period is February 1995 to
July 2009. We convert the implied volatility quotes to option prices using the Black-Scholes
formula. Given the structure of this data set, we select monthly trades that mature on a
date near the end of the month and are initiated 30 days earlier. We select the last maturity
date which is a business day and for which the initiation date is a business day.

4

Payo¤s to the carry trade

In this section we study the properties of the payo¤s to the carry trade. First, we compute
the mean and variance of the payo¤ to the carry trade with and without transactions costs.
Second, we investigate whether the payo¤ distribution has fat tails. Third, we study the
covariance between the payo¤s to the carry trade and various risk factors using both time
series and panel data.
We consider two versions of the carry trade. In the ‘carry trade without transaction
costs’ we assume that agents can buy and sell currency at the average of the bid and ask
rates. We compute St as the average of the bid (Stb ) and the ask (Sta ) spot exchange rates,
St = Sta + Stb =2,
and Ft as the average of the bid (Ftb ) and the ask (Fta ) forward exchange rates,
Ft = Fta + Ftb =2:
The ask (bid) exchange rate is the rate at which a participant in the interdealer market can
buy (sell) foreign currency from (to) a currency dealer.
In the ‘carry trade with transaction costs’ we take bid-ask spreads into account when
deciding whether to buy or sell foreign currency forward and in calculating payo¤s. In this
case the number of FCUs sold forward, wt , is
8
< +1=Ftb
1=Fta
wt =
:
0

given by:

14

if Ftb =Sta > 1,
if Fta =Stb < 1,
otherwise.

(24)

The payo¤ to this strategy is:
zt+1

4.1

8
< wt Ftb
wt Fta
=
:
0

a
St+1
b
St+1

if wt > 0,
if wt < 0,
if wt = 0.

(25)

Characteristics of carry-trade payo¤s

We consider the carry-trade strategy for individual currencies as well as for portfolios of
currencies. For now we focus attention on the payo¤s to an equally-weighted portfolio of
carry-trade strategies.5 This portfolio is constructed by betting 1=nt U.S. dollars in each
individual currency carry trade. Here nt denotes the number of currencies in our sample
at time t. In the remainder of the paper, unless otherwise noted, we use the term ‘carrytrade strategy’ to refer to the equally-weighted carry trade. Also, we report all statistics
on an annualized basis. Table 1 reports the mean, standard deviation, and Sharpe ratio of
the monthly payo¤s to the carry trade, with and without transaction costs. We consider
two alternative home currencies, the British pound and the U.S. dollar. Using the British
pound as the home currency allows us to assess the importance of bid-ask spreads using a
much longer time series than would be the case if we used only the U.S. dollar as the home
currency.
Consider the results when the British pound is the home currency. Ignoring transaction
costs, the Sharpe ratio of the equally-weighted carry-trade portfolio is 0:748. Taking bid-ask
spreads into account reduces the Sharpe ratio to 0:507. But the Sharpe ratio is statistically
di¤erent from zero with and without transaction costs. Next consider the results when the
dollar is the home currency. Ignoring transaction costs, the Sharpe ratio of the equallyweighted carry-trade portfolio is 0:865. Taking bid-ask spreads into account reduces the
Sharpe ratio to 0:694. The impact of transaction costs is smaller when the dollar is the base
currency because bid-ask spreads are lower for the dollar than for the pound.
Taken together, our results indicate that, while transaction costs are quantitatively important, they do not explain the pro…tability of the carry trade. For the remainder of this
5

In the online appendix we report results for individual currencies.

15

paper we abstract from transaction costs and work with spot and forward rates that are the
average of bid and ask rates.6 Given this decision we can work with the longer data set (from
January 1976 to July 2009) using the U.S. dollar as the home currency.
Table 2 reports statistics for the payo¤s to the equally-weighted carry trade and summary
statistics for the individual-currency carry trades. We compute the latter by taking the
average of the statistics for the carry trade applied to each of the 20 currencies in our
sample. To put our results into perspective, we also report statistics for excess returns to
the value-weighted U.S. stock market. Two results emerge from this table. First, there are
large gains to diversi…cation. The average Sharpe ratio across currencies is 0:442, while the
Sharpe ratio for an equally-weighted portfolio of currencies is 0:911. This large di¤erence
between the Sharpe ratios is due to the fact that the standard deviation of the payo¤s is
much lower for the equally-weighted portfolio. Second, the Sharpe ratio of the carry trade
is substantially larger than that of the U.S. stock market (0:911 versus 0:373). While the
average excess return to the U.S. stock market is larger than the payo¤ to the carry trade
(0:058 versus 0:048), the returns to the U.S. stock market are much more volatile than the
payo¤s to the carry trade (0:156 versus 0:053).
So far we have emphasized the mean and variance of the payo¤s to the carry trade. These
statistics are su¢ cient to characterize the distribution of the payo¤s only if this distribution
is normal. Table 2 reports skewness and excess kurtosis statistics, as well as the results
of the Jarque-Bera normality tests. It is evident that the distributions of both payo¤s are
leptokurtic, exhibiting fat tails.

4.2

The impact of the …nancial crisis on carry-trade payo¤s

Panel A of Figure 1 shows the cumulative payo¤s to investing one dollar in January 1976
in three di¤erent strategies. The …rst strategy involves investing in one-month Treasury
bills. The second strategy involves investing in a value-weighted index of the universe of
6

In an earlier version of this paper (Burnside, Eichenbaum, Kleshchelski, and Rebelo (2006)) we present
a more comprehensive set of results for the carry trade payo¤s taking bid-ask spreads into account.

16

U.S. stocks in the CRSP database. In both strategies the monthly proceeds are reinvested.
The third strategy is the carry trade. Since this strategy involves zero net investment we
compute the cumulative payo¤s as follows. We initially deposit one U.S. dollar in a bank
account that yields the same rate of return as the Treasury bill rate. In the beginning of
every period we bet the balance of the bank account on the carry trade strategy. At the end
of the period, payo¤s to the carry trade are deposited into the bank account.
Three features of Figure 1 are worth noting. First, the cumulative payo¤s to the carry
trade and stock market strategies are very similar. Second, the payo¤s to the carry trade
are much less volatile than those of the U.S. stock market. These two features account for
the Sharpe ratio of the carry-trade strategy being roughly 2:5 times higher than that of the
U.S. stock market. Third, in the recent …nancial crisis the carry trade strategy loses money,
but these losses are much smaller than those of the U.S. stock market. The U.S. stock
market cumulative return peaked at $44:32 in October 2007 and fell to a trough of $21:47
in February 2009, a decline of 51:6 percent. The carry trade portfolio cumulative return
peaked at $31:22 in July 2008 and fell to a trough of $27:87 in February 2009, a decline
of 10:7 percent. Both the cumulative payo¤s to the carry trade and the U.S. stock market
strategies have partially recovered from their trough values.
The worst monthly payo¤s (i.e. the largest drawdowns) to the carry trade from February
1976 to July 2009 are:

8:9 percent (March 1991),

5:8 percent (October 1992), and

5:1

percent (June 1993). The three worst monthly payo¤s to the carry trade from July 2008
to July 2009 are:

4:2 percent (September 2008),

3:9 percent (August 2008), and

3:7

percent (January 2009).7 The three worst monthly payo¤s to the stock market strategy in
our sample are

23:0 (October 1987),

18:5 percent (October 2008), and

16:1 (August

1998). Note that the largest drawdowns of the carry trade strategy did not occur during
the recent …nancial crisis. In contrast, one of the three worst payo¤s to the stock market
strategy did occur during the recent …nancial crisis.
7
Because of data limitations we cannot compute the drawdowns on the carry trade strategy at a daily
frequency.

17

It is worth emphasizing that, while there are some reasonably large negative payo¤s to
the carry trade in sample, the average payo¤ is still positive. We now turn to the question
of whether the payo¤s are correlated with traditional risk factors.

4.3

Risk factor analysis of carry-trade payo¤s

In this subsection we show that the covariances between the payo¤s to the carry trade
and traditional risk factors are not statistically di¤erent from zero. We do so using both
time-series and panel-data analysis. We consider data at both the monthly and quarterly
frequencies. When data on the risk factors are available at the monthly frequency, we de…ne
a 26

1 vector Rt containing the time-t nominal payo¤ to the carry-trade strategy and the

nominal excess returns of the 25 Fama-French (1993) portfolios of equities sorted by …rm
size and the ratio of book value to market value. When data on the risk factors are available
at the quarterly frequency, we de…ne a 26

1 vector Rt containing the time-t real quarterly

payo¤ to the carry-trade strategy and the 25 Fama-French (1993) portfolios.8 These payo¤s
or excess returns must satisfy:
Et (Rt+1 mt+1 ) = 0,

(26)

where, when the data are monthly, mt+1 is the SDF that prices nominal USD-denominated
excess returns and, when the data are quarterly, mt+1 is the SDF that prices real USDdenominated excess returns. We consider linear SDFs of the form:
mt =
Here

1

)0 b :

(ft

is a scalar, ft is a vector of risk factors,

(27)

= E(ft ), and b is a conformable vector.

To simplify our analysis we abstract from non-negativity constraints on mt (see Li, Xu and
Zhang (2010) for a discussion of the potential importance of this issue).
It follows from equation (26) and the law of iterated expectations that:
E (Rt mt ) = 0.
8

In Appendix C we show how we convert monthly payo¤s to real quarterly excess returns.

18

(28)

Equations (28) and (27) imply that:
E(Rt ) =

,

where
= cov(Rt ; ft0 )Vf 1 ,

(29)

= Vf b.
Here Vf is the covariance matrix of the factors,
payo¤s, and

is a vector of risk premia. Note that

is a measure of the systematic risk of the
is the population value of the regression

coe¢ cient of Rt on ft . Our time-series analysis focuses on estimating the betas of the carry
trade payo¤s for di¤erent candidate risk factors. Our panel analysis provides complementary
evidence on the importance of di¤erent risk factors by estimating alternative SDF models
using the moment condition (28). One of these models is the Fama-French (1993) model
that we later use to estimate M 0 .
Time-series risk-factor analysis We consider the following risk factors: the excess returns to the value-weighted U.S. stock market, the Fama-French (1993) factors (the excess
return to the value-weighted U.S. stock market, the size premium (SMB), and the value
premium (HML)), real U.S. per capita consumption growth (nondurables and services), the
factors proposed by Yogo (2006) (the growth rate of per capita consumption of nondurables
and services, the growth rate of the per capita service ‡ow from the stock of consumer
durables, and the return to the value-weighted U.S. stock market), luxury sales growth
(obtained from Aït-Sahalia, Parker and Yogo (2004)), GDP growth, industrial production
growth, the Fed Funds Rate, the term premium (the yield spread between the 10 year Treasury bond and the three month Treasury bill), the liquidity premium (the spread between
the three month eurodollar rate and the three month Treasury bill), the Pastor and Stambaugh (2003) liquidity measures, and three measures of volatility: the VIX, the VXO (the

19

implied volatility of the S&P 500 and S&P 100 index options, respectively, calculated by the
Chicago Board Options Exchange) and the innovation to the VXO.
To conserve space this paper reports results for the …rst four risk models listed above.
These results are representative of the results obtained using the broader list of factors (see
the online appendix). Table 3 reports the estimated regression coe¢ cients of the di¤erent
risk-factors. Panels A and B of Table 3 report results for factors that are available at a
monthly frequency and quarterly frequency, respectively. Our key …nding is that none of the
risk factors covaries signi…cantly with the payo¤s to the carry trade. Recall that the average
payo¤ to the carry trade is statistically di¤erent from zero (see Table 2). Factors that have
zero s clearly cannot account for these positive average payo¤s.
Panel risk-factor analysis We now discuss the results of estimating the parameters of
SDF models built using the monthly and quarterly risk factors detailed in Table 3. In
estimating the models we impose the null hypothesis that there are no peso events. We use
the estimated SDF models to generate model-predicated expected payo¤s to the carry-trade
strategy and the 25 Fama-French portfolios.9 We then study how well the model explains
the average payo¤ to the carry trade, as well as its overall ability to explain the cross-section
of average excess returns used in the estimation procedure.
We estimate b and

by the generalized method of moments (GMM) using equation

(28) and the moment condition

= E(ft ). The …rst stage of the GMM procedure, which

uses the identity matrix to weight the GMM errors, is equivalent to the two-pass regression
method commonly associated with Fama and MacBeth (1973). Because, at this stage, we
are imposing the null of no peso events, all payo¤s should re‡ect covariance with risk factors,
so the …rst stage of the GMM procedure is equivalent to a cross-sectional regression with no
constant. The second stage of the GMM procedure uses an optimal weighting matrix. We
provide details of the GMM procedure in the online appendix.
9

The online appendix also reports results for a quarterly version of the Campbell and Cochrane (1999)
SDF. Verdelhan (2010) argues that open-economy models in which agents have Campbell-Cochrane (1999)
preferences can generate non-trivial deviations from UIP.

20

It is evident from equations (27) and (28) that

= E(mt ) is not identi…ed. Fortunately,

the point estimate of b and inference about the model’s overidentifying restrictions are invariant to the value of , so we set

to one for convenience. It follows from equations (27)

and (28) that:
E (Rt ) =

cov (Rt ; mt )
= E Rt (ft
E (mt )

)0 b .

(30)

Given an estimate of b, the predicted mean excess return is the sample analogue of the right^ The actual mean excess return is the
hand side of equation (30), which we denote by R.
sample analogue of the left-hand side of equation (30), which we denote by R. We denote
~ the average across the elements of R. We evaluate di¤erent SDF models using the R2
by R
between the predicted and actual mean excess returns. This R2 measure is invariant to the
value of

and is given by:
R2 = 1

^ 0 (R
R)
~ 0 (R
R)

(R
(R

^
R)
.
~
R)

For each monthly risk factor, or vector of factors, Table 4 reports estimates of b, the
R2 , and the value of Hansen’s (1982) J statistic used to test the overidentifying restrictions
implied by equation (28). In addition, we report the alpha of the carry trade portfolio, i.e.
the average payo¤ that is not priced by the risk factor.
The results fall into two categories, depending on whether the model is rejected based
on the test of the overidentifying restrictions. For nine out of the 16 cases that we consider,
the model is rejected, and the alpha of the carry trade is statistically signi…cant. For the
other seven cases the model is not rejected. However, in these cases the b parameters are
estimated with enormous imprecision and the R2 is negative.
To conserve space, here we report results for the four risk models for which we presented
estimated betas. We present the additional results in the online appendix. From Table 4,
Panel A we see that the CAPM and the Fama-French model are rejected at the one percent
level. In addition, the alpha of the carry trade portfolio is statistically signi…cant for these
models.
We present results for the C-CAPM and the extended C-CAPM in Table 4, Panel B.
21

The b parameters of these models are estimated with enormous imprecision. Since there is
little information in the sample about the b parameters it is hard to statistically reject these
factor models. The R2 for both of these models is negative.
We now provide an alternative perspective on the performance of the SDF models being
^ the predictions of these models for E (Rt ) against R, the sample
considered. Figure 2 plots R,
average of Rt . The circles pertain to the Fama-French portfolios, and the star pertains to
the carry trade. It is clear that the three CAPM models (panels a, c and d) do a poor
job of explaining the excess returns to the Fama-French portfolios and the payo¤s to the
carry trade. Not surprisingly, the Fama-French model (panel b) does a reasonably good job
of pricing the excess returns to the Fama-French portfolios. However, the model greatly
understates the average payo¤s to the carry trade. The annualized average payo¤ to the
carry trade is 4:82 percent. The Fama-French model predicts that this average return should
equal 0:19 percent. The solid line through the star is a two-standard-error band for the
di¤erence between the data and model average payo¤, i.e. the pricing error. Clearly, we can
reject the hypothesis that the model accounts for the average payo¤s to the carry trade, i.e.
from the perspective of the model the carry trade has a positive alpha.
In sum, this section provides evidence that it is di¢ cult to explain the positive average
payo¤ to the carry trade as compensation for exposure to conventional risk factors, at least
in sample.

5

Payo¤s to the hedged carry trade

In this section we analyze the empirical properties of the hedged carry trade. As discussed
in Section 3, our primary options data set from the CME covers six currencies and a shorter
sample period (February 1987 to April 2009) than our data set on forward contracts. For
comparability we also compute the payo¤s to the unhedged carry trade using the currencies
and sample period covered by the CME data set.
We implement the hedged carry trade using strike prices that are close to ‘at the money’
22

(see Appendix B for details). We choose these strike prices because most of the options
traded are actually close to being at the money (see the online appendix). Options that are
way out of the money tend to be sparsely traded and relatively expensive.10
Table 5 reports the mean, standard deviation, and Sharpe ratio of the monthly payo¤s
to the carry trade, the hedged carry trade, and the U.S. stock market. The average payo¤ to
the hedged carry trade is lower than that of the carry trade (1:58 versus 2:96 percent). Both
the average payo¤ and the Sharpe ratio of the hedged carry trade are statistically di¤erent
from zero.11
Recall that we are abstracting from bid-ask spreads in calculating the payo¤s to the
hedged carry trade. In Section 4 we …nd that taking transaction costs into account reduces
the annualized average payo¤ to the unhedged carry trade executed with the U.S. dollar as
the home currency by 9 basis points on an annual basis. To assess the impact of transactions
costs on the hedged carry trade we compute average bid-ask spreads for puts and calls
against the Canadian dollar, the euro, the Japanese yen, and the Swiss franc. We base our
estimates on data from the CME that contains all transactions on currency puts and calls
for a single day (November 14, 2007). This data set contains records for 260 million contract
transactions. The average bid-ask spread in these data is 5:2 percent of the option price.12
This estimate is slightly higher than the point estimate of 4:4 percent obtained by Chong,
Ding, and Tan (2003) using the Bloomberg Financial Database for the period December
1995 to March 2000. To quantify the impact of transaction costs on the average payo¤s of
the hedged carry trade we increase the prices of the puts and calls used in our strategy by
10

See Jurek (2008) for a detailed analysis of the impact of hedging using out-of-the-money options. Jurek
…nds that the payo¤s to the carry trade hedged with these options is positive and highly statistically significant. See also Bhansali (2007) who considers hedging strategies in the course of investigating the relation
between implied exchange-rate volatility and the payo¤s to the carry trade.
11
The average payo¤s and the Sharpe ratios for both carry-trade strategies are higher when we exclude
the …nancial crisis period. Suppose that we compare a sample that stops on July 2008 to our sample period.
The average payo¤ to the unhedged carry trade falls from 3:48 percent to 2:96 percent, while the Sharpe
ratio falls from 0:586 to 0:476. The average payo¤ to the hedged carry trade falls from 1:80 percent to 1:58
percent, while the Sharpe ratio falls from 0:530 to 0:449.
12
The average bid-ask spreads for individual currencies are: Canadian dollar call 5:3 percent, put 4:4
percent, Euro call 4:3 percent, put 4:8 percent, Japanese yen call 5:3 percent, put 5:6 percent, Swiss franc
call 5:3 percent, put 6:4 percent, and British pound call 4:3 percent, and put 4:6 percent.

23

one half of the average bid-ask spread (2:6 percent). We …nd that the average payo¤ to the
hedged carry trade declines from 0:0158 to 0:0121 as a result of transaction costs. This result
suggests that transactions costs have a modest impact on the average payo¤s of the hedged
carry trade.
The …rst panel of Figure 3 displays a 12-month moving average of the realized payo¤s for
the hedged and unhedged carry-trade strategies. The second panel displays a time series of
the realized Sharpe ratios over a 12-month moving window for both carry-trade strategies.
The payo¤s and Sharpe ratios of the two strategies are highly correlated. In this sense, the
hedged and unhedged carry trade payo¤s appear quite similar. For both strategies negative
payo¤s are relatively rare and positive payo¤s are not concentrated in a small number of
periods. In addition, there is no pronounced time trend in either the payo¤s or the Sharpe
ratios.
There is an important dimension along which the payo¤s of the two carry-trade strategies
are quite di¤erent. As Figure 4 shows, the distribution of payo¤s to the unhedged carry trade
has a substantial left tail. Hedging eliminates most of the left tail. This property re‡ects
the fact that our version of the hedged carry trade uses options with strike prices that are
close to at the money.
Panel B of Figure 1 shows the cumulative payo¤s to the unhedged carry trade, U.S. stocks
and Treasury bills as well as the cumulative payo¤ to the hedged carry trade, beginning
from a common initial date, December 1986. Two key features are worth noting. First, the
cumulative payo¤ to the hedged carry trade is somewhat lower than that of the unhedged
carry trade. This result re‡ects the cost of the options used in the hedged strategy and the
fact that there are no large negative payo¤s to the unhedged carry trade in sample. Second,
the hedged carry trade payo¤s are less volatile than those of the unhedged carry trade. This
result re‡ects the fact that the hedging strategy truncates a subset of the negative payo¤s
to the unhedged carry trade that occur in the sample.

24

Time-series risk-factor analysis We now investigate whether the payo¤s to the hedged
carry trade are correlated with traditional risk measures. Table 6 reports our estimates of ,
the regression coe¢ cient of the carry-trade payo¤ on candidate risk factors, using the four
risk models we have been considering. Note that two factors display a signi…cant correlation
with the payo¤s to the hedged carry trade: the excess return to the value-weighted U.S.
stock market and the value premium. This …nding contrasts with our result that none of
the risk factors are correlated with the payo¤s to the unhedged carry trade.
Panel risk-factor analysis We now turn to a panel risk-factor analysis of the hedged
carry-trade payo¤s. We estimate the parameters of the same SDF models considered in
Section 4. Our estimation results are generated using a 26

1 vector of time-t excess

returns to the hedged carry-trade strategy and the 25 Fama-French portfolios. We report
our results in Table 7. As before, our results fall into two categories, depending on whether
the model is rejected based on the test of the overidentifying restrictions. For the CAPM,
the Fama-French model, and the C-CAPM the model is rejected at the one percent level.
The extended C-CAPM model is not rejected because the b parameters are estimated with
great imprecision.
Figure 5 displays the predictions of the CAPM, the C-CAPM, the extended C-CAPM
models, and the Fama-French model for E(Rt ) against the sample average of Rt . The …rst
three models do a very poor job at explaining the cross-sectional variation of excess returns.
Indeed, the cross-sectional R2 of these models is negative. The Fama-French model does a
reasonable job of explaining the average excess returns to the Fama-French portfolios and
the payo¤s to the hedged carry trade.13 Recall that the Fama-French model does a very
poor job at explaining the payo¤s to the unhedged carry trade (see Figure 2).
In sum, this section, together with Section 4, indicates that it is di¢ cult to explain the
13

The use of options in the construction of the hedged carry-trade strategies can introduce non-linearities
in the portfolio payo¤s (see Glosten and Jagannathan (1994) and Broadie, Chernov and Johannes (2009)).
Following Glosten and Jaganathan (1994), we re-do the cross-sectional analysis allowing for quadratic terms
in the factors. Our results are una¤ected by this extension.

25

payo¤s to the unhedged and hedged carry trade as compensation for exposure to conventional
measures of risk. We now turn to the question of whether the payo¤s to the carry trade
re‡ect a peso problem.

6

Characterizing the nature of peso events

In this section we implement the strategy for assessing the importance of peso events discussed in Section 2. This section is organized as follows. In Subsection 6.1 we report
estimates of z 0 and M 0 =E N (M ). We compute these estimates using our benchmark CME
data set. In Subsection 6.2 we incorporate stock returns into our empirical analysis. We
assess the robustness of our results in Subsection 6.3 using data from J.P. Morgan. Finally,
in Subsection 6.4 we extend our analysis to allow for multiple peso events. Up to this point
we reported all statistics on an annualized basis. In this section we report monthly statistics
so that our calculations are easier to follow.

6.1

Benchmark estimates

Our estimates of z 0 and M 0 =E N (M ) are based on equations (18) and (19) which require
estimates of the risk-adjusted average payo¤s to the unhedged and hedged carry trade.
The estimates of these payo¤s reported in Sections 4 and 5 are generated under the null
hypothesis of no peso events. Since this null is inappropriate for the analysis in this section,
we re-estimate these payo¤s allowing for peso events. In practice this means allowing for a
constant in our linear SDF model which is based on the Fama-French factors (see the online
appendix).
The …rst column of Table 8 reports our benchmark estimates which are based on the CME
data for the sample period 1987 to 2009. Note that the average payo¤s to the unhedged and
hedged carry trade are equal to 0:0025 and 0:0013, respectively. The mean minimum net
payo¤ to the hedged carry trade, E N (h), is equal to

0:0105.

We use our estimated SDF model to generate a time series for Mt . We then use this time

26

series to estimate E N (M z) and E N (M z H ). The resulting point estimate of z 0 is

0:0216 with

a standard error of 0:0059. The implied two-standard-error band for z 0 is ( 0:033; 0:010).
The standard deviation of z in our sample is 0:018. So, our point estimate for z 0 is roughly
1:3 standard deviations below the estimated value of E N (z). The lower bound of the twostandard-error band for z 0 ( 0:033) is only two standard deviations below the average payo¤
to the unhedged carry trade. Thus, we …nd little evidence to support the view that z 0 is a
very large negative value relative to the empirical distribution of payo¤s to the carry trade.
For robustness we calculated values of z 0 and M 0 under the assumption that the correlation
between the SDF and the hedged and unhedged carry trade payo¤s is zero in non-peso states.
As reported in Table 8 these estimates are similar to the results reported above. Viewed
overall, our results are consistent with Bates (1996b) who studies high-frequency data on
options prices for the Deutsche Mark and the Yen against the U.S. dollar over the period
1984 to 1992. He argues that peso events, de…ned as a large, negative, value of z 0 , cannot
account for the failure of UIP.
Given an estimate of z 0 and a value of p we can estimate M 0 =E N (M ) using equation (19).
Nakamura, Steinsson, Barro, and Ursúa (2010) provide a convenient benchmark value for
p. Using consumption data covering 24 countries and more than 100 years, these authors
estimate the annual probability of a disaster, thought of as a large drop in consumption, to be
0:017. Nakamura et al. (2010) argue that the frequency of disasters in the U.S. is statistically
consistent with their estimate of p. Motivated by their estimate we use a monthly value of
p equal to 0:0014. This value of p implies that a peso event occurs on average once every
700 months. Recall that our data cover a period of 268 months and we assume that there
are no peso events in sample. Our benchmark value of p implies that the probability of not
observing a peso event in a sample as long as ours is 68 percent. So, our assumption that a
peso event did not occur in our sample is quite plausible from a purely statistical point of
view.
In conjunction with equation (19), our benchmark value of p yields an estimate of

27

M 0 =E N (M ) equal to 92:9, with a standard error 47:5. This result supports interpreting
a peso event as primarily re‡ecting a high value of the SDF. That is, traders value losses
very highly in a peso state.
There is clearly a great deal of uncertainty about the true value of p. But the basic result
that a peso event is characterized by a high value of M 0 =E N (M ) is robust for plausible values
of p. Higher values of p imply lower values of M 0 =E N (M ). Suppose, for example, that p is
equal to 1=268. In this case the probability of observing a sample of 268 months with no peso
events is roughly 37 percent. The implied value of M 0 =E N (M ) is roughly 35. Alternatively,
suppose we choose p = 0:0111, so that the probability of not observing a peso event in our
sample is only …ve percent. Even in this case the implied value of M 0 =E N (M ) equals roughly
12.

6.2

Incorporating stock-market data into our analysis

In this subsection we use stock market data to generate an independent estimate of M 0 .
We begin by contrasting the e¤ect of hedging in stock markets and in currency markets.
Hedging substantially reduces the excess return from investing in the stock market. As
Table 5 indicates, over the period February 1987–April 2009, the annualized rate of return
to the unhedged stock-market strategy is 6:87 percent versus

4:79 for the hedged stock-

market strategy. In sharp contrast, over the same sample period, the annualized payo¤ to
the unhedged carry trade is 2:96 percent versus 1:58 percent for the hedged carry trade.
In section 2 we develop estimators of M 0 and x0 , the payo¤ to the stock market strategy
in a peso state. We base our estimators on equations (22) and (23). We use estimates of the
Fama-French (1993) model …t to the 25 Fama-French portfolios over the period February
1986–July 2009 to compute a time series for Mt . The options data we use to construct the
hedged equity strategy are available over this same time period. We use sample averages of
N
N
H
14
Mt xt and Mt xH
t to estimate E (M x) and E (M x ), respectively.
14

The results reported in the text are based on a linear SDF. We …nd that the same implied values of x0
and M 0 =E N (M ) cannot be rejected when we use an SDF that includes quadratic terms in some or all of the

28

Our estimate of x0 is

0:188. This value of x0 is roughly ten times larger in absolute value

than z 0 . By this metric the peso event has a larger impact on stock market payo¤s than on
carry trade payo¤s. Also x0 is more than four standard deviations away from our estimate
of E N (x). Using our benchmark value of p, our point estimate of M 0 =E N (M ) based on
stock returns is equal to 67:6. Recall that our estimate of M 0 =E N (M ) based on carry-trade
returns is 92:9. These two estimates are not statistically signi…cantly di¤erent from each
other. In this sense, the same value of M 0 =E N (M ) can account for the equity premium and
the observed average payo¤s to the carry trade.
Taken together, the results of this subsection provide corroborating evidence for the view
that the hallmark of a peso event is a large rise in the value of the SDF. Sampling uncertainty
aside, this large rise is associated with large, negative stock market payo¤s and relatively
modest, negative carry-trade payo¤s.

6.3

Robustness analysis: J.P. Morgan data

To assess the robustness of our inference we begin by redoing our analysis using the sixcurrency version of the J.P. Morgan data set. We report our results in Table 8. Our
estimates of E N (h), E N (M z) and E N (M z H ) imply an estimate of z 0 equal to

0:0386 with

a standard error of 0:0173. Table 8 also reports results based on the ten currency version of
the J.P. Morgan data set. These estimates imply an estimate for z 0 equal to

0:0438 with a

standard error of 0:0207. For both J.P. Morgan data sets, our estimate of z 0 is more negative
than for the CME data set and represents a payo¤ roughly three standard deviations below
the estimate of E N (z). Still, these payo¤s are not particularly large, and our estimates of
M 0 =E N (M ) remain large.

6.4

Robustness analysis: allowing for multiple-peso states

Under the assumption that there is a single peso state we …nd that the value of z 0 is a
relatively small negative number. Here we study the robustness of our results by allowing
Fama-French factors.

29

for a continuum of peso states. As above, we denote the set of peso states by

P

and

assume that the probability of the collection of peso states is p, both conditionally and
unconditionally. When the economy is in the peso state the value of ! t+1 is drawn from
an i.i.d distribution. We denote by F P (! t+1 ) the cumulative distribution of ! t+1 given that
! t+1 2

P

. We let the functions M 0 (! t+1 ) and z 0 (! t+1 ) denote the values of the SDF and
P

payo¤ to the carry trade for each ! t+1 2
satisfy:
N

(1

p)E (M z) + p

Z

. The payo¤s to the unhedged carry trade must

M 0 (! t+1 )z 0 (! t+1 )dF P (! t+1 ) = 0.

(31)

P

Consider now the hedged carry trade strategy, where the hedging relies on at-the-money
options. Since these options are in the money in all peso states, it follows that:
p)E N (M z H ) + pE P (M 0 )E N (h) = 0

(1
where E P (M 0 ) =

R

P

M 0 (! t+1 )dF P (! t+1 ).

Solving equation (32) for (1
we obtain:

Z

Letting E P (z 0 ) =

p)E N (M ) and substituting the result into equation (31)

M 0 (! t+1 )z 0 (! t+1 )dF P (! t+1 ) =
P

R

P

E N (M z) P
E (M 0 )E N (h) .
E N (M z H )

(33)

z 0 (! t+1 )dF P (! t+1 ) we can rewrite equation (33) as:

E N (M z) P
E (M 0 )E N (h) .
E (M )E (z ) + cov (M ; z ) = N
H
E (M z )
P

(32)

0

P

P

0

0

0

(34)

We assume that that there is a tendency for worse peso states (large values of M 0 ) to be
associated with worse payo¤s (more negative values of z 0 ) so that covP (M 0 ; z 0 )

0. In this

case equation (34) implies that:
E P (z 0 )

E N (M z) N
E (h) .
E N (M z H )

(35)

So, equation (35) implies that the expected value of z 0 across all peso states is greater
than or equal to the estimate of z 0 implied by equation (18). While there can be some
large negative values of z 0 , these values must have low probabilities. If we assume that
30

covP (M 0 ; z 0 ) = 0, then equation (35) implies that the average value of z 0 is equal to that
implied by equation (18).
We now consider the implications of this extension for the average value of the SDF
across peso states. Solving equation (32) for the average value of the SDF in the peso state
we obtain:
P

0

E (M ) =

1

p E N (M z H )
:
p
E N (h)

(36)

Equation (19) is the analogue of equation (19). Furthermore, the two equations are equivalent
if equation (35) holds with equality.
In sum, in the presence of multiple peso states our empirical results can be reinterpreted
as pertaining to the average value of payo¤s and the SDF across peso states.

7

Conclusion

Equally-weighted portfolios of carry-trade strategies generate large positive payo¤s and a
Sharpe ratio that is almost twice as large as the Sharpe ratio of the U.S. stock market. We
…nd that these payo¤s are not correlated with standard risk factors. Moreover, standard
SDF models do not explain the average payo¤ to the carry trade.
We argue that the positive average payo¤ to the unhedged carry trade re‡ects peso event
risk. A peso event consists of a negative payo¤ to the carry trade and an associated value of
the SDF. We develop and implement a strategy to characterize the peso event. This strategy
uses the payo¤s to a version of the carry trade that employs currency options to protect
an investor from the downside risk associated with large, adverse movements in exchange
rates. By construction, this hedged carry trade strategy eliminates the large negative payo¤s
associated with peso events. Our key …nding is that a peso event is characterized by modest
negative payo¤s to the unhedged carry trade along with a large value of the SDF.
It is important to emphasize that we base our results on an asset pricing framework that
is linear except for the peso state. So, we do not rule out the possibility that the payo¤s to
the carry trade can be explained using a non-linear SDF model.
31

Finally, we note that our analysis is based on unconditional covariances between risk
factors and carry trade payo¤s. It might be di¢ cult to detect non-zero covariances in samples
of our size when the conditional covariance is time varying. Suppose, for example, that the
covariance is zero in most states of nature but it is strongly negative in states that occur with
low probability. In this setting the sample size necessary to …nd a statistically signi…cant
covariance might be much greater than the size of our sample.

32

REFERENCES
Aït-Sahalia, Yacine, Jonathan Parker and Motohiro Yogo (2004) “Luxury Goods and the
Equity Premium,”Journal of Finance 59 (6, Dec.): 2959–3004.
Backus, David K., Silverio Foresi and Chris I. Telmer (2001) “A¢ ne Term Structure Models
and the Forward Premium Anomaly,”Journal of Finance 56 (1, Feb.): 279–304.
Bates, David (1996a) “Jumps and Stochastic Volatility: Exchange Rate Processes Implicit
in Deutsche Mark Options,”Review of Financial Studies 9:1, 69-107.
Bates, David (1996b) “Dollar Jump Fears, 1984-1992: Distribution Abnormalities Implicit
in Currency Futures Options,” Journal of International Money and Finance, 15: 1,
65-93.
Bekaert, Geert (1996) “The Time-Variation of Expected Returns and Volatility in ForeignExchange Markets: A General Equilibrium Perspective,” Review of Financial Studies
9: 427–70.
Bekaert, Geert and Robert J. Hodrick (1992) “Characterizing Predictable Components in
Excess Returns on Equity and Foreign Exchange Markets,”Journal of Finance 47 (2,
Jun.): 467–509.
Bhansali, Vineer (2007) “Volatility and the Carry Trade,” The Journal of Fixed Income,
72-84, Winter.
Broadie, Mark , Michael S. Johannes and Mikhail Chernov (2009) “Understanding Index
Option Returns,”Review of Financial Studies 22 (4, May): 4493-4529.
Brunnermeier, Markus K., Stefan Nagel, and Lasse H. Pedersen (2008) “Carry Trades and
Currency Crashes,”NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2008, 23: 313-347, 2009.
Burnside, Craig (2007) “The Cross-Section of Foreign Currency Risk Premia and Consumption Growth Risk: A Comment,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working
Paper No. 13129.
Burnside, Craig, Martin Eichenbaum, Isaac Kleshchelski, and Sergio Rebelo (2006) “The
Returns to Currency Speculation,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working
Paper No. 12489.
Campbell, John and John Cochrane (1999) “By Force of Habit: A Consumption-Based
Explanation of Aggregate Stock Market Behavior,”Journal of Political Economy, 107:
205–51.
Chong, Beng-Soon, David K. Ding and Kok-Hui Tan (2003) “Maturity E¤ect on Bid-Ask
Spreads of OTC Currency Options,”Review of Quantitative Finance and Accounting,
21: 5–15.
Fama, Eugene and Kenneth R. French (1993) “Common Risk Factors in the Returns on
Stocks and Bonds,”Journal of Financial Economics 33 (1, Feb.), 3–56.
33

Fama, Eugene and James D. MacBeth (1973) “Risk Return and Equilibrium: Empirical
Tests,”Journal of Financial Political Economy, 71: 607-636.
Farhi, Emmanuel and Xavier Gabaix (2008) “Rare Disasters and Exchange Rates,”National
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 13805.
Galati, Gabriele and Michael Melvin (2004) “Why has FX Trading Surged? Explaining the
2004 Triennial Survey,”BIS Quarterly Review (Dec.), 67–74.
Garman, Mark B. and Steven W. Kohlhagen (1983) “Foreign currency option values,”
Journal of International Money and Finance, 2, 231–7.
Glosten, Lawrence and Ravi Jagannathan (1994) “A Contingent Claims Framework for
Analyzing the Performance of Portfolio Managers,” Journal of Empirical Finance, 1,
133-160.
Hansen, Lars Peter (1982) “Large Sample Properties of Generalized Method of Moments
Estimators,”Econometrica 50 (4, July), 1029–54.
Ibbotson and Associates (2006) Stocks, Bonds, Bills and In‡ation Yearbook. Chicago, Ill.:
Ibbotson Associates.
Jurek, Jakub W. (2008) “Crash-neutral Currency Carry Trades,” mimeo, Princeton University.
Li, Haitao and Yuewu Xu Xiaoyan Zhang (2010) “Evaluating Asset Pricing Models Using the Second Hansen-Jagannathan Distance,” forthcoming in Journal of Financial
Economics.
Lustig, Hanno and Adrien Verdelhan (2007) “The Cross-Section of Foreign Currency Risk
Premia and Consumption Growth Risk,”American Economic Review, 97, 89–117.
Nakamura, Emi, Jon Steinsson, Robert J. Barro, and José F. Ursúa (2010) “Crises and
Recoveries in an Empirical Model of Consumption Disasters,” NBER Working Paper
15920.
Pastor, Lubos and Robert F. Stambaugh (2003) “Liquidity Risk and Expected Stock Returns,”Journal of Political Economy 111, 642–85.
Verdelhan, Adrien (2010) “A Habit-Based Explanation of the Exchange Rate Risk Premium,”Journal of Finance, 65: 1, 123-145..
Villanueva, O. Miguel (2007) “Forecasting Currency Excess Returns: Can the Forward Bias
Be Exploited?”Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis (42, Dec.), 963–90.
Yogo, Motohiro (2006) “A Consumption-Based Explanation of Expected Stock Returns,”
Journal of Finance 61 (2, April), 539–80.

34

TABLE 1: Annualized Payoffs of the Equally-Weighted Carry-Trade Strategy
No Transactions Costs

British Pound is the Base Currency
February 1976 to July 2009

US Dollar is the Base Currency
January 1997 to July 2009

With Transactions Costs

Mean

Standard
Deviation

Sharpe
Ratio

Mean

Standard
Deviation

Sharpe
Ratio

0.0319
(0.0080)

0.043
(0.003)

0.748
(0.194)

0.0288
(0.0111)

0.057
(0.004)

0.507
(0.203)

0.0440
(0.0171)

0.051
(0.005)

0.865
(0.358)

0.0431
(0.0213)

0.062
(0.007)

0.694
(0.356)

Note: Payo¤s are measured either in British pounds, per pound bet, or in US dollars, per dollar bet. The
carry-trade portfolio is formed as the equally-weighted average of up to 20 individual currency carry trades
against either the British pound or the US dollar. The twenty currencies are indicated in the Appendix.
Heteroskedasticity consistent GMM standard errors are in parentheses.

35

TABLE 2: Annualized Payoffs of Investment Strategies
US Dollar is the Base Currency (February-1976 to July-2009)
Mean

Standard
Deviation

Sharpe
Ratio

Skewness

Excess
Kurtosis

Jarque-Bera
Statistic

U.S. stock market

0.0582
(0.0281)

0.156
(0.010)

0.373
(0.192)

-0.808
(0.288)

2.53
(1.17)

150.9
(0.000)

Equally-weighted carry trade

0.0482
(0.0101)

0.053
(0.005)

0.911
(0.222)

-0.648
(0.520)

5.81
(2.02)

592.6
(0.000)

0.0492

0.114

0.442

-0.229

1.57

67.4

Average of individual-currency
carry trades

Notes: Payo¤s are measured in US dollars, per dollar bet. The payo¤ at time t to the US stock market is the
value-weighted excess return on all US stocks reported in Kenneth French’s database, divided by 1 + rt 1
(this normalizes the excess stock returns to the same size of bet as the carry-trade payo¤s). The carry-trade
portfolio is formed as the equally-weighted average of up to 20 individual currency carry trades against the
US dollar. The individual currencies are indicated in the Appendix. Heteroskedasticity consistent GMM
standard errors are in parentheses, except for the Jarque-Bera statistic for which the p-value is reported in
parentheses. The mean payo¤ of the equally-weighted carry trade is not equal to the average mean payo¤ of
the individual-currency carry trades because the sample periods for which the currencies are available varies
(see Appendix A).

36

TABLE 3: Factor Betas of the Equally-Weighted Carry-Trade Portfolio
Factors

Intercept

R2

Beta(s)

(A) Monthly Payo¤s and Risk Factors (February 1976 to July 2009)
CAPM

0.004
(0.001)

0.018
(0.018)

Fama-French factors

0.004
(0.001)

0.033
(0.019)

0.003

-0.045
(0.031)

0.028
(0.033)

0.016

(B) Quarterly Real Excess Returns and Risk Factors (1976Q2 to 2009Q2)
C-CAPM

0.012
(0.005)

0.058
(0.840)

Extended C-CAPM

0.007
(0.008)

-0.210
(0.921)

0.000

0.607
(0.663)

0.011
(0.034)

0.009

Notes: Part (A) of the table reports estimates of the equation zt = a + ft0 + t+1 , where zt is the monthly
nominal payo¤ of the equally-weighted carry-trade portfolio and ft is a scalar or vector of risk factors. The
CAPM factor is the excess return on the value-weighted US stock market (M kt Rf ), and the FamaFrench factors are the M kt Rf , SM B and HM L factors (available from Kenneth French’s database).
Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are in parentheses. Part (B) of the table reports estimates of the
equation Rte = a+ft0 + t+1 , where Rte is the quarterly real excess return of the equally-weighted carry-trade
portfolio and ft is a scalar or vector of risk factors. The C-CAPM factor is real per capita consumption
growth, the extended C-CAPM factors are real per capita consumption growth, real per capita durables
growth, and the return on the value-weighted US stock market. Details of the risk factors are provided in
the Appendix. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are in parentheses.

37

TABLE 4: GMM Estimates of Linear Factor Models
Test Assets are the Fama-French 25 Portfolios and the Equally-Weighted Carry-Trade Portfolio
b

R2

J

(A) Monthly Data (February 1976 to July 2009)
CAPM

0.0049
(0.0023)

2.01
(1.25)

0.41
(0.24)

-1.97

102
(0.00)

0.047
(0.010)

Mkt-Rf

0.0049
(0.0023)

3.45
(1.50)

0.44
(0.24)

0.40

89.4
(0.00)

0.046
(0.010)

SMB

0.0027
(0.0016)

3.21
(1.80)

0.22
(0.15)

HML

0.0036
(0.0018)

7.25
(2.02)

0.40
(0.17)

Fama-French Factors

(B) Quarterly Data (1976Q2 to 2009Q2)
C-CAPM

0.0044
(0.0006)

196
(83.7)

0.34
(0.13)

-2.33

35.8
(0.07)

0.049
(0.026)

Consumption

0.0044
(0.0006)

11.2
(114)

0.02
(0.20)

-7.77

2.83
(1.00)

0.050
(0.031)

Durables

0.0100
(0.0028)

0.96
(61.5)

0.01
(0.17)

Market return

0.0184
(0.0073)

0.23
(2.14)

0.22
(1.22)

Extended C-CAPM

Notes: Part (A) of the table reports second stage GMM estimates of the SDF mt = 1 (ft
)0 b using the
moment conditions E(Rt mt ) = 0 and E(ft
) = 0, where Rt is a 26 1 vector containing the nominal excess
returns of the Fama-French 25 value-weighted portfolios of US stocks sorted on size and the book-to-market
value ratio as well as the monthly nominal payo¤ of the equally-weighted carry-trade portfolio, and ft is a
scalar or vector of risk factors. Part (B) of the table uses the same moment conditions, but Rt is a 26 1
vector containing the real quarterly excess returns of the Fama-French 25 portfolios and the equally-weighted
carry-trade portfolio. The risk factors are described in more detail in the footnote to Table 3. The GMM
procedure is described in more detail in the Appendix. Estimates of the factor risk premia ^ = V^f ^b are
reported (in percent), where V^f is the sample covariance matrix of ft . GMM-VARHAC standard errors are
2
reported in parentheses for ^ , ^b and ^ . The
of …t between the sample mean of Rt and
PTR is a0 measure
0^
1
R
(f
^
)
b.
Tests
of the overidentifying restrictions are
the predicted mean returns, given by T
t=1 t t
also reported. The test statistic, J, is asymptotically distributed as a 226 k , where k is the number of risk
factors. The p-value is in parentheses. The pricing error of the equally-weighted carry-trade portfolio ( ) is
reported annualized. Its standard error is in parentheses.

38

TABLE 5: Annualized Payoffs of Investment Strategies
US Dollar is the Base Currency (February 1987 to April 2009)

U.S. stock market
S&P 100 stock index
Unhedged
Hedged
Equally-weighted carry trade
Unhedged
Hedged

Mean

Standard
Deviation

Sharpe
Ratio

Skewness

Excess
Kurtosis

Jarque-Bera
Statistic

0.0452
(0.0349)

0.158
(0.014)

0.286
(0.239)

-1.141
(0.333)

3.31
(1.53)

180
(0.000)

0.0687
(0.0347)

0.163
(0.013)

0.422
(0.233)

-0.593
(0.246)

2.00
(0.63)

60.0
(0.000)

-0.0479
(0.0214)

0.098
(0.007)

-0.491
(0.225)

0.955
(0.339)

2.24
(1.44)

96.3
(0.000)

0.0296
(0.0136)

0.062
(0.005)

0.476
(0.234)

-0.708
(0.154)

1.47
(0.44)

46.3
(0.000)

0.0158
(0.0078)

0.035
(0.002)

0.449
(0.212)

0.722
(0.248)

1.14
(0.63)

37.6
(0.000)

Notes: Payo¤s are measured in US dollars, per dollar bet. The payo¤ at time t to the US stock market is the
value-weighted excess return on all US stocks reported in Kenneth French’s database, divided by 1 + rt 1 .
The carry-trade portfolio is formed as the equally-weighted average of up to six individual currency carry
trades against the US dollar. The individual currencies are the Australian dollar, the Canadian dollar, the
Japanese yen, the Swiss franc, the British pound, and the euro. The hedged carry-trade portfolio combines
the forward market positions with an options contract that insures against losses from the forward position
(details are provided in the main text). Standard errors are in parentheses, except for the Jarque-Bera
statistic for which the p-value is reported in parentheses.

39

TABLE 6: Factor Betas of the Hedged Equally-Weighted Carry-Trade Portfolio
Factors

Intercept

R2

Beta(s)

(A) Monthly Payo¤s and Risk Factors (February 1987 to April 2009)
CAPM

0.001
(0.001)

0.021
(0.015)

Fama-French factors

0.001
(0.001)

0.037
(0.018)

0.009

-0.003
(0.020)

0.060
(0.025)

0.042

(B) Quarterly Real Excess Returns and Risk Factors (1987Q1 to 2009Q1)
C-CAPM

0.004
(0.002)

-0.041
(0.059)

Extended C-CAPM

0.004
(0.002)

-0.038
(0.067)

0.005

-0.008
(0.078)

0.007
(0.095)

0.005

Notes: Part (A) of the table reports estimates of the equation ztH = a + ft0 + t+1 , where ztH is the monthly
nominal payo¤ of the hedged equally-weighted carry-trade portfolio and ft is a scalar or vector of risk factors.
Part (B) of the table reports estimates of the equation Rte = a + ft0 + t+1 , where Rte is the quarterly real
excess return of the hedged equally-weighted carry-trade portfolio and ft is a scalar or vector of risk factors.
The risk factors are described in the footnote to Table 3. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are in
parentheses.

40

TABLE 7: GMM Estimates of Linear Factor Models
Test Assets are the Fama-French 25 Portfolios and the Hedged Equally-Weighted Carry-Trade Portfolio
b

R2

J

(A) Monthly Data (February 1987 to April 2009)
CAPM

0.0038
(0.0028)

2.00
(1.49)

0.42
(0.28)

-0.49

83.4
(0.00)

0.015
(0.008)

Mkt-Rf

0.0038
(0.0028)

3.18
(1.73)

0.41
(0.28)

0.29

78.8
(0.00)

0.011
(0.008)

SMB

0.0009
(0.0021)

1.32
(2.02)

0.03
(0.20)

HML

0.0025
(0.0020)

5.71
(2.31)

0.36
(0.22)

Fama-French Factors

(B) Quarterly Data (1987Q1 to 2009Q1)
C-CAPM

0.0041
(0.0006)

153
(57.8)

0.21
(0.09)

-0.83

54.6
(0.00)

0.013
(0.011)

Consumption

0.0041
(0.0008)

-8.16
(76.0)

-0.01
(0.09)

-6.11

2.67
(1.00)

0.016
(0.011)

Durables

0.0104
(0.0048)

-0.15
(42.1)

0.00
(0.07)

Market return

0.0152
(0.0090)

-0.02
(1.07)

-0.07
(0.77)

Extended C-CAPM

Notes: Part (A) of the table reports second stage GMM estimates of the SDF mt = 1 (ft
)0 b using the
moment conditions E(Rt mt ) = 0 and E(ft
) = 0, where Rt is a 26 1 vector containing the nominal excess
returns of the Fama-French 25 value-weighted portfolios of US stocks sorted on size and the book-to-market
value ratio as well as the monthly nominal payo¤ of the hedged equally-weighted carry-trade portfolio, and
ft is a scalar or vector of risk factors. Part (B) of the table uses the same moment conditions, but Rt is a
26 1 vector containing the real quarterly excess returns of the Fama-French 25 portfolios and the hedged
equally-weighted carry-trade portfolio. The risk factors are described in more detail in the footnote to Table
3. The GMM procedure is described in more detail in the Appendix. Estimates of the factor risk premia
^ = V^f ^b are reported (in percent), where V^f is the sample covariance matrix of ft . GMM-VARHAC standard
errors are reported in parentheses for ^ , ^b and ^ .PThe R2 is a measure of …t between the sample mean of
T
Rt and the predicted mean returns, given by T 1 t=1 Rt (ft0 ^ )0^b. Tests of the overidentifying restrictions
are also reported. The test statistic, J, is asymptotically distributed as a 226 k , where k is the number of
risk factors. The p-value is in parentheses. The pricing error of the hedged equally-weighted carry-trade
portfolio ( ) is reported annualized. Its standard error is in parentheses.

41

TABLE 8: Estimates of Payoffs and the SDF in the Peso Event
Equally-Weighted Carry Trade Portfolios
Options data:
Sample:
Currencies:

Stock Portfolio

CME

J.P. Morgan

S&P 100 / VXO

1987M2-2009M4

1995M2-2009M7

1986M2–2009M7

6

6

10

(A) Non-risk-corrected calculations
E N (z)

0:0025
(0:0011)

0:0031
(0:0010)

0:0035
(0:0012)

E N (x)

0:0068
(0:0029)

E N (z H )

0:0013
(0:0007)

0:0011
(0:0006)

0:0011
(0:0007)

E N (xH )

0:0032
(0:0018)

E N (h)

0:0105
(0:0004)

0:0114
(0:0006)

0:0120
(0:0006)

E N (hx )

0:0257
(0:0015)

z0

0:0198
(0:0055)

0:0328
(0:0113)

0:0375
(0:0146)

87:1
(44:3)

66:0
(36:2)

64:9
(41:1)

M 0 =E N (M )

(B) Risk-corrected calculations
E N (M z)

0:0029
(0:0011)

0:0033
(0:0010)

0:0040
(0:0011)

E N (M x)

0:0182
(0:0026)

E N (M z H )

0:0014
(0:0007)

0:0010
(0:0006)

0:0011
(0:0007)

E N (M xH )

0:0025
(0:0020)

z0

0:0216
(0:0059)

0:0386
(0:0173)

0:0438
(0:0207)

x0

0:188
(0:130)

92:9
(47:5)

60:0
(39:1)

63:3
(42:8)

M 0 =E N (M )

67:6
(54:8)

M 0 =E N (M )

Notes: As in the text z and x denote, respectively, the unhedged payo¤s of the equally-weighted carry trade
and S&P 100 index portfolios. The hedged payo¤s of these portfolios are denoted, respectively, z H and
xH . The variables h and hx denote, respectively, denote the minimum payo¤s of the two hedged portfolios.
The payo¤s of the unhedged portfolios in the peso state are denoted, respectively, z 0 and x0 . The variable
M represents the stochastic discount factor, with M 0 denoting its payo¤ in the peso state. The operator
E N is the unconditional expectations operator that applies to non-peso states of the world. To compute
z H we use data from the Chicago Mercantile Exchange (CME) and J.P. Morgan. To compute xH we use
implied volatility data (VXO) corresponding to options on the level of the S&P 100 index. Our procedure for
constructing M and our data are described in the text and the the Appendix. Heteroskedasticity consistent
GMM standard errors are in parentheses.

42

FIGURE 1: Cumulative Returns of Investment Strategies

$ on a log scale (Jan-1976=1)

(A) 20 Currency Carry Trade and US Stocks, Jan 1976–July 2009
Carry T rade
US Stocks
T -Bills

32
16
8
4
2
1
76

80

84

88

92

96

00

04

08

(B) 6 Currency Carry Trade (Hedged and Unhedged) and US Stocks, Jan 1987–April 2009

$ on a log scale (Dec-1986=1)

12
8

Carry T rade
Hedged Carry T rade
US Stocks
T -Bills

5
3
2

1
86

90

94

98

02

06

10

Note: The …gure plots the cumulative returns of a trader who begins with 1 dollar in January
1976 (panel A) or January 1987 (panel B) and invests his accumulated earnings exclusively in
one of four strategies. For T-bills and US stocks we use the risk free rate and value-weighted
market return reported in Kenneth French’s database. For the carry trade strategies we
assume that the trader invests the initial dollar in T-bills and bets the future nominal value
of those T-bills in the carry trade. In each period all proceeds are deposited in the T-bill
account, and the future value of the T-bill account is bet on the carry trade. Details of the
strageties are provided in the text.

43

FIGURE 2: Cross-Sectional Fit of Estimated Factor Models
Test Assets: Fama-French 25 Portfolios & the Equally-Weighted Carry-Trade Portfolio
(a) CAPM

(b) Fama-French Factors
15

Actual Expected Return (%)

Actual Expected Return (%)

15

10

5

0

-5
-5

0
5
10
Predicted Expected Return (%)

10

5

0

-5
-5

15

(c) C-CAPM
15

Actual Expected Return (%)

Actual Expected Return (%)

15

(d) Extended C-CAPM

15

10

5

0

-5
-5

0
5
10
Predicted Expected Return (%)

0
5
10
Predicted Expected Return (%)

15

10

5

0

-5
-5

0
5
10
Predicted Expected Return (%)

15

Note: In each case the parmeters and b in the SDF mt = 1 (ft
)0 b are estimated
by GMM using the method described in the text. The risk factors, ft , are indicated by the
title of each plot with details provided in the main text. The predicted expected return
P
is (1=T ) Tt=1 Rit (ft ^ )0^b for each portfolio’s excess return, Rit . The actual expected
P
return is Ri = (1=T ) Tt=1 Rit . The blue dots correspond to Fama and French’s 25 portfolios
sorted on the basis of book-to-market value and …rm size. The black star represents the
carry-trade portfolio formed as the equally-weighted average of up to 20 individual currency
carry trades against the US dollar. The black vertical line extending above and below the
star is the actual expected return plus a two-standard error band for the pricing error of
the carry-trade portfolio. When it does not cross the 45 degree line, the pricing error is
statistically signi…cant at the 5 percent level. For models (a) and (b) the sample period is
1976M2–2009M7. For models (c) and (d) the sample period is 1976Q2–2009Q2. Expected
returns are annualized.

44

FIGURE 3: Annualized Realized Average Payoffs and Sharpe Ratios of the
Equally-Weighted Hedged and Unhedged Carry-Trade Portfolios
12-Month Rolling Window, February 1987–April 2009
(a) Realized Pay of f s
0.3
Unhedged Strategy
Hedged Strategy

$ per $ bet

0.2
0.1
0
-0.1
-0.2

88

91

94

97

00

03

06

09

06

09

(b) Realized Sharpe Ratio
6
Unhedged Strategy
Hedged Strategy

4
2
0
-2

88

91

94

97

00

03

Note: Plot (a) shows the annualized average payo¤ from month t 11 to month t, in US
dollars, per dollar bet in the carry trade. Plot (b) shows the ratio of the annualized average
payo¤, to the annualized standard deviation of the payo¤, both being measured from month
t 11 to month t. The unhedged portfolio is the equally-weighted carry-trade portfolio,
described in the main text, formed by taking positions in the forward market currency-bycurrency. The hedged position is formed by combining the forward position on each currency
in the unhedged portfolio with a near-the-money option that insures against possible losses
from the forward position. The carry-trade portfolios are formed as the equally-weighted
averages of up to six individual currency carry trades against the US dollar.

45

FIGURE 4: Sampling Distributions of the Payoffs of the Equally-Weighted
Carry-Trade Portfolios
February 1987–April 2009
(a) Unhedged Carry Trade
12
10

(%)

8
6
4
2
0

-0.06

-0.03

0

0.03

0.06

(b) Hedged Carry Trade
12
10

(%)

8
6
4
2
0

-0.06

-0.03

0

0.03

0.06

Note: In each plot the red line indicates the histogram implied by a normal distribution with
the same mean and standard deviation as in the sampling distribution. The excess returns
are computed at the monthly frequency. The carry-trade portfolios are formed as the equallyweighted average of up to six individual currency carry trades against the US dollar. The
unhedged portfolio is formed by taking positions in the forward market currency-by-currency.
The hedged position is formed by combining the forward position on each currency in the
unhedged portfolio with a near-the-money option that insures against possible losses from
the forward position.

46

FIGURE 5: Cross-Sectional Fit of Estimated Factor Models
Test Assets: Fama-French 25 Portfolios & the Hedged Equally-Weighted Carry-Trade
(a) CAPM

(b) Fama-French Factors
15

Actual Expected Return (%)

Actual Expected Return (%)

15

10

5

0

-5
-5

0
5
10
Predicted Expected Return (%)

10

5

0

-5
-5

15

(c) C-CAPM
15

Actual Expected Return (%)

Actual Expected Return (%)

15

(d) Extended C-CAPM

15

10

5

0

-5
-5

0
5
10
Predicted Expected Return (%)

0
5
10
Predicted Expected Return (%)

15

10

5

0

-5
-5

0
5
10
Predicted Expected Return (%)

15

Note: In each case the parmeters
and b in the SDF mt = 1 (ft
)0 b are estimated by GMM using the method described in the text. The predicted expected return
P
is (1=T ) Tt=1 Rit (ft ^ )0^b for each portfolio’s excess return, Rit . The actual expected reP
turn is Ri = (1=T ) Tt=1 Rit . The blue dots correspond to Fama and French’s 25 portfolios
sorted on the basis of book-to-market value and …rm size. The black star represents the
hedged carry-trade portfolio formed as the equally-weighted average of up to six individual
currency carry trades against the US dollar. The hedged position is formed by combining
the forward position on each currency in the unhedged portfolio with a near-the-money option that insures against possible losses from the forward position. The black vertical line
extending above and below the star is the actual expected return plus a two-standard error
band for the pricing error of the carry-trade portfolio. When it does not cross the 45 degree
line the pricing error is statistically signi…cant at the 5 percent level. For models (a) and
(b) the sample period is 1987M2–2009M4. For models (c) and (d) the sample period is
1987Q1–2009Q1. Expected returns are annualized.

47

A: Spot and Forward Exchange Rate Data
We obtain our foreign exchange rate data from Datastream. They are originally sourced
by Datastream from the WM Company/Reuters. We use two data sets. The …rst data set
consists of spot exchange rates and one month forward exchange rates for twenty currencies
(Australian dollar, Austrian schilling, Belgian franc, Canadian dollar, Danish krone, euro,
French franc, German mark, Irish punt, Italian lira, Japanese yen, Netherlands guilder, New
Zealand dollar, Norwegian krone, Portuguese escudo, South African rand, Spanish peseta,
Swedish krona, Swiss franc, U.S. dollar) quoted against the British pound. The data series
begin in January 1976, with some exceptions (Ireland, April 1979; Japan, June 1978; euro,
December 1998; Australia, NZ and South Africa, December 1996) and end in July 2009,
with the exception of the euro legacy currencies (December 1998). The mnemonics for each
currency are indicated in the online appendix. With the exception of euro forward quotes,
each exchange rate is quoted as foreign currency units (FCUs) per British pound (GBP). To
obtain quotes in GBP/FCU we inverted the original quotes while swapping the bid and ask
prices (except for the Euro forward quotes).
The second data set consists of spot exchange rates and one month forward exchange rates
for twenty currencies quoted against the U.S. dollar. The currencies are the same as above,
with the British pound replacing the U.S. dollar. The data series begin in December 1996,
with the exception of the euro (December 1998), and end in July 2009, with the exception of
the euro legacy currencies (December 1998). The mnemonics for each currency are indicated
in the online appendix. With the exception of the Irish punt, British pound, euro (forwards
only), Australian dollar, and New Zealand dollar, each exchange rate is quoted as foreign
currency units (FCUs) per U.S. dollar (USD). To obtain USD/FCU quotes for the other
currencies we inverted the original quotes while swapping the bid and ask prices. We also
noticed a problem in the original Datastream data set: the bid and ask spot exchange rates
for the euro are reversed for all data available through 12/29/2006. We reversed the quotes
to obtain the correct bid and ask rates.
48

When we ignore bid-ask spreads we obtain a data set running from January 1976 to July
2009 with all currencies quoted against the U.S. dollar. We convert pound quotes to dollar
quotes by multiplying the GBP/FCU quotes by the USD/GBP quotes. The original data set
includes observations on all weekdays. In our analysis of the unhedged carry trade (Tables
1–4) we measure payo¤s using last business day of the month observations.

B: Options Data and Options-Based Strategies
CME Options Our …rst source of options data is the Chicago Mercantile Exchange
(CME). We obtained daily quotes for put and call options for six currencies against the
U.S. dollar. The currencies are available beginning on the following dates: Australian dollar
(January 1994), Canadian dollar (August 1986), euro (January 1999), Japanese yen (May
1986), Swiss franc (May 1985), British pound (January 1991). The data are available through
April 2009. Due to sparse coverage in the early part of the sample we begin our analysis no
earlier than January 1987.
CME options are options against currency futures. The options themselves expire early
in each month (two Fridays prior to the third Wednesday in the month). The futures
against which the options are written expire on the Monday prior to the third Wednesday
(except for the Canadian dollar, for which expiry takes place on the Tuesday prior to the
third Wednesday) of March, June, September and December. When we construct hedged
positions using options, we use options written against the futures contract with the nearest
expiry date that is at least one month ahead. For example, if, in December, we take a bet
with a one month horizon the options we use are options on the March futures contract.
We use the following notation for variables measured at time t: the spot exchange rate
(St ), the one month forward exchange rate (Ft ), the price of the futures contract with the
nearest expiry date that is at least one month ahead ( t ), the strike price on the options
contract, Kt , the settlement price of the call option (Ct ), and the settlement price of the put
option (Pt ). In the description that follows, the variables St , Ft ,
49

t,

and Kt are measured

in USD/FCU, while the variables Ct and Pt are measured in USD per foreign currency unit
transacted. CME options contracts are quoted in the same units, and settlement prices on
the options are provided directly in the data set and do not have to be obtained by converting
implied volatilities.
To be concrete about how we construct hedged and unhedged positions using the CME
data, consider the following example, where a trader takes a position in January 2006 that
expires in February 2006. In February 2006 the third Wednesday was February 15th. Two
Fridays prior to the third Wednesday was February 3rd. We therefore look for transactions
that were initiated on January 4th 2006 with expiry 30 days later on February 3rd 2006.15
Suppose we consider a currency for which Ft > St . In this case, a trader executing the
unhedged carry trade sells 1=Ft units of the foreign currency forward and obtains the payo¤
(Ft

St+1 )=Ft . In our example we measure St and Ft on January 4th and St+1 on February

3rd. We take the values of these variables from the Datastream data set described in Appendix A.16 A trader executing the hedged carry trade takes the same position in the forward
market as the unhedged trader and in addition purchases Xt =Ft call options on the foreign
currency at strike price Kt . The hedged carry trade payo¤ gross of the cost of the option is,
therefore,
Ft

St+1
Ft

+

Xt
maxf
Ft

t+1

Kt ; 0g:

To complete our description of the hedged carry trade we next specify the values of Xt and Kt .
We set Xt = (St =Ft ) where

is the number of months (unrounded) between the expiry date

of the option (February 3rd 2006) and the expiry date of the underlying future (March 13th
2006). We choose the call option with strike price, Kt , closest to Ft St1 . Our choices of Xt
and Kt are motivated by two considerations. Since the underlying asset is a futures contract,
15

The only exceptions to this rule for choosing dates is if date t or date t + 1 is a holiday with no data
available. In this case we shift both dates back one day at a time until the data are no longer missing.
16
Because we have CME options on the Australian dollar dating from 1994, and currency quotes on
the Australian dollar sources from WMR are not available on Datastream prior to the end of 1996, we
augment our forward and spot exchange rate data for Australia for the period 1994-1996 with data sourced
by Datastream from Barclay’s (BBAUDSP and BBAUD1F are the mnemonics for the spot rate and one
month forward rate).

50

not the currency spot rate, perfect hedging is not possible unless interest rates are constant
between date t and the expiry of the futures contract. However, if interest rates remained
constant over this period, covered interest rate parity would imply that (Ft =St ) St+1 =

t+1

and the hedged carry trade payo¤ gross of the cost of the option would be
Ft

St+1
Ft

+

1
maxfSt+1
Ft

Xt Kt ; 0g:

Thus, when the approximation of constant interest rates holds the hedge is perfect in the
sense that if the option is in the money the payo¤ does not depend on the realization of St+1 .
Second, if the strike price is exactly Kt = Ft St1

the payo¤ to the hedged carry trade gross

of the cost of the option is
Ft

St+1
Ft

+

1
maxfSt+1
Ft

St ; 0g =

1
maxfFt
Ft

St+1 ; Ft

St g;

implying that the position in the option on the futures contract is equivalent to an option
on a spot contract whose strike price is St .
We use one-month eurodollar deposit rates from the Federal Reserve Board interest rate
database (H.15) to compute the ex-post prices of the options.
J.P. Morgan Options Data Our second source of options data is J.P. Morgan. We
obtained daily one-month at-the-money implied volatility quotes, forward points, and spot
exchange rates, for ten currencies against the U.S. dollar. These data are available from
January 1995 until July 2009 for the following currencies: Australian dollar, Canadian dollar,
Danish krone, euro (beginning January 1999), Japanese yen, Swiss franc, British pound,
New Zealand dollar, Norwegian krone, and Swedish krone. In the J.P. Morgan data, “atthe-money”one-month options are at the money forward.
We convert the implied volatility quotes to option prices using the Garman and Kohlhagen
(1983) formula in combination with the forward points and spot exchange rate data contained
in the same data set. We use the last business day of the expiry month as t + 1, and 30 days
prior as date t to compute payo¤s. If this choice implies that date t is a Saturday, Sunday,
51

or otherwise missing observation in the data set, we shift both dates back one day at a time
until we have a valid pair of business day observations.
VXO Options Data We also use data on options on the S&P 100 index, referred to as
the VXO index. These data are available daily from Datastream (mnemomic CBOEVXO)
as implied volatilities. We use VXO data rather than VIX data because they are available
over a longer sample period (January 1986–July 2009), but the two series behave similarly
over the common sample. To generate our monthly data we look for a trade initiation date
within each month that is 30 days prior to the third Friday of the following month. We
translate implied volatilities to option prices using the Black-Scholes formula. The price of
a put option on the S&P 100 index is given by
Ptx = Vt [ ( D2t )=(1 + rt )
where D1t = rt

t

+

1
24

2
t

( D1t )=(1 + t )]

p
=( t = 12), D2t = D1t

index, the strike price of the option is Vt ,

t

p

t=

12, Vt is the level of the S&P 100

is the dividend yield of the index (on a monthly

basis), rt is the one-month eurodollar rate (on a monthly basis), described above, and

t

is the implied volatility quote (on an annual basis). We source daily S&P 100 index and
dividend yield data from the Global Financial Database (mnemonics OEX, SPY100W).
We measure the unhedged excess return of the S&P 100 index using the total return on
the S&P 100 index minus the one-month eurodollar rate (on a monthly basis). We source
the total return from the Global Financial Database (mnemonic TRGSPOD). The hedged
excess return of the S&P 100 index is
max

Vt+1 Vt
Dt
;0 +
Vt
Vt

rt

(1 + rt )

Ptx
:
Vt

Here Dt =Vt is the total return to the S&P 100 index minus the rate of change of the index.
That is, it is the component of the return due to the dividend.

52

C: Details of the Risk-Factor Analysis
Monthly Risk Factors When working with monthly data, we use nominal payo¤s to
strategies. The three Fama-French factors are from Kenneth French’s data library. The
three factors are Mkt-Rf (the market premium, which we also use to de…ne the CAPM
factor), SMB (the size premium) and HML (the book to market premium). Results for
additional monthly risk factors, and data sources, are described in the online appendix.
De…ning Quarterly Real Returns The monthly payo¤s to the carry trade, denoted
generically here as zt , were de…ned for trades where 1=Ft FCUs were either bought or sold
forward. This is equivalent to selling or buying one dollar. It is useful, instead, to normalize
the number of dollars sold or bought to 1 + rt 1 , where rt

1

is the yield on a one-month

Treasury bill at the time when the currency bet is made. That is, we de…ne the monthly
excess return
Rte;m = (1 + rt 1 )zt :
To see that Rte;m can be interpreted as an excess return, consider the case where we buy
foreign currency forward, so: zt = St =Ft
(1 + rt 1 ) (St =Ft

1

1

1. This value of zt implies that Rte;m =

1). Assuming that CIP (equation (6)) holds, Rte;m = (1 + rt 1 )St =St

(1 + rt 1 ). So, when (1 + rt 1 )=Ft

1

1

FCUs are bought forward Rte;m is the equivalent to the

excess return, in dollars, from taking a long position in foreign T-bills.
Let t index months, and let s = t=3 be the equivalent index for quarters. To convert the
monthly excess return to a quarterly excess return we de…ne:
Rse;q =

2
j=0 (1

+ rt

1 j

+ Rte;mj )

2
j=0 (1

+ rt

1 j ):

This expression corresponds to the appropriate excess return because it implies that the agent
continuously re-invests in the carry trade strategy. In month t he bets his accumulated funds
from currency speculation times 1 + rt . To de…ne the quarterly real excess return in quarter
s, which we denote Rse , notice that this is simply Rse = Rse;q =(1 +
53

s ),

where

s

is the in‡ation

rate between quarter s

1 and quarter s.

To generate the returns we use the risk free rate data from Kenneth French’s data library: http://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/data_library.html. These
data correspond to the one-month Treasury bill rate from Ibbotson and Associates (2006).
We convert nominal returns to real returns using the in‡ation rate corresponding to the
de‡ator for consumption of nondurables and services found in the U.S. National Income and
Product Accounts and described below in more detail.
When we work with currency options data, monthly payo¤s are realized early in each
month (the median day of the month is the 6th, with no payo¤s occurring before the 2nd of
the month, and no payo¤s occurring after the 9th of the month). Therefore, when de…ning
the returns for the …rst quarter we accumulate the monthly payo¤s (as described above) that
were realized early February, early March and early April. For the second, third and fourth
quarters returns are de…ned analogously.
Quarterly Risk Factors Real per-capita consumption growth (used for the C-CAPM
model) is from the U.S. National Income and Product Accounts which can be found at the
website of the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA): www.bea.gov. We de…ne real consumption growth as the weighted average of the growth rates of nondurables consumption and
services consumption. The weights are the nominal shares of nondurables and services in
their sum. We compute the growth rate of the population using the series provided by the
BEA in the NIPA accounts. This series displays seasonal variation so we …rst pass it through
the Census X12 …lter available from the Bureau of Labor Statistics (www.bls.gov). The in‡ation series used in all our calculations is the weighted average of the in‡ation rates for
nondurables and services with the weights de…ned as above.
The extended C-CAPM model adds two factors to the C-CAPM model: the real growth
rate of the per-capita service ‡ow from the stock of consumer durables, and the market return
(Mkt-Rf plus the risk free rate, Rf, in real terms). To estimate the former we proceeded as

54

follows. Annual end-of-year real stocks of consumer durables are available from the U.S.
National Income and Product Accounts, as are quarterly data on purchases of durables by
consumers. Within each year we determine the depreciation rate that makes the quarterly
purchases consistent with the annual stocks, and use this rate to interpolate quarterly stocks
D
using the identity: Kt+1
= CtD + (1

D

)KtD . Here KtD is the beginning of period t stock of

consumer durables, CtD is purchases of durables, and

D

is the depreciation rate. We assume

that the service ‡ow from durables is proportional to the stock of durables. We obtain Mkt
and Rf from Kenneth French’s data library. To obtain the quarterly real market return, we
proceed as described above for our currency strategies.
Results for additional quarterly risk factors, and relevant data sources, are described in
the online appendix.

55

