NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE MACROECONOMIC IMPLICATIONS OF RISING WAGE INEQUALITY IN
THE UNITED STATES
Jonathan Heathcote
Kjetil Storesletten
Giovanni L. Violante
Working Paper 14052
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14052

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2008

We are grateful to Orazio Attanasio, Dirk Krueger and Fabrizio Perri for help with the CEX data, and
to Greg Kaplan for outstanding research assistance. Heathcote and Violante thank the National Science
Foundation (Grant SEP-0418029). The opinions expressed here are those of the authors and not necessarily
those of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, its staff, or the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Jonathan Heathcote, Kjetil Storesletten, and Giovanni L. Violante. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Macroeconomic Implications of Rising Wage Inequality in the United States
Jonathan Heathcote, Kjetil Storesletten, and Giovanni L. Violante
NBER Working Paper No. 14052
June 2008
JEL No. E21,I21,I31,J2,J31
ABSTRACT
In recent decades, the US wage structure has been transformed by a rising college premium, a narrowing
gender gap, and increasing persistent and transitory residual wage dispersion. This paper explores
the implications of these changes for cross-sectional inequality in hours worked, earnings and consumption,
and for welfare. The framework for the analysis is an incomplete-markets overlapping-generations
model in which individuals choose education and form households, and households choose consumption
and intra-family time allocation. An explicit production technology underlies equilibrium prices for
labor inputs differentiated by gender and education. The model is parameterized using micro data from
the PSID, the CPS and the CEX. With the changing wage structure as the only primitive force, the
model can account for the key trends in cross-sectional US data. We also assess the role played by
education, labor supply, and saving in providing insurance against shocks, and in exploiting opportunities
presented by changes in the relative prices of different types of labor.

Jonathan Heathcote
Dept. of Economics
Georgetown University
ICC Bldg. 5th Floor
Washington, DC 20057
jhh9@georgetown.edu
Kjetil Storesletten
Department of Economics
University of Oslo
Box 1095 Blindern
N-0317 Oslo
Norway
kjetil.storesletten@econ.uio.no

Giovanni L. Violante
Department of Economics
New York University
19 W. 4th Street
New York, NY 10012-1119
and NBER
glv2@nyu.edu

1

Introduction

The structure of relative wages in the US economy has undergone a major transformation in
the last three decades. Wage differentials between college-graduates and high-school graduates
dropped in the 1970s, but have risen sharply since then (Katz and Autor, 1999). The wage
gap between men and women has shrunk significantly (Goldin, 2006). Within narrow groups
of workers defined by education, gender and age, the distribution of wages has become much
more unequal. This increase in residual wage dispersion reflects increasing volatility in both
persistent and transitory shocks (Juhn, Murphy and Pierce, 1993; Gottschalk and Moffitt,
1994).
Over the same period, the US economy experienced large changes in the distributions of
labor supply, earnings, and consumption. Women’s hours worked, relative to men’s, almost
doubled between 1970 and 2000. Conditional on working, cross-sectional variation in hours
remained stable for men, but narrowed markedly for women. The correlation between wages and
hours increased sharply, especially for men. Finally, but perhaps most importantly, dispersion in
measures of household consumption increased much less than dispersion in household earnings
(Krueger and Perri, 2006; Attanasio, Battistin and Ichimura, 2007).1
A vast literature addresses the sources of changes in the wage distribution (for surveys, see
Acemoglu, 2002; Hornstein et al., 2006). However, much less research has been devoted to
exploring whether this transformation has important macroeconomic and welfare implications.
In this paper, the primitive forces behind changes in the wage structure are conceptualized as a
combination of exogenous shifts in the relative demand for distinct types of labor differentiated
by gender and education, coupled with exogenous variations in persistent and transitory idiosyncratic productivity risk. We first ask whether the observed change in the wage structure,
defined this way, is quantitatively consonant with observed changes in the distributions of labor
supply, earnings and consumption. We then address the welfare implications of changes in the
wage structure, and investigate how endogenous changes in behavior allow households to both
insure against additional risk, and to take advantage of new opportunities presented by shifts
in relative demand.
Answering these questions requires an economic model delivering predictions for hours, earnings, consumption and welfare, given wages as inputs. The standard macroeconomic framework
for studying distributional issues is the class of heterogeneous-agents incomplete-markets models developed by Bewley (1986), İmrohoroğlu (1989), Huggett (1993), Aiyagari (1994), and
Rı́os-Rull (1995). Workers in these models are subject to uninsurable idiosyncratic labor mar1

All these facts will be documented in Section 2 based on data from the Consumers Expenditures Survey
(CEX), the Current Population Survey (CPS), and the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID).

1

ket shocks, but can borrow and lend through a risk-free bond to smooth consumption.
The prototypical incomplete markets model adopts the fiction of the “bachelor household”.
However, the decline in the gender wage gap and the rise in female participation have potentially
large effects on inequality and welfare that can only be understood by explicitly modeling
two-person households. Furthermore, wages and hours worked are characteristics recorded
at the individual level, while consumption and welfare are typically measured at the level
of the household. This presents an obvious challenge for the bachelor model as a lens for
interpreting micro data. We therefore model households as comprising two potential earners,
facing imperfectly correlated shocks. This model provides a mapping from individual wages
to the within-household allocation of market hours, which in turn determines household-level
income, consumption and, ultimately, welfare.
The life-cycle of individuals in the model is as follows. First they choose education, given
an idiosyncratic cost of attending college. Then they form households comprising husbands
and wives. Couples move through the rest of the life-cycle together. During working age, the
family chooses consumption, asset holdings and labor supply of both spouses. Retirement is
financed through savings and a simple public pension system.
Another important feature of the model is an explicit production technology that aggregates
capital and four types of labor input, defined by gender and educational attainment (as in Katz
and Murphy, 1992; Heckman, Lochner, and Taber, 1998). The prices of different types of labor
input are equilibrium market-clearing outcomes, where both demand and supply change over
time. Changes in labor demand for college relative to high-school graduates and for women
relative to men are modeled as exogenously time-varying weights in the aggregate production
technology, which we label “skill-biased” and “gender-biased” demand shifts. Changes in the
supply of different labor inputs reflect the cumulative effects of individuals’ optimal education
choices and households’ choices of hours worked for both spouses.
The four distinct exogenous forces driving wage dynamics – skill and gender-biased demand
shifts, and changes in the volatility of persistent and transitory individual-specific productivity
shocks - are parameterized to reproduce, respectively, the observed rise in the skill premium,
the observed decline in the gender wage gap, and the increases in the persistent and transitory
components of residual wage dispersion estimated from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics
(PSID) for 1967-2003.
The advantage of being explicit about the underlying technology is that we can conduct two
sets of counter-factual experiments. First, we activate the exogenous forces driving the wage
structure one at a time, to shed light on the role of each time-varying component in explaining
the evolution of cross-sectional inequality. Second, by varying the set of choice variables for

2

individuals (savings, labor supply, female participation, enrollment), we can isolate the roles of
different behavioral responses in mediating the welfare effects of these changes.
Overall, the quantitative experiment is successful in that the calibrated model, coupled with
the estimated changes in the wage structure, can account for many important trends in our
cross-sectional data.
First, the model accounts for three quarters of the observed rise in relative hours worked
for women. The key driving force is the narrowing gender wage gap (as in Jones, Manuelli
and McGrattan, 2003). The model misses the rise in female hours in the period 1965-1975,
suggesting non-wage factors were at work at that time.
Second, because of the modest individual labor-supply elasticity, the model predicts little
change in the dispersion of hours worked for men, as in the data. However, it also predicts stable
dispersion in female hours worked, contrary to the decline observed in the data. Conflicting
forces are at work: more volatile idiosyncratic shocks tend to increase inequality, while the
smaller gender wage gap reduces inequality in female hours towards the level for men.
Third, the model successfully replicates observed dynamics in the correlation between individual wages and individual hours, for both men and women. Transitory shocks, which are
largely self-insurable through savings, induce individuals to work more when wages are temporarily high. Thus, the rise in the variance of transitory shocks pushes up the wage-hour
correlation. Rising relative demand for female labor is also important: as women’s share of
household earnings rises over time, shocks to male wages come to have a smaller impact on
household consumption, implying smaller offsetting wealth effects on hours worked.
Fourth, the model generates increases in household earnings and consumption dispersion
in line with the US evidence. Skill-biased (and gender-biased) demand shifts affect inequality
in earnings and consumption symmetrically, since households do not adjust savings much in
response to such permanent changes in the wage structure. In contrast, changes in the variance
of wage risk have very different effects on earnings and consumption inequality, reflecting self
insurance through labor supply, borrowing and saving. In the model, more volatile transitory
shocks have very little effect on consumption dispersion, while bigger persistent shocks increase
consumption inequality only about half as much as earnings inequality.
Finally, the model can explain one third of the slowdown in aggregate labor productivity that
began in the early 1970s, and two thirds of the acceleration since 1995. These changes entirely
reflect behavioral responses to changes in the wage structure. In the earlier period, women’s
relative hours are rising, thanks to gender-biased demand shifts. These women earn less per
hour than the average working man, which translates into declining average productivity. In
the 1995-2005 decade, productivity growth reflects a large inflow to the labor force of college

3

graduates, whose relative wages are rising thanks to skill-biased demand shifts.
Given the model’s success in replicating key trends in cross-sectional dispersion, we feel confident in using it to assess the welfare costs of observed changes in the wage structure.2 We find
that (ex-ante) welfare costs vary dramatically across cohorts, such that early cohorts entering
the labor market in the 1970s and early 1980s lose up to 0.5 percent of permanent consumption
relative to the 1965 cohort, while later cohorts are in fact left better off, in expected terms, as
a result of structural change in labor markets. However, there is great dispersion in expected
welfare effects conditional on education. For example, households comprising two high-school
graduates who enter the labor market in 1990 expect a loss equal to 3.7% of permanent consumption relative to the 1965 cohort.
The set of counter-factuals in which we shut down various margins of adjustment to structural change shed further light on the sources of welfare gains and losses. Welfare losses are
primarily due to bigger persistent shocks, while gender-biased and especially skill-biased demand shifts are welfare improving. We find that savings and labor supply are the most important adjustment margins used by households to mitigate the adverse effects of larger persistent
volatility. We also conclude that, over the past thirty years, US households have been able to
take great advantage of the opportunities presented by gender-biased and skill-biased demand
shifts by increasing female participation and college enrollment, respectively.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the stylized facts of interest.
Section 3 presents the model, and defines the equilibrium. Section 4 describes the calibration
and estimation strategy. Section 5 contains the main results on the macroeconomic and welfare
consequences of the changing wage structure. Section 6 concludes. In the Appendix, we describe
the CEX, CPS and PSID samples, and the estimation of the statistical wage process.

2

Stylized facts

This section describes the salient facts motivating our exercise. Statistics on wages, hours
and earnings reported in this section are all computed from the Current Population Survey
(CPS) March Files (1967-2005). Statistics on household consumption are based on Consumer
Expenditure Survey (CEX) data (1980-2003). Enrollment data are taken from the US Census
Bureau. Our sample comprises married households where the husband is 25-59 years old.
Appendix A contains a detailed description of the underlying micro data, the handling of
2
There is a small but growing literature on the implications of rising inequality for the distribution of
household consumption and welfare. The question was first addressed by Attanasio and Davis (1996) and,
subsequently by Blundell and Preston (1998), Heckman, Lochner, and Taber (1998), Krueger and Perri (2003,
2006), Blundell, Pistaferri, and Preston (2008), and Guvenen and Kuruscu (2007). At various points in the
paper, we compare and contrast our methodology and results to the existing literature.

4

measurement issues, and sample selection criteria.3
College premium and enrollment. Panel (A) of Figure 1 plots the evolution of college
wage premium for men and women in the United States over the period 1967-2005. The male
(female) college wage premium is defined as the ratio between the average hourly wage of men
(women) with at least a college degree and the average hourly wage of men (women) without
college degree. In the late 1960s, male college graduates earned around 45% more than men
without a college degree. Over the 1970s, the college-high school wage differential declined to
30%. Since the late 1970s, the male college premium has been rising, reaching 90% in 2000.
The dynamics of the college wage premium for married women are qualitatively similar, with
a more prolonged fall over the 1970s and a smaller rise since 1980. While the college premium
was almost identical across sexes in the late 1960s, it is now substantially lower for women
(65% versus 90%). These magnitudes are consistent with those documented in the literature
(see Katz and Autor, 1999, Table 3; or Eckstein and Nagypal, 2004, Figures 6 and 7).
Panel (C) shows that college enrollment rose remarkably for both men and women over the
same period. The fraction of women aged 25-29 with a college degree almost tripled, and in
the mid 1990s women’s enrollment rates overtook men’s.4
The simultaneity of the increase in the relative supply and relative price of college-educated
labor indicates a growth in aggregate labor demand favoring college graduates, which, following
the literature, we label a “skill-biased demand shift”. Technological change and, to a lesser
extent, increased openness to trade have been identified as the main exogenous drivers of this
shift (see, among others, Katz and Murphy, 1992; Krusell et al., 2000; Acemoglu, 2002).5
Gender gap in wages and hours worked. Panel (B) depicts the dynamics of the gender
wage gap, defined as the ratio of male to female wages. The gender gap stayed constant around
1.65 until the late 1970s and then declined rapidly to 1.35 by 2003. The rise in relative female
wages coincided with a surge in relative female hours: panel (D) shows than in the late 1960s
women worked 30% as much as men, while since the 1990s women’s market hours have been
almost 60% of men’s.6 The trends in panels (B) and (D) are in line with existing estimates.
3

In our sample 75% of households where the head is 40-45 years old are couples, with single and divorced
households accounting equally for the rest. Thus, our sample contains most of the US population.
4
Men’s college enrollment shows a slower upward trend, and a large deviation above trend around the mid
1970s which is hard to explain through price movements. Some authors attribute this temporary surge in college
enrollment to the incentives provided by the Vietnam War draft deferment rules for male college students and
the GI Bill benefits for war veterans who took on college training programs (Card and Lemieux, 2001).
5
In the existing literature the leading explanation for this shift is the rapid adoption of new information and
communication technologies (ICT) which raised the relative productivity of more educated labor (“skill-biased
technical change”). A less prominent role is attributed to falling demand for unskilled-intensive goods produced
in the US due to greater openness to trade with developing countries abundant in unskilled labor.
6
As common in the literature (e.g., Blau and Kahn, 2000), we report the full-time gender gap, where full-time

5

Goldin (2006, Figure 6) and Blau and Kahn (2000, Figure 1) report virtually the same path as
panel (B) for the gender wage gap, and Jones, Manuelli and McGrattan (2003, Figure 1) show
a similar rise in relative hours worked for married women.
We interpret these trends using a supply-demand logic similar to that applied to the college
premium: since relative female wages and hours rose at the same time, a “gender-biased demand
shift” in favor of female labor was operative over this period. An increase in the demand for
women could be driven either by changes in technology favoring occupations in which women
have a comparative advantage, or by changes in social norms making qualified women more
willing to seek high-paying positions, and employers more willing to hire them.7
Wage inequality. Panel (A) of Figure 2 plots the variance of log hourly wages for men and
women over the 1967-2005 period.8 Interestingly, the increase is quite similar across genders,
around 20 log points (or 0.20) over the entire period. This rise in cross-sectional wage inequality
has been well documented in the literature. For example, Katz and Autor (1999, Table 4B)
document a similar increase for men and women, around 15 log points from 1970 to 1995.
The rising college premium (i.e. between-educational-group inequality) accounts for a sizable part (around 1/3) of the increase, but rising residual (within-group) inequality explains
the lion’s share. This fact has been well known since the seminal work of Juhn, Murphy, and
Pierce (1993). Changes in the college premium are, by definition, permanent shocks once the
education decision has been made. However, as first pointed out by Gottschalk and Moffitt
(1994), rising residual inequality can be either persistent or transitory in nature. In Section 4.1,
the panel dimension of PSID is used to estimate a statistical model for cross-sectional residual
male wage dispersion in order to distinguish the persistent from the transitory components.
This decomposition of residual inequality is a key input of our exercise.
Labor-supply inequality. While there is a growing literature on the dynamics of wage
inequality, this paper is one of the first to explore the dynamics of dispersion in hours worked,
and in the correlation between wages and hours. Panel (B) of Figure 2 plots the variance of log
hours worked by gender.9 Here, in contrast to the skill premia and wage inequality, both the
work is defined to be 2000 hours per year or more. This criterion is used because women are more likely to be
employed part-time, and part-time work carries a wage penalty (see e.g. Manning and Petrongolo, 2007).
7
Goldin (2006) discusses the sources of the labor demand shift that has occurred since the 1960s – what she
calls the “quiet revolution”. She points to the impact of WWII in showing employers that women could be
profitable and reliable workers; the role of contraceptives in allowing women to plan their careers and to become
viable candidates for high-paying jobs like lawyers or managers; the structural shift towards the service sector
with its more flexible work schedule; and, finally, the role of anti-discrimination legislation.
8
The cross-sectional moments plotted in Figure 2 (as well as Figures 4, and 6-12) are demeaned in order to
visualize differences in trends. Means are reported in square brackets in the legend.
9
By construction, this statistic excludes women who do not participate. We define an individual as a
nonparticipant if he/she works less than 260 hours in the market, i.e. a quarter of part-time work. None of the

6

levels and the trends are rather different for men versus women. Hours inequality is much higher
for women, and female hours inequality declines throughout the period, while it is basically flat
for men.
Panel (C) reports the cross-sectional correlation between log wages and log hours by gender.
This correlation rises until the late 1980s. The rise for men is more pronounced, around 0.25
versus 0.15 for women. In the 1990s and beyond, the correlation is stable for men, while it
declines somewhat for women.
The variance of individual log earnings (not plotted) can be computed residually given the
moments discussed above as the sum of (i) the variance of log wages, (ii) the variance of log
hours, and (iii) twice the covariance between log wages and log hours.
Household earnings and consumption inequality. The variances of household log
earnings and equivalized log consumption are plotted in panel (D) of Figure 2.10 Household
earnings inequality rose steadily by 23 log points over the period, driven by increases in wage
inequality and in the wage-hour correlation.11
The second line in this plot is the variance of log household equivalized consumption. The
CEX data, assembled by Krueger and Perri (2006), are consistently available only since 1980.
We use the same definition of consumption as Krueger and Perri: expenditures on nondurable
goods, services and small durables, such as household appliances, plus services from housing
and vehicles (this variable is labelled ND+). As previously documented by Cutler and Katz
(1991) and Johnson and Shipp (1997), consumption inequality tracks earnings inequality quite
closely in the 1980s. Slesnick (2001) and Krueger and Perri (2006) uncovered the surprising
divergence between the two series in the 1990s and beyond.
Overall, between 1980 and 2003, household log earnings dispersion rises more than twice as
much as log consumption dispersion: 17 versus 7 log points. Comparable results on trends in US
consumption inequality for the 1990s are reported by Attanasio, Battistin and Ichimura (2007),
and Blundell, Pistaferri, and Preston (2008), notwithstanding differences in the methodologies
used to organize the data.
Model inputs and targets. The facts just described form the basis of the quantitative
key trends in hours is sensitive to this threshold: however, the lower the threshold, the higher is the level of
measured inequality.
10
We follow Krueger and Perri (2006) in using the Census scale to construct adult equivalent measures of
household consumption. Equivalizing earnings is of less importance: the increase in the variance of household
log equivalized earnings is 0.20, i.e. just 3 log points lower than our benchmark series.
11
Evidence on the within-household correlation between male and female wages is mixed. The CPS data
show an increase concentrated in the 1980s, while PSID data display some swings, but no clear trend over the
sample period. See Technical Appendix T-2 for a short discussion, and Figure T-4 for a plot of this moment
in both data sets. We return to this point in Section 4.1 when discussing the assumptions on the female wage
process.

7

analysis of our paper. Some facts serve as inputs to the model, and others as targets for the
model. The college-high school wage differential and the college enrollment rate allow us to
infer a time-path for skill-biased demand shifts, our first input. Similarly, the male-female wage
and hours differentials enable us to derive a time path for gender-biased demand shifts, the
second input. As we have already explained, time paths for the variances of persistent and
transitory idiosyncratic wage shocks, our third and fourth inputs, are estimated using PSID
data.
The aim of the thought experiment is to assess the extent to which these changes in the
wage structure, taken as exogenous, can account for observed changes in the distribution of male
and female hours worked (gender differentials in average hours, variances of hours, and wagehour correlations), in household earnings inequality, and, finally, in household consumption
inequality. These moments are our targets.

3

Economic model

We begin by describing the model’s demographic structure, preferences, production technologies, government policies, and financial markets. Next, we outline the life cycle of the agents
and define a competitive equilibrium.

3.1

Preliminaries

Time is discrete, indexed by t = 0, 1, ..., and continues forever.
Demographics The economy is populated by a continuum of individuals, equally many
females and males. Gender is indexed by g ∈ {m, f } and age is denoted by j ∈ J ≡ {1, 2, ..., J}.
Prior to age J, individuals survive from age j to j + 1 with age-dependent probability ζ j . At
each date a new cohort of measure one of each gender enters the economy. Since the cohort
size and survival probabilities are time-invariant, the model age distribution is stationary.
Life-cycle The life cycle of individuals is comprised of four stages: education, matching,
work, and retirement. In the first two stages, the decision unit is the individual. In the second
two stages the decision unit is the household, i.e. a pair of spouses. Since our focus is mostly
on labor market risk, we simplify the first two stages of the life cycle by letting education and
matching take place sequentially in a pre-labor market period of life labeled “age zero”. Thus
agents enter the labor market as married adults at age j = 1, retire at age j = j R , and die with
certainty if they reach age j = J.
Preferences We let u (ct , xt ) be the period utility function defined over market consumption ct and a non-market (or home) good xt . Both ct and xt are public goods for the household.
8

This assumption implies that we do not need to distinguish between utility at the level of the
individual spouse and utility at the level of the household, or between unitary and collective
models of household behavior. Furthermore, viewing the family as a unitary decision maker
enjoying utility from public goods represents the smallest possible deviation from the standard
single-agent “bachelor” model that predominates in the life-cycle consumption-savings literature. The non-market good xt is jointly produced with³male and female
´ non-market hours

g
f
according to the constant returns to scale technology x 1 − nm
t , 1 − nt , where nt ∈ [0, 1]
denotes hours worked in the market by the spouse of gender g.12

Technology There is one final market good produced by a representative firm using aggregate capital Kt and aggregate labor input Ht according to a Cobb-Douglas production technology Zt Ktα Ht1−α where α is capital’s share of output, and Zt is a time-varying scaling factor.
Output can be used for household consumption Ct , government consumption Gt , investment
It , or net exports N Xt . Capital depreciates at rate δ.
We follow Katz and Murphy (1992) and Heckman, Lochner and Taber (1998) in modeling
aggregate labor Ht as a CES aggregator of four types of labor input, Htg,e , indexed by gender
g and education level e ∈ E ≡ {h, l} , where h denotes high education and l low education:
θ
· ³
¸ θ−1
´ θ−1
´ θ−1
¡
¢ ³ G f,l
θ
θ
m,h
m,l
G f,h
G
S
G
S
. (1)
Ht = λt λt Ht + (1 − λt )Ht
+ 1 − λt λt Ht + (1 − λt )Ht

According to this specification, male and female efficiency units of labor, conditional on sharing
the same education level, are perfect substitutes, while the elasticity of substitution between
the two different education groups is θ.
The technological parameters λSt and λG
t capture exogenous skill-biased and gender-biased
demand shifts in favor of college-educated labor and female labor, respectively.13
Government The government taxes labor and asset income at flat rates (τ n , τ a ) and
pays out a fixed pension benefit b to retirees. The government budget is balanced every period:
once the pension system has been financed, any excess tax revenues are spent on non-valued
government consumption Gt .
Commodities, assets and markets At each date t, there are five traded commodities:
a final good and four types of labor services, as described above. As in İmrohoroğlu (1989),
12

Following Greenwood and Hercowitz (1991), we do not distinguish explicitly between time devoted to
leisure and to home production. In many instances, the distinction between the two is fuzzy (e.g., in the case
of childcare, cooking, gardening, shopping). Greenwood and Hercowitz’s view is that “time [...] has no intrinsic
worth on its own [...], but instead derives its value from what can be done with it.” (page 1192).
G
13
The term (1 − λG
t )/λt creates a time-varying wedge between the wages of men and women with the same
human capital. Jones, Manuelli and McGrattan (2003) model this wedge as a “tax” on the female wage in the
household budget constraint. They calibrate this sequence by matching the observed gender premium, exactly
as we do. From the viewpoint of an agent in the model, these alternative strategies are equivalent.

9

Huggett (1993), Aiyagari (1994), and Rı́os-Rull (1995), financial markets are incomplete: agents
trade risk-free bonds, subject to a borrowing constraint, but do not have access to statecontingent insurance against individual labor-income risk. The interest rate on the bonds is set
internationally and is assumed to be constant and equal to r. Agents have access to annuities –
insurance against the risk of surviving. An intermediary pools savings at the end of each period,
and returns pooled savings proportionately to individuals who are still alive at the start of the
next period, at actuarially-fair rates.14 All markets are perfectly competitive.

3.2

Life cycle

We now describe the four stages of the life-cycle in detail.
3.2.1

Education

At the start of life (age zero), individuals make a discrete education choice between pursuing a
college degree (e = h) or a lower schooling degree (e = l). The utility cost of attending college
κ is idiosyncratic, and is drawn from the gender-specific distribution F g . This cost captures,
in reduced form, cross-sectional variability in scholastic talent, parental background, access to
credit, and tuition fees.
When individuals decide whether or not to go to college they consider their draw for the
cost, κ, the college wage premium they expect to command in the labor market, and the value
of being highly educated when entering the matching stage: with positive assortative matching,
acquiring a college education increases the probability of meeting a college-educated, and thus
high-earning, spouse. Let Mgt (e) be the expected value, upon entering the matching stage at
date t, for an individual of gender g who has chosen education level e. The optimal education
choice for an individual with education cost κ is
½
h
if Mgt (h) − κ ≥ Mgt (l)
g
(2)
et (κ) =
l
otherwise

where egt (·) denotes the gender-specific education decision rule.15 Let qtg be the fraction of
14

While the assumption of perfect annuity markets is widely used in the literature for its convenience (it allows
one to abstract from bequests), we acknowledge that it is not realistic. However, since bequests are typically
received at a stage of the life-cycle when wealth is already sizeable, they are not an important insurance channel
against income shocks, which is the main theme of our paper.
15
Our simple model for education acquisition is consistent with the key empirical patterns: (i) a positive
correlation between education and scholastic ability/parental background (i.e. low κ), (ii) a positive correlation
between education and wages, and, therefore, (iii) a positive correlation between measures of ability/background
and wages. In the model, κ does not have a direct effect on earnings, it impacts earnings only through education.
The debate on whether there are returns to ability above and beyond education is ongoing. For example, in a
recent paper, Cawley, Heckman and Vytlacil (2001) argue that measures of cognitive ability and schooling are so
strongly correlated that one cannot separate their effects on labor market outcomes without imposing arbitrary
parametric structures in estimation (e.g., log-linearity and separability) which, when tested, are usually rejected.

10

individuals of gender g choosing to attend college in period t. Then
qtg = F g (Mgt (h) − Mgt (l)) ∈ [0, 1] .
3.2.2

(3)

Matching

Upon entering the matching stage, individuals are characterized by two states: gender and
education (g, e) . Following Fernández and Rogerson (2001), individuals of opposite gender
¡ m f¢
are matched stochastically based on their educational level. Let π m
e , e ∈ [0, 1] be the
t

probability that a man in education group em is assigned to a woman belonging to group ef at
¡
¢
time t. Symmetrically, matching probabilities for women are denoted π ft ef , em .
The expected values upon entering the matching stage for men of high and low education
levels can be written, respectively, as:
m
0
m
0
Mm
t (h) = π t (h, h) Vt (h, h) + π t (h, l) Vt (h, l) ,

(4)

m
0
m
0
Mm
t (l) = π t (l, l) Vt (l, l) + π t (l, h) Vt (l, h) ,

¡
¢
where V0t em , ef is expected lifetime utility at date t for each member of a newly-married (age

zero) couple comprising a male with education em and a female with education ef . Similar
expressions can be derived for the functions Mft (e).

The enrollment rates from the schooling stage, qtg , together with the matching probabilities,
π gt , jointly determine the education composition of newly-formed households. For example, the
fraction of matches of mixed type (h, l) at date t is given by
³
´
f
f
qtm π m
(h,
l)
=
1
−
q
t π (l, h) ,
t

(5)

where the equality is an aggregate consistency condition. Let ̺t denote the cross-sectional
Pearson correlation between the education levels of husband and wife. One can show that
̺t = r

m f
qtm π m
t (h, h) − qt qt
³
´.
f
f
m
m
qt (1 − qt ) qt 1 − qt

(6)

The correlation ̺t is a measure of the degree of assortative matching. We treat this correlation
as a structural parameter of the economy.
Finally, since our focus is on labor market risk, we abstract from shocks to family composition. Thus, matching takes place only once, and marital unions last until the couple dies
together.16
16

Calibrated equilibrium models of marriage and divorce have been developed to assess the determinants of
intergenerational mobility (see e.g. Aiyagari, Greenwood, and Guner, 2000), and to assess the role of changes
in family composition on macroeconomic magnitudes (Cubeddu and Rı́os-Rull, 2003). As a first step towards
understanding the implications of household composition for changes in cross-sectional inequality, in Section
5.3 we consider a single-earner “bachelor” version of the model.

11

3.2.3

Work

Individuals start working at age j = 1 and retire at age j R . During this phase of the life cycle,
they allocate their time between market work and production of the non-market good xt . Labor
services supplied to the market are indexed by the gender-education pair (g, e) , and each labor
input commands a type-specific competitive price pg,e
t per efficiency unit.
An individual’s endowment of efficiency units per hour of market work (or individual labor
productivity) depends on experience and on the history of idiosyncratic labor productivity
shocks. Thus, at time t, the hourly wage for an individual of age j and type (g, e) is
pg,e
× exp (L (j) + yt ),
t
|{z}
{z
}
|

price per unit

(7)

efficiency units

where L (j) is a deterministic function of age and yt is the stochastic individual-specific component of (log) labor productivity.17
Men and women face the same experience profile and the same stochastic process for idiosyncratic productivity. We model yt as the sum of two orthogonal components: a persistent
autoregressive shock, and a transitory shock. More precisely,
yt = η t + v t ,

(8)

η t = ρη t−1 + ω t
where vt and ω t are drawn from distributions with mean zero and variances λvt and λωt , respectively. The sequences {λvt , λωt } capture time variation in the dispersion of idiosyncratic
transitory and persistent shocks. At age j = 1, the initial value for the persistent component is
drawn from a time-invariant distribution with mean zero and variance λη . Shocks are positively
but imperfectly correlated across spouses within a household. We will defend this model for
idiosyncratic productivity in Section 4.1. In what follows, for notational simplicity, we stack
the two idiosyncratic components {η t , vt } for an individual of gender g in the vector ytg ∈ Y,
and denote her/his individual efficiency units by ε (j, ytg ).
Households trade the risk-free asset subject to a borrowing limit a. Asset holdings are
denoted at ∈ A ≡ [a, ∞). One unit of savings delivers 1/ζ j units of assets next period,
reflecting the annuity-market survivors’ premium.
17

Our model assumes a return to age rather than to actual labor market experience. This choice is made out
of convenience: accounting explicitly for the return to experience would add two continuous state variables (one
for each spouse), making the problem significantly harder to solve. This simplification is unlikely to matter for
men’s choices, since the vast majority participate throughout working life anyway. In the literature there are
different views on the role of labor market experience for women’s work decisions. Olivetti (2006) argues that
increases in returns to experience have had a large effect on women’s hours worked in the last three decades.
In contrast, Attanasio, Low and Sanchez (2008) find small effects.

12

The problem of the household can thus be written as follows
´i
³
´
³
h
f
f
j
m f
m
m f
m
=
max
Vt e , e , j, at , yt , yt
u (ct , xt ) + βζ Et Vt+1 e , e , j + 1, at+1 , yt+1 , yt+1
f
ct ,at+1 ,nm
t ,nt

subject to

´ i
h
³
m
f
f,ef
f
m
m
ε
(j,
y
)
n
+
p
ε
j,
y
ct + ζ j at+1 = [1 + (1 − τ a ) r] at + (1 − τ n ) pm,e
t
t
t nt
t
t
´
³
f
x t = x 1 − nm
,
1
−
n
t
t
at+1 ≥ a,

ct ≥ 0,

f
nm
t , nt ∈ [0, 1] ,

(9)

where the value function Vt defines expected discounted utility at time t as a function of the
state variables for the household problem: education (em , ef ), age j, wealth at , and the vectors
of male and female productivity (ytm , ytf ). Preferences and the asset market structure imply
that there are neither voluntary nor accidental bequests.
The expected lifetime value for each spouse in a newly-formed household, V0t , is given by
´i
h ³
¡
¢
V0t em , ef = E Vt em , ef , 1, 0, ytm , ytf ,

where the zero value for the fourth argument reflects the assumption that agents enter the
working stage of the life cycle with zero wealth, and where the expectation is taken over the
set of possible productivity shocks at age one.18
3.2.4

Retirement

Since retirees do not work, the only state variables for a retired household (j ≥ j R ) are age and
wealth. Retirees receive lump-sum social-security benefits b every period until death. Benefits
are taxed at rate τ n . The problem of a retired household is
Vt (j, at ) =

max u (ct , xt ) + βζ j Vt+1 (j + 1, at+1 )

ct ,at+1

subject to
ct + ζ j at+1 = [1 + (1 − τ a ) r] at + (1 − τ n )b
xt = x (1, 1)
at+1 ≥ a,

ct ≥ 0,

at+(J−j+1) ≥ 0

(10)

Note that the entire time endowment of each spouse is devoted to production of the non-market
good xt . The last inequality implies that agents cannot die in debt.19
18

The assumption of zero initial wealth is consistent with the absence of bequests in equilibrium. We analyzed
the empirical distribution of financial wealth for individuals aged 23-25 in the US from the 1992 Survey of
Consumer Finances. We found that median wealth is negligible for this age group ($2,000), with no significant
differences across the two education groups. Details are available upon request.
19
With a slight abuse of notation, we include only a subset of the individual states as arguments of Vt in the
retiree’s problem, since the other state variables are irrelevant during retirement.

13

3.3

Equilibrium

The economy is initially in a steady-state. Unexpectedly, agents discover that the economy will
experience a period of structural change, with the changes fully summarized by the sequences
for skill-biased and gender-biased demand shifts and for variances of the stochastic wage com©
ª
v
ω
ponents {λt } ≡ λSt , λG
t , λt , λt . Agents have perfect foresight over the future evolution of
these sequences.
Let BA and BY be the Borel sigma algebras of A and Y, and P (E) and P (J ) be the power
sets of E and J . The state space is denoted by S ≡ E 2 ×J × A × Y 2 with generic element s.
Let ΣS be the sigma algebra on S defined as ΣS ≡ P (E) ⊗ P (E) ⊗ P (J ) ⊗ BA ⊗ BY ⊗ BY and
(S, ΣS ) be the corresponding measurable space. Denote the measure of households on (S, ΣS )
in period t as µt and the initial stationary distribution as µ∗ .
Given µ∗ and sequences {Zt }, {̺t }, and {λt }, a competitive equilibrium is a sequence of discounted values {Mgt (e)} ; decision rules for education, consumption, hours worked and savings
{egt (κ) , ct (s) , ngt (s) , at+1 (s)}; value functions {Vt (s)} ; firm choices {Htg,e , Kt }; prices {pg,e
t };
government expenditures {Gt }; individual college graduation rates by gender and cohort {qtg };
matching probabilities {π gt }; and measures of households {µt } such that, for all t:
1. The education decision rule egt (κ) solves the individual problem (2) and qtg is the fraction
of college graduates of gender g determined by (3).
2. The matching probabilities π gt satisfy equation (6) and the consistency conditions
f f
qtm π m
t (h, h) = qt π t (h, h)
´
³
f
m m
qt π t (h, l) = 1 − qt π ft (l, h)

f f
(1 − qtm ) π m
t (l, h) = qt π t (h, l)
´
³
f
m
m
(1 − qt ) π t (l, l) = 1 − qt π ft (l, l) .

(11)

Moreover, the discounted utilities at this stage, Mgt (e), are defined in (4).

3. The household decision rules ct (s) , ngt (s) , at+1 (s) and value functions Vt (s) solve the
household problem (9) during the work stage, and (10) during retirement.
4. Capital and labor inputs are allocated optimally, i.e., Kt and Htg,e satisfy
³ ´1−α
¡
¢ m,l
¡
¢¡
¢
Ht
−δ
pm,h
= Ωht λSt 1 − λG
pt = Ωlt 1 − λSt 1 − λG
r = αZt K
t
t
t
t
¡
¢ G
S
l
pf,h
= Ωht λSt λG
pf,l
t
t = Ωt 1 − λt λt ,
t
where Ωet ≡ (1 − α)Zt

³

Kt
Ht

´α

(12)

´− θ1
1 ³
f,e
m,e
G
Ht1−θ λG
and Ht is given by (1).
H
+
(1
−
λ
)H
t
t
t
t

5. The domestic labor markets clear, i.e. for all (g, e) pairs, Htg,e =
14

R

S,eg =e

ε (j, ytg ) ngt (s) dµt .

6. The domestic good market clears, Ct + Kt+1 − (1 − δ)Kt + Gt + N Xt = Zt Ktα Ht1−α , where
R
Ct = S ct (s) dµt is aggregate consumption.

7. The world asset market clears. This requires that the change in net foreign asset position
between t and t + 1 equals the year-t current account: (At+1 − Kt+1 ) − (At − Kt ) =
R
N Xt + r (At − Kt ), where At+1 = S at+1 (s) dµt is aggregate domestic wealth.
R
P
g,e
8. The government budget is balanced: Gt + (1 − τ n ) b S,j≥j R dµt = τ a rAt + τ n g,e pg,e
t Ht
³
´
¡
¢
9. For all s ≡ em , ef , j, at , ytm , ytf ∈ S, and S ≡ Em × Ef × J × A × Ym × Yf ∈ ΣS ,
R
where {1} ∈
/ J, the measures µt satisfy µt+1 (S) = S Qt (s, S) dµt with
n
o
f
f
m
m
f
m
Qt (s, S) = I{em ∈Em ,ef ∈Ef ,j+1∈J,at+1 (s)∈A} Pr yt+1 ∈ Y , yt+1 ∈ Y |yt , yt ζ j .
The initial measure at age j = 1, for example for the (h, h) type, is obtained as
n
o
¡
¢
f
m
m
f
µt {h} , {h} , {1} , {0} , Ym , Yf = qtm π m
(h,
h)
Pr
y
∈
Y
,
y
∈
Y
|j
=
1
,
t
t
t

and so on for all other education pairs.

4

The computational experiment

Experiment design The first objective of the paper is to study the implications of transformations in the wage structure for the dynamics of cross-sectional inequality in individuals’ and
households’ earnings, consumption, and labor supply. In particular, we want to assess the ability
of our model to reproduce the observed changes in a set of cross-sectional moments of interest,
©
ª
v
ω
with changes in the wage structure parameters, i.e. the sequence {λt } ≡ λSt , λG
t , λt , λt , as
the only time-varying input. The sequence {λt } is parameterized so that it reproduces the
rise in the skill premium, the narrowing of the gender gap, and the increase in transitory and
persistent residual wage inequality, respectively.
In addition, we calibrate the distributions for education costs so that the model broadly
replicates the empirical time paths for college enrollment by gender {qtg }. This ensures that
when applying the matching probabilities {π gt } from equation (11), the model will also replicate
the cross-sectional composition of households by education observed in the data.
We set the path for the aggregate scaling factor Zt so that, in the absence of any behavioral response (i.e., assuming no changes in total effective hours for each type of labor input),
the dynamics of λt would leave average output and labor productivity constant at the initial
steady state levels. We make this choice because we want to remain agnostic about the precise
microfoundations underlying the dynamics in the components of λt , and thus we want to avoid
15

hard-wiring productivity changes in a particular direction into the design of the experiment.
Of course it is quite possible that some of the much-talked-about forces that have propelled the
observed dynamics in λt – e.g. the fall in the price of ICT capital for skill-biased demand shifts
– have also directly increased economy-wide TFP and thus welfare. Any such gains would need
to be added to the behavior-induced effects that we quantify below.
We now turn to the parametrization of the model.

4.1

Parametrization

Some parameters are set outside the model, while others are estimated within the model and
require solving for equilibrium allocations. The parameter values are summarized in Table 1.
4.1.1

Parameters set externally

Demographics The model period is one year. After schooling choice and household formation, individuals enter the labor market at age 25, the median age of first marriage for males
in the midpoint of our sample, 1982. They work for 35 years, and retire on their 60th birthday,
© ª
which implies that j R = 35. Agents die by age 100, so J = 75. Mortality probabilities ζ j are
from the National Center for Health Statistics (1992).

Production technology The capital share parameter α is set to 0.33 and the depreciation
rate δ to 0.06 (see Cooley, 1995). The constant world pre-tax interest rate r is set to 0.05. These
parameter choices imply a capital-to-output ratio K/Y = α/(r + δ) = 3, a reasonable value for
the US. We follow Katz and Murphy (1992) in setting the parameter θ measuring the elasticity
of substitution between education groups to 1.43.
Tax rates Following Domeij and Heathcote (2004), the tax rates on labor and capital
income are set to τ n = 0.27 and τ a = 0.40, which implies an after-tax return to saving of 3%.
Matching probabilities The correlation between husbands’ and wives’ education level
̺ is constant, and set to 0.517, which is the average in our PSID sample for newly-formed
households (i.e., aged 25-35). Given the model’s equilibrium enrollment rates and the target education correlation ̺, equation (6) identifies the conditional probability π m
t (h, h). The
remaining three matching probabilities follow from equations (11). The observed rise in educational attainment implies substantial changes in the matching probabilities. For example,
across steady-states π m
t (h, h) rises from 0.43 to 0.79.
Productivity shocks

The mapping between observed individual hourly wages and in-

dividual labor productivity is not immediate in our model, for two reasons. First, there are
four different types of labor in the model, and over time their relative prices change. These
16

dynamics induce changes in observed wages that do not correspond to changes in the number
of efficiency units of labor supplied per unit of time. In particular, as is clear from equation
(7), one must filter out changes in prices pg,e
t to isolate changes in efficiency units.
Second, an individual’s wage is observed in the data only if she/he works enough hours
to qualify for inclusion in our sample (260 hours per year). This selection problem is acute
for women, especially in the first part of the sample period. Since in the model males and
females are assumed to have the same stochastic process for labor productivity shocks, it can
be estimated using only wage data for males, for whom selection issues are relatively minor
given their strong labor force attachment.20
Let wi,j,t be the hourly wage of individual i of age j at time t. We run an OLS regression
on PSID data of male hourly wages on a time dummy, a time dummy interacted with a college
education dummy (ei ), and a cubic polynomial in potential experience (age minus years of
education minus five) L (j):
ln wi,j,t = β 0t + β 1t ei + L (j) + yi,j,t

(13)

This specification is consistent with the wage equation (7) in the structural model. The estimated polynomial function L peaks after 29 years of labor market experience at around twice
the initial wage, and then declines by roughly 1% per year until retirement. The residuals of
equation (13) are a consistent estimate of the stochastic labor productivity component, since
education is predetermined with respect to the realizations of yi,j,t .
As described in equation (8), yi,j,t is modelled as a the sum of transitory plus a persistent
component, with time-varying variances. The choice of this statistical model was guided by
three considerations. First, the autocovariance function for wages (across ages) shows a sharp
drop between lag 0 and lag 1. This pattern suggests the presence of a purely transitory component which likely incorporates classical measurement error in wages. Second, there are strong
life-cycle effects in the unconditional variance of wages: in our sample, there is almost a two-fold
increase in the variance between age 25 and age 59. This suggests the existence of a persistent
autoregressive component in wages. This component is modelled as an AR(1) process. Third,
the nonstationarity of the wage process is captured by indexing the distributions for productivity innovations by year rather than by cohort, following the bulk of the literature which
argues that cohort effects are small compared to time effects in accounting for the rise in wage
inequality in the United States (e.g., Juhn, Murphy, and Pierce, 1993; Heathcote, Storesletten,
and Violante, 2005).
20

Low, Meghir, Pistaferri (2007) provide evidence on this. Attanasio, Low, and Sanchez (2008) make the
same symmetry assumption and find that it implies the right magnitude for the female wage variance, under
the model’s selection mechanism. As we will document later, our model has the same implication.

17

In Appendix B, we discuss identification and estimation of the wage process in detail. Our
estimation method is designed to minimize the distance between model and data with respect
to the variances and covariances of wage residuals across cells identified by year and overlapping
ten-year age group. We use the Equally Weighted Minimum Distance estimator proposed by
Altonji and Segal (1996) based on Chamberlain (1984), which is frequently employed in this
type of analysis. Since one cannot separately identify the variance of the genuine transitory
shock from the variance of measurement error, we assume that the variance of measurement
error is time-invariant, and use an external estimate.21 Based on the PSID Validation Study
for 1982 and 1986, French (2002) finds a variance of measurement error in log hourly wages of
0.02, averaging across the two surveys. Expressed as a percentage of the residual wage variance
in our sample, measurement error accounts for 8.5% of the total.
Our findings are summarized in Figure 3 and Table 2. Panel (B) of Figure 3 shows that
residual wage dispersion (i.e., within male experience/education groups) increased steadily over
this period, and that the estimated model provides an excellent fit to the data. Comparing
this picture to panel (A) in Figure 2 one concludes that the rise in this residual component
accounts for around 2/3 of the total change in wage dispersion–a fraction in line with existing
estimates: Katz and Autor (1999) estimate this fraction to be close to 60%.
Panel (C) of Figure 3 displays the variance of measurement error, the variance of genuine
transitory shocks λvt , and the cumulated variance of persistent shocks: these three components
sum to the total residual variance in panel (B). The variance of transitory shocks grows steadily
throughout the period, while the cumulated variance of the persistent component is flat until
the late 1970s and is growing thereafter, especially during the early 1980s. Consistent with this
pattern, panel (D) shows that the variance of persistent shocks λωt doubles during the 1975-1985
decade. The point estimate for the initial (age 1) variance of the persistent component λη is
0.124, and shocks to this component are very persistent: the estimated annual autocorrelation
coefficient ρ is 0.973 (see Table 2). The table also reports bootstrapped standard errors for all
our estimates. In general, standard errors are small and the trends significant. As inputs for
the model, we use Hodrick-Prescott (HP) filtered trends of the estimated sequences {λvt , λωt },
with the HP smoothing parameter equal to ten.
The correlation structure for shocks within the household is the only remaining aspect of the
wage process to consider. The correlation in the initial persistent productivity draw between
husband and wife (which is almost a fixed effect, given the high persistence) is set equal to the
correlation of education levels, i.e., 0.517. Our preferred interpretation for this assumption is
that when matching, agents sort positively with respect to wages, irrespective of whether wage
21

The strategy of using independent estimates of measurement error to separate the two components is
common in the literature (e.g., Meghir and Pistaferri, 2004).

18

differences reflect education or the initial draw for the persistent component.22 The cross-spouse
correlations for transitory shocks and for innovations to persistent shocks are set to a common
and constant level that reproduces, in equilibrium, the average observed correlation between
wage growth for husbands and wives. This empirical correlation, corrected for measurement
error, is 0.15, which the model replicates when setting, as a structural parameter, the shock
correlation to 0.134.23
4.1.2

Parameters calibrated internally

Utility costs of education We impose that the gender-specific distributions F g for the
utility cost of attending college are log-normal, ln κ ∼ N (κ̄g , υ gκ ), and we choose means κ̄g and
variances υ gκ to match enrollment rates by gender in the initial and final steady-states. The
empirical counterpart for the initial steady state is the fraction of 25-54 year-olds who were
college graduates in 1967: 15.3% for men, and 8.5% for women. The empirical counterpart
for the final steady state enrollment rate is an estimate of the fraction of college-graduate
25 year-olds in 2002: 25.6% for men and 31.7% for women. Intuitively, κ̄g determine average
enrollment levels by gender, while υ gκ regulate the gender-specific elasticities of enrollment rates
to increases in the college wage premium. The fact that college enrollment has increased more
for women than for men (recall panel (C) in Figure 1) implies less dispersion in the distribution
of female enrollment costs relative to that for men (see Table 1).
When we simulate the economy, the model’s enrollment rates at each date t are those determined in equilibrium by the calibrated time-invariant cost distribution together with equation
(3). By construction, the implied enrollment rates fit the broad trends documented in panel
(C) of Figure 1.24
Preferences The period utility function for a household is:
u(c, x) =

x1−σ
c1−γ
+ψ
,
1−γ
1−σ

22

(14)

The initial persistent draw does not appear explicitly in our expressions for matching probabilities, but
sorting in this dimension is implicit in expected match values.
23
These two choices for within-household shock correlation are supported by existing studies. Hyslop (2001,
Table 3) estimates the correlation between husband and wife fixed effects (which includes education) to be
0.572, and estimates the correlation of persistent shocks to be 0.154 over the 1980-1985 period in a sample of
married households. Attanasio, Low and Sanchez (2008) use the Hyslop estimate for the correlation of shocks
within the household, and thus choose a value very similar to ours.
24
The model enrollment rates do not reproduce the spike in male enrollment in the mid 1970s (see panel (C)
of Figure 1) discussed in Section 2. With a time-varying cost distribution we could have replicated enrollment
rates year by year. We chose not to add this extra dimension of nonstationarity to the model given our focus
on changes in the wage structure. Thus our simulations underestimate the college-biased demand shift in the
1970s. However, skill prices are correct since the model is calibrated to match the empirical college premium
year by year.

19

and the production technology for the non-market good has the symmetric CES form:
£
¤ 1
x = (1 − nm )1−σ + (1 − nf )1−σ 1−σ

(15)

First, note that even though we do not explicitly model fixed costs of work or indivisibilities,
our preference specification allows for labor supply adjustments along the extensive margin: if
the wages of two spouses are sufficiently different, the lower wage spouse will chose zero market
labor supply, and focus exclusively on producing the non-market good.
Estimates of relative risk-aversion between one and two are common in the consumption
literature (see Attanasio, 1999, for a survey), so we set γ = 1.5. We set the utility weight
of non-market time relative to market consumption to ψ = 0.335 to match average household
hours worked in the market, estimated to be 30% of the time endowment (assumed to be
15 ∗ 365 = 5, 475 hours per year per individual) over the sample period.
Given our functional forms and parametric restrictions, market consumption, the husband’s
non-market hours and the wife’s non-market hours all enter separably in household period
utility. Moreover, σ serves two purposes. First, the intertemporal elasticity of substitution
for individual non-market time is exactly 1/σ, hence σ regulates the Frisch elasticity of labor
supply.25 Second, 1/σ is the static elasticity of substitution between male and female time in
producing the non-market good. Consequently, σ will determine the allocation of time within
the household. In particular, when the optimal division of time is interior for both spouses,
relative hours are given by
ln

µ

1 − nf
1 − nm

¶

1
= ln
σ

µ

wm
wf

¶

.

(16)

Thus the extent to which within-household wage differentials translate into differences in market
hours is increasing in 1/σ.
We set σ = 3. This value satisfies three criteria. First, this choice exactly replicates
the empirical ratio of average female to average male hours of 0.48 (averaged over the entire
period). Second, the implied mean Frisch elasticity of labor supply for men is 0.48 and the one
for women is 1.46.26 These values are well within the range of gender-specific micro estimates
(see Blundell MaCurdy, 1999, for a survey of micro estimates, and Domeij and Flodén, 2006, for
an argument based on liquidity constraints for why micro-estimates may be downward biased).
Third, with this choice the model almost exactly replicates the empirical correlation of −0.11
between changes in male wages and changes in female hours worked over the sample period.27
25

Recall that the Frisch elasticity of labor supply is (1/σ) (1 − ng ) /ng .
The elasticity for women in the model declines from 1.77 in 1967 to 1.23 in 2005. This fall is consistent with
the findings of Blau and Kahn (2005), who document a decline in married women’s labor supply elasticities
between 1980 and 2000.
27
The raw correlation is −0.087 and when correcting for measurement error it is lowered to −0.11. The
26

20

Satisfying these three criteria is an important indicator of the model’s ability to capture
household behavior. The first and second results show that one can account for gender differences in average hours and in the sensitivity of hours to changes in wages without introducing
any asymmetries in how male and female non-market hours enter preferences, or in the process
for individual wage shocks. The third result provides an implicit empirical validation for the
degree of within-household risk-sharing that the model delivers through the joint labor supply
decision. We conclude that this simple two-parameter (σ, ψ) model of non-market work can
account surprisingly well for the salient features of time allocation within the household.28
As emphasized by Storesletten, Telmer, and Yaron (2004), agents must have a realistic
amount of wealth for the model to feature the appropriate amount of self insurance through
savings. In the 1992 Survey of Consumer Finances, the ratio of average wealth to average pretax earnings was 3.94 (Dı́az-Giménez, Quadrini, and Rı́os-Rull, 1997, Tables 6 and 9). With
β = 0.969 our model matches this ratio in 1992.29 This value for β implies that the model
economy has, on average, a small negative net foreign asset position (in 1992 foreign-owned
assets are 9.0% of the domestic capital stock).
Borrowing constraint The ad-hoc borrowing constraint a is calibrated to match the
proportion of agents with negative or zero wealth. In 1983, this number was 15.5% (Table 1 in
Wolff, 2000). The implied borrowing limit is 20% percent of mean annual individual after-tax
earnings in the initial steady state.
Pension benefits The US social security system pays old-age pension benefits based on
a concave function of average earnings. Several authors have documented that the implied
risk-sharing is significant (e.g., Storesletten et al., 2004). Explicitly including such a system
in our model would be computationally expensive, since two indexes of accumulated earnings
would have to be added as state variables. Here, we adopt a simpler, stylized version which
captures the redistribution embedded in the US system. In particular, all workers receive the
correction assumes that hourly wages inherit all measurement error from hours, and that the variance of these
errors is 0.02, as estimated by French (2002). The correlation in the model over the same period is −0.10.
28
Our separable specification between market and non-market goods implies that the static elasticity of
substitution (SEP) between the two goods varies across households, and our choices for γ and σ imply that
this elasticity is generally less than one (derivations are available upon request). Real business cycle models
with a representative stand-in household sometimes assume larger static elasticities in order to increase internal
propagation (e.g., Benhabib, Rogerson, and Wright, 1991). However, a large value for the SEP at the micro level
in our model would imply implausibly high volatility for individual market hours and an implausibly negative
intra-household correlation of market hours. As the recent literature on the Frisch labor supply elasticity has
emphasized (e.g., Chang and Kim, 2006) “small” values for elasticities at the micro level are not necessarily
inconsistent with “large” equilibrium values at the aggregate level.
29
In comparing average household wealth across model and data, we exclude the wealth-richest 1% of households in both, since the very richest households in the SCF are missing in both the PSID and in our model (see
Section 5 and Storesletten et al., 2004, for more discussion).

21

same lump-sum pension, b, the value of which is such that the dispersion of discounted lifetime
earnings plus pension income in the final steady state of our economy is the same as in an
alternative economy featuring the actual US Old-Age Insurance system. The implied value for
b is 24.5% of mean individual after-tax earnings in the initial steady state.30
©
ª
Skill and gender biased demand shifts We compute the sequences λSt , λG
defining
t
exogenous demand shifts in favor of educated workers and women so that the model’s time
paths for the equilibrium male college wage premium and gender wage gap exactly match the
trends in their empirical counterparts, where these trends are defined by applying an HP filter
with smoothing parameter equal to ten to the raw data presented in Section 2. Panel (A) of
Figure 3 shows that the implied paths for λSt and λG
t are qualitatively similar to those for the
skill premium and the (inverse of the) gender gap.
Table 1 summarizes the calibration strategy and parameter values. The Technical Appendix
T-1 outlines the computational algorithm for solving and simulating the model economy.

5

Results

This section presents the results of our numerical simulations. First, we simulate the calibrated
benchmark economy, when all elements of the vector λt are time-varying. We compare the
model-implied paths for the cross-sectional moments of interest to their data counterparts. For
this comparison we focus on changes over time by demeaning all variances and correlations. To
properly compare levels of inequality across model and data would require a careful treatment
of measurement error and preference heterogeneity. However, one can safely compare trends
in inequality as long as the variances of measurement error and preference heterogeneity are
stationary (see Heathcote et al., 2008a).
In a set of decomposition experiments we change the components of λt one at a time, holding
the other components fixed at initial steady-state levels.31 This allows us to assess the extent
to which the predicted dynamics are primarily attributable to (i) skill-biased demand shifts (ii)
gender-biased demand shifts, (iii) changes in the variance of persistent shocks, and (iv) changes
in the variance of transitory shocks.
Finally, we run a set of counterfactual experiments assessing the importance of the various
decision margins households use to respond to changes in the wage structure: self-insurance
through borrowing and saving, individual labor supply, female participation, and education.
30

See Technical Appendix T-1 for further details.
For each of these decompositions, we compute a new path for the scaling factor Zt following the same
strategy described in Section 4.
31

22

5.1

Macroeconomic implications

We compare theoretical moments computed from simulated model output to the corresponding
empirical moments computed from the CPS (for wages, hours, and earnings) and from the CEX
(for consumption).32
Life cycle Although the focus of the exercise is on changes in cross-sectional inequality
over time, it is useful to check the performance of the model along the life-cycle dimension.
Thus, we begin by reporting the life-cycle dynamics in the mean and variance of household
earnings and consumption for the cohort which is 25-29 years old in 1980 –the initial year of
the consumption sample– and we compare it to the 1980 cohort in the model (Figure 4). The
model slightly overestimates the rise in mean household earnings after age 45, but it replicates
the other life-cycle facts remarkably well. We now turn to the performance of the model along
the time dimension.
Female college premium

Panel (A) of Figure 5 describes the evolution of the female

college premium (conditional on participation) in model and data. Recall that the model is
calibrated to replicate the path for the male college premium. Panel (A) indicates that the
model is able to replicate the fact that the female college premium has grown somewhat less
than the corresponding male premium over the sample period (see Figure 1). Recall that female
college enrollment increases more than male enrollment over this period. Thus, towards the
end of the sample women college graduates tend to be younger than high school graduates in
the cross-section, and this negative experience gap delays the rise in the female skill premium.
Panel (C) indicates that, not surprisingly, the dynamics of the college premium are almost
exclusively attributable to skill-biased demand shifts. Labor demand shifts favoring women
have a small positive effect on the college premium, because women are disproportionately highschool graduates in the 1970s and 1980s, and thus increasing female labor force participation
reduces the relative supply of skilled labor.
Relative hours worked

Panel (B) of Figure 5 plots average female hours worked relative

to average male hours worked. The model accounts for roughly three quarters of the increase in
relative female hours over this period. Panel (D) indicates that the dynamics of relative hours
are entirely driven by a narrowing wage gap (see also Jones, Manuelli and McGrattan, 2003).
32

Recall that to estimate the time-varying parameters {λt } we used data from the PSID, since our identification scheme relies on the panel dimension. We chose to use CPS data for the model evaluation because the CPS
sample is much larger than the PSID and CEX samples (see Table A-1), and thus trends in empirical moments
are more easily discerned. In the Technical Appendix T-2, we compare the time-paths for all the moments
of interest across the PSID and CPS. Although there is more noise in the PSID series, reflecting the smaller
sample, lower frequency trends are generally very similar to those in the CPS.

23

We find evidence of positive selection in the model. The gender gap for average observed
wages is smaller than for offered wages, because low-wage women married to high-wage men tend
to not work full time. Blau and Kahn (2006) provide empirical support for this type of selection
in the US in the 1980s and 1990s, using a wage imputation procedure for women working few or
zero hours. Over time, as increasing female wages induce less productive women to work, the
selection effect weakens in the model. The fact that the gap in offered wages narrows rapidly
(relative to the gap in observed wages) helps explain why the model generates such a surge in
female market work.
The finding that the model accounts for the bulk of the increase in female hours over
the period, and essentially the entire increase after 1980, is important since it means that our
framework can address the implications of the transition from the traditional single-male-earner
household towards the current dual-earner prototype. At the same time, the fact that our model
falls short of replicating the increase in female hours in the 1960s and early 1970s suggests a role
for alternative supply-based explanations during this period, such as cultural change (Goldin
and Katz, 2002; Fernández and Fogli, 2005), rapid technological progress in the home sector
(Greenwood, Seshadri, and Yorukoglu, 2005), and declines in childcare costs (Attanasio, Low,
and Sanchez, 2008).
Wage inequality Figure 6 shows the evolution of the cross-sectional variance of log
wages for men and women. Model and data align well in both cases. For men, this result
confirms that, when fed back into the model, our statistical decomposition of the wage process
into components attributable to age, education and persistent and transitory shocks aggregates
back up to reproduce the time series for cross-sectional inequality.33
For women, the close alignment between the model and data series for wage inequality offers
ex-post support for our assumption that the processes for male and female wages are symmetric.
Panels (C) and (D) indicate that skill bias, persistent shocks, and transitory shocks all play
important roles in accounting for the dynamics of wage inequality over this period.
Hours inequality Figure 7 displays the variances of log male and female hours. The
model successfully replicates the fact that the level of cross-sectional dispersion in female market
hours is much higher than for male market hours, even though our preference specification
and wage process treat male and female leisure symmetrically. The reason is that the Frisch
elasticity for market hours is decreasing in average hours worked. Given the gender wage gap,
within-household efficient allocations typically imply less market work for the wife, so women’s
33

There are several reasons the match is not perfect: (i) the data plotted is from the CPS, while our process
for residual wage dispersion is estimated from the PSID; (ii) the joint distributions over age and education in
model and data do not perfectly align year by year; and (iii) the inputs for the wage process are smoothed to
filter out high-frequency fluctuations.

24

market hours are more sensitive to wage changes.
Over time, the model generates a small rise in hours inequality for men, compared to
an essentially flat empirical time profile. Panel (C) indicates that this rise is driven mostly by
stronger transitory shocks. For women, however, the model predicts a flat profile for the variance
of hours, in contrast to the observed decline in hours inequality (panel (B)). This reflects the
existence of several offsetting forces (see panel (D)). Larger transitory and persistent shocks
drive up dispersion in female hours. At the same time, the narrowing gender gap increases
average female hours, thereby reducing the average Frisch elasticity for female labor supply
and hours variability. To better understand how a narrowing gender gap works to reduce
inequality in female hours, note that if the gender wage gap were to vanish entirely in our
symmetric model, the distribution for female market hours would become identical to that for
males.34
Wage-hours correlation

Figure 8 plots the cross-sectional correlation between the in-

dividual log wage and individual log hours. As documented in Section 2, there is a dramatic
rise in the wage-hour correlation for men in the 1970s and 1980s. The model reproduces both
the magnitude and the timing of this increase.35
Panel (C) of the figure indicates that each component of the wage process is important for
determining the overall evolution of the wage-hour correlation. Given our assumption on risk
aversion (γ > 1), wealth effects cause individual hours to move inversely with uninsurable wage
changes, whereas market hours will move in step with wage changes that can be insured either
through saving or through intra-household time reallocation. In the context of our model,
34

A closer examination of the CPS data indicates that, mechanically, the main reason for the decline in
women’s hours dispersion is the increased clustering at full-time work (i.e., 2000 hours per year). This decline
could be artificially inflated by heaping (i.e., rounding-off) in hours reports, a typical bias of retrospective
surveys. However, part of it is certainly genuine. One way to reproduce this trend would be to extend the
model, either by allowing for a part-time penalty in offered wages, or by restricting the hours decision to, say,
zero, part-time, or full-time. In such a model, women would tend to work either relatively few hours or full-time.
A narrowing gender gap would then push more and more women into the full-time category.
35
The average level of this correlation is positive in the model, but negative in the data. In large part, the low
number in the data reflects measurement error (the “division bias”): if an individual’s report of hours worked
is too high (low), their imputed hourly wage, computed as earnings divided by hours, is automatically too low
(high). The CPS offers two alternative ways to estimate hours worked, based two different questions, one about
“usual weekly hours worked this year”, and the other about “hours worked last week”. The first question should
provide a more accurate estimate for total hours worked in the previous year, but it was only asked beginning
with the 1976 survey. Because we want to measure hours in a consistent way across our entire sample period, we
use the first question. However, for the post-1976 period we computed moments both ways. Reassuringly, the
implied trends in the wage-hours correlation are essentially identical, both for men and for women. However,
consistent with the conjecture that the usual-weekly-hours variable is less subject to measurement error, we
found that the sub-sample correlation increases by 0.18 when hours are computed this way. Assuming that
earnings are measured perfectly, so all measurement error in wages comes from hours, and using our external
estimate for measurement error in wages of 0.02 (see Section 4.1), implies a measurement-error-corrected wagehour correlation of 0.10, which significantly narrows the gap between data and model.

25

the secular upward trend in the college premium has been largely uninsurable (conditional on
educational choice), and has reduced the wage-hour correlation. However, this effect is more
than offset by the positive impact of more volatile transitory shocks – which are straightforward
to insure through precautionary savings – and by the effect of gender-biased demand shifts.
Labor demand shifts towards women drive up the correlation between male hours and male
wages because the larger is the fraction of household income attributable to the female, the
smaller is the impact of a shock to the male wage on household consumption, and thus the
smaller the wealth effect on male hours.
The path for the female wage-hour correlation is flatter than the correlation for men, both in
the model and data. As women’s share of household earnings has risen, household consumption
has responded increasingly strongly to female wage shocks, and these larger wealth effects
moderate the increase in the wage-hour correlation. This also explains why the wage-hour
correlation for women is higher than for men, both in the model and the data: on average the
wealth effects associated with wage changes are smaller for women.
The variance of individual earnings predicted by the model (not plotted) lines up closely
with the data for both men and women. In both model and data, the increase in male earnings
inequality is larger than the increase in wage inequality, which mathematically reflects an
increasing wage-hour correlation.
Household earnings and consumption inequality

Figure 9 shows the time paths for

the variances of household earnings and household consumption. The variance of household log
earnings is one moment for which the CPS and the PSID are not in full agreement, particularly
towards the end of the sample, where inequality rises more rapidly in the CPS.36 The increase
in household earnings inequality generated by the model (14 log points) lies in between the CPS
and PSID series, and is closer to the PSID, as might be expected given that we use the PSID
to estimate time variation in the wage structure. The rise in household earnings inequality in
our CEX sample also lies in between that observed in the CPS and the PSID.
Panel (C) indicates that the dynamics of household earnings dispersion are primarily driven
by increases in the variances of transitory and persistent shocks. The model-generated rise in
household earnings inequality is smaller than the rise in individual wage and earnings inequality
because shocks at the individual level are imperfectly correlated within the household, and
household earnings can be further smoothed by reallocating hours between husband and wife.
Furthermore, demand shifts in favor of women reduce incentives for women to specialize in
the non-market sector, increasing scope for within-household insurance over time, and further
mitigating the rise in household earnings inequality. The role of skill-biased demand shifts is
36

We discuss the source of this discrepancy in the Technical Appendix T-2.

26

muted by the imperfect correlation of education within the household, and by the fact that the
skill bias in labor demand drives down the wage-hour correlation (recall Figure 8).
Panel (B) describes the dynamics in the variance of household log consumption (ND+).
The data show a modest increase in consumption inequality over the 1980 to 2003 period. The
increase in consumption inequality generated by the model is very similar to that observed in
the CEX.
The counter-factual experiments in which only one component of the wage process is timevarying shed light on the mapping from earnings inequality to consumption inequality. A
comparison of panels (C) and (D) reveals that demand shifts have quantitatively similar impacts
on earnings inequality and consumption inequality. This reflects the fact that agents respond
to changes in relative demand primarily by changing education choices and the allocation of
market work within the household, rather than by adjusting savings. Similarly, Attanasio and
Davis (1996) find that low-frequency changes in relative wages between educational groups lead
to similar changes in relative consumption.37
In contrast to demand shifts, changes in the variance of wage risk have very different effects
on earnings and consumption inequality, reflecting self insurance through savings. When only
the variance of transitory shocks is time-varying, the increase in the variance of consumption
over the 1965-2003 period is just 9% of the increase in the variance of household log earnings.
This confirms that transitory shocks can be smoothed effectively with the risk-free asset. Isolating the impact of increasingly volatile persistent shocks delivers an increase in consumption
inequality 59% as large as the increase in earnings inequality. Thus households in the model
achieve a degree of self-insurance even against highly persistent shocks, which is consistent with
empirical evidence to the effect that permanent income shocks only partially translate into consumption growth (see, for example, Blundell, Pistaferri, and Preston, 2007). In the benchmark
simulation, when all dimensions of the wage structure are time-varying, the increase in consumption inequality is 38% as large as the increase in earnings inequality, a ratio consistent
with the available data.
Krueger and Perri (2006, Figures 2 and 5) decompose the rise in consumption inequality
into changes within and between groups. They document that half of the rise in consumption
inequality was due to residual (within-group) inequality, and that the Huggett (1993) version
of the standard incomplete-markets model delivers too large an increase in residual dispersion,
whereas their debt-constrained economy delivers too little. They conclude that the amount of
37

Demand shifts in favor of educated labor induce a change in consumption inequality even though they are
assumed to be foreseen (after 1965). This is because high-school graduates who are of working age when demand
starts favoring college graduates cannot avoid low permanent income and consumption levels. Moreover, even
when the upward trend in skill-biased labor demand is foreseen, an individual who draws a very high schooling
cost κ will optimally choose to remain unskilled and suffer low lifetime income.

27

insurance available to households in the US economy is somewhere in between the two models.
Our model, which has many more channels of self insurance than the Huggett model, generates an increase in within-education-group consumption inequality that is precisely half of
the total. However, in the data the rise of the within-group component occurs mostly in the
1980s, whereas in our model it grows smoothly throughout the 1990s as well. One possible interpretation of this finding is that households’ borrowing constraints were relaxed in the 1990s,
which is the main argument of Krueger and Perri (2006).
Wealth inequality

Our model does not capture the empirical level of wealth inequality.

In 1992, the Gini coefficient of wealth for married households was 0.76 (Dı́az-Giménez et al.,
1997), compared to 0.57 in the model. The discrepancy is particularly large at the very top:
the richest 1% of the population holds 5% of aggregate wealth in the model, compared to 30%
in US data. This is a common shortcoming of incomplete-market models (see Castañeda, Dı́azGiménez, and Rı́os-Rull, 2003, and Domeij and Heathcote, 2004, for alternative calibration
strategies that generate realistic wealth inequality). Excluding the wealthiest one percent of
households, the model replicates the stability of wealth concentration in the data over this
period: the Gini coefficient for household-level net worth in the Survey of Consumer Finances
increased by 0.018 between 1983 and 1998 (Wolff, 2000, Table 2) while over the same period
our model predicts a decline of 0.007.
Labor productivity

Panel (A) of Figure 10 plots aggregate labor productivity (output

per hour) in the model relative to the detrended data.38 Recall that our computational experiment is designed so that all changes in labor productivity originate from behavioral adjustments
to the varying wage structure. The model generates a decline in labor productivity in the 1970s
and a sharp rise after the mid 1990s – two key features of the actual US data.
Panel (B) decomposes productivity dynamics. Demand changes favoring female labor reduce
aggregate labor productivity, since they shift the pool of workers disproportionately towards
women who, on average, earn less per hour than men. In contrast, increased demand for skilled
workers shifts the pool towards college graduates who, on average, earn more than high-school
graduates. In the 1970s, when the gender gap is narrowing rapidly, the first force dominates.
In subsequent decades, the second force gradually takes over, as growth in the college premium
accelerates and college enrollment rises. While the upward trend in enrollment implies a net
gain in aggregate productivity over the entire sample period, median wages (not plotted) decline
substantially, primarily because the median worker is always a high school graduate. Panel (B)
38

The data series is “Output Per Hour of All Persons: Nonfarm Business Sector”, series OPHNFB in FRED,
http://research.stlouisfed.org/fred2. The data plotted in Figure 10 are deviations from a linear trend
applied to the log of the original series from 1967 to 2005.

28

also shows a sizable productivity gain due to the rise in transitory uncertainty. Transitory
shocks are relatively insurable, and since labor supply is flexible, households optimally time
market hours to exploit (transitory) periods of high wages.39

5.2

Welfare implications

The ability of the model to account for cross-sectional dynamics over the sample period encourages us to consider the welfare implications of the estimated changes in structural labor
market parameters.
Methodology

For households entering the labor market in year t, the average welfare

gain associated with changes in the wage structure is measured as the percentage increase in
lifetime market consumption required to make households in a benchmark cohort indifferent
between entering the labor market (behind a veil of ignorance) in the benchmark year versus
entering in year t. Recall that the only reason welfare will differ across cohorts is because of time
variation in λt . We also compute expected household welfare conditional on the educational
composition of the household.
We take 1965 as the benchmark year. This is the year when new information is revealed
about the dynamics of the vector λt , so our welfare numbers are not affected by surprise effects
concentrated in a short period of time. Moreover, using the 1965 cohort as the baseline for
our welfare comparison rather than initial steady state cohorts (those entering the labor force
in 1929 or earlier) will allow us to compare our welfare numbers with other estimates in the
literature (see below). All our welfare calculations factor in education costs, which is important
because enrollment increases over time in response to demand shifts in favor of college graduates.
m

f

Let Ute ,e (c, x) be expected lifetime utility per member of a newly formed household of
¡
¢
education composition em , ef belonging to cohort t, where the expectation is over the set of

possible equilibrium sequences for consumption of the market and non-market goods, (c, x) ≡
J−1
{ct−1+j , xt−1+j }j=1
. Recall that the average education cost paid by college graduates of gender g

is the expected value of κ conditional on κ being less than the threshold κ̂gt below which college
is the optimal education choice. Thus the equivalent-variation welfare gain for households of
type (em , ef ) is the value φt that solves:
Z κ̂gt
Z κ̂g1965
X
X
κdF g
κdF g
em ,ef
em ,ef
(c, x) −
I{eg =h}
2Ut
.
I{eg =h}
= 2U1965 ((1 + φt ) c, x) −
g
g
qt
q1965
0
0
g∈{m,f }

g∈{m,f }

(17)

39

The larger the Frisch elasticity, the larger the productivity gain from a rise in transitory dispersion. See
Heathcote, Storesletten, and Violante (2008b) for a thorough analysis of this point in a partial insurance model
admitting closed-form solutions.

29

The average welfare gain across all household types is defined by a similar equation where
the terms involving lifetime utilities and education costs are now population-weighted sums
across the different types. For example, values and expected schooling costs for type (h, l) in
cohort t are weighted by qtm π m
t (h, l).
Attanasio and Davis (1996) and Krueger and Perri (2003) estimate stochastic processes for
consumption (and leisure) using CEX data, and evaluate the welfare effects of rising inequality
with standard CRRA preferences. In a similar vein, Storesletten (2003) evaluates the welfare
implications of changes in the empirical CEX distributions of consumption and leisure. These
studies report welfare losses between 1% and 2% of lifetime consumption. This empirical
approach has the advantage that no assumptions have to be made on markets, technologies,
or agents’ choice sets. However, it has several drawbacks relative to our structural approach,
which lead these authors to overestimate welfare losses.
First, absent a structural model, it is not possible to connect changes in relative wages to
changes in average productivity. Thus papers following the empirical approach are forced to
exclude “level effects” by detrending the data. In our structural model, skill- and gender-biased
demand shifts change average productivity through their effects on human-capital accumulation
and female participation, while a rise in transitory wage volatility leads to higher productivity
through modified labor supply decisions. All these “level effects” are captured in our welfare
numbers. A related point is that only a structural model can isolate the role of changes
in the wage structure (rather than changes in the tax code or other factors) in explaining
time variation in the distributions of hours and consumption. The advantage of being explicit
about what drives changes in inequality is that different drivers will have different effects on
average productivity and welfare (we return to this point when exploring changes in different
subcomponents of the wage structure).
An additional problem with the Attanasio and Davis (1996) approach is that when computing welfare effects, they average over education groups, but hold fixed the weights on the two
groups over time. Thus their welfare calculations tend to exaggerate welfare losses, because
they do not incorporate the fact that infra-marginal agents can choose to switch from the lowto the high-education group when the college premium rises.40 The wage gains and switching
costs of agents who exercise this option do appear in our welfare calculation in equation (17).
40

To illustrate this point, consider an example: Suppose there are two groups in the population, low-skilled
and high-skilled, and suppose the difference in consumption between the groups increases between t and t + 1.
This would, from an ex-ante viewpoint, induce a welfare loss between t and t + 1. However, if households can
switch from the low- to the high-skill group by paying a cost, then the appropriate welfare comparison would
put different weights on the two groups at t and t + 1 (and subtract the average incurred switching cost from
the utility of the switchers). Since switching is optimal for the switchers, this latter welfare calculation will
imply a smaller welfare loss.

30

Notwithstanding these advantages to our structural approach, one important caveat is that
our welfare results are sensitive to the assumed path for the scaling factor in the aggregate
production technology, Zt . Recall that the path for Zt is chosen such that changes in λt do not
impact productivity, absent a behavioral response. Suppose, for a moment, that allocations were
chosen by a benevolent utilitarian planner. Following a change in λt , the planner could always
replicate the initial allocation; hence any response on the part of the planner would be welfareimproving, by a revealed-preference logic. In an incomplete-markets environment, however,
skill- or gender-biased demand shifts, as well as increased dispersion of individual productivity,
have important distributional effects that cannot be ignored in the welfare calculus. Since
demand shifts favoring women tend to reduce inequality, the associated distributional effects
are positive and thus such shifts are likely to be welfare-improving. By contrast, demand shifts
favoring college-graduates increase inequality, and it is unclear a priori whether gains from
increased productivity will outweigh the negative distributional impact. We now turn to our
findings.
Average (ex-ante) welfare

Panel (A) of Figure 11 plots the average welfare change

for cohorts entering the labor market in years t ≥ 1965. Cohorts entering before the early
1980s experience welfare losses up to 0.5% of lifetime consumption. Cohorts entering after
1983 experience welfare gains, and the gains are increasing over time. For example, the cohort
entering the labor market in 1990 enjoys a welfare gain, relative to the 1965 cohort, of 0.9%.
Panel (C) of Figure 11 plots the contribution of each component of structural change (persistent and transitory shocks, skill-biased and gender-biased demand shifts) to the overall welfare
effect. Larger transitory shocks have trivial distributional effects, since they are easily insurable. The implied welfare gains – due to increased labor productivity – are small and evenly
distributed across all cohorts, including the 1965 cohort. This is why the gains from transitory
uncertainty are negligible for subsequent cohorts relative to 1965 cohort.41
The large increase in the variance of persistent shocks is the main source of welfare losses
for the typical US household. Since these shocks are so durable, buffer-stock savings are of
limited use as an insurance device. If one were to focus only on the welfare effects of the rise in
residual wage variability (transitory plus persistent shocks), one would conclude that changes
in the wage structure led to welfare losses of around 2.0% of consumption.42
41
Relative to living their entire life in the initial steady state, the 1965 cohort enjoys an expected welfare gain
of 0.7%, of which 0.3% is due to larger transitory shocks.
42
This was, in fact, the conclusion we reached in Heathcote, Storesletten and Violante (2004). There the wage
process also included a fixed individual effect and, as a result, the persistent component had lower durability:
the autoregression coefficient ρ was 0.94. The 2% welfare loss obtained in our early draft was the result of both
components (time-varying fixed effects and persistent shocks). Here, we have abstracted from fixed effects and,
not surprisingly, the estimated AR(1) component is more persistent: ρ = 0.97.

31

Increased relative demand for female labor reduces average labor productivity in the market
sector, because it increases hours worked by women who earn less than men, on average. At the
same time, a more even allocation of time within the household effectively increases productivity
in the home sector, and also improves within-household risk sharing of individual wage shocks.
As expected, the positive effects dominate. For example, the welfare gain from the genderbiased demand shifts is equivalent to 0.7% of consumption for the 1990 cohort.
Panel (C) indicates that skill-biased demand shifts generated sizable welfare gains for the
average US household. Both demand shifts favoring graduates (an increase in λSt ) and bigger
persistent shocks (an increase in λωt ) imply increased cross-sectional consumption inequality
(see Figure 9, panel D). However, the two phenomena have opposite implications for welfare.
This asymmetry arises because in response to the skill-biased demand shift, individuals have the
opportunity to avoid the low-wage outcome through a behavioral response: inframarginal agents
change their education decision, relative to the initial steady state, in favor of college. The
dramatic rise in college enrollment witnessed in the US (and replicated in the model) indicates
that many households took advantage of this opportunity. Mechanically, in the calculation of
average welfare, the weight on households with at least one college-graduate spouse rises in
each successive cohort, with positive and sizable implications for average labor productivity
and welfare.
Our estimates of the welfare gains from skill-biased demand shifts depend on the size of the
education costs. In particular, welfare gains will be smaller the larger are education costs on
average, and the more rapidly costs per student rise with enrollment.43
Within and between group welfare effects Panel (B) shows welfare changes conditional on household type. As long as a household has at least one college educated member,
it is significantly better off in expected terms, relative to the 1965 cohort. By contrast, the
high-school/high-school households, accounting for 65% of all households in 1990, experience
a remarkable welfare loss of 3.7% of lifetime consumption. Panels (C) and (D) reveal that
the losses for these low-skilled households, relative to other households, are driven by adverse
labor-demand shifts.44
43

We conducted two simple experiments to examine how the education costs affect our welfare numbers. First,
we assumed that all additional college attendees during the transition have the same utility cost of going to
college, where this cost is equal to the average cost in the initial steady state – an upper bound to the gains from
skill-biased demand shifts. Second, we assumed that costs rise over time such that every additional college-goer
is indifferent between going to college or not – this is a lower bound. Average welfare gains in our model lie
roughly midway between these two bounds: for example the bounds for average welfare for the 1990 cohort are
−1.3% and 2.8%, while the model value is 0.9%.
44
In contrast to skill-biased demand shifts, gender-biased demand shifts benefit every household in the model,
because we focus on married couples. If we had single men in the model, they would unambiguously lose from
the growth in the relative demand for female labor.

32

Within education groups, we find large heterogeneity in ex-post welfare effects which are
driven by differences in histories of persistent and transitory shocks. For example, 29% of
high-school/high-school households in the 1990 cohort experience a welfare gain ex post, not
withstanding the large expected welfare loss for this group. The 90-10 differential in the distribution of ex-post welfare gains for this household type is 14.9%.

5.3

Insurance and opportunities

The observed changes in the US wage structure have amplified the risks households face in the
labor market, but they have also offered new economic opportunities by raising the relative
wages of women and of individuals who obtain a college education. In this section, we use
our model to study how US households have modified their economic choices to mitigate the
adverse effects of rising uncertainty and to take advantage of these new opportunities.
Four distinct channels of behavioral response are considered: savings, flexible labor supply,
female participation, and college enrollment. To isolate the role of each channel, we run a
series of counterfactuals in which we “freeze” one margin of adjustment at a time. In each case
we adopt the benchmark parametrization, including the benchmark sequences {λt } and {Zt } .
Thus each counter-factual simulation exhibits a different set of equilibrium price sequences,
{pg,e
t }.
Savings: We begin by solving the economy under the restriction that household asset holdings are zero each period, and compare the outcomes to the benchmark economy with access
to credit markets.45 The results are displayed in Figure 12. Agents now use labor supply as a
substitute for savings to respond to wage shocks and to smooth consumption, lowering (raising)
market hours in response to higher (lower) wages.46 This strategy translates into a substantially
lower wage-hour correlation and lower earnings dispersion than in the baseline economy (see
panels (A) and (C) in Figure 12). Absent savings, cross-sectional dispersion in household consumption must equal dispersion in household earnings. Thus the no-savings economy features
both a higher level of consumption inequality and a larger increase in consumption inequality
than the benchmark economy (panel (B)). Households entering the labor market after the mid
1980s suffer a welfare loss in the no-savings economy of around two percent of lifetime consumption relative to the 1965 cohort (panel (D)), in stark contrast to the welfare gains that
accrue to these cohorts in the baseline model.
Labor supply: We then compare the benchmark economy to one without a flexible choice
45

In this counterfactual economy, the entire aggregate demand for capital is satisfied by foreign assets.
The quantitative study by Pijoan-Mas (2006) also finds that households make ample use of work effort as
a self-insurance mechanism in order to mitigate the welfare costs of market incompleteness.
46

33

of hours - at each date men and women are forced to work their respective average hours in the
initial steady state of the benchmark model. Fixing hours worked has little effect on the level
of earnings inequality, because empirically the wage-hour correlation is close to zero anyway.
However, fixing hours increases the level of consumption inequality by shutting down wealth
effects that reduce (increase) hours and thus earnings for high (low) consumption households.
The additional welfare losses, relative to the baseline model, are about the same as for the
savings channel, indicating that labor supply and savings are equally valuable adjustment
margins. In the rigid labor supply economy, the ratio of mean wealth to mean earnings is 9.0%
larger than in the benchmark model (averaging across the 1965-2000 period), as households
rely more heavily on precautionary savings to smooth shocks.
Female labor force participation: In our next alternative economy we constrain women’s
hours to be zero in every period, while allowing men to choose hours freely. Absent female
participation, the shift in the wage structure would be detrimental: from the 1985 cohort and
onwards, the welfare loss would be four to five percent lower than in the benchmark economy.
The main reason is that the shrinking gender wage gap makes it very costly to exclude women
from the labor market. Moreover, ruling out female participation reduces the extent to which
more volatile shocks can be self-insured via intra-household reallocation of time.
Interestingly, this alternative economy still generates about half the observed increase in
female college enrollment since 1970, even though women’s earnings are always zero by assumption. The reason is that going to college increases the probability of matching with a
college-educated partner. Rising relative wages for college-educated men therefore increase the
return to education for women through the “marriage market”.
Education choice: To examine the role of education choice as a means for exploiting
the new opportunities offered by a rising skill premium, we consider an economy in which the
fraction of college graduates is fixed at the initial steady state level. The model reveals large
welfare losses when agents cannot adjust their education choices: the welfare loss from changes
in the wage structure would be 7.4% for the cohorts born in 1990, relative to a gain of 0.9%
in the benchmark economy. This is due to three forces. First, the rise in college attendance
in the baseline model has a negative general-equilibrium effect on the college premium, which
partially offsets the positive effect of increased demand for college workers. The no-educationchoice economy assumes away any such supply response, implying a larger increase in the
college premium after 1985.47 Without this powerful force at work, the increase in consumption
47

According to the model, the rise in the male college premium would be twice as large in the absence of
increased college enrollment: an increase from 1.3 to 2.6 between 1977 and 2000, compared to an increase from
1.3 to 1.9 in the data and in the benchmark economy.

34

inequality would be twice as large (see panel (B)). Second, in the economy with no schooling
choice, the individuals who optimally change decisions in favor of college in the benchmark
economy miss out on the opportunities offered by a higher college premium. Third, there is a
positive externality associated with higher enrollment, reflecting the fact that - absent perfect
assortative matching - individuals do not fully internalize the welfare gains associated with a
higher-quality pool in the matching market.
In summary, the four channels of adjustment explored here – savings, flexible hours, female
participation, and enrollment – are all quantitatively important. In terms of alleviating the
adverse effects of rising consumption inequality, the four channels appear to be roughly equally
important: closing any of them would imply about twice the increase in consumption inequality
compared to the baseline model. However, in terms of overall welfare, female participation
and college choice matter much more than saving and flexible labor supply, since they allow
individuals to take advantage of the opportunities created by the dynamics of gender and
skill-biased demand shifts.

6

Conclusion

Since the early 1970s, the US economy has experienced a dramatic change in the wage distribution along several dimensions. First, the college premium doubled. Second, the gender gap
halved. Third, residual individual wage variability increased substantially due to a rise in the
variance of persistent shocks - concentrated primarily in the 1980s - and a steady increase in
the variance of transitory shocks.
In this paper, we studied the macroeconomic and welfare implications of all these changes
through the lens of a version of the neoclassical growth model with incomplete markets and
overlapping generations. Our model extends the prototypical incomplete-markets framework in
several dimensions, adding an education choice, a model of the family in which husbands and
wives face imperfectly correlated persistent and transitory shocks to wages, and a production
technology incorporating labor inputs differentiated by gender and education.
The payoff from adding all these features is twofold. First, we can provide a detailed description of the transformation in the US wage structure and of its impact on the distribution of
consumption, hours, earnings and welfare. Second, we can study how US households have modified their economic decisions (i.e., college attendance, family labor supply, and precautionary
saving) to respond to changes in the macroeconomic environment.
We argued that the model can account for most of the key trends in cross-sectional US data
on hours, earnings and consumption. Each dimension of the wage structure plays an important

35

role. Rising transitory wage instability is a key determinant of the growth in the wage-hour
correlation and in household earnings inequality. Larger skill premium and more volatile persistent shocks account for the dynamics in consumption inequality. The narrowing gender gap
explains most of the rise in relative hours worked by women, and also drives convergence across
men and women in higher moments for individual hours.
When we calculated the welfare effects of the observed changes in the wage distribution, we
found that couples comprising two high-school graduates were hit harshly. For these families,
the cohort who entered the labor market in 1990 was 3.7% worse off than the 1965 cohort in
terms of lifetime consumption. However, every other family-type experiences welfare gains, and
on average the 1990 cohort was better off than the 1965 cohort by 0.9 percentage points. This
welfare gain contrasts with the conventional view that rising inequality led to large welfare
losses (e.g., Attanasio and Davis, 1996; Krueger and Perri, 2003). Our welfare estimates are
less pessimistic because they are derived in the context of a structural equilibrium model that
incorporates behavioral adjustment in response to exogenous labor market changes.
In extending the standard incomplete-markets model, we generally opted for the simplest
modeling choices, in part because solving for equilibrium transitional dynamics is numerically
challenging. However, the model invites refinement in various dimensions to address a large set
of issues that are not the focus of the present paper.
First, one could pursue alternative models of the family. We assumed that market and
non-market goods are public goods within the family, because this constitutes the smallest
deviation from the standard bachelor-household model, and because we found that this effectively unitary model of the household can successfully replicate key features of time allocation
within the household.48 By contrast, models of the family based on the “collective” paradigm
or on cooperative bargaining emphasize how the distribution of control of resources within the
household can influence the distribution of private consumption and leisure. For example, Lise
and Seitz (2007) find evidence that, in the U.K., the closing of the gender gap induced a decline
in intra-family consumption inequality, with positive implications for welfare.
Second, our model of household formation is fairly rudimentary. Since 1970, Americans
have become less likely to marry across education groups, and more likely to divorce. By
endogenizing choices at the matching stage one could investigate whether the rise in the college
premium, and other changes in the wage structure, can explain these trends in family structure.
Third, we made some stark assumptions on the information set of the agents: they have
48

Given our separable preference specification, we could have chosen to define individual utility over consumption and leisure, both private goods, and to represent the household utility function as an equally weighted
average of each spouse’s individual utility. Appropriately recalibrated, this alternative would imply identical
allocations across the initial and final steady states, but since it would alter the cost-benefit calculation of
education, welfare calculations would be affected.

36

no advanced information on idiosyncratic persistent and transitory wage fluctuations, but have
perfect foresight at the aggregate level over the future variances of these shocks and the evolution
of the college and gender premia. The greater the fraction of future wage changes that is
foreseen, the smaller should be the impact of rising residual wage dispersion on consumption
inequality. Our model generates realistic increases in consumption dispersion both over the
life-cycle and over time, indicating that the consumption data are consistent with the view that
idiosyncratic wage fluctuations are mostly unforeseen by individuals. Nonetheless, it would
be interesting to extend the analysis to consider the implications of alternative information
structures.

37

References
[1] Acemoglu, Daron. 2002. “Technical Change, Inequality and the Labor Market.” J. Economic Literature
40 (March): 7-72.
[2] Aiyagari, S. R. 1994. “Uninsured Idiosyncratic Risk and Aggregate Saving.” Q.J.E. 109 (August): 659-84.
[3] Aiyagari, S. R., Jeremy Greenwood, and Nezih Guner. 2000. “On the State of the Union.” J.P.E. 108
(April): 213-44.
[4] Altonji, Joseph G., and Lewis M. Segal. 1996. “Small-Sample Bias in GMM Estimation of Covariance
Structures.” J. Bus. and Econ. Statis. 14 (July): 353-66.
[5] Attanasio, Orazio. 1999. “Consumption.” In Handbook of Macroeconomics, vol. 1B, edited by John B.
Taylor and Michael Woodford. Amsterdam: Elsevier Science.
[6] Attanasio, Orazio, Erich Battistin, and Hidehiko Ichimura. 2007. “What really happened to consumption
inequality in the U.S.?” In Hard-to-Measure Goods and Services: Essays in Honor of Zvi Griliches, edited
by Ernst R. Berndt and Charles R. Hulten, Chicago University Press, Chicago, pp. 515-43.
[7] Attanasio, Orazio, Hamish Low, and Virginia Sanchez-Marcos. 2008. “Explaining Changes in Female
Labour Supply in a Life-Cycle Model.” A.E.R. forthcoming.
[8] Attanasio, Orazio, and Steven J. Davis. 1996. “Relative Wage Movements and the Distribution of Consumption.” J.P.E 104 (December): 1227-62.
[9] Barillas, Francisco, and Jesús Fernández-Villaverde. 2006. “A Generalization of the Endogenous Grid
Method.” Mimeo, University of Pennsylvania.
[10] Benhabib, Jess, Richard Rogerson, and Randall Wright. 1991. “Homework in Macroeconomics: Household
Production and Aggregate Fluctuations.” J.P.E. 99 (December): 1166-87.
[11] Bewley, Truman F. 1986. “Stationary monetary equilibrium with a continuum of independently fluctuating
consumers.” In Contributions to Mathematical Economics in Honor of Gerard Debreu, edited by W.
Hildenbrand and A. Mas-Colell. Amsterdam: North Holland.
[12] Blau, Francine D., and Lawrence Kahn. 2000. “Gender Differences in Pay.” Journal of Economic Perspective 14 (Fall): 75-99.
[13] Blau, Francine D., and Lawrence Kahn. 2005. “Changes in Labor Supply Behavior of Married Women.”
NBER Working Paper no. 11268, NBER, Cambridge, MA.
[14] Blau, Francine D., and Lawrence Kahn. 2006. “The U.S. gender pay gap in the 1990s: slowing convergence.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 60 (October): 45-66.
[15] Blundell, Richard, and Ian Preston. 1998. “Consumption Inequality And Income Uncertainty,” Q.J.E. 113
(May): 603-640.
[16] Blundell, Richard, Luigi Pistaferri, and Ian Preston. 2008. “Consumption Inequality and Partial Insurance.” A.E.R. forthcoming.
[17] Blundell, Richard, and Thomas MaCurdy. 1999. “Labor Supply: A Review of Alternative Approaches.” In
Handbook of Labor Economics, vol. 3, edited by Orley Ashenfelter and David Card. Amsterdam: Elsevier
Science, pp. 1559-1695.
[18] Card, David E., and Thomas Lemieux. 2001. “Going to College to Avoid the Draft: The Unintended
Legacy of the Vietnam War.” A.E.R. 91 (May): 97-102.

38

[19] Carroll, Christopher D. 2006. “The Method of Endogenous Gridpoints for Solving Dynamic Stochastic
Optimization Problems.” Econ. Letters 91 (June): 312-20.
[20] Castañeda, Ana, Javier Dı́az-Giménez and José-Vı́ctor Rı́os-Rull, 2003. “Accounting for the U.S. Earnings
and Wealth Inequality,” Journal of Political Economy, 111 (August): 818-857.
[21] Cawley, John, James Heckman, and Edward Vytlacil. 2001. “Three Observations on Wages and Measured
Cognitive Ability.” Labour Econ. 8 (September): 419-42.
[22] Chamberlain, Gary. 1984. “Panel Data.” In Handbook of Econometrics, vol. 2, edited by Zvi Griliches
and Michael D. Intrilligator. Amsterdam: North Holland.
[23] Chang, Yongsung, and Sun-Bin Kim. 2006. “From Individual to Aggregate Labor Supply: A Quantitative
Analysis based on a Heterogeneous Agent Macroeconomy. I.E.R. 47 (February): 1-27.
[24] Cooley, Thomas F. 1995. Frontiers of Business Cycle Research. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
[25] Cubeddu, Luis, and José-Vı́ctor Rı́os-Rull. 2003. “Families as Shocks.” J. European Econ. Assoc. 1
(April/May): 671-82.
[26] Cutler, David M., and Lawrence F. Katz. 1991. “Macroeconomic Performance and the Disadvantaged.”
Brookings Papers Econ. Activity 0: 1-74.
[27] Dı́az-Giménez, Javier, Vincenzo Quadrini, and José-Vı́ctor Rı́os-Rull. 1997. “Dimensions of Inequality:
Facts on the U.S. Distribution of Earnings, Income and Wealth.” Fed. Reserve Bank Minneapolis Quart.
Rev. 21: 3-21.
[28] Domeij, David, and Jonathan Heathcote. 2004. “Factor Taxation with Heterogenous Agents.” Internat.
Econ. Rev. 45 (May): 523-54.
[29] Domeij, David, and Martin Flodén. 2006. “The Labor-Supply Elasticity and Borrowing Constraints: Why
Estimates Are Biased.” Rev. Econ. Dynamics 9 (April): 242-62.
[30] Eckstein, Zvi, and Eva Nagypal. 2004. “The Evolution of U.S. Earnings Inequality: 1961-2002.” Fed.
Reserve Bank Minneapolis Quart. Rev. 28 (December): 10-29.
[31] Fernández, Raquel, and Alessandra Fogli. 2005. “Culture: An Empirical Investigation of Beliefs, Work,
and Fertility.” NBER Working Paper no. 11268, NBER, Cambridge, MA.
[32] Fernández, Raquel, and Richard Rogerson. 2001. “Sorting and Long-Run Inequality.” Q.J.E. 116 (November): 1305-41.
[33] French, Eric. 2002. “The Labor Supply Response of (Mismeasured but) Predictable Wage Changes.”
Mimeo, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago.
[34] Goldin, Claudia. 2006. “The ‘Quiet Revolution’ That Transformed Women’s Employment, Education, and
Family.” A.E.R. 96 (May): 1-21.
[35] Goldin, Claudia, and Lawrence F. Katz. 2002. “The Power of the Pill: Oral Contraceptives and Women’s
Career and Marriage Decisions.” J.P.E. 110 (August): 730-70.
[36] Gottschalk, Peter, and Robert A. Moffitt. 1994. “The Growth of Earnings Instability in the U.S. Labor
Market.” Brookings Papers Econ. Activity 0: 217-72.
[37] Greenwood, Jeremy, Ananth Seshadri, and Mehmet Yorukoglu. 2005. “Engines of Liberation.” Rev. Econ.
Studies 72 (January): 109-33.

39

[38] Greenwood, Jeremy, and Zvi Hercowitz. 1991. “The Allocation of Capital and Time over the Business
Cycle.” J.P.E. 99 (December): 1188-1214.
[39] Guvenen, Fatih, and Burhanettin Kuruscu. 2007. “A Quantitative Analysis of the Evolution of the U.S.
Wage Distribution.” NBER Working Paper no. 13095, NBER, Cambridge, MA.
[40] Heathcote, Jonathan, Kjetil Storesletten, and Giovanni L. Violante. 2004. “The Macroeconomic Implications of Rising Wage Inequality in the United States.” Mimeo, NYU.
[41] Heathcote, Jonathan, Kjetil Storesletten, and Giovanni L. Violante. 2005. “Two Views of Inequality Over
the Life-Cycle.” J. European Econ. Assoc. 3 (April-May): 543-52.
[42] Heathcote, Jonathan, Kjetil Storesletten, and Giovanni L. Violante. 2008a. “Consumption and Labor
Supply with Partial Insurance: An Analytical Framework.” Mimeo, NYU.
[43] Heathcote, Jonathan, Kjetil Storesletten, and Giovanni L. Violante. 2008b. “Insurance and Opportunities:
A Welfare Analysis of Labor Market Risk.” J. Monetary Econ. forthcoming.
[44] Heckman, James, Lance Lochner, and Christopher Taber. 1998. “Explaining Rising Wage Inequality:
Explorations with a Dynamic General Equilibrium Model of Labor Earnings with Heterogeneous Agents.”
Rev. Econ. Dynamics 1 (January): 1-58.
[45] Hornstein, Andreas, Per Krusell and Giovanni L. Violante. 2005. “The Effects of Technical Change on
Labor Market Inequalities.” In Handbook of Economic Growth, vol. 1B, edited by Philippe Aghion and
Steven Durlauf. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
[46] Huggett, Mark. 1993. “The Risk Free Rate in Heterogeneous-Agents Incomplete-Insurance Economies.”
J. Econ. Dynamics and Control 17 (September-November): 953-69.
[47] Hyslop, Dean R. 2001. “Rising US Earnings Inequality and Family Labor Supply: The Covariance Structure of Intrafamily Earnings.” A.E.R. 91 (September): 755-77.
[48] Imrohoruglu, Ayse. 1989. “Cost of Business Cycles with Indivisibilities and Liquidity Constraints.” J.P.E.
97 (December): 1364-83.
[49] Johnson, David, and Stephanie Shipp. 1997. “Trends in Inequality Using Consumption-Expenditures: The
U.S. from 1960 to 1993.” Rev. Income and Wealth 43 (June): 133-52.
[50] Jones, Larry E., Rodolfo E. Manuelli, and Ellen R. McGrattan. 2003. “Why Are Married Women Working
So Much?” Staff Report no. 317, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, Minneapolis, MN.
[51] Juhn, Chinhui, Kevin M. Murphy, and Brooks Pierce. 1993. “Wage Inequality and the Rise in Returns to
Skill.” J.P.E. 101 (June): 410-42.
[52] Katz, Lawrence F., and David H. Autor. 1999. “Changes in the Wage Structure and Earnings Inequality.”
In Handbook of Labor Economics, vol. 3A, edited by Orley Ashenfelter and David Card. Amsterdam:
North Holland.
[53] Katz, Lawrence F., and Kevin M. Murphy. 1992. “Changes in Relative Wages, 1963-1987: Supply and
Demand Factors.” Q.J.E 107 (February): 35-78.
[54] Krueger, Dirk, and Fabrizio Perri. 2003. “On the Welfare Consequences of the Increase in Inequality in
the United States.” In NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2003, edited by Mark Gertler and Kenneth Rogoff.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
[55] Krueger, Dirk, and Fabrizio Perri. 2006. “Does Income Inequality Lead to Consumption Inequality? Evidence and Theory.” Rev. Econ. Studies 73 (January): 163-93.

40

[56] Krusell, Per, Lee E. Ohanian, José-Vı́ctor Rı́os-Rull, and Giovanni L. Violante. 2000. “Capital-Skill Complementarity and Inequality: A Macroeconomic Analysis.” Econometrica 68 (September): 1029-54.
[57] Lise, Jeremy, and Shannon Seitz. 2007. “Consumption Inequality and Intra-Household Allocations.”
Mimeo, Boston College.
[58] Low, Hamish, Costas Meghir, and Luigi Pistaferri. 2007. “Wage Risk and Employment Risk over the Life
Cycle.” CEPR Discussion Paper no. 6187, CEPR, London, UK.
[59] Manning, Alan, and Barbara Petrongolo. 2007. “The part-time pay penalty for women in Britain.” Economic Journal, forthcoming.
[60] Meghir, Costas, and Luigi Pistaferri. 2004. “Income Variance Dynamics and Heterogeneity.” Econometrica
72 (January): 1-32.
[61] National Center for Health Statistics. 1992. US Decennial Life Tables 1989 - 1991. Washington, DC:
Hyattsville, Md.
[62] Olivetti, Claudia. 2006. “Changes in Women’s Hours of Market Work: The Role of Returns to Experience.”
Rev. Econ. Dynamics 9 (October): 557-87.
[63] Pijoan-Mas, Josep. 2006. “Precautionary Savings or Working Longer Hours?” Rev. Econ. Dynamics
9(April): 326-352.
[64] Primiceri, Giorgio, and Thjis van Rens. 2007. “Heterogeneous Life-Cycle Profiles, Income Risk and Consumption Inequality.” Mimeo, Universitat Pompeu Fabra.
[65] Rı́os-Rull, José-Vı́ctor. 1995. “Models with Heterogeneous Agents.” In Frontiers of Business Cycle Research, edited by Thomas F. Cooley. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
[66] Slesnick, Daniel T. 2001. Consumption and Social Welfare: Living Standards and Their Distribution in
the United States. New York: Cambridge University Press.
[67] Storesletten, Kjetil. 2003. Comment to “On the Welfare Consequences of the Increase in Inequality in the
United States” by Krueger, Dirk, and Fabrizio Perri. In NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2003, edited by
Mark Gertler and Kenneth Rogoff. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
[68] Storesletten, Kjetil, Chris I. Telmer, and Amir Yaron. 2004. “Consumption and Risk Sharing over the Life
Cycle.” J. Monetary Econ. 51 (April): 609-33.
[69] Wolff, Edward N. 2000. “Recent Trends in Wealth Ownership, 1983-1998.” Working Paper no. 300, Jerome
Levy Economics Institute, New York City.

41

Table 1: Summary of Parameterization
Parameter

Moment to match

Value

Parameters set externally
© jª
ζ
γ
̺
α
δ
θ
r
τ n, τ a
L (j)
v
η
{λω
,
λ
t
t},λ ,ρ

age-specific survival rates (U.S. Life Tables)
micro-estimates of intertemporal elasticity of substitution
intra-family correlation of education at ages 25-35 (PSID)
capital share of output (NIPA)
depreciation rate (NIPA)
elasticity of substitution between college and high-school graduates
risk-free interest rate
labor income and capital income tax rates
male hourly wage life-cycle profile (PSID)
male hourly wage residuals dynamics (PSID)

see text
1.50
0.517
0.33
0.06
1.43
0.03
0.27, 0.40
see text
see Table 2

Parameters calibrated internally
κm , υ m
κ
κf , υ fκ
β
ψ
σ
b
a
n o
λS
n to
λG
t
{Zt }

male college enrollment in initial and final steady-state
female college enrollment in initial and final steady-state
ratio of average wealth (for poorest 99%) to average labor income
average household market hours
ratio of average male to female market hours
redistribution (of lifetime earnings) through U.S. pension system
15.5% of households have zero or negative wealth

2.96, 0.88
2.22, 0.31
0.969
0.335
3.0
0.245
−0.20

ratio of average male college to high-school wages

see Figure 1

ratio of average male to female wages, full-time workers
average post-tax earnings equal to one, absent behavioral response

see Figure 1
see text

42

Table 2: Parameter Estimates of Wage Process

ρ
λη
λω
1967
λω
1968
λω
1969
λω
1970
λω
1971
λω
1972
λω
1973
λω
1974
λω
1975
λω
1976
λω
1977
λω
1978
λω
1979
λω
1980
λω
1981
λω
1982
λω
1983
λω
1984
λω
1985
λω
1986
λω
1987
λω
1988
λω
1989
λω
1990
λω
1991
λω
1992
λω
1993
λω
1994
λω
1995
λω
1996
λω
1997
λω
1998
λω
1999
λω
2000

Persistent Component
Estimate
S.E.
0.9733
(0.0066)
0.1242
(0.0067)
0.0076
0.0151
0.0079
0.0087
0.0074
0.0219
0.0065
0.0030
0.0094
0.0067
0.0083
0.0132
0.0075
0.0171
0.0118
0.0179
0.0180
0.0208
0.0158
0.0249
0.0045
0.0226
0.0144
0.0054
0.0182
0.0078
0.0303
0.0087
0.0114
0.0163
0.0190
0.0219
0.0216
0.0212

Transitory Component
Estimate
S.E.

λv1967
λv 1968
λv1969
λv1970
λv1971
λv1972
λv1973
λv1974
λv1975
λv1976
λv1977
λv1978
λv1979
λv1980
λv1981
λv1982
λv1983
λv1984
λv1985
λv1986
λv1987
λv1988
λv1989
λv1990
λv1991
λv1992
λv1993
λv1994
λv1995
λv1996
λv1997
λv1998
λv1999
λv2000

(0.0024)
(0.0077)
(0.0039)
(0.0044)
(0.0043)
(0.0067)
(0.0038)
(0.0022)
(0.0050)
(0.0042)
(0.0038)
(0.0047)
(0.0039)
(0.0052)
(0.0052)
(0.0046)
(0.0066)
(0.0061)
(0.0058)
(0.0053)
(0.0039)
(0.0048)
(0.0055)
(0.0047)
(0.0058)
(0.0054)
(0.0072)
(0.0055)
(0.0063)
(0.0069)
(0.0049)
(0.0068)
(0.0049)
(0.0079)

0.0389
0.0215
0.0321
0.0317
0.0328
0.0489
0.0375
0.0490
0.0371
0.0626
0.0472
0.0547
0.0580
0.0620
0.0566
0.0611
0.0663
0.0510
0.0511
0.0754
0.0683
0.0762
0.0606
0.0648
0.0703
0.0661
0.0734
0.0772
0.0681
0.0581
0.0714
0.0774
0.0787
0.0872

(0.0121)
(0.0098)
(0.0110)
(0.0093)
(0.0096)
(0.0098)
(0.0092)
(0.0093)
(0.0086)
(0.0102)
(0.0099)
(0.0121)
(0.0117)
(0.0101)
(0.0113)
(0.0095)
(0.0102)
(0.0096)
(0.0096)
(0.0111)
(0.0109)
(0.0110)
(0.0104)
(0.0098)
(0.0103)
(0.0111)
(0.0100)
(0.0130)
(0.0110)
(0.0117)
(0.0115)
(0.0123)
(0.0111)
(0.0131)

Note: Minimum Distance estimates of the parameters of the wage process in equation (8). Standard Errors
(S.E.) are obtained by block-bootstrap based on 500 replications. See Appendix B for details.

43

(A) College Wage Premium

(B) Gender Wage Gap

2

1.7

1.9

1.65

1.8

1.6

1.7

1.55

1.6

1.5

1.5

1.45

1.4

1.4
Male
Female

1.3
1.2

1970

1980

1990
Year

1.35
1.3

2000

1970

1980

1990
Year

2000

(D) Female/Male Hours Worked

(C) Fraction of Coll. Grad. (age 25−29)
0.35

0.6
0.55

0.3

0.5
0.25

0.45
0.4

0.2
Male
Female

0.35

0.15
0.3
0.1

1970

1980

1990
Year

0.25

2000

1970

1980

1990
Year

2000

Figure 1: Cross-Sectional Facts. Sources: CPS for panels (A), (B), (D); U.S. Census Bureau
for enrollment data in panel (C).

44

(A) Variance of Log Wages

(B) Variance of Log Hours
0.08
0.06

0.1

0.04
0.05
0.02
0

0
−0.02

−0.05
−0.1

−0.04

Male [0.34]
Female [0.3]

−0.06
−0.08

1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005
Year

0.15

0.1

0.1

0.05

0.05

0
−0.05

0

−0.1

−0.05

−0.2

1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005
Year
(D) Variance of Household Log Earnings
and Equivalized Consumption

(C) Correlation btw Log Wages and Hours

−0.15

Male [0.11]
Female [0.24]

Male [−0.16]
Female [−0.042]

−0.1
−0.15

1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005
Year

Earnings [0.42]
Consumption ND+ [0.24]
1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005
Year

Figure 2: Cross-Sectional Facts. Sources: CPS for panels (A), (B), (C) and earnings data in
panel (D); CEX for consumption data in panel (D). Household consumption expenditures are
equivalized through the Census scale. Sample means in square brackets in the legend.

45

(B) Residual Variance of Log Male Wages

(A) Skill and Gender Bias
1.4

0.3

S

Skill Bias (λ )
G

Gender Bias (λ )

1.3

0.28
0.26

1.2
0.24
1.1
0.22
1

0.2

0.9
0.8

PSID Data
Model Fit

0.18
1970

1980

1990

0.16

2000

1970

1975

1980

Year

(C) Variance Decomposition

1985
Year

1990

1995

2000

(D) Variance of the Persistent Shock
0.03

0.2

λω

0.025
0.15

0.02
Persistent Component (cumulated)
Transitory Component (λv)
Measurement Error

0.1

0.015
0.01

0.05
0.005
ρ = 0.973
0

1970

1975

1980

1985
Year

1990

1995

0

2000

1970

1975

1980

1985
Year

1990

1995

2000

Figure 3: Panel (A): Results of the internal calibration for skill- and gender-biased demand
shifts. Panels (B)-(D): Results of the estimation of the residual wage process in equation (8)
from PSID data. The estimation method is discussed in Appendix B. See also Table 2 for
the point estimates and the bootstrapped standard errors. This Figure displays all the four
components of the {λt } sequence.

46

(A) Mean Household Earnings
(1980 Cohort)

(B) Mean Household Consumption
(1980 Cohort)

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0

0

−0.2

−0.2

−0.4

−0.4

Model
CPS Data

−0.6
−0.8
25

30

35

40

45

Model
CEX Data

−0.6
50

−0.8
25

30

35

Age
(C) Variance of Log Household Earnings
(1980 Cohort)

45

50

(D) Variance of Log Household Consumption
(1980 Cohort)
0.15

0.15
0.1

0.1

0.05

0.05

0

0

−0.05

−0.05
Model
CPS Data

−0.1

25

40
Age

30

35

40

45

Model
CEX Data

−0.1

50

25

Age

30

35

40

45

50

Age

Figure 4: Model-data comparison. Evolution of household earnings and equivalized consumption (mean and variance of the logs) over the life cycle of the cohort which is 25-29 years old
in 1980.

47

(A) Female College Wage Premium

(B) Female / Male Hours Worked
0.65

1.9

0.6

Data: CPS
Model

1.8

Data: CPS
Model

0.55

1.7

0.5
1.6
0.45
1.5
0.4
1.4

0.35

1.3
1.2

0.3
1970

1980

1990

0.25

2000

1970

1980

Year

1990

2000

Year

(C) Decomposition

(D) Decomposition
0.65

1.9
Pers
Trans
SB
GB

1.8
1.7

Pers
Trans
SB
GB

0.6
0.55
0.5

1.6

0.45
1.5

0.4

1.4

0.35

1.3
1.2

0.3
1970

1980

1990

0.25

2000

Year

1970

1980

1990

2000

Year

Figure 5: Model-data comparison and decomposition. Evolution of the female college wage
premium and of female-male relative hours worked.

48

(A) Variance of Log Male Wages

(B) Variance of Log Female Wages

0.15

0.15
CPS: Mean=0.32
Model: Mean=0.29

0.1

0.1

0.05

0.05

0

0

−0.05

−0.05

−0.1

1970

1980
1990
Year

CPS: Mean=0.29
Model: Mean=0.26

−0.1

2000

1970

1990

2000

Year

(C) Decomposition

(D) Decomposition

0.15

0.15
Pers
Trans
SB
GB

0.1
0.05

0.05
0

−0.05

−0.05

1970

1980
1990
Year

Pers
Trans
SB
GB

0.1

0

−0.1

1980

−0.1

2000

1970

1980

1990

2000

Year

Figure 6: Model-data comparison and decomposition. Evolution of male and female log wage
dispersion.

49

(A) Variance of Log Male Hours

(B) Variance of Log Female Hours

0.1

0.1

0.05

0.05

0

0

−0.05

−0.05
CPS: Mean=0.24
Model: Mean=0.23

CPS: Mean=0.11
Model: Mean=0.015
−0.1

1970

1980

1990

−0.1

2000

1970

1980

Year

0.1

0.05

0.05

0

0

−0.1

Pers
Trans
SB
GB
1970

−0.05

1980

2000

(D) Decomposition

(C) Decomposition
0.1

−0.05

1990
Year

1990

−0.1

2000

Year

Pers
Trans
SB
GB
1970
1980

1990

2000

Year

Figure 7: Model-data comparison and decomposition. Evolution of male and female log hours
dispersion.

50

(A) Male Wage−Hour Correlation

(B) Female Wage−Hour Correlation

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.1

0

0

−0.1

−0.1
CPS: Mean=−0.17
Model: Mean=0.31

−0.2
1970

1980
1990
Year

CPS: Mean=−0.041
Model: Mean=0.39

−0.2

2000

1970

(C) Decomposition
0.2

0.1

0.1

0

0
Pers
Trans
SB
GB

−0.2
1970

1980
1990
Year

2000

(D) Decomposition

0.2

−0.1

1980
1990
Year

Pers
Trans
SB
GB

−0.1
−0.2
2000

1970

1980
1990
Year

2000

Figure 8: Model-data comparison and decomposition. Evolution of male and female correlation
between log wages and log hours.

51

(A) Variance of Log Household Earnings

(B) Variance of Log Household Consumption
0.06
CEX ND+: Mean=0.19
0.04
Model: Mean=0.13

0.15
0.1
0.05

0.02

0

0

−0.05

−0.02
CPS: Mean=0.32
PSID: Mean=0.28
Model: Mean=0.23

−0.1
−0.15

1970

1980

1990

2000

−0.04
−0.06

1970

1980

Year
(C) Decomposition
0.06

0.1

0.04

0.05

0.02

0

0
Pers
Trans
SB
GB

−0.1
−0.15

1970

Pers
Trans
SB
GB

−0.02
−0.04

1980

2000

(D) Decomposition

0.15

−0.05

1990
Year

1990

2000

−0.06

Year

1970

1980

1990

2000

Year

Figure 9: Model-data comparison and decomposition. Evolution of dispersion in households
log earnings and log consumption.

52

Aggregate Labor Productivity
Percentage Change from 1965

10

5

0

−5

−10
1965

Model
Data

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

1990

1995

2000

2005

Year

Decomposition
Percentage Change from 1965

10

5

Pers
Trans
SB
GB

0

−5

−10
1965

1970

1975

1980

1985

Year

Figure 10: Model-data comparison and decomposition. The empirical series for aggregate labor
productivity (output per hour) is constructed as log-deviations from a linear time trend.

53

(A) Average Welfare Gain
(Relative to 1965 Cohort)

(B) Welfare Gain by Household Type
(Relative to 1965 Cohort)

4
10
% Lifetime Consumption

% Lifetime Consumption

3
2
1
0
−1
−2
−3

5

0

−5

−10

(Col,Col)
(Col,HS)
(HS,Col)
(HS,HS)

−4
1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995
Year of Labor Market Entry

1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995
Year of Labor Market Entry

(C) Decomposition

(D) Decomposition for (HS,HS)

4

2
1

Pers
Trans
SB
GB

10
% Lifetime Consumption

% Lifetime Consumption

3

0
−1
−2
−3

5

Pers
Trans
SB
GB

0

−5

−10
−4
1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995
Year of Labor Market Entry

1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995
Year of Labor Market Entry

Figure 11: Panels (A)-(C): Average welfare gain and decomposition. Panel (B): Welfare gains
by household type. Panel (D): Decomposition for families where both spouses are high-school
graduates.

54

(A) Variance of Log Household Earnings

(B) Variance of Log Household Consumption
0.45
Baseline
0.4
No Saving Decision
0.35
No Hours Decision
No Female Participation
0.3
No Education Decision
0.25

0.45
0.4
0.35
0.3
0.25
0.2

0.2

0.15

0.15

0.1

0.1
1970

1980

1990

2000

1970

1980

1990

2000

Year

Year

(C) Male Wage−Hour Correlation

(D) Average Welfare Gain
(Relative to 1965 Cohort)

0.5
% Lifetime Consumption

2

0

−0.5
1970

1980

1990

2000

0
−2
−4
−6
−8
−10
−12

Year

1970
1980
1990
Year of Labor Market Entry

2000

Figure 12: Counterfactual experiments to study the role of households’ behavioral responses to
the shift in the wage structure. The line labelled “Baseline” refers to the benchmark economy.
“No Saving Decision”: economy where household wealth is always zero. “No Hours Decision”:
economy where male and female labor supply is fixed. “No Female Participation”: economy
where women do not work. “No Education Decision”: economy where the fraction of men and
women with college degree is constant at the initial steady-state level.

55

A

Data description

Our sources for individual and household level data are the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID), the
Current Population Survey (CPS), and the Consumer Expenditure Survey (CEX). Since all three data sets are
widely used for microeconometric, and more recently, for quantitative macroeconomic research, we shall only
briefly describe them here.
PSID: The PSID is a longitudinal study of a representative sample of U.S. individuals (men, women, and
children) and the family units in which they reside. Approximately 5,000 households were interviewed in the
first year of the survey, 1968. From 1968 to 1997, the PSID interviewed individuals from families in the sample
every year, whether or not they were living in the same dwelling or with the same people. Adults have been
followed as they have grown older, and children have been observed as they advance through childhood and into
adulthood, forming family units of their own (the “split-offs”). This property makes the PSID an unbalanced
panel. Since 1997, the PSID became biennial. The most recent year available, at the time of our analysis, is
2003. In 2003, the sample includes over 7,000 families. The PSID consists of various independent samples. We
focus on the main and most commonly used, the so-called SRC sample, which does not require weights since it
is representative of the U.S. population. Questions referring to income and labor supply are retrospective, e.g.,
those asked in the 1990 survey refer to calendar year 1989.
CPS: The CPS is a monthly survey of about 50,000 households conducted by the Bureau of the Census for
the Bureau of Labor Statistics. The sample is selected to represent the civilian non-institutional population.
Respondents are interviewed to obtain information about the employment status of each member of the household 16 years of age and older. The CPS is the primary source of information on the labor force characteristics
of the U.S. population. Survey questions cover employment, unemployment, earnings, hours of work, and other
indicators. A variety of demographic characteristics is available, including age, sex, race, marital status, and
educational attainment.
In our investigation, we use the Annual Social and Economic Supplement (so-called March Files) in the
format arranged by Unicon Research. Computer data files are only available starting from 1968, and the latest
year available, at the time of our research, was 2006. In all our calculations, we use weights. As for PSID,
questions referring to income and labor supply are retrospective.
CEX: The CEX is a survey collecting information on the buying habits of American consumers, including
data on their expenditures, income, and consumer unit (household) characteristics. The data are collected by
the Bureau of Labor Statistics and used primarily for revising the CPI. The data are collected in independent
quarterly Interview and weekly Diary surveys of approximately 7,500 sample households (5,000 prior to 1999).
We use the data set constructed from the original CEX data by Krueger and Perri (2006) and available on
the authors’ web sites. As is common in most of the previous research, their data uses only the Interview survey
which covers around 95% of total expenditures Frequently purchased items such as personal care products and
housekeeping supplies are only reported in the Diary survey. The period covered by their data is 1980-2003.
CEX data before 1980 is not comparable to the later years. Households who are classified as incomplete income
respondents by the CEX and have not completed the full set of five interviews are excluded. We refer to Krueger
and Perri (2006) for additional details on the data construction.
Variable definitions: The calibration of the model and its evaluation are based on a set of cross-sectional
first and second moments constructed from both PSID and CPS. The key variables of interest are: gross (i.e.,
before-tax) annual labor earnings, annual hours, hourly wages and household consumption. We always construct
hourly wages as annual earnings divided by annual hours worked. Nominal wages, earnings, and consumption
are deflated with the CPI and expressed in 1992 dollars.
In PSID, gross annual earnings are defined as the sum of several labor income components including wages
and salaries, bonuses, commissions, overtime, tips, etc. Annual hours are defined as “annual hours worked for
money on all jobs including overtime”.
In CPS, gross annual earnings are defined as income from wages and salaries including pay for overtime,
tips and commissions. Annual hours worked are constructed as the product of weeks worked last year and hours
worked last week. Until 1975, weeks worked are reported in intervals (0, 1-13, 14-26,...,50-52). To recode weeks
worked for 1968-1975, Unicon grouped the data in a few years after 1975 by intervals and computed withininterval means. These means from the later years were applied to the earlier years. The variable “hours worked

56

last week at all jobs” is not ideal, but it is the only one continuously available since 1968 and comparable across
years. Starting from the 1976 survey, CPS contains a question on “usual weekly hours worked this year”. As
discussed in the paper, even though levels differ, trends in mean hours, in their variance and in the wage-hour
correlation, which are the focus of our study, are virtually equivalent across the two definitions.
In CEX, gross annual earnings refer to the amount of wage and salary income before deductions received in
past twelve months. Since we noticed that in the Krueger-Perri file there were some missing values for earnings,
we merged earnings data from the CEX Public Release Member files (provided to us by Orazio Attanasio)
into the Krueger-Perri file and use the former observations whenever earnings data were missing in the original
Krueger-Perri file. Annual hours worked are defined as the product of “number of weeks worked full or part
time by member in last 12 months” and “number of hours usually worked per week by member”.
Our benchmark definition for consumption is the same as Krueger and Perri, i.e. the sum of expenditures
on nondurables, services, and small durables (such as household equipment) plus imputed services from owned
housing and vehicles. Each expenditure component is deflated by an expenditure-specific, quarter-specific CPI.
Household expenditures are equivalized through the Census scale. We label this variable ND+. In the paper, we
also report statistics based on nondurable consumption only (variable ND in Krueger and Perri). See Krueger
and Perri (2006) for further details.
Sample selection: The objective of our sample selection is to apply exactly the same restrictions to PSID,
CPS and CEX. We select married households with no missing values for gender, age, and education where: 1)
the husband is between 25 and 59 years old, 2) annual hours of the husband are at least 260, 3) conditional
on working, the hourly wage (annual earnings divided by annual hours) is above half of the minimum wage for
both spouses, and 4) income is not from self-employment.
The marital status restriction is needed in order to be consistent with the theoretical model. Restriction 1)
is imposed to avoid severe sample selection in the hours and wage data due to early retirement. Restriction 2) is
imposed since 260 hours per year (one quarter part-time) is our definition of labor force participation. Restriction 3) is imposed to reduce implausible outliers at the bottom of the wage distribution which is particularly
important since we use the variance of log wages as a measure of dispersion (see Katz and Autor, 1999, for a
discussion on the importance of trimming earnings data at the bottom). Restriction 4) is imposed since the
presence of self-employment income makes it difficult to distinguish between the labor and the capital share,
particularly in CPS and CEX, and to deal with negative labor income.
Table A-1 details the sample selection process in the three data sets, step by step. The final sample has 43,123
household/year observations in PSID, 600,326 household/year observations in CPS and 21,556 household/year
observations in CEX.
Top-coding: After imposing our selection criteria, there are only 6 top-coded observations in the final
PSID sample. Since we found that none of the statistics are affected by those few values, we did not make any
correction for top-coded values. Roughly 2.1% of the earnings values in the final CPS sample are top-coded.
Top coding of earnings in CPS changed substantially over the sample period. We follow Autor and Katz (1999)
and multiply all top-coded observations by a factor equal to 1.5 up to 1996 and made no correction after 1996,
when top-coded observations take on the average value of all top-coded observations, by demographic group,
instead of the threshold value. We tried with other factors, for example 1.75 as suggested by Eckstein and
Nagypal (2004), and our findings remain robust. In the final CEX sample there are 362 top-coded observations,
i.e. around 1.7% of the total. Since the top-coding changes virtually in the same ways as in CPS, including the
change of approach after 1996, we used the Autor-Katz strategy for CEX as well.
Comparison across PSID and CPS: Table A-2 shows that–over the period where they overlap (19802003)–the three samples are remarkably similar in their demographic and education structure by gender. Also
means of wages, earnings and hours, by gender, are extremely similar in the three data sets. Finally, average
food consumption expenditures in PSID are very comparable to the CEX estimate.
Enrollment data: The data on college enrollment that we use for the calibration of the model refer to
the percentage of individuals 25-29 years of age who have completed college, by gender and year from 1940
to 2006. The source is Table A.2 of the Educational Attainment section on the U.S. Census Bureau web site,
www.census.gov/population/www/socdemo.

57

Table A-1: Sample Selection in PSID, CPS and CEX

Initial sample of married households
Age of husband 25-59
Hours worked of husband at least 260
Wage husband above half minimum wage
Wage wife above half minimum wage
Income husband not from self-employment
Income wife not from self-employment

PSID (67-96, 98, 00, 02)
#dropped
# remain
–
68,860
10,274
58,586
1,927
56,659
1,215
55,444
1,723
53,721
8,784
44,937
1,814
43,123

CPS (67-05)
#dropped
# remain
–
1,312,864
354,256
958,608
138,269
820,339
87,466
732,893
32,021
700,872
28,330
672,542
12,216
660,326

Table A-2: Comparison Across PSID, CPS and CEX Samples

Average age of men
Average age of women
Fraction of male college graduates
Fraction of female college graduates
Average earnings of men (1992 $)
Average earnings of women (1992 $)
Average hours worked by men
Average hours worked by women
Average hourly wage of men (1992 $)
Average hourly wage of women (1992 $)
Average household earnings (1992 $)
Average food consumption (1992 $)

58

PSID

CPS

CEX

39.15
37.0
0.31
0.24
39,674
15,097
2,223
1,258
18.09
9.55
54,772
4,626

40.94
38.62
0.31
0.24
40,182
14,199
2,252
1,227
18.44
9.33
54,381
–

41.26
39.2
0.31
0.24
38,441
15,570
2,225
1,286
17.49
9.83
54,011
4,082

CEX (80-03)
#dropped
# remain
–
40,605
11,604
29,001
1,430
27,571
2,316
25,255
902
24,353
1,857
22,496
940
21,556

B
B.1

Identification and estimation of the wage process
Statistical model

As discussed in Section 3.2 of the main text, we posit the following statistical model of the log wage residuals
for individual i of age j at time t. For all j, t
yi,j,t = η i,j,t + vi,j,t + ṽi,j,t
where ṽi,j,t ∼

³

0, λṽ

´

is a transitory (i.e., uncorrelated over time) component capturing measurement error

in hourly wages, vi,j,t ∼ (0, λvt ) is a transitory component representing genuine individual productivity shock,
and η i,j,t is the persistent component of labor productivity. In turn, this persistent component is modelled as
follows. For all j, t > 1
η i,j,t = ρη i,j−1,t−1 + ω i,j,t
where ω i,j,t ∼ (0, λω
t ). For all t, at age j = 1, η i,1,t is drawn from the time-invariant initial distribution with
variance λη . We assume that ω i,j,t , ṽi,j,t , vi,j,t and η i,1,t are orthogonal to each other, and i.i.d. across individuals
in the population.
n For all j, at
o t = 1 the distribution of labor productivity is assumed to be in its steady-state with variances
ṽ
v
ω
η
λ , λ1 , λ1 , λ . This assumption is made to maintain consistency with the model’s solution and simulations.
n
o
λṽ , λη are not. We restrict the
Note that some of the variances {λvt , λω
t } are time-varying while others
variance of measurement error λṽ to be constant for identification purposes and, as explained in the main text,
we use an external estimate to identify its size.

B.2

Identification: an example

We now describe the identification procedure for the case where t = 1, 2, 4 and j = 1, 2, 3. This is a useful
example to illustrate our case where, after a certain date, the PSID survey becomes biannual and data for
some intermediate years (t = 3 in the example) are missing. Let Υ denote the (1 × 10) parameter vector
ω
ω
ω
η
{λv1 , λv2 , λv3 , λv4 , λω
1 , λ2 , λ3 , λ4 , λ , ρ}. The key challenge is to identify parameters at date t = 3.
Define the theoretical moment
mjt,t+n (Υ) = E (yi,j,t · yi,j+n,t+n ) .

(B-1)

The expectation operator is defined over all individuals i of age j at time t present both at t and at t + n. In
our simple example, we have a total of 12 such moments that we can construct from available data.
The covariance between period t = 1 and t = 2 for the entry cohort of age j = 1 at t = 1 is
£¡
¢¡
¢¤
m11,2 = E η i,1,1 + vi,1,1 η i,2,2 + vi,2,2 = ρλη ,
and the same covariance between period t = 2 and t = 4 is
£¡
¢¡
¢¤
m12,4 = E η i,1,2 + vi,2 η i,3,4 + vi,3,4 = ρ2 λη .
This pair of moments identifies (ρ, λη ) .
At t = 1, the variance for the entry cohort
h¡
¢2 i
m11,1 = E η i,1,1 + vi,1,1
= λη + λv1

identifies λv1 given knowledge of λη .
From variance of the age group j = 2 at time t = 1
h¡
¢2 i
v
m21,1 = E η i,2,1 + vi,2,1
= ρ2 λη + λω
1 + λ1 ,

59

η
v
we can identify λω
1 , given knowledge of the initial variance λ and of λ1 .
At t = 2, the two variances for age groups j = 1, 2
h¡
¢2 i
m12,2 = E η i,1,2 + vi,1,2
= λη + λv2
h¡
i
¢2
v
m22,2 = E η i,2,2 + vi,2,2
= ρ2 λη + λω
2 + λ2

identify λv2 and λω
2.
At t = 4, we can construct the three variances
h¡
¢2 i
m14,4 = E η i,1,4 + vi,1,4
= λη + λv4
h¡
¢2 i
v
m24,4 = E η i,2,4 + vi,2,4
= ρ2 λη + λω
4 + λ4
h¡
i
¢2
ω
v
m34,4 = E η i,3,4 + vi,3,4
= ρ4 λη + ρ2 λω
3 + λ4 + λ4 .

As usual, the variance of the entrant cohort identifies λv4 , given knowledge of the initial variance λη . Comparing
the variance of new cohorts with the variance of age 2 cohorts identifies identify λω
4 , the variance of the current
persistent shock. Finally, the variance of the age j = 3 cohort contains the variance of the persistent shock that
hit at the previous date, and this allows identification of λω
3.
Two remarks are in order. First, we can identify λω
in
spite of lack of data for t = 3 because the ω shock
3
hitting individuals at time t = 3 persists into t = 4, a date for which observations are available. Thus comparing
wage dispersion between a new cohort and an old cohort at t = 4 allows us to identify λω
3 since there are no
cohort effects. Second, in general, one cannot separately identify persistent and transitory shocks in the last
year of the sample. Here we can, thanks, once again, to the assumption of no cohort effects in the initial variance
λη .
The only parameter left to identify is λv3 . Transitory shocks at t = 3 do not show up in moments at any
other t, and thus we need to impose a restriction to complete our identification. There are several possible
choices. We opt for assuming that the cross-sectional variance of wages in the population in the missing years is
a weighted average of the variance in the year before and in the year after. In our specific example, if we let m̄t,t
be the cross-sectional variance of log wages at time t, then we assume that m̄3,3 = (m̄2,2 + m̄4,4 ) /2. Given our
ω
ω
knowledge of all the parameters {ρ, λη , λω
1 , λ2 , λ3 } one can reconstruct the cross-sectional variance component
due to the cumulation of the persistent shocks up to t = 3. The difference between the total variance and the
part due to persistent shocks identifies residually the transitory component λv3 .

B.3

Estimation

Parameter vector: We have available survey data for 1967-1996, 1998, 2000 and 2002. Even though, theoretically, the variance of the persistent shocks λω
t is identified in the missing years, in practice the fact that the
lack of data occurs towards the end of the sample substantially reduces the amount of information available to
estimate such parameters. Moreover, as explained, identification in the missing years hinges on the no-cohort
effects assumption. Therefore, we choose to take a cautious approach and estimate λω
t only for those years
when data are available. In simulating the model, we assume that the variance of the persistent shocks for the
missing years is a weighted average of the two adjacent years.
Moreover, as we have explained above, separating the variances of persistent and transitory shocks in the
last year of the sample hinges also upon the, arguably restrictive, assumption of no cohort effects. Therefore,
we choose not to estimate these two variances for 2002, but rather we use the 2002 survey only to improve our
estimation of the structural variances up to ©2000 (by constructing covariances between 2002 and ª
the previous
v
v
v
v
ω
ω
ω
years). To sum up, we estimate ρ, λη , and λω
1967 , ..., λ1996, λ1998, λ2000 ; λ1967 , ..., λ1996, λ1998, λ2000, for a total
of L = 66 parameters. Denote by Υ the (L × 1) parameter vector.
Empirical moments: Every year t, we group individuals in the sample into 10-year adjacent age cells
indexed by j, the first cell being age group “29” containing all workers between 25 and 34 years old, up until
the last cell for age group “54” with individuals between 50 and 59. Our sample length and age grouping imply

60

T = 33 and J = 26. Let mjt,t+n (Υ) be the theoretical covariance between wages in the two age-group/year cells
determining the triple (j, t, n) , exactly as in (B-1). For every pair (j, t), let n̄ (j, t) be the maximum number of
moments involving individuals of age j at time t that can be constructed from the sample (taking into account
the fact that some years are missing).
The moment conditions used in the estimation are of the form
h
i
E (ιi,j,t,n ) ybi,j,t · ybi,j+n,t+n − mjt,t+n (Υ) = 0,

where ιi,j,t,n is an indicator function that equals 1 if individual i has observations in both periods/age groups
determined by (j, t, n) and zero otherwise. The empirical counterpart of these moment conditions becomes
m̂jt,t+n − mjt,t+n (Υ) = 0,
where m̂jt,t+n =

1
Ij,t,n

PIj,t,n

ybi,j,t · ybi,j+n,t+n is the empirical covariance between wages for individuals of age
PI
j at time t and wages of the same individuals n periods later. Note that Ij,t,n = i=1 ιi,j,t,n since not all
individuals contribute to each moment.
i=1

Estimator: The estimator we use is a minimum distance estimator that solves the following minimization
problem
′
min [m̂ − m (Υ)] W [m̂ − m (Υ)] ,
(B-2)
Υ

where m̂, and m (Υ) are the vectors of the stacked empirical and theoretical covariances with dimension
PJ PT
N = j=1 t=1 n̄ (j, t), and W is a (N × N ) weighting matrix. In our estimation, N = 9, 634.
To implement the estimator, we need a choice for W. The bulk of the literature follows Altonji and Segal
(1996) who found that in common applications there is a substantial small sample bias in the estimates of Υ,
hence using the identity matrix for W is a superior strategy to using the optimal weighting matrix characterized
by Chamberlain (1984). With this choice, the solution of equation (B-2) reduces to a nonlinear least square
problem.
Standard errors are computed by block bootstrap, using 500 replications. Bootstrap samples are drawn
at the household level with each sample containing the same number of households as the original sample.
Resulting confidence intervals thus account for arbitrary serial dependence, heteroskedasticity and additional
estimation error induced by the use of residuals from the first stage regressions.
Table 2 reports parameter estimates and standard errors. The results of the estimation are discussed in
detail in Section 4.1.

61

