NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

A PRAGMATIC APPROACH TO CAPITAL ACCOUNT LIBERALIZATION
Eswar S. Prasad
Raghuram Rajan
Working Paper 14051
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14051

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2008

We are grateful to James Hines and Jeremy Stein for very useful comments and to Timothy Taylor
for helping us sharpen the exposition. Yusuke Tateno provided excellent research assistance. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Eswar S. Prasad and Raghuram Rajan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

A Pragmatic Approach to Capital Account Liberalization
Eswar S. Prasad and Raghuram Rajan
NBER Working Paper No. 14051
June 2008
JEL No. F21,F31,F36,F43
ABSTRACT
Cross-country regressions suggest little connection from foreign capital inflows to more rapid economic
growth for developing countries and emerging markets. This suggests that the lack of domestic savings
is not the primary constraint on growth in these economies, as implicitly assumed in the benchmark
neoclassical framework. We explore emerging new theories on both the costs and benefits of capital
account liberalization, and suggest how one might adopt a pragmatic approach to the process.¸

Eswar S. Prasad
Cornell University
3150 North 20th Street
Arlington, VA 22201
eswar.prasad@cornell.edu
Raghuram Rajan
Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
rajan@chicagogsb.edu

2
In the mid-1990s, mainstream economists of nearly all stripes commonly
recommended capital account liberalization – that is, allowing a free flow of funds in and out
of a country’s economy -- as an essential step in the process of economic development.
Indeed, in September 1997, the governing body of the International Monetary Fund (1997)
sought to make “the liberalization of capital movements one of the purposes of the IMF, and
extend as needed, the IMF’s jurisdiction …regarding the liberalization of such movements.”
But then came the East Asian financial crisis of 1997-98, in which even seemingly healthy
and well-managed economies like those of South Korea were engulfed by massive capital
outflows and tremendous currency volatility, and capital account liberalization became quite
controversial in the economics profession. For example, Fischer (1998) and Summers (2000)
continued to make the case for capital account liberalization, while Rodrik (1998) and
Stiglitz (2000) were skeptical.
A decade later, now that time has quelled passions and intervening research can shed
more light on the debate, it appears that both the costs and benefits of capital account
liberalization may have been misunderstood in that earlier debate. The major benefit of
capital account liberalization was allegedly that it would help low-income countries expand
investment and thus generate higher rates of economic growth. However, cross-country
regressions suggest little connection from foreign capital inflows to more rapid economic
growth for such countries. This suggests that the lack of domestic savings is not the primary
constraint on growth in these economies, as implicitly assumed in the benchmark
neoclassical framework.
So is openness to capital flows irrelevant? Probably not! The debate is refocusing on
a different set of benefits, primarily the indirect or “collateral” benefits that accrue to a
country’s governance and institutions when it opens up to cross-border capital flows. It is
also looking at some other costs, primarily the real exchange rate overvaluation and loss of
competitiveness that can occur when foreign capital floods in, rather than the more traditional
risk of “sudden stops” when foreign (and domestic) investors take fright and head for the
exits.
But if the benefits are large why don’t we see them in cross-country regressions of
growth against net foreign financing? One explanation could be that there are threshold
levels of institutional development only above which the costs exceed the benefits – this

2

3
could explain why the correlation between growth and the use of foreign capital is strongly
positive for industrial countries but not for low-income countries. Another is that the
collateral benefits of openness to foreign capital are greater at higher levels of development
while the associated costs and risks are greater at lower levels of development. A third is that
crude quantity-based measures of the use of foreign finance, such as the current account
deficit or gross inflows, may not capture the influence of foreign capital. These explanations
are not mutually exclusive.
There is then somewhat of a Catch-22 situation for countries that might be close to,
but below the undoubtedly difficult-to-define threshold. It is this; the country’s institutions
will likely improve with greater openness to financial flows, allowing the country to
eventually secure net gains from openness, but it may be exposed to significant immediate
costs. This is where the pragmatic approach kicks in – opening up further when costs are
likely to be lower, and attempting to take steps to reduce the costs even further.
All this assumes that policy makers have the luxury of being able to decide when to
increase or decrease their economy’s openness to capital flows. But increasingly, they may
not have much option. The enormous expansion in trade around the world offers a conduit
for disguising capital account transactions, through under-invoicing and over-invoicing for
example, which inevitably will result in the further de facto opening of the capital account.
Thus, open capital accounts are a looming reality in virtually every country, irrespective of
the formal capital control regime in place. In this situation, policymakers in emerging market
economies should see their job as how to manage the speed and scope of capital account
liberalization, not whether to liberalize at all.

Challenges to the Conventional Story of International Financial Integration

The conventional presumption about international financial integration is that it
should enable capital to flow from high-income countries, with relatively high capital-labor
ratios, to low-income countries with lower capital-labor ratios (see Lucas, 1990). If
investment in poor countries is constrained by the low level of domestic saving, access to
foreign capital should boost their growth – and it would also allow residents of richer

3

4
countries to get higher returns on their savings invested abroad. However, this conventional
story has a variety of shortcomings. Let us start by discussing foreign capital inflows.

Missing Links from Capital Inflows to Growth

Many economists believe that productivity growth, rather than just accumulation of
inputs, is the main determinant of long-term growth (for example, Solow, 1956; Hall and
Jones, 1999). A corollary is that foreign capital inflows by themselves should only have
temporary effects on growth. Gourinchas and Jeanne (2006) use calibrations of a
parameterized general equilibrium model to argue that the effects on economic growth of
opening up to capital inflows are likely to be small precisely because productivity growth is
the main determinant of long-term growth. Similarly, Henry (2006) points out that the
benefits of equity market liberalizations on investment and output growth are likely to be of
short duration, unless the resulting financial market development fundamentally changes
productivity growth. Of course, for countries with very low levels of investment the short run
of adjusting to higher levels of factor inputs could be several decades long, and so the search
for a positive correlation between capital flows, investment and growth is not without
theoretical grounding.
However, empirical studies using macroeconomic data typically do not find that
inflows of foreign capital have spurred growth in developing countries. For example,
Aizenman, Pinto and Radziwill (2004) find that developing countries with higher selffinancing ratios (share of domestic investment accounted for by domestic savings) turn in
better growth performances on average. Prasad, Rajan and Subramanian (2007; henceforth,
PRS) document that nonindustrial countries that have relied less on foreign finance—that is,
countries that have run smaller current account deficits or even run current account
surpluses—have not grown slower (and, in many cases, have grown faster) over the last three
decades than those more reliant on external capital. Kose, Prasad, Rogoff, Wei (2006)

4

5
conclude from a more extensive survey that there is little evidence that financial integration
has a robust positive correlation with GDP growth.1
Moreover, Lucas (1990) noted that capital flows from industrial to developing
countries were much smaller than the levels predicted by the conventional story of capital
flows between countries with differing capital-labor ratios. During the first decade of the
twenty-first century, the “Lucas paradox” has intensified as emerging market economies
have, on net, been exporting capital to richer industrial economies, mostly in the form of
accumulation of foreign exchange reserves, which are largely invested in industrial country
government bonds. These “uphill flows” of capital have had no discernible adverse impact on
the growth of developing economies, which suggests that the paucity of resources for
investment is not the key constraint to growth in these economies.
One possible explanation is that perhaps low-income countries are not primarily
“savings-constrained” but the profitability of the investment opportunities they offer is very
limited. This may be because they lack institutions protecting property rights (so private
investment, if profitable, risks expropriation) or because their financial system is
underdeveloped so investor rights are not protected (Alfaro, Kalemli-Ozcan, and
Volosovych, 2007). In these economies where the lack of important domestic institutions
constrains investment, Rodrik and Subramanian (2008) argue foreign capital inflows may be
disproportionately used to finance consumption, leading to an overvalued exchange rate, and
an even greater reduction in the profitability of investment. This may explain the negative
correlation between foreign capital inflows and growth, as well as the positive correlation
between foreign capital inflows and exchange rate overvaluation, that PRS (2007) find.
Yet this cannot be the entire story. What about countries like China or India that are
experiencing investment booms? Why are they not big users of foreign capital? One
possibility is that the very improvement in domestic institutions that enhances investment
opportunities also enhances incentives for domestic households to save (or keep their savings
in the country). Indeed, the improvement in domestic savings may be a better proxy for the
1

Some recent studies based on data over longer time spans and using finer measures of financial integration
have turned up more positive evidence of the benefits of financial integration; for example, see Quinn and
Toyoda (2006) and Bekaert, Harvey and Lundblad (2005). But these scattered pieces of positive evidence are
far from conclusive.

5

6
true improvement in the quality of institutions, and hence investment opportunities. So
countries that invest more, but are able to finance more of it with domestic savings grow
faster, as PRS (2007) find, but this may have nothing to do with whether foreign capital is
bad for growth, and everything to do with the quality of investment opportunities in countries
that finance more through domestic savings.
In sum, there is little evidence that low income countries have a tremendous gap
between domestic investment and savings that holds back growth, a gap that can be plugged
by foreign capital as the traditional literature would suggest. Some simply don’t have good
investment opportunities (and the factors that depress investment may depress domestic
savings even further, forcing these countries to rely on foreign capital), while those that have
investment opportunities may also be able to generate adequate domestic savings. But what
then are the benefits of financial openness more generally, and foreign capital inflows
specifically?

Collateral Benefits and Institution Building from Financial Liberalization

Openness to capital flows can expose a country’s financial sector to competition, spur
improvements in domestic corporate governance as foreign investors demand the same
standards locally that they are used to at home, and impose discipline on macroeconomic
policies, and the government more generally. So even if foreign capital is not needed for
financing, it may be that financial openness (to both inflows and outflows) creates “collateral
benefits” (Kose, Prasad, Rogoff and Wei, 2006), such as domestic financial sector
development (see Rajan and Zingales, 2003a and Stulz 2005), which could enhance growth
in total factor productivity.
For instance, international financial flows serve as an important catalyst for domestic
financial market development, as reflected in both straightforward measures of the size of the
banking sector and equity markets as well as broader concepts of financial market
development, including supervision and regulation (see the survey by Mishkin, 2006).
Foreign bank presence is associated with improvements in the quality of financial services
and the efficiency of financial intermediation (Claessens, Demirguc-Kunt and Huizinga,
2001; Levine, 2001; Clarke, Cull, Martinez Peria, and Sanchez, 2003; Claessens and Laeven,

6

7
2004; Schmukler, 2004). And stock markets do tend to become larger and more liquid after
equity market liberalizations (Levine and Zervos, 1998).
Financial openness has induced a number of countries to adjust their corporate
governance structures in response to foreign competition and demands from international
investors (see the evidence surveyed in Gillian and Starks, 2003). Moreover, financial-sector
foreign direct investment from well-regulated and well-supervised source countries tends to
support institutional development and governance in emerging markets, providing a sense of
direction for the complex supervisory and regulatory challenges that developing countries
face as they integrate into the world economy (Goldberg, 2004).
Other collateral benefits could include, for instance, the discipline imposed on
macroeconomic policies. The logic is that financial openness acts as a commitment device
since bad policies that result in large government budget deficits or high inflation could lead
to foreign investors bolting for the exits at the first sign of trouble. The evidence on this point
is limited, however. Tytell and Wei (2004) find that financial openness is positively
correlated with lower inflation but uncorrelated with the size of budget deficits.
If indeed collateral benefits are important, and they come from the possibility of twoway flows as much as from the actual inflow of foreign capital, then only looking at the
effects of the latter may be inadequate. The effect of the intrinsic openness of the country to
cross-border capital flows needs also to be included, the so-called de-jure openness that
authors such as Arteta, Eichengreen and Wyplosz (2001) and Klein and Olivei (2006) have
examined. The evidence here is rather mixed, in part because the information content of
measures of capital controls is limited—having legal controls is one thing, enforcing them
effectively is quite another. Using the sum of the stocks of foreign assets and liabilities,
which capture the accumulated exposure to international capital markets, as the measure of
financial integration also yields at best weak evidence of the growth benefits.
Also, it takes time to build institutions, enhance market discipline and deepen the
financial sector, which may explain why, over relatively short periods, detecting the benefits
of financial globalization is difficult. Even at long horizons, it may be difficult to detect the
productivity-enhancing benefits of financial globalization in empirical work if the analysis
includes structural, institutional and macroeconomic policy variables. After all, these are the
very channels through which financial integration generates growth benefits.

7

8
Thresholds for Benefiting from Financial Openness

But perhaps the biggest problem in detecting collateral benefits in long run crosscountry regressions may be that they kick in only when a country is above a certain level of
institutional and economic development. For instance, when property rights are unprotected
or the judiciary is very weak, there may be little that foreign investors can do to improve
corporate governance. It is only when there is a minimum threshold level of these institutions
that arm’s length foreigners can press for better governance. It may also be that only when a
country is more advanced and close to the technological frontiers can it use the full
capabilities that foreign financial know-how brings, such as the ability to discriminate
between alternative sets of investment opportunities. When a country is very poor, the
investments that are needed may be much more obvious, provided appropriate protections are
in place.
Indeed, it may be that below the threshold, financial openness could be detrimental
(see the evidence in PRS, 2007). For example, foreign investors are often depicted as arm’s
length investors who cut and run at the first sight of trouble. If this is not entirely a caricature,
a country with an inadequate regime to deal with corporate insolvencies could be hurt very
badly in a panic, as fleeing foreigners bring firms down.
In fact, the very nature of foreign engagement may change with improvements in a
country’s institutional quality—a term that encompasses quality of corporate and public
governance, the legal framework, government transparency, and level of corruption. Faria
and Mauro (2004) find that better institutional quality tilts a developing country’s foreign
inflows towards foreign direct investment and portfolio equity flows, which not only are less
risky than debt flows, but also lead to more foreign involvement in corporate governance and
technology transfer. Rajan and Tokatlidis (2005) suggest that countries with limited capacity
to solve internal fiscal conflicts are likely to have more fragile foreign debt structures, and
more dollarization.
Finally, some macroeconomic structures and policies are also typically (though not
always) associated with underdeveloped countries and lead to greater risks from financial
openness. Rigid exchange rate regimes can make a country more vulnerable to crises when it
opens its capital markets (Obstfeld and Rogoff, 1995). A lower level of trade relative to the

8

9
size of the economy increases the probability of crises associated with financial openness and
increases the costs of such crises if they do occur. Thus, the recent literature strengthens the
case made by the old sequencing literature for putting trade liberalization ahead of financial
integration.
There is some evidence suggesting threshold effects for the correlation between
openness and growth; Although greater reliance on foreign capital does not seem to be
associated with growth for non-industrial countries, it is positively associated with growth for
industrial countries and, over shorter time horizons, for more advanced transition countries
also (Prasad, Rajan, and Subramanian, 2007; Abiad, Leigh, and Mody, 2007). A number of
papers also suggest that financial depth or the quality of domestic institutions can affect
growth benefits from capital inflows (for example, Alfaro, Chanda, Kalemli-Ozcan and
Sayek, 2004; Klein, 2005; Chinn and Ito, 2006; Klein and Olivei, 2006).

The Policy Dilemma

If net collateral benefits kicked in beyond a threshold, the policy response would be
clear – wait till the country is clearly beyond the threshold and then liberalize. The only
problem then (and not an inconsequential one) would be to determine when the country was
beyond the threshold. The real dilemma lies, however, in the possibility that openness can
catalyze some of the institutional and financial sector development that is necessary to obtain
the collateral benefits of openness. If so, it might make sense for a country to liberalize
somewhat before it is institutionally developed enough to secure net benefits from openness,
in order to speed up institutional development itself.
Given that there could be merits to opening up even for somewhat underdeveloped
countries, a country following a pragmatic approach to liberalization would pick periods
when the risks associated with liberalization are likely to be lower, so that its institutions
could develop over a relatively benign period, and they are ready when times become
tougher. What might define such benign periods? That is what we explore in the next section.

9

10
The Evolution of the Cost-Benefit Tradeoff

Emerging markets and developing countries in recent years have typically run large
current account surpluses instead of the more traditional deficits. In part, this has been
because of relatively subdued investment, perhaps because of learning from past crises; in
part this has been because of expanded savings. For instance, in the Philippines, investment
fell from 24% of GDP in 1996 to 17% in 2006, while savings rose from 14% to 20% of GDP.
From borrowing the equivalent of 10% of its GDP from abroad, it has now gone to pumping
out 2.5% as a current account surplus.

Stock of Foreign Exchange Reserves

In part as a result of trade surpluses, in part as a result of capital inflows because of
their better economic health, a number of emerging market countries have had a prodigious
build-up in their foreign exchange reserves as they attempt to stave off large exchange rate
appreciations by intervening in the foreign exchange market. Figure 1 shows that the total
stock of foreign exchange reserves held by emerging markets and other developing countries
skyrocketed to nearly $5 trillion dollars at the end of 2007 (compared to $0.7 trillion in 1995
and $1.2 trillion in 2000).
The level of reserves now held by emerging market countries far exceeds the standard
guidelines for what is necessary to insure against sudden stops or reversals of capital flows
(Jeanne, 2007; Durdu, Mendoza and Terrones, 2007; Reddy, 2005). Most emerging markets
now comfortably meet or exceed the common rules-of-thumb that they should hold liquid
reserves sufficient to meet all foreign liabilities coming due over the next twelve months, or
at least six months’ worth of imports. In addition, reserve pooling arrangements, like the
Chiang Mai Initiative in South East Asia, allow individual countries to swap their domestic
currencies for U.S. dollars held by other countries in the pool, increasing the insurance value
of individual country reserve holdings. Of course, such pooling would not provide much
insurance against common regional shocks that hit all countries in the pool. However, the
sheer volume of reserves is likely to serve as a deterrent to speculative attacks on a currency,
making financial crises and their subsequent contagion effects (wherein countries with

10

11
otherwise reasonable macroeconomic conditions get swept along in financial panics) less
likely in the first place.
While foreign exchange reserves provide a useful cushion against financial and
balance of payments crises, thus making capital account liberalization less risky, they also
create problems of their own. Many of these economies are finding it increasingly difficult to
soak up, or “sterilize” (using government bonds), the liquidity created by inflows, so
pressures for domestic currency appreciation are building. Furthermore, governments are
increasingly questioning the benefits of a policy that, in essence, involves purchasing more
low-yield securities from foreign governments financed by higher-yield domestic debt.
The surge in foreign exchange reserves has led to three types of responses. One
approach is to find creative uses for reserves—for instance, using them to recapitalize
domestic banks, to finance infrastructure spending, or to stockpile oil reserves. China and
India, for instance, have adopted some of these uses for their reserves.
A second approach has been to set up government investment corporations,
sometimes called “sovereign wealth funds,” that can recycle reserves into high-yielding
assets. Estimates of assets held by sovereign wealth funds, including those of industrial
countries such as Norway, come to about $2.5 trillion dollars, not including the unreported
size of wealth funds of oil-exporting countries in the Middle East. (This total is separate from
about $5.5 trillion held as foreign exchange reserves by sovereign governments.)
It is difficult to predict how much of the resources from these funds will flow into
international capital markets; for example, some of the resources of these funds may be
destined for domestic investment in strategic sectors or in infrastructure. But even so, such
funds raise a number of questions. Has the government the competence to choose profitable
investments? Will the sovereign fund be so concerned about making losses that it simply
joins the herd of institutional investors? Will the government exercise influence, not
motivated by commercial concerns, over the foreign companies it owns? Will it allow foreign
corporations it invests in undue influence over its own policies?
A third approach under consideration in some countries is to expand opportunities for
private capital outflows, with the hope that this will alleviate appreciation pressures on the
exchange rate. Many countries such as China and India have loosened the reins on capital

11

12
that can be taken out by corporations and individuals. We will discuss this at greater length
later.
A more basic concern is that the underlying distortions that often contribute to rapid
reserve accumulation, such as overly rigid exchange rates and repressed financial sectors,
could have long-term detrimental effects on the economy. While policymakers in emerging
markets often recognize this point, they are typically under political constraints to restrain
rapid currency appreciation, because this could hurt export competitiveness. Consequently,
they are able to allow only modest currency appreciations that, in the short run, generate
expectations of further appreciation. This pattern, in turn, tends to fuel further speculative
inflows and makes domestic macroeconomic management even more complicated.

Changes in the Composition of External Liabilities

One major trigger of balance of payments crises has historically been when a country
has a large share of short-term debt denominated in foreign currency (Rodrik and Velasco,
1999). Many emerging markets were unable to generate other, safer, forms of financial
inflows during the 1980s and 1990s, perhaps because foreign investors feared the countries’
weak institutions, bad policies, or worse still, possible expropriation (see, for example,
Diamond and Rajan, 2001; Jeanne, 2000, Rajan and Tokatlidis 2005). Whatever the
underlying cause, sudden stops of capital inflows in this situation mean that countries cannot
finance their debts, which in turn leads to more capital fleeing the country and a plummeting
exchange rate. When the exchange rate depreciates, it becomes difficult for the country to
repay its foreign-currency denominated borrowing, which can lead to a collapse of the
banking sector.
However, the share of foreign direct investment flows has now become far more
important than that of debt in gross private capital flows to nonindustrial countries. Table 1
(top panel) shows how these shares have evolved for emerging markets and other developing
countries. The share of foreign direct investment in total gross inflows to emerging markets
and other developing countries rose from about 25 percent in 1990-94 to nearly 50 percent by
2000-04. Over the same period, the share of debt (including portfolio debt and bank loans) in
inflows to emerging markets fell from 64 percent to 39 percent. There has been a similar but

12

13
more gradual evolution in the composition of stocks of external liabilities (Table 1, lower
panel).
Moreover, when emerging market countries do borrow, they have had less need to
borrow in a foreign currency; foreign investors now enthusiastically buy bonds denominated
in many local currencies – even from countries that suffered financial crises just a few years
ago. For example, during 2004-05, Brazil, Colombia and Uruguay issued bonds denominated
in local currency to foreign investors. These bonds were not indexed to inflation, had
reasonably long maturities, and had low spreads relative to industrial country bonds.
Countries that have experienced an increase in the share of foreign direct investment
and a decrease in borrowing in foreign-denominated currencies face lower risks from capital
account liberalization. Domestic currency-denominated debt is of course safer for the issuing
country because it does not create the risk that currency depreciation will make it difficult or
impossible to repay the debt. Of course, only time will tell how much these developments
reflect temporary benign worldwide financing conditions, and how much they reflect
permanent changes.

From Fixed Exchange Rates to Inflation Targeting

Many emerging market economies once used a fixed exchange rate as the primary
target for their monetary policy. Fixed exchange rates can be useful for economies at early
stages of financial development and could serve as a useful nominal anchor, especially if
their central banks are not credible (Husain, Mody, and Rogoff, 2005). One hope behind this
policy was that a fixed exchange rate would make it easier for the country to carry out
foreign trade and investment, because the risks of foreign exchange fluctuations would be
reduced. However, as these economies opened their capital markets, they encountered severe
risks.
A number of papers have made the point that the combination of open capital
accounts and de facto fixed exchange rates has precipitated many of the financial and balance
of payments crises witnessed in the last two decades. Edwards (2007) summarizes these
arguments and provides new empirical evidence that, for countries that have relatively open

13

14
capital accounts, a fixed exchange rate significantly increases the probability of a capital flow
contraction.
An increasing number of emerging market economies have begun to switch to more
flexible exchange rate regimes, with many of them using an inflation target rather than a
fixed exchange rate as the anchor for their monetary policy. The academic literature suggests
that giving monetary policy the operational independence to focus on low inflation is the best
way that monetary policy can contribute to overall macroeconomic and financial stability (for
discussion and some critical perspectives, see Bernanke and Woodford, 2004). Rose (2006)
provides empirical evidence that inflation targeters have lower exchange rate volatility and
fewer sudden stops than similar countries that do not target inflation. He also notes that this
monetary regime seems durable—no country has yet been forced to abandon an inflation
targeting regime. Of course, emerging markets are only recently beginning to adopt this
regime in significant numbers and international capital markets have been relatively calm
during the 2000s, and so this regime hasn’t really been tested much yet. However, flexible
exchange rates do offer an important shock absorber for an economy that is becoming more
integrated into international trade and financial markets.
Conducting monetary policy with a framework of inflation targeting and flexible
exchange rates can still leave policymakers with a difficult set of options in the short run if
there are surges in foreign capital inflows. Inflows translate into increases in domestic
liquidity that result in inflationary pressures, which require monetary policy tightening in the
form of higher interest rates. This response, in turn, can induce even more capital inflows. An
appreciation of flexible exchange rates can of course act as a shock absorber, reducing
domestic inflation and tamping down inflows. However, very rapid exchange rate
appreciation can also hurt external competitiveness, because exporting firms have little time
to boost their productivity sufficiently to avoid becoming uncompetitive.
Thailand is an example of an Asian economy that allowed its exchange rate to
appreciate significantly in order to maintain its inflation target. India’s experience has been
similar, with the real effective exchange rate of the rupee appreciating by about 12 percent
during 2007, notwithstanding a current account deficit. Exporters in countries experiencing
such rapid currency appreciation have complained loudly of reduced competitiveness and job
losses. In India, these pressures have led the government to compensate exporters directly

14

15
using fiscal transfers. However, a country with an open capital market is probably better off
dealing with the problems of currency fluctuations, rather than attempting the risky policy
mix of fixed (or tightly managed) exchange rates and an open capital market.

Trade Openness

Many emerging market economies and developing countries have liberalized trade
flows by reducing tariff and nontariff barriers. Figure 2 shows that the volume of total trade
expressed as a ratio to GDP has increased significantly since the mid-1980s for both
emerging markets and other developing countries. Indeed, the trade openness ratio for
virtually every emerging market economy has increased steadily and, for some economies,
quite markedly over the last two decades.
Economies that are more open to trade are also more favorably placed for capital
account liberalization for two broad reasons. First, they face less risk from sudden stops or
reversals of capital inflows because they are in a better position to service their external
obligations through their export revenues and are less likely to default (Calvo, Izquierdo, and
Mejia, 2004; Frankel and Cavallo, 2004). Furthermore, more open economies have to
undergo a smaller real exchange rate depreciation for a given current account adjustment;
hence, among countries that have experienced sudden stops or current account reversals,
those that are more open to trade face smaller adverse growth effects and are able to recover
faster (Edwards, 2004, 2005).
Second, expanding trade is in effect a form of capital account liberalization, because
it provides a simple avenue to evade capital account restrictions. For instance, by overinvoicing exports, an exporter can funnel money into his home country—that is, by making
the capital inflow associated with the exports greater than the actual market value of exports.
Of course, this requires a willing counterparty at the other end to facilitate such a transaction;
the proliferation of multinationals and foreign-owned subsidiaries has made this much easier.
Similarly, over-invoicing of imports provides a conduit for taking money out of a country.
In China during the late 1990s, for example, the “errors and omissions” category of
the balance of payments was large and negative, which was widely believed to reflect capital
outflows through unofficial channels (Prasad and Wei, 2007). As the renminbi has come

15

16
under increasing pressures for appreciation during this decade, the sign of the errors and
omissions category switched and the magnitude grew rapidly until 2005, indicative of capital
inflows through unofficial channels, notwithstanding extensive controls on inflows. As
China’s government tightened up its capital controls to try and stanch speculative inflows,
the errors and omissions fell to near zero in 2006 but the trade surplus rose dramatically,
buoyed by remarkably high rates of export growth. A portion of this increase in reported
exports and the trade surplus is believed by some analysts to reflect speculative inflows
through the trade channel.

Summary

Recent economic developments have generally created a more benign environment in
which countries can become more open. But the risks are not inconsequential. Many
emerging market countries are still below the necessary threshold levels of institutional and
financial development. The capacity of these countries to weather the volatility associated
with foreign capital flows, especially surges in inflows, followed by sudden stops, is limited.
An underdeveloped financial system, which is typical of many developing economies, is
more likely to channel foreign capital to easily collateralized non-tradeable investments like
real estate, thereby contributing to asset price booms (and the risk of disruptions from
subsequent busts). Similarly, foreign portfolio equity flows into shallow equity markets could
lead to disruptive sharp swings. In the absence of other financial assets in some emerging
markets, foreign investors may also use equity markets in these countries to bet on currency
appreciation, thereby distorting asset values and adding to the risk of speculative bubbles.
Large capital inflows could also result in rapid real exchange rate appreciation, which
can hurt manufacturing exports (Rajan and Subramanian, 2005; Bhalla, 2007; Johnson,
Ostry, and Subramanian, 2007; Prasad, Rajan, and Subramanian, 2007; Rodrik, 2007). Even
a relatively short-term appreciation can sometimes lead to longer-lived consequences like
loss of market share in export markets and reductions in manufacturing capacity.
In sum, while the environment is benign, countries may want to liberalize more so as
to reap some of the benefits of openness such as financial market development, but only if
they can limit some of the costs such as potential exchange rate overvaluation. The need to

16

17
consider a pragmatic approach becomes all the more important because as trade expands the
world over, the effectiveness of capital controls is rapidly eroding, even in a tightlycontrolled economy like China. It is becoming increasingly easy for capital to find loopholes
and channels for evading these controls. Is there a constructive way to make progress that
does not result in precipitous opening of the capital account and the attendant risks? In the
next section we discuss what countries have tried to do; in the following section, we offer
some suggestions of our own.

Approaches to Restricting and Liberalizing Capital Flows

Before we turn to liberalization, let us start by asking whether countries have been
successful in shutting themselves off from cross-border capital flows. Are capital controls
effective?

Capital Controls

The measures that countries have put in place to control capital flows come in various
flavors. For example, controls can be imposed on inflows or outflows; on different types of
flows (like foreign direct investment, portfolio equity, or portfolio debt); flows of different
maturities; and flows into specific sectors. Kose, Prasad, Rogoff and Wei (2006, Appendix I)
provides a detailed taxonomy of capital controls. Do capital controls affect capital flows in
the intended way? Do capital controls lead to better macroeconomic outcomes? The answer
to this second question cannot be conclusive because the counterfactual is not clear, so our
discussion on this point can only be suggestive.
In recent decades, a number of countries have imposed capital controls, usually in
response to short-term problems with international capital flows. Some Latin American
economies imposed controls on capital outflows during the 1980s and 1990s, but typically
did not succeed in stemming capital flight by domestic economic agents.
During the Asian crisis of 1997 through mid-1998, the Malaysian ringgit came under
severe depreciation pressures as foreign exchange reserves fell rapidly and portfolio outflows
surged. However, Malaysia declined IMF financial assistance and in September 1998, the

17

18
Malaysian government pegged the ringgit to the dollar and introduced sweeping controls on
portfolio outflows. The Malaysian experience is sometimes touted as an example of the
success of capital controls, although there are different interpretations of how effective these
were in practice and how important they were in Malaysia’s recovery from the Asian crisis.
Kaplan and Rodrik (2001) argue that the imposition of controls had beneficial
macroeconomic effects, especially compared to the experiences of countries such as Korea
and Thailand that accepted IMF programs during the crisis. Dornbusch (2001) rejects this
view, noting that the capital controls came quite late, after the region had already begun to
stabilize. In terms of the efficacy of capital controls, one key difference between Malaysia
and the Latin American economies is that Malaysia had tight control of its banking system,
which meant that channels for capital flight could be shut off more easily.
Countries have also attempted to control inflows. Chile, which faced massive inflows
during the early 1990s, is the canonical example. The authorities imposed an unremunerated
reserve requirement of 20 percent on short-term debt inflows in 1991. In subsequent years, as
investors began to exploit various loopholes, the authorities attempted to stay ahead of the
game by increasing the reserve requirements and extending them to different types of
inflows, and by imposing a minimum “stay” requirement on foreign direct investment and
portfolio equity inflows. De Gregorio, Edwards and Valdes (2000) argue that the controls did
not affect the volume of inflows but were successful in tilting the maturity structure of debt
inflows--away from short-term and towards longer-term loans. These authors argue that the
reasonable effectiveness of the Chilean controls on capital inflows is attributable to an
effective government with low corruption, and to the nimbleness of the authorities in
clamping down on evasion. However, the Chilean experience also suggests that capital
controls with more than the most modest objectives will eventually lose effectiveness as the
private sector finds ways to get around even the most innovative regulators.
More recent examples include Thailand and India, which have tried to manage the
frothiness in their equity markets that has been abetted by foreign capital inflows. In
December 2006, the Thai central bank imposed a tax on short-term portfolio equity inflows.
The announcement of this measure set off a 15 percent one-day fall in the main stock price
index, causing the government to largely retract it. The government of India, fearing that
foreign inflows were feeding house price inflation, and also into upward pressure on the

18

19
rupee, attempted in May and August 2007 to limit external commercial borrowing by certain
corporate entities. However, firms have circumvented this restriction by disguising their
borrowing through other channels (for example, by delaying repayments on trade finance and
thereby effectively getting a temporary loan). One lesson from these episodes is that when
capital controls have previously been eliminated, reinstating them can have substantial
effects on asset prices, and will thus be politically very difficult. This irreversibility means
that the opening of the capital account should be driven by longer-term considerations.
These episodes suggest a few other general lessons about capital controls. First,
inflows are easier to control than outflows; once channels for outflows are opened up, they
can be much harder to shut down when there are large pressures for capital to flee (Reinhart
and Smith, 2002; Magud, Reinhart and Rogoff, 2005). Second, capital controls work better
when the financial system is reasonably well regulated and supervised, and domestic
institutions are reasonably strong. This finding has an ironic tone, because these conditions of
course make it less likely that controls will be needed in the first place. Third, new capital
controls pose a significant administrative burden—they need to be constantly updated to
close loopholes and, in any event, tend not to be effective beyond the short term.
Even when capital controls are effective in a narrow sense, they can have significant
costs. In the case of Chile, the capital controls penalized short-term credit. As a consequence,
small and medium-sized firms (and also new firms), which typically find it harder to issue
long-term bonds, faced much higher costs of capital (Forbes, 2005). Capital controls can also
affect overall economic efficiency by conferring undue benefits to politically well-connected
firms (invariably, quotas on inflows get implemented in an arbitrary fashion by the
government) and protecting incumbents from competition. Johnson, Kochhar, Mitton, and
Tamirisa (2006) provide some evidence of this phenomenon for Malaysia. There is also
increasing microeconomic evidence of the distortionary costs of capital controls (see the
survey by Forbes, 2005). Desai, Foley and Hines (2006) show that capital controls distort the
investment decisions of multinational firms. Finally, an accumulating body of evidence
indicates that capital controls by themselves do not serve their main stated purpose of
reducing the probability of financial crises, especially banking crises. Edwards (2005) and
Glick, Guo and Hutchison (2006) find that there is no relationship between de jure capital
account openness and crises.

19

20
Liberalizing the Capital Account

Capital account liberalization can imply removing impediments to inflows of capital,
or allowing domestic investors to invest more freely in foreign assets. We catalogue various
approaches that countries have taken to freeing capital inflows and outflows, and discuss the
pros and cons of some of these approaches.
Inflows of foreign direct investment are considered quite attractive for an emerging
market economy. They tend to be more stable than other types of capital flows (unlike
portfolio equity and bank loans, which can be reversed quickly) and also tend to bring in
more transfers of technological and managerial expertise. China has successfully tilted its
flows largely towards foreign direct investment by encouraging those inflows, even at the
expense of domestic industry (Prasad and Wei, 2007). For example, until recently, China’s
income tax on joint venture enterprises financed through foreign direct investment inflows
was set at 15 percent, compared to 33 percent for domestic firms. China also set up special
economic zones to attract foreign direct investment by providing additional incentives such
as better infrastructure, less red tape, and exemptions from local labor laws. One lesson from
China’s experience is that trade liberalization is important for attracting foreign direct
investment—the ability to use China as an export-processing platform has encouraged
substantial foreign direct investment from other East Asian countries. The focus on foreign
direct investment, however, has deprived China of one of the key indirect benefits of
financial integration--the catalytic effect on development of the domestic financial market.
A number of emerging market economies have undertaken equity market
liberalizations, which make shares of common stocks of local firms available to foreign
investors. Equity market liberalizations appear to boost economic growth (Henry, 2000;
Bekaert, Harvey and Lundblad, 2005); firm-level evidence suggests that they have a positive
impact on profitability, efficiency, and other measures of operating performance (Chari and
Henry, 2005; Mitton, 2006).
Some countries have permitted entry of foreign banks, and have generally found that
this can act as a spur for improved efficiency of the overall banking system as domestic
banks are forced to raise their service and risk-assessment standards to compete. For
example, starting in early 2007, China has in principle allowed free foreign bank entry, and

20

21
even before that, China had allowed a small group of foreign banks to take minority stakes in
a few of the largest state-owned banks. The idea behind China’s policy was to use these
“foreign strategic investors” to introduce better corporate governance practices and other
innovations to local banks, without exposing the local banks to full-fledged competition from
foreign banks. Foreign banks also often introduce new saving and loan instruments, thereby
widening the range of choices available to depositors and borrowers. However, the presence
of foreign banks poses difficult regulatory and supervisory challenges, particularly since
local bank supervisors may have little familiarity with complex financial instruments.
Foreign banks can also introduce channels for moving capital in and out of a country,
rendering capital controls less effective.
A few countries such as China and Taiwan have sought to cautiously encourage
capital inflows and outflows by limiting portfolio investments (those that do not involve
foreign direct investment) to certain carefully screened qualified foreign or domestic
institutional investors. The logic behind this approach is to maintain control on capital
inflows and outflows by limiting the number of players. A related approach has been taken
by the Reserve Bank of India, which decided upon a particular hierarchy of economic agents
that would benefit from a liberalization of outflows, with the intent being to first liberalize
outflows for corporations, and eventually for individuals; Reddy (2007) describes the
rationale for this approach. In particular, corporations have been implicitly encouraged to
make foreign acquisitions, with the idea that domestic financing for these takeovers would
lead to a net outflow of reserves. In practice, however, domestic Indian banks have often
been too small, too unsophisticated, or have had too high a cost of funds to compete with
foreign lenders in financing these acquisitions. Hence, only a small amount of the needed
funding for foreign takeovers is raised domestically, resulting in little outflow.
A recurring theme in many of the approaches to capital account liberalization is the
government’s desire to maintain some control over the composition and quantity of capital
inflows and outflows. However, the surge in overall international capital flows, and the
increasing sophistication of international investors, has made it harder to shape financial
flows into or out of a country. And attempts to control capital flows invariably reduce the
indirect benefits of financial globalization.

21

22
A Pragmatic Approach to Capital Account Liberalization

Rather than viewing capital account liberalization as a one-shot, all-or-nothing
phenomenon, that under all circumstances is welfare-improving, a pragmatic policy would
design a gradual and opportunistic approach to capital account liberalization that takes into
account individual country circumstances.
A pragmatic approach would recognize:

1) Not all countries are ready for capital account liberalization – typically the more
developed the country, the readier it is. However, some may want to liberalize to improve
institutions even if the net benefits do not seem to be overwhelming. Others may want to
liberalize because leakages through trade are creating de-facto channels for capital to
flow.
2) Liberalizing flows and strengthening institutions at a time when the country’s economic
situation is good and the external environment is relatively benign can stimulate the
institutional development that will sustain the country even when the environment turns.
For example, deepening domestic currency debt markets in benign times by allowing
more foreign participation can give the country more options in harsher times, and reduce
its reliance on riskier foreign currency debt. Similarly, allowing domestic households a
greater ability to hold globally-diversified asset portfolios can reduce their exposure to
domestic shocks.

But there are costs to opening up. Substantial inflows could lead to an overvalued
exchange rate, and as we have argued, there are limits to sterilization.

3) Rather than the central bank intervening and sterilizing these inflows, and accumulating
more reserves, a pragmatic approach would focus at this time on encouraging more
international portfolio diversification by domestic investors, that is, encouraging
outflows. The easiest way is to push government controlled pension funds and insurance
companies to invest more of their holdings internationally. Less easy is to get households
to diversify abroad at a time when their own country’s markets are being buoyed by

22

23
international interest. This may require an active education campaign on the benefits of
international portfolio diversification so as to reduce natural home bias. In addition, the
channels for them to take their money out have to be made more accessible and easier to
use.

But this raises the dilemma – how to prevent possible capital flight when times turn
adverse? Shutting off international access for individuals in bad times may be difficult, and
even impose costs if they have entered into situations where they have to put up further
capital (e.g., margin calls) to maintain their investments.

4) It is best if in the early stages of liberalization, these private sector outflows are easily
controlled. We offer a proposal next.

A modest proposal for controlled outflows

The risks we have outlined above would suggest a more controlled approach to
capital account liberalization that essentially channels household flows through institutions.
The country authorizes a number of closed-end mutual funds to issue shares, denominated in
the domestic currency.2 These mutual funds will use the proceeds to purchase foreign
exchange from the central bank and then invest this foreign exchange abroad, in a wide array
of foreign assets. The central bank would control the timing and amount of outflows by
stipulating the amount of foreign exchange it would make available to the mutual funds in a
given period. Licenses for such mutual funds could be auctioned by the government to foster
competition and capture any rents. The sale of foreign exchange to the mutual funds would
take place at the market exchange rate. This scheme essentially securitizes reserves as shown
in the schematic diagram in Figure 3, where the Chinese currency—the renminbi —is the
domestic currency (see Prasad and Rajan, 2005, for more details).

2

Open-ended mutual funds could achieve much the same objective except that they may
engender more frequent flows and therefore complicate the licensing of fund flows for the
central bank.

23

24
The government would need to maintain clear separation from the fund-- other than
its traditional role in financial sector regulation and supervision--to avoid any presumption of
bailouts if asset values plunge. Given that a large number of domestic citizens will be
investing in these funds, the government risks angering many if it expropriates assets, and
thus the structure of our proposal builds in some natural protection against expropriation.
To understand the merits of this plan, it’s useful to consider why some close
alternatives would be inferior. For example, the central bank could itself create an investment
vehicle for purchasing foreign assets. This would require the central bank to acquire
investment skills, and it is not clear why it would be able to do so better than the private
sector, especially given the constraints on pay in the public sector (also, the problems
associated with sovereign wealth funds discussed earlier would apply here also). It could sell
shares in that investment vehicle to domestic investors. However, this approach would create
a direct link between the government and investors that could be detrimental, especially
because it could create pressures for a bailout if the investment vehicle were to generate poor
returns or losses.
Our proposal would give domestic retail investors experience with international
investments and allow for gradual learning-by-investing, while giving them more choice and
potential diversification in their portfolios of financial assets. In countries with weak
financial systems, this approach would give domestic banks some breathing room to adjust to
the new reality of their depositors having alternative investment opportunities, and it would
leave the recycling of foreign inflows to the private sector rather than to the government.
Private sector institutions could gain expertise in investing in foreign assets. These
developments would improve the depth and efficiency of the domestic financial sector, and
better prepare the ground for an eventual fuller capital account liberalization.
Also, unlike proposals that would give open-ended mutual funds the right to invest
abroad up to a aggregate dollar amount (across all funds) that is determined every year, our
proposal would remove the uncertainty about how much a fund can invest, right at the outset.
Similarly, the closed end funds cannot be an explicit channel for foreigners to repatriate
money, so they are unlikely to prompt greater inflows from foreign investors (unlike other
channels liberalizing outflows, that could prompt greater inflows).

24

25
If appropriately structured, our proposal has limited downside risk. At worst, if
domestic investors felt that returns in domestic investments trump the need for international
portfolio diversification, there would be no demand for the securities of the new mutual
funds. The liabilities of the mutual funds would be denominated in domestic currency, which
eliminates the risk that speculative runs on the currency would cause a debt crisis. Thus, the
proposal would allow countries to make progress towards the goal of capital account
convertibility in a calibrated manner, without exposing the domestic financial system to risks
associated with uncontrolled outflows.

Concluding Remarks

The main benefits of capital account liberalization for emerging markets appear to be
indirect, more related to their role in building other institutions than to the increased
financing provided by capital inflows. These indirect benefits are important enough that
countries should look for creative approaches to capital account liberalization that would help
attain these benefits while reducing the risks. In fact, countries don’t have much of a choice
but to plan for capital account liberalization, because capital accounts are de facto becoming
more open over time irrespective of government attempts to control them.
This is not to say that capital account liberalization is an appropriate policy objective
for all countries and in all circumstances. For poor countries with weak policies and
institutions, capital account liberalization should not be a major priority. However, even this
group includes some poor but resource-rich countries that are having to deal with capital
inflows and their mixed benefits. These countries need a strategy, rather than just coping in
an ad hoc way with the whims of international investors. Indeed, a key lesson from country
experiences is that capital account liberalization works best when other policies are
disciplined and not working at cross-purposes (Arteta, Eichengreen and Wyplosz, 2003).
Ultimately, a framework to achieve capital account liberalization could help set in
motion broader reforms and break the power of interest groups that seek to block reforms
(Rajan and Zingales, 2003b). China’s commitment to open up its banking sector to foreign
competition by the beginning of 2007 can be seen in this light. The Chinese government has
used the prospect of increased competition to spur reforms in the state-owned banking sector

25

26
and used foreign strategic investors to bring in not just capital but also knowledge about
better risk-management and corporate governance practices into domestic banks. Similarly,
in India and many other emerging economies, the entry of foreign banks has helped spur
efficiency gains in the domestic banking system and provided a fillip to banking reforms. In
this way, capital account liberalization may best be seen not just as an independent objective
but as part of an organizing framework for policy changes in a number of dimensions (see
Kose, Prasad, Rogoff and Wei, 2008).

26

27
References
Abiad, Abdul, Daniel Leigh, and Ashoka Mody. 2007. “International Finance and Income
Convergence: Europe is Different.” IMF Working Paper 07/64.
Aizenman, Joshua, Brian Pinto, and Artur Radziwill. 2004. “Sources for Financing Domestic
Capital—Is Foreign Saving a Viable Option for Developing Countries?” Working
Paper 10624. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Alfaro, Laura, Areendam Chanda, Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, and Selin Sayek. 2004. “FDI and
Economic Growth: The Role of Local Financial Markets.” Journal of International
Economics, 64(1): 89–112.
Alfaro, Laura, Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, and Vadym Volosovych. 2007. “Capital Flows in a
Globalized World: The Role of Policies and Institutions.” In Capital Controls and
Capital Flows in Emerging Economies: Policies, Practices, and Consequences.
Sebastian Edwards, editor. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Arteta, Carlos, Barry Eichengreen, and Charles Wyplosz. 2003. “When Does Capital
Account Liberalization Help More than It Hurts?” in Economic Policy in the
International Economy: Essays in Honor of Assaf Razin. Elhanan Helpman and
Efraim Sadka, eds. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.
Bekaert, Geert, Campbell R. Harvey, and Christian Lundblad. 2005. “Does Financial
Liberalization Spur Growth?” Journal of Financial Economics, 77(1): 3–55.
Bernanke, Ben S., and Michael Woodford, editors. 2004. The Inflation-Targeting Debate.
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Bhalla, Surjit S. 2007. Second Among Equals: The Middle Class Kingdoms of India and
China. Washington, DC: Peterson Institute of International Economics.
Calvo, Guillermo, Alejandro Izquierdo, and Luis-Fernando Mejia. 2004. “On the Empirics of
Sudden Stops: The Relevance of Balance-Sheet Effects.” Manuscript, IADB.
Chari, Anusha, and Peter B. Henry. 2005. “Firm-Specific Information and the Efficiency of
Investment.” Working Paper. Ann Arbor, Michigan: University of Michigan.
Chinn, Menzie, and Hiro Ito. 2006. “What Matters for Financial Development? Capital
Controls, Institutions and Interactions.” Journal of Development Economics, 81(1):
163-192.
Claessens, Stijn, Aslí Demirgüç-Kunt, and Harry Huizinga. 2001. “How Does Foreign Entry
Affect Domestic Banking Markets?” Journal of Banking and Finance, 25(5): 891–
911.
Claessens, Stijn, and Luc Laeven. 2004. “What Drives Bank Competition? Some
International Evidence.” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 36(3): 563-83.

27

28
Clarke, George R. G., Robert Cull, Maria Soledad Martinez Peria, and Susana M. Sanchez.
2003. “Foreign Bank Entry: Experience, Implications for Developing Economies, and
Agenda for Further Research.” World Bank Research Observer, 18(1): 25–59.
De Gregorio, Jose, Sebastian Edwards, and Rodrigo Valdes. 2000. “Controls on Capital
Inflows: Do They Work?” Journal of Development Economics, 63(1): 59-83.
Desai, Mihir, C. Fritz Foley, and James R. Hines Jr. 2006. “Capital Controls, Liberalizations
and Foreign Direct Investment.” Review of Financial Studies. 19(4): 1399-1431.
Diamond, Douglas, and Raghuram Rajan. 2001. “Banks, Short Term Debt, and Financial
Crises: Theory, Policy Implications, and Applications.” Carnegie-Rochester Series on
Public Policy, 54: 37–71.
Dornbusch, Rudiger. 2001. “Malaysia: Was It Different?” NBER Working Paper No. 8235.
Durdu, Ceyhun Bora, Enrique Mendoza, and Marco Terrones. 2007. “Precautionary Demand
for Foreign Assets in Sudden Stop Economies: An Assessment of the New
Mercantilism.” IMF Working Paper 07/146.
Edwards, Sebastian. 2004. “Financial Openness, Sudden Stops, and Current Account
Reversals.” NBER Working Paper 10277.
Edwards, Sebastian. 2005. “Capital Controls, Sudden Stops, and Current Account
Reversals.” NBER Working Paper 11170.
Edwards, Sebastian. 2007. “Capital Controls, Capital Flow Contractions, and
Macroeconomic Vulnerability.” NBER Working Paper 12852.
Faria, Andre, and Paolo Mauro. 2004. “Institutions and the External Capital Structure of
Countries.” IMF Working Paper 04/236.
Fischer, Stanley. 1998. “Capital Account Liberalization and the Role of the IMF.” In Should
the IMF Pursue Capital-Account Convertibility? Essays in International Finance 207.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University.
Forbes, Kristin. 2005. “The Microeconomic Evidence on Capital Controls: No Free Lunch.”
NBER Working Paper 11372.
Frankel, Jeffrey, and Eduardo A. Cavallo. 2004. “Does Openness to Trade Make Countries
More Vulnerable to Sudden Stops or Less? Using Gravity to Establish Causality.”
NBER Working Paper 10957.
Gillian, Stuart, and Laura T. Starks. 2003. “Corporate Governance, Corporate Ownership,
and the Role of Institutional Investors: A Global Perspective.” Journal of Applied
Finance, 13: 4-22.
Glick, Reuven, Xueyan Guo, and Michael Hutchison. 2006. “Currency Crises, Capital
Account Liberalization, and Selection Bias.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 88:
698-714.
Goldberg, Linda. 2004. “Financial-Sector Foreign Direct Investment and Host Countries:
New and Old Lessons.” NBER Working Paper 10441.

28

29
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, and Olivier Jeanne. 2006. “The Elusive Gains from International
Financial Integration.” Review of Economic Studies, 73: 715-41.
Hall, Robert E., and Charles I. Jones. 1999. “Why Do Some Countries Produce So Much
More Output Than Others?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114(1): 83-116.
Henry, Peter B. 2000. “Stock Market Liberalization, Economic Reform, and Emerging
Market Equity Prices.” Journal of Finance, 55(2): 529–64.
Henry, Peter B. 2006. “Capital Account Liberalization: Theory, Evidence, and Speculation.”
NBER Working Paper 12698.
Husain, Aasim M., Ashoka Mody, and Kenneth Rogoff. 2005. “Exchange Rate Regime
Durability and Performance in Developing versus Advanced Economies.” Journal of
Monetary Economics, 51(1): 35-64.
International Monetary Fund, 1997. “Communiqué of the Interim Committee of the Board of
Governors of the International Monetary Fund: The Liberalization of Capital
Movements Under an Amendment of the IMF’s Articles,” Press Release Number
97/44, September 21, 1997. At
<http://www.imf.org/external/np/sec/pr/1997/pr9744.htm>.
IMF World Economic Outlook. September 2005, September 2006. Washington, DC: IMF.
Jeanne, Olivier. 2000. “Debt Maturity and the Global Financial Architecture.” CEPR
Discussion Paper No. 2520.
Jeanne, Olivier. 2007. “International Reserves in Emerging Market Countries: Too Much of a
Good Thing?” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, forthcoming.
Johnson, Simon, Kalpana Kochhar, Todd Mitton, and Natalia Tamirisa. 2006. “Malaysian
Capital Controls: Macroeconomics and Institutions.” IMF Working Paper 06/51.
Johnson, Simon, Jonathan Ostry, and Arvind Subramanian. 2007. “The Prospects for
Sustained Growth in Africa: Benchmarking the Constraints.” IMF Working Paper
07/52.
Kaplan, Ethan, and Dani Rodrik, 2001. “Did the Malaysian Capital Controls Work.”
Manuscript, Kennedy School of Government, Harvard University.
Klein, Michael. 2005. “Capital Account Liberalization, Institutional Quality and Economic
Growth: Theory and Evidence.” NBER Working Paper 11112.
Klein, Michael, and Giovanni Olivei. 2006. “Capital Account Liberalization, Financial
Depth, and Economic Growth” Tufts University Working Paper.
Kose, M. Ayhan, Eswar Prasad, Kenneth Rogoff, and Shang-Jin Wei. 2006. “Financial
Globalization: A Reappraisal.” NBER Working Paper 12484.

29

30
Kose, M. Ayhan, Eswar Prasad, Kenneth Rogoff, and Shang-Jin Wei. 2008. “Financial
Globalization and Economic Policies.” Forthcoming in Handbook of Development
Economics. Dani Rodrik and Mark Rosenzweig, editors.
Kose, M. Ayhan, Eswar Prasad, Kenneth Rogoff, and Shang-Jin Wei. 2006. “Financial
Globalization: A Reappraisal.” NBER Working Paper 12484.
Lane, Philip R., and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti. 2006. “The External Wealth of Nations
Mark II: Revised and Extended Estimates of Foreign Assets and Liabilities, 1970–
2004.” IMF Working Paper 06/69.
Levine, Ross, and Sara Zervos. 1998. “Capital Control Liberalization and Stock Market
Development.” World Development, 26(7): 1169–83.
Levine, Ross. 2001. “International Financial Integration and Economic Growth.” Review of
International Economics, 9(4): 684-98.
Lucas, Robert E., Jr. 1990. “Why Doesn’t Capital Flow from Rich to Poor Countries.”
American Economic Review, 80: 92–6.
Magud, Nicolas, Carmen Reinhart, and Kenneth Rogoff. 2005. “Capital Controls: Myth and
Reality. A Portfolio Balance Approach to Capital Controls.” Manuscript.
Mishkin, Frederic S. 2006. The Next Great Globalization: How Disadvantaged Nations Can
Harness Their Financial Systems to Get Rich. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press.
Mitton, Todd. 2006. “Stock Market Liberalization and Operating Performances at the Firm
Level.” Journal of Financial Economics, 81: 625-47.
Obstfeld, Maurice, and Kenneth Rogoff. 1995. “The Mirage of Fixed Exchange Rates.”
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 9(4): 73-96.
Prasad, Eswar, and Shang-Jin Wei. 2007. “The Chinese Approach to Capital Inflows:
Patterns and Possible Explanations.” In Capital Controls and Capital Flows in
Emerging Economies: Policies, Practices, and Consequences. Sebastian Edwards, ed.
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Prasad, Eswar, and Raghuram Rajan. 2005. “Controlled Capital Account Liberalization: A
Proposal” IMF Policy Discussion Paper 05/7.
Prasad, Eswar, Raghuram Rajan, and Arvind Subramanian. 2007. “Foreign Capital and
Economic Growth.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2007(1): 153-230.
Quinn, Dennis, and Maria Toyoda. 2006. “Does Capital Account Liberalization Lead to
Growth?” Manuscript, Georgetown University. Forthcoming in Review of Financial
Studies.
Rajan, Raghuram, and Luigi Zingales. 1998. “Which Capitalism: Lessons from the East
Asian Crisis.” Journal of Applied Corporate Finance, 11(3): 40-48.
Rajan, Raghuram, and Luigi Zingales. 2003a. Saving Capitalism from the Capitalists.
Random House Publishers.

30

31
Rajan, Raghuram, and Luigi Zingales. 2003b. “The Great Reversals: The Politics of
Financial Development in the 20th Century.” Journal of Financial Economics, 69: 5–
50.
Rajan, Raghuram. 2005. “Has Financial Development Made the World Riskier?” Manuscript.
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago.
Rajan, Raghuram, and Arvind Subramanian. 2005. “What Undermines Aid’s Impact on
Growth?” IMF Working Paper 05/126.
Rajan, Raghuram, and Ioannis Tokatlidis. “Dollar Shortages and Crisis.” International
Journal of Central Banking, 1(2): 177-220.
Reddy, Yaga V. 2005. “Overcoming Challenges in a Globalising Economy: Managing
India’s External Sector,” Lecture delivered at the Foreign Policy Center, London, on
June 23, 2005; posted at www.rbi.org.in.
Reddy, Yaga V. 2007. “Converting a Tiger.” Finance & Development, 44(1): 20-23.
Reinhart, Carmen, and Todd Smith. 2002. “Temporary Controls on Capital Inflows.” Journal
of International Economics, 57(2): 327-51.
Rodrik, Dani. 1998. “Who Needs Capital-Account Convertibility?” Essays in International
Finance 207. Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University.
Rodrik, Dani, and Andres Velasco. 1999. “Short-Term Capital Flows.” In Annual Bank
Conference in Development Economics. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Rodrik, Dani, 2007. “The Real Exchange Rate and Economic Growth: Theory and
Evidence.” Manuscript, Kennedy School of Government, Harvard University.
Rose, Andrew. 2006. “A Stable International System Emerges: Bretton Woods, Reversed.”
CEPR Discussion Paper 5854.
Schmukler, Sergio L. 2004. “Financial Globalization: Gain and Pain for Developing
Countries.” Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta Economic Review, Q2: 39-66.
Solow, Robert M. 1956. “A Contribution to the Theory of Economic Growth.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 70: 65-94.
Stiglitz, Joseph. 2000. “Capital Market Liberalization, Economic Growth, and Instability.”
World Development, 28(6): 1075–86.
Stulz, Rene. 2005. “The limits of financial globalization,” Journal of Finance, v60(4), 15951638.
Summers, Lawrence H. 2000. “International Financial Crises: Causes, Prevention, and
Cures.” American Economic Review, 90(2): 1–16.
Tytell, Irina, and Shang-Jin Wei. 2004. “Does Financial Globalization Induce Better
Macroeconomic Policies.” IMF Working Paper 04/84.
World Economic Outlook. September 2005. Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund.
31

32

32

33

Table 1. The Changing Composition of Gross Inflows and External Liabilities

1980-84 1985-89 1990-94 1995-99 2000-04
Gross Inflows
Emerging Markets (in billions of U.S. dollars)
Share of Debt
Share of FDI
Share of Equity

66
83.0
15.5
1.5

60
69.3
27.3
3.4

194
63.9
24.4
11.7

328
48.2
40.7
11.0

288
39.3
48.6
12.1

Other Developing Countries (in billions of U.S. dollars)
Share of Debt
Share of FDI
Share of Equity

6
83.8
15.1
1.1

4
82.2
17.2
0.6

7
71.8
27.7
0.5

13
58.6
40.9
0.5

16
55.4
44.2
0.4

Emerging Markets (in billions of U.S. dollars)
Share of Debt
Share of FDI
Share of Equity

611
84.6
14.2
1.2

865
83.7
14.6
1.8

1,356
70.9
21.5
7.6

2,585
61.1
29.0
10.0

3,469
51.7
36.7
11.5

Other Developing Countries (in billions of U.S. dollars)
Share of Debt
Share of FDI
Share of Equity

71
79.9
19.8
0.3

101
84.1
15.4
0.5

129
81.2
18.3
0.5

170
73.7
25.5
0.8

222
64.9
33.6
1.5

Gross External Liabilities

Sources: Data for the top panel are taken from Table 2 of Kose, Prasad, Rogoff and Wei
(2006), which is based on data from the IMF's International Financial Statistics and Lane and
Milesi-Ferretti (2006). The lower panel is based on Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2006) and
authors' calculations.
Notes: "Debt” is defined as the sum of portfolio debt, bank loans & deposits, and other debt
instruments FDI is foreign direct investment and "equity" refers to portfolio equity flows.
Data are based on cross-country averages of annual data over the relevant five-year period.
The sample covers 20 emerging markets and 30 other developing countries.

33

34
Figure 1. Foreign Exchange Reserves Held by Non-industrial Economies
(in trillions of U.S. dollars)

Sources: The IMF’s International Financial Statistics and authors’ calculations
Note: This figure is based on data for147 countries.
Figure 2. Trade Openness
(the sum of imports and exports as a ratio to GDP, in 2000 constant prices)

Sources: Penn World Tables 6.2 and authors' calculations
Notes: The sample comprises 20 emerging markets and 30 other developing countries. The
statistics shown above are based on cross-sectional distributions of the openness measure,
calculated separately for each year.
34

35

Figure 3. Securitizing Foreign Exchange Reserves

Inflows

Investment

$

$
$

Closed-end
mutual funds

Central Bank
RMB
RMB

Liquidity

RMB

Sterilization

35

Shares

