NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SECOND-BEST INSTITUTIONS
Dani Rodrik
Working Paper 14050
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14050

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2008

The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Dani Rodrik. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Second-Best Institutions
Dani Rodrik
NBER Working Paper No. 14050
June 2008
JEL No. O1
ABSTRACT
The focus of policy reform in developing countries has moved from getting prices right to getting
institutions right, and accordingly countries are increasingly being advised to move towards "best-practice"
institutions. This paper argues that appropriate institutions for developing countries are instead "second-best"
institutions -- those that take into account context-specific market and government failures that cannot
be removed in short order. Such institutions will often diverge greatly from best practice. The argument
is illustrated using examples from four areas: contract enforcement, entrepreneurship, trade openness,
and macroeconomic stability.

Dani Rodrik
John F. Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
dani_rodrik@harvard.edu

SECOND-BEST INSTITUTIONS
Dani Rodrik*
January 2008
The focus of reforms in the developing world has moved from getting prices right to
getting institutions right. This reflects the recognition that markets are unlikely to work well in
the absence of a predictable and legitimate set of rules that support economic activity and
dispense its fruits. “Governance reforms” have become the buzzword for bilateral donors and
multilateral institutions, in much the same way that liberalization, privatization and stabilization
were the mantras of the 1980s.
But what kind of institutions should reformers strive to build? It is easier to list the
functions that good institutions perform than it is to describe the shape they should take.
Desirable institutions provide security of property rights, enforce contracts, stimulate
entrepreneurship, foster integration in the world economy, maintain macroeconomic stability,
manage risk-taking by financial intermediaries, supply social insurance and safety nets, and
enhance voice and accountability. But as the variety of institutional forms that prevail in the
advanced countries themselves suggests (Richard Freeman 2000, Peter Hall and David Soskice
2001), each one of these ends can be achieved in a large number of different ways (Dani Rodrik
2007).
Furthermore, developing nations are different from advanced countries in that they face
both greater challenges and more constraints. That this may require “appropriate” institutions
differing from those that prevail in rich countries is an old theme that goes back at least to
Alexander Gerschenkron (1962). This theme has been picked up in a number of recent analyses.
For example, Daron Acemoglu et al. (2006) argue that countries that are distant from the global
*

John F. Kennedy School of Government, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138 (dani_rodrik@harvard.edu).

2
technology frontier, and where the main challenge is stimulating investment rather than
innovation, may benefit from institutional arrangements that privilege incumbent firms over
entrants because these generate the rents that finance the requisite investments. Yingyi Qian
(2003) has ascribed China’s success to the adoption of a variety of transitional and heterodox
institutions that managed to provide efficient incentives while maintaining the rents of those who
are politically powerful. Avinash Dixit (2004) has argued that self-enforcing governance
arrangements can be more efficient than formal institutions in early stages of economic
development in light of the large fixed costs of setting up the latter. Simeon Djankov et al.
(2003) conceptualize institutions as a spectrum that runs the full gamut between private ordering
(with no room for public enforcement) to state ownership (with no room for private enterprise),
and argue that the appropriate choice depends on a society’s initial conditions.
Yet this literature appears to have had very little impact on operational practices. The
type of institutional reform promoted by multilateral organizations such as the World Bank, IMF,
or the World Trade Organization is heavily biased towards a best-practice model. It presumes it
is possible to determine a unique set of appropriate institutional arrangements ex ante and views
convergence towards those arrangements as inherently desirable. One of its apparent virtues is
that it enables cross-national comparisons and benchmarking: institutional performance can be
measured by, say, counting the number of days it takes to register a firm in different countries or
settle a commercial dispute in courts. This approach is grounded in a first-best mindset which
presumes the primary role of institutional arrangements is to minimize transaction costs in the
immediately relevant domain--without paying attention to potential interactions with institutional
features elsewhere in the system.

3
I shall argue that dealing with the institutional landscape in developing economies
requires a second-best mindset. In such settings, a focus on best-practice institutions not only
creates blind spots, leading us to overlook reforms that might achieve the desired ends at lower
cost, it can also backfire. I will elaborate on this point using illustrations from four areas:
contract enforcement, entrepreneurship, trade openness, and macroeconomic stability.

I. Courts and contract enforcement
Consider the legal environment in which firms operate in most countries of Sub-Saharan
Africa. Even though there are commercial laws on the books that govern the settlement of
contractual disputes, courts are highly inefficient, costly to use, and potentially corruptible. Firms
therefore rarely resort to them in practice. When Ghanaian firms were asked whether they would
go to court following a dispute with a supplier or a client, fewer than 10 percent answered in the
affirmative (Marcel Fafchamps 2004, Table 4.5). Lacking legal recourse, firms resort instead to
relational contracting: they build long-term, personalized relationships with their suppliers or
consumers, and sustain cooperation through repeated interaction. In addition, they screen
potential business partners by gathering information about them, inspect goods on delivery prior
to payment, and are often willing to renegotiate when contract terms are not fulfilled (Fafchamps
2004).
This brief description of the contracting environment suggests that a weak judiciary
imposes significant costs on doing business in Africa. It is only one short step to conclude that a
package of judicial reforms—aimed at strengthening the capacity, autonomy, and honesty of
courts—is an important priority for the region.

4
But now consider the situation in Vietnam, where the private sector has been booming
and the economy has been growing at 8 percent a year. The legal environment is, if anything, in
worse shape there than it is in most of Africa. In their surveys of firms, John McMillan and
Christopher Woodruff (1999) found that there was little confidence in the courts and very little
resort to them. Firms relied instead on relational contracting, just as in Africa. The strategies
were in fact quite similar: build long-term relationships based on trust, demand immediate
payment, screen out unreliable firms, and renegotiate when things run into trouble.
Why is relational contracting able to sustain so much more economic activity in Vietnam
than it does in African settings? I don’t know. But we can nonetheless draw some implications
from this comparison. First, even if the formal system of contract enforcement is weak, the
contracting environment can still be conducive to high growth in the presence of informal
substitutes. Obviously, the legal system has (so far) not constrained the growth of Vietnam’s
private sector. Second, the knee-jerk reaction that the apparent weakness of courts in Africa
requires an immediate remedy in the form of judicial reform may well be misplaced. Since
relational contracting in Africa has so many of the same features of that in Vietnam, perhaps it is
not the inadequacies of the legal system that constrains Africa’s growth either.
Third, and more intriguingly, an effort to strengthen judicial (third-party) enforcement
can easily do more harm than good in the presence of relational contracting. Imagine that some
of the firms begin to think that they can rely on courts and therefore don’t care about the
reputation of the suppliers that they work with. Since suppliers that cheat now have an improved
outside option, the discipline that prevents opportunistic behavior in relational contracts is
undermined (Dixit 2004, chap. 2). This raises transaction costs for firms that continue to regard
courts as ineffective.

5
Thinking in these second-best terms also suggest avenues of reform that may have been
easily overlooked. Perhaps it is more effective to enhance relational contracting—for example by
improving information gathering and dissemination about the reputation of firms—than to invest
(at the current stage of a country’s development at least) in first-class legal institutions. Perhaps
early efforts at reforming formal contract enforcement institutions should focus on specific
categories of firms that do not have access to relational contracting—foreign firms or new
firms—instead of targeting all firms across the board.
II. Entry regulations and entrepreneurship
Entrepreneurship can be suppressed for a variety of reasons. Entry costs may be high,
property rights may not be well protected, the contracting environment may be poor (either
because relational contracting does not work well or the courts are ineffective), or the perceived
returns may be low. The World Bank’s Doing Business Surveys and Investment Climate
Assessments focus on some of these impediments while neglecting others, potentially skewing
institutional reform strategies. In particular, costs associated with the regulatory and legal
regimes figure prominently, while costs relating to relational contracting or market imperfections
are entirely absent.
Consider entry regulations. Licensing and registration requirements that raise the cost of
entry reduce competition and generate rents for incumbents. In one view the world, this is an
unmitigated bad because it generates static inefficiencies and possibly also undermines
productivity growth over time through the dynamics of entrepreneurial selection. In a first-best
world, that would be the end of the story. But in a second-best world, rents can be useful to
stimulate entrepreneurship. In fact, rents may well be a necessary condition for adequate levels
of entrepreneurship to emerge in non-traditional economic activities.

6
This point is made in Ricardo Hausmann and Rodrik (2003) using a particular model of
entrepreneurship that may be particularly relevant to developing countries. In this model,
entrepreneurs provide a cost-discovery function: by engaging in new economic activities, they
help map out the underlying cost structure of the economy, providing valuable information to
other entrepreneurs about what can be produced profitably and what can not. This kind of
informational spillover implies that the requisite level of entrepreneurship is generically undersupplied in competitive situations. In fact, under free entry, the incentive to engage in cost
discovery is eliminated totally: if I discover, say, that pineapple canning is a profitable economic
activity my profits are quickly socialized through imitative entry, while if I discover that it was a
mistake to invest in that activity, I bear the losses in full. There needs to be some rents in
equilibrium, maintained through entry restrictions or other means, for entrepreneurship of this
kind to be provided at all. Bailey Klinger and Daniel Lederman (2006) provide some evidence
that entry barriers may indeed promote new export activities.
More generally, rents play a useful role in sustaining long-term relational contracts of the
sort discussed in the previous section. When entrepreneurs do not earn rents which they can
share with their suppliers, they have no carrot with which they can induce “honest” behavior on
the part of the latter. And when creditors earn no rents, they have little incentive to monitor
borrowers and improve project selection (Thomas Hellman et al. 1997). The paper by Acemoglu
et al. (2006) I referred to earlier emphasizes the growth-enhancing role of such rent-sustained
relationships early in the development process. In all these settings, a moderate amount of entry
restrictions helps because foregone efficiency gains are more than offset by improvements in
dynamic incentives.

7
These considerations suggest that a single-minded effort to reduce entry regulations may
not only fail to produce the intended effects, it can also backfire when the binding constraint is
expected returns that are too small rather than inadequate competition. Appropriate reform
strategy requires having a good fix on the binding constraint.
III. Import liberalization and global integration
Suppose you want to open yourself up to international trade and integrate into the global
economy. The textbooks (and the WTO) suggest you accomplish this by eliminating quantitative
restrictions and other administrative measures on trade and by lowering your import tariffs.
But a striking feature of the global experience with trade liberalization over the last half
century is that the most successful globalizers among developing countries adopted institutional
arrangements that look quite different. South Korea and Taiwan instituted a regime of export
subsidies in the 1960s, highly differentiated by product and targeted at non-traditional exports.
Southeast Asian countries like Malaysia and Thailand relied heavily on export-processing zones,
as did Mauritius, a rare African globalization success story. China relied on a combination of
export incentives and Special Economic Zones. In none of these countries did tariff cuts on
imports play a significant role in fostering outward orientation early on. Chile is perhaps the only
case that fits what most economists and policy advisers would consider “best-practice” in trade
liberalization.
What is going on here? One could argue that the manner in which outward orientation is
achieved is immaterial since export promotion is the same as import liberalization (thanks to the
Lerner symmetry theorem). But this argument overlooks the highly specific nature of the export
incentives provided by the Asian countries, and in any case only further highlights the puzzle of
why these countries did not choose the much simpler route of import liberalization.

8
An important feature of these alternative paths to global integration is that they generate
supply incentives at the margin for new tradable activities, without removing protection for
existing activities. That in turn has two advantages, one having to do with efficiency and the
other with political economy. The efficiency reason is that the Asian model of liberalization
protects employment in the transition to the new long-run equilibrium. When new export
oriented activities are slow to arise—due either to overvalued exchange rates or to market
failures that hinder supply incentives for non-traditional products—import liberalization may
result in workers in previously protected industries being displaced and transferred into even less
productive activities such as informality or unemployment. Indeed, Latin America’s poor
economy-wide TFP performance and its expanding informality during the 1990s can be ascribed
in part to the conventional program of import liberalization that was administered in the region.
Export subsidies, EPZs, and SEZ instead create new opportunities at the margin, while
minimizing the squeeze on import-competing activities.
The political economy advantage is now easy to see. The sequential, marginal nature of
the Asian model of liberalization blunts the adverse impact on the firms in import-competing
sectors and therefore removes an important obstacle to trade reform. For example, the Mauritian
EPZ enabled an export boom in the midst of a highly protected domestic economy and despite
the political power of import-substituting industrialists who would never have allowed acrossthe-board import liberalization at the time.
The lesson here is that a particular economic objective—outward orientation—can be
achieved through a number of different institutional designs, and sometimes it is worth doing
things in an unorthodox, round-about way if this will serve to relax other constraints elsewhere in
the system.

9
IV. Credibility of monetary policy and economic performance
One of the most striking institutional innovations in the developing world in the last two
decades has been the spread of independent central banks operating under strict rules. Given the
experience with high inflation and macroeconomic instability in the 1970s and 1980s, it is easy
to understand the appeal of these reforms. Central bank independence removes monetary policy
from the day-to-day control of politicians and therefore enhances credibility of anti-inflationary
policies. Along with much improved fiscal policies, it has no doubt contributed to the return of
macroeconomic stability in Latin America and other parts of the world suffering from high
inflation. Together with inflation targeting and flexible exchange rates, it now defines the bestpractice in monetary policy towards which the IMF goads countries under its influence.
But such institutional arrangements begin to look like a worse bargain when low inflation
is no longer the over-arching goal of monetary policy, and in particular when currency
competitiveness becomes a serious concern. The cross-country evidence is highly suggestive
with regard to the growth benefits of currency undervaluation (Rodrik 2008), and it is telling that
few of the central banks in Asia are independent. As many governments are finding out, it is very
difficult to get the central bank to respond to currency concerns when it has been locked into a
price-stability objective and when its responsiveness to the government has been diminished
through independence.
Argentina’s convertibility experiment during the 1990s illustrates in extreme form both
the benefits and costs of institutional lock-in. The convertibility law was an ingenious
institutional innovation through which the government was able to relax the most binding
constraint at the time: the lack of policy credibility on the monetary policy front. The plan
worked as long as the constraint remained unchanged. But once the binding constraint became

10
lack of competitiveness, following the Asian financial crisis and the Brazilian devaluation in
particular, rigid rules that prevented currency depreciation became the problem rather than the
solution. Ultimately, neither convertibility nor central bank independence survived the ensuing
crisis. As Alejandro Neut and Andres Velasco (2003) show, pre-commitments can actually
undermine credibility when unforeseen circumstances render flexibility desirable ex-post.
The lesson here is that institutional rigidity pays off when lack of credibility and time
inconsistency are the main problems of the day, but that it can eventually become a drag on
growth. No single set of best practices will serve the needs of all countries at all times.
V. Concluding remarks
Governments can learn a lot by looking at what works and doesn’t in other settings.
Codifying this experience is no doubt a useful exercise. But real-world reformers operate in a
second-best environment of their own, which means they need to keep an eye on how proposed
solutions affect multiple distortions. Sometimes binding constraints will lie elsewhere and they
need to guard against adverse interactions with other distorted margins. At other times, there will
be multiple ways of removing a constraint, some of which may be politically much more feasible
than others. Finally, the nature of the binding constraint will change over time, requiring a
change in focus as well. Best-practice institutions are, almost by definition, non-contextual and
do not take account these complications. Insofar as they narrow rather than expand the menu of
institutional choices available to reformers, they serve the cause badly.

11
REFERENCES
Acemoglu, Daron, Philippe Aghion and Fabrizio Zilibotti. 2006. “Distance to Frontier, Selection,
and Economic Growth.” Journal of the European Economic Association, 4(March): 3774.
Dixit, Avinash K. 2003. Lawlessness and Economics: Alternative Modes of Governance.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Djankov, Simeon, Edward Glaeser, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes and Andrei
Shleifer. 2003. “The New Comparative Economics.” Journal of Comparative Economics,
31(4): 595-619.
Fafchamps, Marcel. 2004. Market Institutions and Sub-Saharan Africa: Theory and Evidence.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Freeman, Richard B. 2000. “Single Peaked vs. Diversified Capitalism: The Relation Between
Economic Institutions and Outcomes.” NBER Discussion Paper no.7556.
Gerschenkron, Alexander. 1962. Economic Backwardness in Historical Perspective: A Book of
Essays. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Hausmann, Ricardo, and Dani Rodrik. 2003. “Economic Development as Self-Discovery.”
Journal of Development Economics, 72(2): 603-633.
Hall, Peter A., and David Soskice, eds. 2001. Varieties of Capitalism: The Institutional
Foundations of Comparative Advantage. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Hellmann, Thomas, Kevin Murdock, and Joseph Stiglitz. 1997. “Financial Restraint: Toward a
New Paradigm.” In The Role of Government in East Asian Economic Development:
Comparative Institutional Analysis, eds. M. Aoki et al. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

12
Klinger, Bailey, and Daniel Lederman. 2006. “Diversification, Innovation, and Imitation inside
the Global Technological Frontier.” World Bank Policy Research Discussion Paper no.
3872.
Neut, Alejandro, and Andres Velasco. 2003. “Tough Policies, Incredible Policies?” NBER
Discussion Paper no. 9932.
Qian , Yingyi. 2003. “How Reform Worked in China.” In In Search of Prosperity: Analytic
Narratives on Economic Growth, ed. Dani Rodrik. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press.
Rodrik, Dani. 2007. One Economics, Many Recipes: Globalization, Institutions, and Economic
Growth. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Rodrik, Dani. Forthcoming. “The Real Exchange Rate and Economic Growth: Theory and
Evidence.” Harvard University.

