                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           BRINGING SCIENCE TO MARKET:
                       COMMERCIALIZING FROM NIH SBIR AWARDS

                                          Albert N. Link
                                        Christopher J. Ruhm

                                        Working Paper 14057
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14057


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2008




We are pleased to acknowledge the helpful comments and suggestions of our colleagues David Ribar
and Ken Snowden, as well as the able research assistance of Rebecca Klimowicz. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Albert N. Link and Christopher J. Ruhm. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Bringing Science to Market: Commercializing from NIH SBIR Awards
Albert N. Link and Christopher J. Ruhm
NBER Working Paper No. 14057
June 2008
JEL No. I28,O38

                                                 ABSTRACT

We offer empirical information on the correlates of commercialization activity for research projects
funded through the U.S. National Institutes of Health's (NIH's) Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) award program. Based on this analysis we suggest possible recommendations for improving
this aspect of the performance of NIH's SBIR program. Specifically, we estimate a model of the probability
of commercialization as a function of the project's ability to attract additional developmental funding,
along with other control variables. We find that additional developmental funding from non-SBIR
federal sources and from own internal sources are important predictors of commercialization success,
relatively more so than additional developmental funding from venture capitalists. We also find, among
other things, that university involvement in the underlying research increases the probability of commercialization.
Thus, these factors should be considered by NIH when making awards, if increased commercialization
is an objective.


Albert N. Link
Department of Economics
Bryan School, UNCG
P.O. Box 26165
Greensboro, NC 27402-6165
al_link@uncg.edu

Christopher J. Ruhm
Department of Economics
Bryan School, UNCG
P.O. Box 26165
Greensboro, NC 27402-6165
and NBER
chrisruhm@uncg.edu
                                 Bringing Science to Market:
                         Commercializing from NIH SBIR Awards



I. Introduction
In light of the productivity slowdown in the United States in the late-1970s and early-
1980s, a number of public policy responses were initiated to enhance the rate of U.S.
innovation through increases in research and development (R&D) and related activities.1
The Bayh-Dole Act was passed in 1980, the R&E Tax Credit was enacted in 1981, the
Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) program was created in 1982, and the
National Cooperative Research Act was legislated in 1984. The broad purpose of these
policy responses was to renew technological growth throughout the nation.2


This paper focuses specifically on the management of the SBIR program, and it offers
information relevant to assessment of the program’s objective of stimulating the private
sector’s commercialization of the innovations resulting from the use of public resources.
Based on that information, the paper also suggests possible policy recommendations to
improve funding performance. We certainly do not claim that the SBIR program was the
most significant of the post-productivity slowdown policy initiatives. However, our focus
on it is particularly fruitful because of the availability of unique and rich data—recently
collected by the National Research Council (NRC) within the National Academies as part
of an overall evaluation of the SBIR program—related to SBIR projects funded by the
National Institutes of Health (NIH) and because the SBIR program has yet to be analyzed
statistically relative to its stated objectives.3




1 Real R&D performed in U.S. industry had been decreasing since 1970, and not until 1977 did it return to its
1969 pre-decline level. A number of culprits have been identified as related to the U.S. productivity
slowdown. For a review of this literature, see Link and Siegel (2003).
2 Public support for enhancing innovation in small firms can be traced to the 1960s (Turner and Brown
1999).
3 Previous studies of NIH, or of an institute within NIH, include HHS (2003); Audretsch, Aldridge, and Oettl
(2006); and Toole and Czarnitzki (2007). None of these studies investigated within the context of an
econometric model the determinants of the incidence of commercialization from SBIR-funded projects.



                                                   Page 2
Statistical analysis of commercialization is important at two levels. Broadly, it is a
dimension of public accountability (Link and Scott 1998); as stated in a recent NRC report:
“Commercializing SBIR-supported innovation is necessary if the nation is to capitalize on
its SBIR investments” (National Research Council 2007, p. 5). And, at a narrower level,
an assessment offers the potential for policy recommendations to improve the management
of the SBIR program.


Commercialization of SBIR projects funded by the NIH is of particular interest for several
reasons. First, as detailed below, the Department of Health and Human Services is the
largest funder of non-defense related SBIR projects and most of these are through the NIH.
Second, commercialized technologies that result in improvements in health are particularly
likely to have high rates of return (social and private). For instance, recent research (e.g.,
Murphy and Topel 2006; Hall and Jones 2007) documents both the large net benefit of
previous health spending, as well as the desirability of even higher expenditure shares in
the future.


This paper is outlined as follows. In Section II, we overview the history of the SBIR
program with an emphasis on current funding activities. Section III describes the NIH
SBIR dataset analyzed, and therein we posit the empirical framework used for estimating
the probability that an SBIR-funded project will be commercialized. Section IV presents
our econometric findings. Section V discusses endogeneity issues related to our
econometric analysis, and Section VI offers tentative policy recommendations subject to
the limitations of our analysis.


II. Overview of the SBIR Program
The SBIR program is a public/private partnership that provides grants to fund private R&D
projects. It aims to help fulfill the government’s mission to enhance private-sector R&D
and to complement the results of federal research.4 A prototype of the SBIR program
began at the National Science Foundation (NSF) in 1977 (Tibbetts 1999). At that time, the

4This section draws on Link and Scott (2000); Audretsch, Link, and Scott (2002); National Research
Council (2004); and Wessner (2000, 2007). For a taxonomy of public/private partnerships, see Link (1999,
2006).



                                                  Page 3
goal of the program was to encourage small businesses—increasingly recognized to be a
source of innovation and employment in the U.S. economy—to participate in NSF-
sponsored research, especially research with commercial potential. Because of the early
success of the program at NSF, Congress passed the Small Business Innovation
Development Act of 1982 (P.L. 97-219; hereafter, the 1982 Act).


The 1982 Act required all government departments and agencies with external research
programs of greater than $100 million to establish their own SBIR program and to set aside
funds equal to 0.20 percent of the external research budget.5 In 1983, this amount totaled
$45 million.


The 1982 Act stated that the objectives of the program are:
         (1) to stimulate technological innovation
         (2) to use small business to meet Federal research and development needs
         (3) to foster and encourage participation by minority and disadvantaged
             persons in technological innovation
         (4) to increase private sector commercialization of innovations derived
             from Federal research and development.


As part of the 1982 Act, SBIR program awards were structured as defined by three phases
(National Research Council 2004; Wessner 2007).6 Phase I awards are small, generally
less than $100,000 for the six month award period. The purpose of Phase I awards is to
assist businesses as they assess the feasibility of an idea’s scientific and commercial




5Since  SBIR is a set aside program, it redirects existing R&D funds for competitive awards to small
businesses rather than appropriating new monies for R&D. The 1982 Act allowed for this percentage to
increase over time.
6 As stated in the 1982 Act, to be eligible for an SBIR award, the small business must be: independently
owned and operated; other than the dominant firms in the field in which they are proposing to carry out SBIR
projects; organized and operated for profit; the employer of 500 or fewer employees, including employees of
subsidiaries and affiliates; the primary source of employment for the project’s principal investigator at the
time of award and during the period when the research is conducted; and at least 51 percent owned by U.S.
citizens or lawfully admitted permanent resident aliens. Our database does not cover projects funded under
the related Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) program, which has similar aims but different
eligibility requirements.



                                                   Page 4
potential in response to the funding agency’s objectives.7 Phase II awards typically range
up to $750,000 over two years.8 These awards are for the business to develop further its
proposed research, ideally leading to a commercializable product, process, or service.9 The
Phase II awards of public funds for development are sometimes augmented by outside
private funding (Wessner 2000). Further work on the projects launched through the SBIR
program occurs in what is called Phase III, which does not involve SBIR funds.10 At this
stage businesses needing additional financing—to ensure that the product, process, or
service can move into the marketplace—are expected to obtain it from sources other than
the SBIR program.


In 1992, the SBIR program was reauthorized until 2000 through the Small Business
Research and Development Enactment Act (P.L. 102-564). Under the 1982 Act, the set
aside had increased to 1.25 percent; the 1992 reauthorization raised that amount over time
to 2.50 percent and re-emphasized the commercialization intent of SBIR-funded
technologies (see point (4) of the 1982 Act above).11 The 1992 reauthorization broadened
objective (3) above to also focus on women: “to provide for enhanced outreach efforts to
increase the participation of … small businesses that are 51 percent owned and controlled
by women.” The Small Business Reauthorization Act of 2000 (P.L. 106-554) extended the
SBIR program until 2008 and kept the 2.50 percent set aside.12


7 “The objective of Phase I is to determine the scientific or technical feasibility and commercial merit of the
proposed research or R&D efforts and the quality of performance of the small business concern, prior to
providing further Federal support in Phase II.” See,
http://grants.nih.gov/grants/funding/SBIRContract/PHS2008-1.pdf, page 1.
8 It is not uncommon, however, for NIH Phase II awards to exceed the $750,000 threshold. While NIH
offers no research assessment-based justification, the NRC, as part of its evaluation of SBIR programs
(discussed below) recommended that NIH formalize criteria for larger awards (Wessner forthcoming). See
footnote 12.
9 “The objective of Phase II is to continue the research or R&D efforts initiated in Phase I. Funding shall be
based on the results of Phase I and the scientific and technical merit and commercial potential of the Phase II
proposal.” See, http://grants.nih.gov/grants/funding/SBIRContract/PHS2008-1.pdf, page 1. According to
Wessner (forthcoming), in 2004 about 6 percent of Phase I applications were approved. Of those, just over
one-third of those that requested Phase II funding were approved.
10 “The objective of Phase III, where appropriate, is for the small business concern to pursue with non-SBIR
funds the commercialization objectives resulting from the outcomes of the research or R&D funded in Phases
I and II.” See, http://grants.nih.gov/grants/funding/SBIRContract/PHS2008-1.pdf, page 1.
11 The percentage increased to 1.5 in 1993 and 1994, 2.0 in 1995, and 2.5 in 1997.
12 At the time of writing this paper, the SBIR/STTR Authorization Act was introduced in the U.S. House of
Representatives as H.R. 5819. It would, among other things, extend the SBIR program until 2010, increase



                                                    Page 5
Eleven agencies currently participate in the SBIR program: the Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA), the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), the National
Science Foundation (NSF), and the Departments of Agriculture (USDA), Commerce
(DoC), Defense (DoD), Education (ED), Energy (DoE), Health and Human Services
(HHS, particularly the NIH), Transportation (DoT), and, most recently, Homeland Security
(DHS). In 2005, DoD maintained the largest program, awarding about 51 percent of total
dollars and funding about 57 percent of total awards in that year. Five agencies—DoD,
HHS, NASA, DoE, and NSF—account for nearly 97 percent of the program’s
expenditures, with HHS (which includes the NIH) being the second most important,
accounting for 30 percent of awards and 19 percent of total dollars in 2005. See Table 1.


III. The NRC Dataset and the Statistical Framework
The NRC dataset on NIH SBIR awards was constructed for the broader purpose of
conducting a cross-agency evaluation of the SBIR program, as requested by Congress as
part of the Small Business Reauthorization Act of 2000.13 This is the dataset analyzed
herein.14


Between 1992 and 2001—the time period covered in the NRC dataset—2,497 Phase II
SBIR project awards were made by NIH. Of these, 1,672 were randomly selected by the
NRC (for budgetary reasons) to receive an in-depth survey related to outputs associated
with the project, representing a random sampling proportion of 67.0 percent. The NCR’s
random sample was chosen to ensure balanced coverage by year and by number of Phase II
awards received each year between 1992 and 2001. From the 1,672 random projects, 488
completed or partially completed surveys were returned to the NRC. Phase II research was


agency set asides from 2.50 percent to 3.00 percent, and increase Phase I and Phase II funding limits to
$300,000 and $2.2 million, respectively.
13 This National Research Council initiative was mandated by the Small Business Reauthorization Act of
2000 (H.R. 5667). For background information on the Council’s efforts, see National Research Council
(2007) and Wessner (2007). The NRC, which graciously made these data available for this study, is also in
the process of assessing the SBIR program in the Department of Defense, Department of Energy, NASA, and
the National Science Foundation. See National Research Council (2004, 2007) for an overview of these
agencies.
14 The dataset and survey questionnaires are described completely in Cahill (2006).




                                                 Page 6
not yet finished in 34 of the projects with completed surveys, 5 projects were excluded
because they were funded by Institutes with fewer than 5 completed surveys, and another
44 did not provide all of the information needed for our analysis (discussed below).15 The
final sample of projects analyzed is 405; see Table 2.


The project output focused on in this study is a dichotomous variable taking the value of
one (zero) for completed Phase II projects that had (had not) resulted in commercialized
products, processes, services or other sales such as rights to technology or licensing
revenues by 2005, the year that the NRC survey was administered. As shown in Table 3,
the mean value of this dichotomous variable Commercial is .5111. In other words, the
chance of a Phase II NIH SBIR award being successful, as measured in terms of it
resulting in a commercialized technology was just over 50 percent or just better than the
odds associated with the flip of a fair coin.16


There is a conspicuous void of systematic information in the academic literature on factors
associated with the success of small entrepreneurial firms (Åstebro 1998). The data that do
exist are limited in scope, and they relate in general to the longevity and commercial
success of R&D-based technologies in larger, well-established organizations.17 Thus, our



15 The National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research had only four funded projects with surveys
returned, there was only a single project funded by the National Library of Medicine and no projects were
funded by the National Center for Complementary and Alternative Medicine. We tested robustness of the
econometric results (below) to including observations with missing values for one or more covariates by
placing a value of zero on these regressors and also controlling for a set of missing value dummy variables.
The findings were not materially different than those presented below; these results are available from the
authors on request
16 We had no priors about the percent of NIH SBIR projects that had commercialized. The NIH’s Phase I
selection criteria focus, in part, on the significance of the project’s commercialization potential: One
criterion question is: “Does the proposed project have commercial potential to lead to a marketable product,
process or service?” And, at the Phase II stage, there are additional related criteria, including” “Did the
applicant submit a concise Commercialization Plan?” and “Does the project carry a high degree of
commercial potential, as described in the Commercialization Plan?” See:
http://grants.nih.gov/grants/funding/sbirsttr_ReviewCriteria.htm
17 Mansfield et al. (1971), for example, reported an average probability of commercial success from R&D
projects in three laboratories (one chemical laboratory and two proprietary drug laboratories) of 31 percent.
We caution the reader about comparing the probability of commercial success from this, or other similar case
studies, to the probability of commercialization from NIH SBIR awards and concluding that businesses
receiving NIH SBIR award are more successful. The size and underlying research structure of the two
groups of businesses is too different for meaningful comparisons.



                                                   Page 7
hypotheses below follow from both a selected theoretical literature and related and
generalizable empirical studies.


We posit a positive correlation between commercialization and the presence of additional
development funding for the award project. We believe that small entrepreneurial
businesses face what Zeira (1987) called “structural uncertainty” (p. 204). Specifically,
such businesses do not know a priori if their SBIR technology is commercializable, and if
it is, what its commercial potential might be.18 Zeira argued, but not in the context of
SBIR, that under structural uncertainty relevant information could be acquired through
technological research. Thus, to the extent that the presence of additional development
funding reflects the ability of a business to conduct more research on its SBIR project, then
that project, ceteris paribus, should have a greater probability of commercialization—this,
of course, is the objective of Phase III.


Relatedly, Åstebro (2003) argued that independent inventors, who might be similar to the
entrepreneurs in the businesses that receive NIH SBIR awards, inherently face problems
attracting external financing due to “information asymmetries, moral hazard and
coordination problems” (p. 237).19 Private investors (e.g., venture capitalists, foreign
investors) incur significant costs acquiring information about new technologies. When
they do invest in a potential technology, it is therefore reasonable to conclude that at least
two hurdles have been cleared. One hurdle is that the business receiving the venture
capital was selected among all businesses to be scrutinized, and the other hurdle is that the
specific business was then selected among all that were scrutinized. This suggests, ceteris
paribus, that the probability of commercialization should be greater for NIH SBIR project
for which there is additional developmental funding from private investors.


Thus, our empirical model is:

18 We thank an anonymous referee for pointing out the additional possibilities that: small businesses have
greater difficulty obtaining external financing, so only the better projects are accepted; larger businesses are
on average more productive that smaller businesses so the latter have to play catch up within a market niche;
and subsidies are generally granted to smaller businesses for short term project for which results are more
easily observed.
19 Link and Scott (2000) documented this fact through case studies of DoD SBIR awards.




                                                     Page 8
(1)     Probability (commercialization) = f (AddFund, X)


where, commercialization is measured by the dichotomous variable Commercial, and
where the variable AddFund represents additional developmental funding received by the
business in support of the technology developed during its Phase II project. AddFund
equals 1 if any additional developmental funding was received to support the project at
some point in time, and 0 otherwise. Just under 59 percent of the projects in the sample
received additional developmental funding; see Table 3.


In some specifications of equation (1) we disaggregate additional developmental funding
into five non-mutually exclusive dichotomous categories. AddFund-Fed equals 1 if the
project received additional non-SBIR funds from federal sources, and 0 otherwise;
AddFund-VC equals 1 for U.S. venture capital funds, and 0 otherwise; AddFund-Oth
equals 1 for other private investment funds (e.g., foreign investment, other private equity,
or other domestic private company), and 0 otherwise; AddFund-SLU equals 1 for state or
local government or university funds, and 0 otherwise; and AddFund-Own equals 1 for
personal and/or internal business funds, and 0 otherwise. Table 3 also shows mean
amounts of external funding from each of these sources, denoted with a $ in front of the
specified variable (e.g. $AddFund-Fed indicates that $ amount of non-SBIR federal funds
received).


Five control variables are subsumed in vector X. The first represents the knowledge base,
or absorptive capacity (Cohen and Levinthal 1989), of the business with respect to the
technology being researched during the Phase II project. KnowlBase is the number of
previous Phase II awards the business has previously received that are related to the project
supported by the current Phase II award.20 Nearly 38 percent of the projects in our sample
are related to previous Phase II awards (not shown in Table 3). To the extent there is
learning-by-doing, in the sense of Arrow (1962), and/or economies of scope in research


20The overall knowledge base of the business is broader than measured by this variable; our emphasis is on
complementary knowledge from previous awards.



                                                  Page 9
from an expanded knowledge base, and to the extent that this enriched knowledge base
leads to subsequent research success, we posit a positive correlation between KnowlBase
and the probability of commercialization, ceteris paribus.21 The distribution of previous
related Phase II SBIR awards is skewed. Nearly 38 percent of the projects in our sample
are related to previous Phase II awards (not shown in Table 3) but only 17 percent are in
businesses with more than one previous related award while 5 percent are in businesses
having previously received 5 or more Phase II awards.


The second control variable represents the ownership of the business being 51 percent
owned and controlled by a female. Female equals 1 for such a business, and 0 otherwise.
Nearly 18 percent of the Phase II projects in the sample were awarded to female owned
and controlled businesses; see Table 3. We do not posit the direction of the correlation
between Female and the probability of commercialization, but rather offer alternative
interpretations of an observed correlation. If female owned and controlled businesses were
discriminated against from receiving SBIR awards prior to the 1992 reauthorization,
removing that bias should imply that such businesses would now be equally as successful
as other businesses, thus there should not be any statistical correlation between Female and
the probability of commercialization. If female owned and controlled businesses were less
qualified, on average, to receive SBIR awards, and reauthorization was interpreted as a
mandate for agencies to now fund more of these projects, there should be a negative
correlation between Female and the probability of commercialization. Conversely, if
female owned and controlled businesses were more qualified to receive NIH SBIR awards
but were not being objectively evaluated prior to the reauthorization, there should be a
positive correlation between Female and the probability of commercialization.


The third control variable represents the ownership of the business being 51 percent
minority owned and controlled. Minority equals 1 for such a business, and 0 otherwise.
As shown in Table 3, nearly 5 percent of the Phase II projects in the sample were awarded



21 Link and Scott (2005) offered this same argument, and supported it empirically, with respect to various
dimensions of success of small internal research projects conducted within the laboratories of the National
Institute of Standards and Technology.



                                                   Page 10
to minority owned and controlled businesses.22 Although the 1992 reauthorization did not
explicitly focus on increasing minority participation, it was nevertheless a stated objective
of the 1982 Act. We anticipate that the interpretation of the direction of correlation
between Minority and the probability of commercialization will be similar to that for
Female.


The fourth control variable quantifies if a university was involved with the SBIR project
research (Univ=1), or not (Univ=0).23 Hall, Link, and Scott (2003) argued that universities
are invited to partner with small entrepreneurial research joint ventures to provide research
insights that are anticipatory of future research problems. University faculty thus act as
ombudsman to oversee the research and help to ensure the project’s success. Relatedly
Zucker and Darby and their colleagues (1998a, 1998b, 2001) found that when star
scientists were involved with small biotechnology enterprises, patenting, product
innovations, and the introduction of new products increased. Thus, to the extent that
university involvement, albeit broadly defined by the variable Univ, helps to ensure the
success of research projects, we posit a positive correlation with it and the probability of
commercialization.24 Universities were involved in 53 percent of the sample projects; see
Table 3.


And finally, we control for the attributes of the research associated with the Phase II award
through a set of binary variables representing the Institute within the NIH that funded each
project (defined in the note within Table 3 and recall that 5 projects were deleted from the
sample because they were funded by Institutes with fewer than 5 completed surveys).25


22 2.7 percent of sampled projects are in businesses that were both female and minority owned and
controlled.
23 The survey question asks if (“yes” or “no”) there was any involvement by university faculty, graduate
students, and/or university developed technologies.
24 For a review of the literature related to universities as research partners, see Hall (2004).
25 As examples of the project variation across Institutes, in 1997 the National Cancer Institute funded a
California business to develop an image detector with 100 micrometer spatial resolution applicable to the
detection of cancer in small animals; in 1988 the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute funded a Virginia
business to develop an optical imaging device to measure skin blood glow velocities for the treatment of
vascular disease in diabetic patients; in 1999 the National Institute of Drug Abuse funded a New York
business to develop an Internet-based dissemination plan for information and methods concerning drug abuse
prevention approaches; and in 1994 the National Institute on Deafness and other Communication Disorders



                                                  Page 11
We have no prior expectation about the correlations between the probability of
commercialization and any particular Institute.


A potential empirical concern is selection bias resulting from the relatively low rate (29.2
percent) at which businesses returned the SBIR project surveys. We examined this
possibility by estimating equation (1), by maximum likelihood, as a bivariate probit model
with selection, simultaneously with a model of the probability of response to the project
survey specified by:


(2)      Probability (response) = g (Age),


where Age measures the number of years since the Phase II award, defined as the year of
the survey (2005) less the year of the Phase II award (between 1992 and 2001).26 Our key
identification strategy in the selection model is that Age is included in the response
equation but excluded from the commercialization model. Absent a strong theoretical
foundation for why some businesses would respond to the survey for a particular project,
we posit that the older the Phase II award, the less institutional knowledge there is that still
exists within the business for such a project and thus the less likely the business would
respond to the survey. Thus, there should be a negative correlation between Age and the
probability of response. This is confirmed by our econometric estimates.27


Conversely, Age is not included in the probability of commercialization model: equation
(1). One might reason that the probability of commercialization would increase over time
as the business was first able to complete its Phase II award project and then seek and
receive Phase III funding. However, the data do not support this. In fact, the age
distributions of commercialized and non-commercialized projects are virtually identical,
and the coefficient on Age is small and insignificant when entered as an additional


funded a Florida business to develop a hearing screener based on noise cancellation techniques to rapidly
detect hearing problem in new born infants.
26 The NRC’s (2007) data collection methodology implicitly assumed that recent Phase II awards will be
completed and will have had sufficient time to commercialize within four years.
27 Each additional year of age is predicted to reduce the probability of response by a statistically significant
(at the .01 level) 1.12 percentage points.



                                                     Page 12
covariate in equation (1).28 A reasonable interpretation of these findings is that, if
commercialization is going to occur, it will take place close to the date that the Phase II
award project is completed.


The bivariate probit estimates provided no indication of selection bias. Specifically, the
estimates always fail to reject the null hypothesis that the models of response and
commercialization are independent of one another (the correlation of the errors in the two
models is not significantly different from zero) and the parameter estimates of interest are
always very close to those obtained without accounting for selection.29 For this reason, the
results reported below are for single equation models that do not account for selection.


Table 4 provides sample average values of selected variables for commercialized and
noncommercialized projects. The last column of the table shows p-values for the null
hypothesis that the sample means are the same for the two groups. The most important
findings are that commercialized projects are significantly more likely than non-
commercialized projects to have received additional developmental funding (74 versus 42
percent), particularly non-SBIR funds from federal sources (9.2 versus 3.5 percent) and
from personal or internal funds (63 versus 37 percent). They are also more than twice as
likely to receive venture capital funds but, because this occurs infrequently (4.8 versus 2.0
percent), the difference is not significant at the .10 level. Projects are also significantly (at
the .10 level) more likely to be commercialized when awarded to businesses with a more
extensive knowledge base (1.4 versus 0.8 previous related SBIR projects) and to those
owned by minorities (6.8 versus 3.0 percent). There are no significant differences by other
sources of external funding, female ownership, university involvement or years since the
Phase II award. Finally, projects funded by the National Institutes on Drug Abuse and
Mental Health are significantly more likely than others to commercialize while those
supported by the National Institutes on Aging, Allergy and Infectious Diseases, Arthritis




28 For example, the average ages of commercialized and non-commercialized projects were 7.3 and 7.5
years, while the median age was 7.0 years for both. These results are available from the authors on request.
29 These results are available from the authors on request.




                                                   Page 13
and Musculoskeletal and Skin Disease, National Eye Institute and National Heart Lung and
Blood Institute are relatively less likely to do so (not shown in Table 4).30


Despite large absolute differences in the magnitudes, none of the variables showing dollar
amounts of external funding differ significantly with commercialization status (not shown
in Table 4).31 Consider venture capital funding, which provides the most extreme
example. The mean commercialized project received almost $689,000 of venture capital
compared to less than $56,000 for non-commercialized projects, yet this difference is not
significant at the 0.10 level. The reason is that the receipt of this funding is extremely
skewed, with a small number of projects receiving virtually all of the funds. For instance,
in our sample, just 10 commercialized projects obtained venture capital, with over 90
percent of all such funds received by just three projects.32 One implication is that it will be
quite difficult to model econometrically how the amount of external funding influences
commercialization probabilities, and that efforts to do so will need to account for the
skewness in the distribution.33


Table 5 provides additional information on the frequency and distribution of external
funding. Over one-third (36 percent) of projects receiving additional funding obtain it
from two or more sources, with funding from own company or personal sources being by
far the most common, as well as most frequently being the exclusive source of additional
funding. Indeed, funds are rarely received from most other sources unless some own
company or personal funding is also provided.


IV. Econometric Results
The probability of commercialization models are summarized in Table 6. Because probit
coefficients can be somewhat difficult to interpret, we report marginal effects for the


30 A table showing a complete set of sample means for commercialized and non-commercialized projects is
available from the authors on request.
31 These results are available from the authors on request.
32 These three commercialized projects received $59.9, $50.1 and $20.0 million of venture capital funding.
33 Skewness is also an issue for sources of external funds that are received more frequently. For example,
although 63 percent of commercialized projects obtain personal or internal funding, the average amount
($273,421) is over nine times as large as the median ($30,000).



                                                  Page 14
continuous regressors and predicted effects of changing dichotomous variables from zero
to a one, with the other covariates evaluated at the sample means. Robust standard errors
are reported in parentheses. We account for the possibility of diminishing returns to the
effect of the knowledge base of the business from previous related Phase II projects on
commercialization by controlling for the natural log, rather than level, of related Phase II
projects.34


With reference to the estimated marginal effects in column (1), projects that received
additional developmental funding (AddFund=1) have a greater probability of success than
projects that received no additional funding (AddFund=0). The estimated marginal effect
on AddFund is positive and significant at the .01 level, and it indicates that additional
funding correlates with a 35 percentage point increase in the probability of
commercialization.


Likewise, as the log of the number of previous Phase II awards received by the business
that are related to the current project (KnowlBase) increases, so does the probability of
commercialization: the estimated marginal effect on lnKnowlBase is positive and
significant at the .01 level. To provide perspective on this variable, notice that a 100
percent increase in levels (e.g. from 1 to 2) corresponds to an increase of 0.693 log points.
Thus, a 100 percent increase in the knowledge base is predicted to raise the probability of
commercialization by approximately 10 percentage points (0.1413 x .693 = .098).


Both of these results support our a priori reasoning and are consistent with evidence from
the descriptive analysis.


Female (Female) and/or minority (Minority) owned and controlled businesses are not
significantly more or less likely to commercialize from a Phase II project than are male

34 KnowlBase if redefined as the number of related Phase II projects, including the current one, so that there
are no (undefined) zero values. We obtained qualitatively similar results when controlling for the level rather
than natural log of related previous Phase II projects. We also tested for diminishing returns by estimating
specifications with controls for both linear and quadratic terms. The point estimates from these models
suggest a concave relationship (with the commercialization probability predicted to reach a maximum at
around 21 to 22 previous projects), consistent with the hypothesis of diminishing returns.



                                                   Page 15
and/or non-minority owned and controlled businesses. This suggests that the SBIR
program’s emphasis and funding priorities on female and minority owned and controlled
businesses may be well-focused in that female and minority owned and controlled
businesses commercialize on par with businesses with other ownership profiles.35

Conversely, university involvement (Univ=1) is positively related to the probability of
commercialization; the estimated marginal effect is significant at the .05 level. University
involvement increases the predicted probability of commercialization by 12 percentage
points.


Finally, as a group the Institute effects are statistically significant at the .01 level in this
and all models estimated, with the highest rates of commercialization for projects funded
by the National Institute of Mental Health (MH) and the lowest for those funded by the
National Eye Institute (EY).36


AddFunds is a binary variable quantifying additional developmental funding, from any
source. The model underlying the results in column (2) disaggregates additional
developmental funding into the five specific (although non-mutually exclusive)
dichotomous categories. The presence of additional non-SBIR federal funds, U.S. venture
capital funds, and own funds are all positively related to the probability of
commercialization. The estimated marginal effect of AddFund-Fed is positive and
significant at the .05 level and indicates that the receipt of non-SBIR federal funds is
correlated with a 29 percentage point increase in the probability of commercialization. The
effect of AddFund-Own is positive and significant at the .01 level and is associated with a
28 percentage point rise in the probability of commercialization. Venture capital support,
AddFund-VC, has a positive effect as well on the probability of commercialization, at the
.05 level, and predicts a 26 percentage point higher commercialization probability.


35 However, this conclusion is tentative since we do not know whether there are race/ethnicity or gender
differences in the quality of projects initially receiving SBIR funding.
36 In an effort to also control for the “structural uncertainty” of each project, in the context of Zeira (1987),
we included dummy variables to account for how (i.e., in what non-mutually exclusive form) each project
was commercialized (e.g., software, hardware, process technology, drug, biologic, research tool, etc.).
Statistically, these dummies were not significant.



                                                      Page 16
The models underlying columns (3) and (4) of Table 6 replace the disaggregated binary
variables that denoted additional developmental funding, in columns (1) and (2), with the
natural log of the dollar amount from each source. Natural logs rather than levels are used
because preliminary estimates suggested diminishing returns to investment amounts.37 The
significance pattern for these estimates is similar to that of corresponding specifications in
columns (1) and (2) (that used dichotomous variables for corresponding categories of
additional developmental funding), as are the conclusions to be drawn from the results.38
For instance, a 100 percent increase in the total amount of additional funding is predicted
to increase commercialization probabilities by 1.9 percentage points. One difference,
however, is these specifications suggest that given amounts of additional developmental
funding from non-SBIR federal funds and, particularly, own and/or internal business
sources, may have a stronger positive effect on commercialization probabilities than
similar amounts of venture capital support, and that the greatest effect is associated with
own and/or internal business funding (where there would logically be the greatest
information about the potential success of the project).


A summary of the marginal effects obtained from the probit models is useful to motivate a
policy discussion in the concluding section of the paper. The probit estimates in column
(4) of Table 6 imply that a 100 percent increase in developmental non-SBIR federal
funding raises the predicted probability of commercialization by 1.5 percentage points; this
probability similarly increases by 1.2 percentage points with corresponding growth in
venture capital funding, and by 1.8 percentage points with additional developmental
funding from the owners or business itself.39 The probability of commercialization
increases when the business’ knowledge base has been built through previous related


37 For instance, a specification that included linear and quadratic terms for the total dollar amount invested
suggested weakly diminishing returns, with a maximum commercialization probability at around $81 milliion
dollars, which is equal to the maximum investment observed in our sample. The estimated marginal effects
from a linear specification of the dollar amount of alternative funding sources reveal little, as was expected
given the highly skewed distributions for these variables.
38 Zero values for $AddFunds, $AddFunds-Fed, $AddFunds-VC, $AddFunds-Oth, $AddFunds-SLU, and
$AddFund-Own were reset to equal 1 so that the log of each would be defined.
39 As above, the predicted effects of a 100 percent increase in explanatory variables expressed in natural logs
are estimated by multiplying the marginal effect from the probit model by 0.693.



                                                   Page 17
Phase II research; it increases by 9.1 percentage points per 100 percent increase in the
number of previous related Phase II awards. Female and minority owned and controlled
businesses are equally as likely to commercialize as are other businesses. And, university
involvement in Phase II award projects increase the probability of commercialization by 13
percentage points.


As previously shown (in Table 5), many projects receiving additional funding obtain it
from multiple sources, with frequent arrangements being some combination of personal or
own company contributions combined with one of the four sources of funds. We explicitly
allowed for this possibility in specifications (not reported) that interacted AddFund-Own
with AddFund-Fed, AddFund-VC, AddFund-Oth, and AddFund-SLU. Somewhat
surprisingly, the first of these interactions was negative and significant at the .10 level,
suggesting non-SBIR federal funding is strongly associated with commercialization
probabilities when it is not accompanied by own company or personal contributions. This
may reflect endogeneity in the federal funding process, an issue addressed in greater detail
in the following section. None of the other three interaction coefficients approach
statistical significance.


V. Endogeneity Issues
The preceding econometric models treat the receipt of additional funding as exogenous. If
this is correct then the results indicate causal effects of the various types of funding (and of
the other explanatory variables) on commercialization probabilities. However, this a
strong assumption. For instance, potential funders may be more likely to provide support
for projects with relatively favorable prospects for commercialization and some of these
might also be more likely to have commercialized even in the absence of additional funds.
Both possibilities suggest that our estimates may overstate the extent to which additional
funding will cause increases in commercialization for the average project. The relevance
of potential endogeneity for assessing the SBIR program depends on the particular goals of
policy-makers, and it is described in greater detail in the final section of the paper.




                                             Page 18
We attemped to use instrumental variables techniques to examine potential endogeneity in
the provision of non-SBIR federal funds, as well as from venture capital or other private
sources. Not surprisingly, the principle difficulty was in obtaining good instruments—
variables that strongly predict the receipt of additional funding without independently
affecting commercialization probabilities. We instrumented for non-SBIR federal funding
using the average amount of extramural award dollars provided, over the 1998-2006
period, by the NIH institute associated with the Phase II SBIR award.40 We then divided
this average level of extramural funding by the number of Phase II SBIR awards in our
data set and from the specified institute, so as to calculate a measure of funding availability
per award.41 We also instrumented for funds from venture capital or other private sources
using data from the PricewaterhouseCoopers/National Venture Capital Association
MoneyTree Report (www.pwcmoneytree.com/MTPublic/ns/index.jsp) on average venture
capital activity for 19 regions of the United States over the 1996-2006 period. The
procedure used was to match the state in which the firm receiving the award was located to
the relevant region and then to assign the average funding level and number of deals for the
region (normalized by the number of associated surveyed SBIR projects) to that project.42


Our efforts to use IV estimates to explicitly account for endogeneity were largely
unsuccessful. The venture capital activity variables had essentially no predictive power in
the first-stage.43 Conversely, the institute-specific level of NIH extramural award activity
funding did strongly predict the first-stage probability of receiving non-SBIR federal
funding. However, the IV point estimates of the effect of the latter on commercialization
probabilities were almost identical to those obtained without instrumenting, while the
associated standard errors increased dramatically. Therefore, while we did not uncover


40 These data were obtained from: http://grants.nih.gov/grants/award/awardtr.htm. See Wallsten (2000) who
used a similar technique.
41 In performing this calculation, we used information on all awards surveyed, rather than just those with
responses to it.
42 Thus, there were two instruments, one indicating the normalized amount (in dollars) invested and the
second denoting the (normalized) number of venture capital deals. Four of the regions were located within
the state of California (LA/Orange County, Northeastern California, Silicon Valley and the San Diego areas).
These were consolidated into a single region for the state of California.
43 We estimated models where the first-stage dependent variable was all additional funding, additional
funding from venture capital, or from either venture capital or other private sources. The instruments lacked
predictive power in all of these cases.



                                                  Page 19
any evidence that our estimates were being seriously biased by endogeneity; our overall
conclusion is that the issue remains potentially important and that future research will need
to use creative approaches to examine its role.


VI. Discussion
The NRC dataset is rich in a number of dimensions, not the least of which is that the
information is at the level of a project rather than at the business level. However, before
discussing possible policy implications of our findings, we offer several words of caution
related to the data and the analysis performed. First, while the NRC dataset does contain
limited self-reported information on commercialization in dollar terms; the number of
projects for which those data are available is small, with the result that our analysis is
restricted to a dichotomous commercialization variable. From an assessment perspective,
however, this constraint may be less detrimental than it at first appears since the stated
objective of the SBIR program is commercialization per se.


Second, we do not have information on when in time a project received additional
developmental funds. Some projects may have received these monies during the Phase II
research and others only after they attempt to or do commercialize an initial
product/process/service. Or, additional developmental funding may have come in stages
such as first obtaining non-SBIR federal funds and then obtaining venture capital funds.
To offer some suggestive information on this question, we examined how the frequency of
receipt of outside funds varied with the number of years since the Phase II award was
granted. Our hypothesis is that if most outside funds were received after completion of the
project as the research advanced towards commercialization, we would observe a greater
probabilities and larger amounts of additional funding for “older” projects. There was no
evidence of this, leading us to conclude that these funds are likely to be frequently
provided during the project period and justifying our emphasis on the role of additional
funding.44 That said, were we able to control for the timing of the additional
developmental funds we might have been able to determine more precisely the relative

44 For example, additional funding was received more frequently and in larger amounts for projects surveyed
4, 5 or 6 years after the award date than for those examined in later years. (The data set does not contain
information on projects aged less than four years.)



                                                  Page 20
importance of each source. For example, we could not investigate whether there was a
“halo effect” from additional non-SBIR federal support that subsequently increased the
likelihood of the business obtaining venture capital funds (Toole and Turvey
forthcoming).45


Third, our analysis does not control for the nature of the underlying technology being
researched and/or commercialized. While we did include Institute effects in our model, as
a proxy for the character of the research, more detailed technology controls would be
useful. One promising avenue for future research would be to make use of information
from the original project proposal on the types of technologies focused upon and the
expected method of commercialization, although it may be difficult to develop a
satisfactory rubric for classifying technology alternatives.


Caveats aside, several dimensions of our findings may have policy management relevance,
and we offer piecemeal observations related to such issues, and then collectively we offer a
numerical illustration of a specific recommendation. First, venture capital funding is
positively related to the probability of commercialization. This is precisely the objective
of Phase III. However, additional funding from the owner and/or business is much more
common and has an equal or greater relative estimated impact on commercialization.
Perhaps these results could be replicated in reality if Phase II awards were conditional on a
commitment of matching internal funds.46


Interestingly, this policy implication may be valid even if additional development funding
is endogenously determined, as has been discussed and seems likely. Consider that there
are at least two reasons why additional funding may be associated with higher rates of

45 We did, however, examine whether the dollar amount of the SBIR award was related to the probability of
receiving additional funding, thinking that award size might be viewed as a signal of the government’s
assessment of project potential. The data provide little support for this possibility. For instance, the average
award of projects receiving outside funding was just 6 percent larger than for those that did not ($663,159
versus $627,186).
46 A handful of states (e.g., North Carolina) have programs that match federal Phase I awards. The
insignificance of the additional developmental funding from state or local government variable in our models
might be a cautionary sign to bring about a rethinking of extending such programs to Phase II, assuming that
one of the state’s objectives in so doing would be to increase commercialization. If commercialization is a
state objective, perhaps tying a matching grants program to university involvement is worth consideration.



                                                    Page 21
commercialization. First, the extra funds may permit activities that lead to successful
commercialization and that would otherwise not take place. In this case, the non-SBIR
money causally affects commercialization rates. Alternatively, the funds could be
provided because the project has a high potential for commercialization. For instance,
businesses are likely to be more willing to put their own resources into projects they view
as having a high potential for commercialization. Notice, however, that conditioning
Phase II awards on matching funds is likely to be desirable even in this second situation,
since the government is essentially using the willingness to provide outside funds as a
signal of the project’s potential.


Second, the NIH, and possibly other funding agencies, might consider incentives for Phase
II award recipients to include university faculty and resources in research projects. A
possible mechanism for doing so might be to award merit evaluation points during the
Phase II award reviews for proposed university involvement, or to increase the funding
amount for the same.47


Of course, an obvious policy issue is whether increasing the dollar amount of Phase II
awards will increase the probability of commercialization. Our theoretical arguments for
the specification of equation (1) did not include the size of the award and, more to the
point, the NIH regularly exceeds the $750,000 guideline so a policy recommendation to
increase the upper bound on Phase II awards would be moot.48 Empirically, as a
descriptive observation, the award amount is not correlated with the probability of
commercialization.


Finally, we should emphasize that designing the SBIR award criteria so as to direct funds
towards projects with the highest probabilities of commercialization does not necessarily
increase the overall rate at which innovations are commercialized, since it is possible that

47 Our finding related to university involvement increasing the probability of commercialization has other
possible implications. University technology transfer offices might broaden the scope of their mission to
include assisting local and regional small entrepreneurial businesses during the Phase I and Phase II award
process in anticipation of later involvement in the Phase II research and the possibility of sharing ownership
with whatever is subsequently commercialized.
48 Phase II awards were higher than $750,000 for just over 20 percent of our sample.




                                                    Page 22
sufficient private-sector support would have been obtained to commercialize these
projects, even in the absence of the SBIR funds—in this case, the SBIR program is
“crowding out” private funds.49 Although we cannot definitively address this question, the
available evidence suggests that the SBIR support is crucial for many of these projects.
For instance, the NRC dataset includes a question asking whether companies would have
undertaken the projects in the absence of the SBIR award. The answer to this after-the-fact
question was “definitely yes” or “probably yes” for less than 11 percent of the
commercialized projects and “probably not” or “definitely not” for 75 percent.50 Thus,
SBIR support appears to be critical for most of the projects that ultimately commercialize.


To combine aspects of the piecemeal observations above into a single policy simulation,
consider the hypothetical numerical illustration in Table 7, which is based, mathematically,
on the estimated probit equation underlying the results in column (4) of Table 6. As a base
point of reference, consider a hypothetical Phase II project in a business that has no
knowledge base, $0 own and/or internal business additional developmental funding and no
university involvement (and with all other covariates evaluated at the sample means).
Under these hypothetical conditions, the calculated base probability that the Phase II
project will commercialize a product, process, or service is 26 percent.


Assume next that the business receiving the Phase II SBIR has a knowledge base
corresponding to one previous related Phase II SBIR project (lnKnowlBase increases from
0 to 0.693). This raises the predicted probability of commercialization to 34 percent. The
predicted commercialization probability rises by a similar amount—to 38 percent—when a
university is involved in the research but the business has no knowledge base. The
increase is much larger conditional on own and/or internal business funding at a level

49 There is a rich literature about the complementary versus substitutability between public R&D and private
R&D. This so-called “crowding out” literature traces to Blank and Stigler (1957), as reviewed by Leyden and
Link (1992). David, Hall, and Toole (2000) have recently summarized the econometric literature on the
subject and concluded that the empirical evidence to date is inconclusive, and more recent research
(González and Pazó 2007, Görg and Strobl (2007), and Piekkola (2007) does not contradict the David, Hall,
and Toole conclusions.
50 The company was “uncertain” for the remaining 14 percent of commercialized projects. It is not possible
to provide the distribution of answers for noncommercialized projects (or for all projects) because this
question was not asked for the majority of noncommercialized projects that had been “discontinued” by the
survey date.



                                                  Page 23
equal to the sample mean of $AddFund-Own ($208,911), but with no previous knowledge
base or university involvement, in which case the expected commercialization rate is 57
percent.


Thus, subject to the previously mentioned caveats, our results suggest that if the NIH is
interested in managing its SBIR program so as to increase the probability of
commercialization, it might wish to consider conditioning receipt of a Phase II award on
university involvement and own and/or internal business funding. In this case, the
commercialization probability is predicted to be 69 percent.51 Furthermore, for illustration
purposes, and we are not suggesting this as a policy recommendation, Phase II awards
were also conditioned on the receipt of at least one previous related award, the probability
of commercialization would increase even more, to 77 percent.52


Additional research is certainly warranted to better understand the nature of
commercialization from SBIR awards and to assess more completely that program
objective. Hopefully, future research will overcome some of the data limitations of this
study. Alternative research methodologies—such as a matched pairs analysis of small
entrepreneurial businesses with and without SBIR support—might be useful for
investigating both factors associated with the propensity to commercialize as well as the
private and social implications from such commercialization. We also need to understand
how the nature of the technology being researched affects commercialization probabilities,
when in the development process additional funds are most needed to promote success of


51 These estimates assume additive effects of university involvement and own company/personal funding on
commercialization probabilities. A specification that also included the interaction of these two variables,
suggests still larger increase in predicted commercialization rates (the interaction coefficient is positive).
52 The SBIR program has made several institutional changes in recent years to increase the rate of
commercialization. The Fast Track program permits businesses with projects of high commercialization
success to submit the Phase I and Phase II applications for concurrent review. Among other things, projects
funded under Fast Track avoid the possibility of a funding gap between the completion of Phase I and the
award/receipt of Phase II dollars. See Audretsch, Link, and Scott (2002) for an evaluation of the Fast Track
program within the Department of Defense. According to Wessner (forthcoming), less than 6 percent of
applicants current apply through the Fast Track Program. In 2002, NIH initiated their Commercialization
Assistance Program (CAP) “ … to help some of the nation’s most promising small life science and healthcare
companies develop their commercial businesses and transition their SBIR-funded technologies into the
marketplace” through assistance with business development plans, marketing strategies, and formulating
roadmaps for licensing. See, http://www.larta.org/nihcap/NIHCAP-ProgramDescription.pdf.



                                                   Page 24
the projects, and whether the development process and role of SBIR support differ for
commercialized projects ultimately generating large versus small amounts of revenue.




                                          Page 25
Table 1
SBIR Awards and Dollars, FY2005

Agency        Phase I     Phase I           Phase II          Phase II    Total   Total Dollars
              Awards      Dollars           Awards             Dollars   Awards
DoD             2344 $213,482,152               998       $729,285,508     3342   $942,767,660
HHS              732 $149,584,038               369       $412,504.975     1101   $562,089,013
DoE              259 $25,757,637                101        $77,852,565      360   $103,610,202
NASA             290 $20,183,648                139        $83,014,853      429   $103,198,501
NSF              152 $15,054,750                132        $64,101,179      284    $79,155,929
USDA              91   $7,195,211                40        $11,738,536      131    $18,933,747
DHS               62   $6,158,240                13        $10,241,202       75    $16,399,442
ED                22   $1,646,603                14         $6,749,980       36     $8,396,583
DoC               34   $2,373,433                19         $5,469,846       53     $7,843,279
EPA               38   $2,652,216                14         $3,540,251       52     $6,192,467
DoT                 7    $679,154                  3        $1,765,468       10     $2,444,622

Total             4031 $444,767,082             1842 $1,406,264,363        5873 $1,851,031,445
Source: U.S. Small Business Administration (2006).




                                                Page 26
Table 2
Final Sample of NIH Phase II Projects Awarded between 1992 and 2001

Data Reduction                                                        Number of
                                                                        Projects
Population of NIH Projects                                                2,497
Survey Population                                                         1,680
Random Survey Population                                                  1,672
Survey Respondents                                                          488
Respondents with Completed Phase II Project                                 454
Responses from Institutes with ≥5 Survey Responses                          449
Survey Respondents Reporting All Relevant Information                       405




                                           Page 27
Table 3
Descriptive Statistics for the Final Sample (n=405)

Variable                   Mean               Standard Deviation         Minimum            Maximum
Commercial                  .511                     .501                   0                   1
AddFund                     .585                     .493                   0                   1
AddFund-Fed                 .064                     .245                   0                   1
AddFund-VC                  .035                     .183                   0                   1
AddFund-Oth                 .158                     .365                   0                   1
AddFund-SLU                 .057                     .232                   0                   1
AddFund-Own                 .504                     .501                   0                   1
AddFund                  $1,203,383               $6,781,290                0               8.15e+07
$AddFund-Fed              $111,271                $1,325,214                0               2.60e+07
$AddFund-VC               $379,301                $4,021,767                0               5.99e+07
$AddFund-Oth              $488,872                $3,702,643                0               5.50e+07
$AddFund-SLU              $15,028                  $126,162                 0               1650000
$AddFund-Own              $208,911                 $93,3430                 0               1.28e+07
KnowlBase                   1.08                     3.33                   0                  28
Female                      .175                     .381                   0                   1
Minority                    .049                     .217                   0                   1
Univ                        .533                     .500                   0                   1
AA                          .017                     .131                   0                   1
AG                          .086                     .281                   0                   1
AI                          .111                     .315                   0                   1
AR                          .012                     .111                   0                   1
CA                          .128                     .335                   0                   1
DA                          .057                     .232                   0                   1
DC                          .040                     .195                   0                   1
DK                          .044                     .206                   0                   1
ES                          .025                     .155                   0                   1
EY                          .017                     .131                   0                   1
GM                          .074                     .262                   0                   1
HD                          .057                     .232                   0                   1
HG                          .015                     .121                   0                   1
HL                          .126                     .332                   0                   1
MH                          .059                     .236                   0                   1
NR                          .005                     .070                   0                   1
NS                          .069                     .254                   0                   1
RR                          .052                     .222                   0                   1
Age                         7.37                     2.65                   4                  13
Note: AA=National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (NIAAA), AG=National Institute on Aging
(NIA), AI=National Institute on Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID), AR=National Institute on Arthritis
and Musculoskeletal and Skin Disease (NIAMS), CA=National Cancer Institute (NCI), DA=National
Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA), DC=National Institute on Deafness and other Communication Disorders
(NIDCD), DK=National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases (NIDDK), ES=National
Institute of Environmental Health Sciences (NIEHS), EY=National Eye Institute (NEI), GM=National
Institute of General Medical Sciences (NIGMS), HD=National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development (NICHD), HG=National Human Genome Research Institute (NHGRI), HL=National Heart,
Lung and Blood Institute (NHLBI), MH=National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH), NR=National Institute
of Nursing Research (NINR), NS=National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS), and
RR=National Center for Research Resources (NCRR).




                                                 Page 28
Table 4
Selected Sample Means by Commercialization Status

Variable                  Not Commercialized              Commercialized             P-Value of
                                (n=198)                      (n=207)                 Difference
AddFund                          0.424                        0.739                   <0.001
AddFund-Fed                      0.035                        0.092                    0.021
AddFund-VC                       0.020                        0.048                    0.122
AddFund-Oth                      0.131                        0.184                    0.150
AddFund-SLU                      0.051                        0.063                    0.594
AddFund-Own                      0.369                        0.633                   <0.001
KnowlBase                        0.783                        1.367                    0.078
Female                           0.152                        0.198                    0.219
Minority                         0.030                        0.068                    0.083
Univ                             0.505                        0.560                    0.266
Age                              7.394                        7.348                    0.861
Note: Table shows sample means separately for commercialized and non-commercialized projects. The last
column shows the P-Value for the null hypothesis that the sample means are the same for the two groups.




                                                Page 29
Table 5
Sources and Frequency of Additional Project Funding

                                            Funding Received                                  Projects Receiving Funding From:
                                                      Exclusive
                      All Projects                                         AddFund-         AddFund-         AddFund-         AddFund-         AddFund-
                                        All Sources   Funding
                                                                             Fed               VC              Oth              SLU              Own
                                                       Source
  Funding Source
  AddFund-Fed             0.064            0.114            0.017            1.000            0.143            0.109            0.304             0.078
  AddFund-VC              0.035            0.061            0.000            0.077            1.000            0.156            0.043             0.034
  AddFund-Oth             0.158            0.279            0.039            0.269            0.714            1.000            0.391             0.221
  AddFund-SLU             0.057            0.100            0.000            0.269            0.072            0.140            1.000             0.103
  AddFund-Own             0.504            0.890            0.585            0.615            0.500            0.703            0.913             1.000
  Not Identified          0.020            0.034
  # Identified Funding Sources
  1                       0.363            0.642                             0.154            0.000            0.141            0.000             0.657
  2                       0.161            0.284                             0.539            0.643            0.656            0.478             0.265
  3                       0.035            0.061                             0.231            0.286            0.156            0.391             0.064
  4                       0.007            0.013                             0.077            0.071            0.047            0.130             0.015
  Sample Size              405              237              237               26               14               64               23               204

Note: Table shows proportion of projects receiving specified types of additional funding and the number of additional funding sources. The sample in the third
and fourth column is restricted to projects receiving some additional funding. Those in the fifth through ninth columns are restricted to projects receiving
specified sources of outside funding. The “Not Identified” category refers to projects receiving additional funding but without information provided on its
source.




                                                                           Page 30
Table 6
Estimated Marginal Effects of the Probability of Commercialization (robust standard
errors in parentheses)

Variable                                (1)                    (2)                      (3)                     (4)
AddFund                    .3475* (.0515)                       —                        —                       —
AddFund-Fed                              —      .2873** (.0947)                          —                       —
AddFund-VC                               —      .2626** (.1093)                          —                       —
AddFund-Oth                              —          .0028 (.0813)                        —                       —
AddFund-SLU                              —         -.1020 (.1360)                        —                       —
AddFund-Own                              —        .2787* (.0535)                         —                       —
ln$AddFund                               —                      —          .0276* (.0045)                        —
ln$AddFund-Fed                           —                      —                        —       .0210** (.0098)
ln$AddFund-VC                            —                      —                        —      .0176***(.0105)
ln$AddFund-Oth                           —                      —                        —           .0007 (.0063)
ln$AddFund-SLU                           —                      —                        —          -.0084 (.0118)
ln$AddFund-Own                           —                      —                        —         .0264* (.0049)
lnKnowlBase                .1413* (.0445)         .1310* (.0443)           .1341* (.0444)          .1318* (.0445)
Female                      -.0083 (.0747)         -.0007 (.0753)            .0064 (.0744)           .0009 (.0749)
Minority                     .0819 (.1315)          .0949 (.1267)            .1004 (.1306)           .1151 (.1269)
Univ                     .1190** (.0553)        .1223** (.0550)          .1195** (.0552)         .1333** (.0556)
AA                          -.0247 (.3564)          .0053 (.3676)           -.0265 (.3613)           .0066 (.3656)
AG                          -.2440 (.2648)         -.2459 (.2759)           -.2444 (.2736)          -.2521 (.2735)
AI                          -.3147 (.2404)         -.2979 (.2589)           -.3268 (.2440)          -.3142 (.2522)
AR                          -.1795 (.3165)         -.1833 (.3303)           -.1900 (.3246)          -.1974 (.3257)
CA                           .0216 (.2978)          .0148 (.3111)            .0008 (.3087)           .0020 (.3116)
DA                           .1424 (.2927)          .1350 (.3038)            .1225 (.3059)           .1195 (.3079)
DC                           .0091 (.3210)          .0142 (.3302)           -.0116 (.3305)          -.0142 (.3314)
DK                          -.3123 (.2381)         -.3127 (.2510)           -.3142 (.2470)          -.3278 (.2431)
ES                          -.0815 (.3254)         -.0654 (.3462)           -.0577 (.3428)          -.0671 (.3452)
EY                          -.4625 (.1228)         -.4813 (.1137)      -.4729*** (.1155)       -.4914*** (.1000)
GM                          -.0675 (.3044)         -.0366 (.3177)           -.0554 (.3149)          -.0551 (.3170)
HD                          -.0694 (.3077)         -.0443 (.3204)           -.0777 (.3172)          -.0514 (.3201)
HG                           .0587 (.3322)          .0634 (.3464)            .0530 (.3440)           .0527 (.3480)
HL                          -.3423 (.2309)         -.3347 (.2459)           -.3565 (.2334)          -.3441 (.2420)
MH                           .2822 (.2434)          .2961 (.2423)            .2712 (.2546)           .2902 (.2450)
NR                       -2.0e-15 (.4050)           .0496 (.4369)           -.0267 (.4136)           .0163 (.4306)
NS                          -.2379 (.2698)         -.2451 (.2782)           -.2474 (.2747)          -.2573 (.2738)
RR                          -.1162 (.3047)         -.0968 (.3205)           -.1145 (.3148)          -.1017 (.3195)
Pseudo R-squared                     .1928                  .1853                    .1881                   .1908
Log Pseudo-                       -226.53                -226.63                  -227.89                 -227.08
likelihood
n                                      405                    405                      405                       405
Note: * = significant at the .01 level, ** = significant at the .05 level, *** = significant at the .10 level.




                                                      Page 31
Table 7
Probability of Commercialization under Alternative Scenarios

Scenario                                       Probit Index               Estimated Probability
                                                                          of Commercialization
Baseline Scenario
KnowlBase=0                                        -0.649                          25.8%
$AddFund-Own=$0
Univ=0

One Previous Related Phase II SBIR
KnowlBase=1                                        -0.420                          33.7%
$AddFund-Own=$0
Univ=0

University Involvement
KnowlBase=0                                        -0.313                          37.7%
$AddFund-Own=$0
Univ=1

Average Amount of Own/Internal Funding
KnowlBase=0
$AddFund-Own=$208,911                              0.163                           56.5%
Univ=0

Average Own/Internal Funding and University Involvement
KnowlBase=0
$AddFund-Own=$208,911                       0.499                                  69.1%
Univ=1

All Three
KnowlBase=1
$AddFund-Own=$208,911                              0.729                           76.7%
Univ=1
Note: Commercialization probabilities are obtained from the probit model estimated in column (4) of Table
5. The estimated equation for the index function is: Commercial = -0.3589 + 0.0529(ln$AddFund-Fed) +
0.0441(ln$AddFund-VC) + 0.0018(ln$AddFund-Oth) - 0.0212(ln$AddFund-SLU) + 0.0663(ln$AddFund-
Own) + 0.3308(lnKnowlBase) + 0.0025(Female) + 0.2943(Minority) + 0.3359(Univ) + 0.0166(AA) -
0.6590(AG) - 0.8410(AI) - 0.5099(AR) + 0.0050(CA) + 0.3058(DA) - 0.035(DC) - 0.9031(DK) - 0.1684(ES) -
1.8230(EY) - 0.1384(GM) - 0.1290(HD) + 0.1331(HG) - 0.9320(HL) + 0.8075(MH) + 0.04086(NR) -
0.6760(NS) - 0.2563(RR).




                                                 Page 32
                                         References

Arrow, Kenneth J. (1962), “The Economic Implications of Learning by Doing,” Review of
   Economic Studies, 29 (3): 155-173.
Åstebro, Thomas (1998), “Basic Statistics on the Success Rate and Profits for Independent
   Inventors,” Entrepreneurship: Theory and Practice, 23 (2): 41-48.
Åstebro, Thomas (2003), “The Return to Independent Invention: Evidence of Unrealistic
   Optimism, Rent Seeking or Skewness Loving,” The Economic Journal, 113 (1), 226-
   239.
Audretsch, David B., Albert N. Link, and John T. Scott (2002), “Public/Private
   Technology Partnerships: Evaluating SBIR-Supported Research,” Research Policy, 31
   (1): 145-158.
Audretsch, David B., Taylor Aldridge, and Alexander Oettl (2006), “The Knowledge Filter
   and Economic Growth: The Role of Scientist Entrepreneurship,” Max Planck working
   paper #0611.
Blank, David M. and George J. Stigler (1957), The Demand and Supply of Scientific
   Personnel, New York: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Cahill, Pete (2006), “National Research Council Survey of Small Business Innovation
   Research,” Preliminary report to the National Research Council.
Cohen, Wesley. M. and Levinthal, Daniel A. (1989), “Innovation and Learning: The Two
   Faces of R&D,” Economic Journal, 99 (397): 569-596.
David, Paul A., Bronwyn H. Hall, and Andrew A. Toole (2002), “Is Public R&D a
   Complement or Substitute for Private R&D? A Review of the Econometric Evidence,”
   Research Policy, 29 (3-4): 497-529.
González Xulia and Consuelo Pazó (2007), “Do Public Subsidies Stimulate Private R&D
   Spending?” Research Policy, 37 (3): 371-389.
Görg, Holger and Eric Strobl, “The Effect of R&D Subsidies on Private R&D,”
   Economica, 74 (294): 215-234.
Hall, Bronwyn H. (2004), “University-Industry Research Partnerships in the United
   States,” in Rethinking Science Systems and Innovation Policies, edited by Jean-Pierre




                                           Page 33
   Contzen, David Gibson, and Manuel Heitor, West Lafayette, IN: Purdue University
   Press.
Hall, Bronwyn H., Albert N. Link, and John T. Scott (2003), “Universities as Research
   Partners,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 85 (2): 485-491.
Hall, Robert E. and Charles I. Jones (2007), “The Value of Life and the Rise in Health
   Spending,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122 (1): 39-72.
Leyden, Dennis P. and Albert N. Link (1992), Government’s Role in Innovation, Boston:
   Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Link, Albert N. (1999), “Public/Private Partnerships in the United States,” Industry and
   Innovation, 6 (2): 191-217.
Link, Albert N. (2006), Public/Private Partnerships: Innovation Strategies and Policy
   Alternatives, Norwell, MA: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Link, Albert N. and John T. Scott (1998), Public Accountability: Evaluating Technology-
   Based Institutions, Norwell, MA: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Link, Albert N., and John T. Scott (2000), “Estimates of the Social Returns to Small
   Business Innovation Research Projects,” in The Small Business Innovation Research
   Program: An Assessment of the Department of Defense Fast Track Initiative, edited by
   Charles W. Wessner, Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
Link, Albert N. and John T. Scott (2005), Evaluating Public Research Institutions: The
   U.S. Advanced Technology Program’s Intramural Research Initiative, London:
   Routledge.
Link, Albert N. and Donald S. Siegel (2003), Technology Change and Economic
   Performance, London: Routledge.
Mansfield, Edwin, John Rapoport, Jerome Schnee, Samuel Wagner, and Michael
   Hamburger (1971), Research and Innovation in the Modern Corporation, New York:
   W.W. Norton.
Murphy, Kevin M. and Robert H. Topel (2006), “The Value of Health and Longevity,”
   Journal of Political Economy, 114 (5): 871-904.
National Research Council (2004), SBIR: Program Diversity and Assessment Challenges,
   Washington, DC: National Academy Press.




                                          Page 34
National Research Council (2007), Capitalizing on Science, Technology, and Innovation:
   An Assessment of the Small Business Innovation Research Program, Washington, DC:
   National Academy Press.
Piekkola, Hannu T. (2007), “Public Funding of R&D and Growth: Firm-Level Evidence
   from Finland,” Economics of Innovation and New Technology, 16 (3): 195-210.
Tibbetts, Ronald (1999), “The Small Business Innovation Research Program and NSF
   SBIR Commercialization Results,” mimeograph.
Toole, Andrew A. and Dirk Czarnitzki (2007), “Biomedical Academic Entrepreneurship
   through the SBIR Program,” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 63 (4):
   716-738.
Toole, Andrew A. and Calum Turvey (forthcoming), “How Does Initial Public Financing
   Influence Private Incentives for Follow-on Investment in Early-Stage Technologies?”
   Journal of Technology Transfer.
Turner, James and George Brown (1999), “The Federal Role in Small Business Research,”
   ISSUES in Science and Technology, summer: 51-58.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) (2003), National Survey to
   Evaluate the NIH SBIR Program, Washington, DC: National Institutes of Health.
U.S. Small Business Administration (2006), <http://tech-net.sba.gov/>.
Wallsten, Scott J. (2000), “The Effects of Government-Industry R&D Programs on Private
   R&D: The Case of the Small Business Innovation Research Program,” RAND Journal
   of Economics, 31 (1): 82-100.
Wessner, Charles W. (2000), The Small Business Innovation Research Program: An
   Assessment of the Department of Defense Fast Track Initiative, Washington, DC:
   National Academy Press.
Wessner, Charles W. (2007), SBIR and the Phase III Challenge of Commercialization,
   Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
Wessner, Charles W. (forthcoming), An Assessment of the Small Business Innovation
   Research Program at the National Institutes of Health, Washington, DC: National
   Academy Press.
Zeira, Joseph (1987), “Investment as a Process of Search,” Journal of Political Economy,
   95 (1): 204-210.




                                         Page 35
Zucker, Lynne G., Michael R. Darby, and Jeff S. Armstrong, (1998a), “Geographically
   Localized Knowledge: Spillovers or Markets?” Economic Inquiry, 36 (1): 65-86.
Zucker, Lynne G., Michael R. Darby, and Marilynn B. Brewer (1998b), “Intellectual
   Human Capital and the Birth of U.S. Biotechnology Enterprises,” American Economic
   Review, 88 (1): 290-306.
Zucker, Lynne .G. and Michael R. Darby (2001), “Capturing Technological Opportunity
   via Japan’s Star Scientists: Evidence from Japanese Firms’ Biotech Patents and
   Products,” Journal of Technology Transfer, 26 (1-2): 37-58.




                                         Page 36
