                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     PLANT-SIZE DISTRIBUTION AND CROSS-COUNTRY INCOME DIFFERENCES

                                           Laura Alfaro
                                         Andrew Charlton
                                          Fabio Kanczuk

                                       Working Paper 14060
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w14060


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2008




We thank Daron Acemoglu, Jeff Frankel, John Haltiwanger, Chang-Tai Hsieh, Pete Klenow, Julio
Rotemberg, Kei-Mu Yi, and participants at the NBER Economic Fluctuations and Growth Meeting
and NBER International Seminar on Macroeconomics (ISOM) for valuable comments and suggestions.
We are grateful to Dennis Jacques for helping us with the D&B dataset, and HBS and LSE for financial
support. We further thank Pamela Arellano for excellent research assistance. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Laura Alfaro, Andrew Charlton, and Fabio Kanczuk. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Firm-Size Distribution and Cross-Country Income Differences
Laura Alfaro, Andrew Charlton, and Fabio Kanczuk
NBER Working Paper No. 14060
June 2008, Revised August 2008
JEL No. O1

                                             ABSTRACT

We investigate, using firm level data for 79 developed and developing countries, whether differences
in the allocation of resources across heterogeneous plants are a significant determinant of cross-country
differences in income per worker. For this purpose, we use a standard version of the neoclassical growth
model augmented to incorporate monopolistic competition among heterogeneous firms. For our preferred
calibration, the model explains 58% of the log variance of income per worker. This figure should be
compared to the 42% success rate of the usual model.


Laura Alfaro                                        Fabio Kanczuk
Harvard Business School                             University of São Paulo
Morgan Hall 263                                     R. Dr Alberto Cardoso de Melo Neto 110/131A
Soldiers Field                                      Sao Paulo-S.P.-CEP 01455-100
Boston, MA 02163                                    BRAZIL
and NBER                                            kanczuk@usp.br
lalfaro@hbs.edu

Andrew Charlton
London School of Economics
Houghton Street
London, WC2A 2AE, U.K
a.charlton@lse.ac.uk
1 Introduction


         Cross-country differences in income per worker are widely known to be enormous. Per capita

income in the richest countries exceeds than in the poorest countries by more than a factor of fifty.1 An

important strand of the literature trying to understand cross-country differences in per capita incomes has

focused on the role of aggregate factor accumulation by abstracting from heterogeneity in the production

units.2 But there is an emerging and growing body of research that takes a different approach, focusing

instead on the misallocation of resources across plants (Restuccia and Rogerson 2007, Hsieh and Klenow

2007, and Bartelsman, Haltiwanger, and Scarpetta 2006). Policies’ and institutions’ differential effects on

the business climate broadly defined might significantly influence the allocation of resources across

establishments. The working hypothesis in this literature is that not only the level of factor accumulation,

but also how these factors are allocated across heterogeneous production units, matters in trying to

understand income differences.

         Our paper contributes to this literature by performing a development accounting exercise using a

new dataset of more than 20 million establishments in 79 developing and industrialized countries.

Specifically, we develop a simple model of heterogeneous production units that follows Melitz (2003).3

Plants’ dynamics and policy distortions are as in Restuccia and Rogerson (2007), but we assume that

production units have constant returns to scale technologies and some degree of market power, as in

Hsieh and Klenow (2007). We calibrate the model to match our dataset. Our calibration exercise consists

in finding the profile of output taxes and subsidies needed to match each country’s plant-size distribution.


1
  See Caselli (2005), Hall and Jones (1999), Klenow and Rodriguez-Clare (1997), and Prescott (1998).
2
  The consensus view in the development accounting literature is that two-thirds of these differences can be
attributed to differences in efficiency or total factor productivity. Researchers have consequently attempted to
explain why some countries are able to use their factors of production more efficiently and extract more output from
them than others. In other words, the challenge of the growth literature it is to reduce the role of measured
productivity in explaining cross-country income. The traditional approach to tackling this puzzling question has
been to explore the slow diffusion of technology from rich to poor countries (see Howitt, 2000; Keller, 2004; and
Parente and Prescott, 1994).
3
  The model implies a direct relation between productivity and size, and the model’s size distribution relates to that
of Lucas (1978). See Bartelsman, Haltiwanger, and Scarpetta (2006) for a discussion of the limitations of this class
of models, and Sutton (1997) for a general discussion of firm size distribution.


                                                                                                                    2
These distortions should be interpreted as the different types of policies that might generate these effects

such as non-competitive banking systems, product and labor market regulations, corruption, and trade

restrictions. For example, specific producers might be offered, by governments, special tax deals and

contracts financed by taxes on other production activities, and by non-competitive banking systems,

favorable interest rates on loans based on non-economic factors, leading to misallocation of credit across

establishments. Corruption and trade restrictions might also result in less productive firms obtaining a

larger share of the market.

           In practice, our calibration exercise amounts to making each artificial economy’s plant-size

distribution match the observed plant-size distribution for each country. Taking the United States as a

supposedly undistorted benchmark economy, we find the distribution of plant-specific productivities

needed to generate its plant-size histogram.4 We then find, for each country, the plant-size specific

distortions needed to match its plant-size histogram, assuming it faces the same distribution of

productivity as the U.S. economy. This enables us to calculate how much aggregate output is being

wasted due to misallocation attributable to distortions.

           To make them directly comparable, our results are reported using the same framework as Caselli

(2005). We measure the success of our model by computing cross-country income dispersion under the

assumption that all countries have the same productivity. In other words, we calculate the extent to which

differences in the misallocation of resources (as well as differences in the amount of physical and human

capital resources) explain dispersion in income per worker.

           We find misallocation of resources across plants to be a powerful explanatory factor of cross-

country differences in income. For our benchmark calibration, the model explains 58% of the log variance

of cross-country income dispersion. This figure should be compared to the 42% success rate of the usual

model, which considers physical and human capital (average years of schooling).




4
    See Davis and Henrekson (1999) and Hsieh and Klenow (2007) for a similar strategy.


                                                                                                          3
        We redo the basic experiment with sub-samples of the data that are more reliable, choose

different parameter calibrations, and truncate the data at different thresholds. We find that the results are

not particularly driven by the parameter calibration or sample differences or biases. We conclude with a

discussion of the limitations of, and possible extensions to, our exercise. The acknowledged shortcomings

notwithstanding, our results suggest that misallocation of resources is a crucial determinant of income

dispersion.

        As noted above, the papers closest to the present study are those of Restuccia and Rogerson

(2007), Hsieh and Klenow (2007), and Bartelsman, Haltiwanger, and Scarpetta (2006).

        Restuccia and Rogerson (2007), consider idiosyncratic polices that have the direct effect of

engendering heterogeneity in the prices to individual producers and reallocation of resources across plants

but that do not change aggregate capital accumulation and aggregate relative prices. Nonetheless, the

authors find substantial effects of these policies on aggregate output and measured efficiency. In their

benchmark model, they find that the reallocation of resources implied by such policies can lead to

reductions of as much as 30% in output, even though the underlying range of available technology is the

same.

        As these authors show through simulations in their model, as distortions increase, more resources

are shifted towards subsidized plants, implying higher drops in output and measured productivity. The

source of the measured productivity differences is that subsidized plants become larger and taxed plants

become smaller. That is, whereas in the undistorted economy all plants with the same productivity are of

the same size, in the distorted economy there is a non-degenerate distribution of plant size within a plant

level productivity class. This entails an efficiency loss, which shows up in the aggregate measure of

productivity.

        In one set of simulations, the authors consider the case in which plants with low productivity

receive a subsidy and plants with high productivity are taxed. Specifically, assuming that half the plants

with low productivity are subsidized and the other half taxed, they find that a tax rate equal to 10% entails




                                                                                                           4
an output and aggregate productivity loss of 13%. They also study the case in which large, presumably

productive plants are subsidized. This policy is usually associated with the view that larger, productive

plants need to assume a larger role in the development process. In the context of their model, however,

policies that subsidize high productivity plants, because they also distort optimal plant size, also have

negative effects on output and productivity. Quantitatively, subsidizing 10% of the highest productivity

plants and taxing the rest at 40% implies a drop in output and productivity of 3%, according to their

model.

         Hsieh and Klenow (2007) use plant level information from the Chinese and Indian manufacturing

census data to measure dispersion in the marginal products of capital and labor within 4-digit

manufacturing sectors. When capital and labor are hypothetically reallocated to equalize marginal

products to the extent observed in the United States, the authors find efficiency gains of 25%-40% in

China and 50%-60% in India. An analogous exercise performed on those two countries using our data

yields similar results.

         Our work also relates to that of Bartelsman, Haltiwanger, and Scarpetta (2006) who, using an

Olley and Pakes (1996) decomposition of industry-level productivity, find evidence of considerable cross-

country variation in allocative efficiency in a sample of 24 industrial, transition, and emerging economies.

Importantly, they show that their simulated model cannot fully match some key aspects of the firm

dispersion observed in the actual data, which should be seen as a limitation of this type of model.

         The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the dataset and its

characteristics. The model is presented in section 3 and its calibration detailed in section 4. The results are

discussed in section 5. In section 6, we carry out a number of robustness tests, and in section 7 discuss

some limitations and unaddressed extensions of our analysis, and present tentative conclusions.




                                                                                                             5
2 Data Description


        Recent theoretical work in macroeconomics, trade, and development has emphasized the

importance of heterogeneity in production units and the level of their dynamism to economic activity.

Cross-country empirical investigations at the firm and establishment level, however, are notoriously

challenging because of the lack of data and difficulty of comparing the few datasets that are available.5

There are few high quality time-series datasets (mostly in rich countries), but there is a clear need to

combine data from multiple countries (in particular, developing ones) in order to understand, for example,

the role of institutional policy differences. The paucity of data is particularly acute for developing

countries, and selection problems tend to be associated with biases in, and the potential endogeneity of,

the cross-country samples. The reason for the data constraint is simple: economic censuses of

establishments are infrequently collected due to high cost and institutional restrictions that impose an

“upper-bound” on research, especially in poor countries. No institution has the capacity or resources to

overcome the limitation of “lack of census data” for a wide range of countries and periods. Hence, most

methodologies face this restriction. Because the implications of firm heterogeneity warrant going forward

despite existing data limitations, researchers have sought other sources of business “compilations”

(registries, tax sources) such as the UNIDO, Amadeus, and the WorldBase data set used in this paper.

        Dun & Bradstreet’s (D&B) WorldBase is a database of public and private companies in 205

countries and territories.6 The data, compiled from a number of sources including partner firms in dozens


5
  Bartelesman, Haltiwanger, and Scarpetta (2005) review the measurement and analytical challenges of handling
firm level data and attempt to harmonize indicators of firm dynamics for a number of countries. Their harmonized
data, however, is available for only a few (mostly industrialized) countries, and for many of these the data are
confidential.
6
  Dun & Bradstreet has been the leading U.S. source of commercial credit and marketing information since 1845.
D&B operates in 205 countries and territories, either directly or through affiliates, agents, and associated business
partners. It is also a government-approved source for assigning SIC codes to companies. Early uses of the D&B data
include Caves’ (1975) size and diversification pattern comparisons between Canadian and U.S. domestic plants as
well as subsidiaries of U.S. multinationals in Canada, and Lipsey’s (1978) observations regarding the reliability of
the U.S. data. More recently, Harrison, Love, and McMillian (2004) used D&B’s cross-country foreign ownership
information. Other research that has used D&B data includes Black and Strahan’s (2002) study of entrepreneurial
activity in the United States and Acemoglu, Johnson, and Mitton’s (2005) cross-country study of concentration and
vertical integration.


                                                                                                                   6
of countries, telephone directory records, websites, and self-registration, are meant to provide clients with

contact details for and basic operating information about potential customers, competitors, and suppliers.

Information from local insolvency authorities and merger and acquisition records are used to track

changes in ownership and operations. All information is verified centrally via a variety of manual and

automated checks.

        Importantly, the unit of observation in WorldBase is the establishment rather than the firm.

Establishments (also referred to as plants), like firms, have their own addresses, business names, and

managers, but might be partly or wholly owned by other firms. It is therefore possible to observe new

enterprises spawned from existing firms, or, by aggregating to the firm level, examine only independent

new firms. Our unit of observation in this paper is the establishment. WorldBase reports each

establishment’s age, number of employees, and the four-digit SIC-1987 code of the primary industry in

which it operates as well as sales and exports (albeit with much less extensive coverage).7

        The main advantage of our database is its size. Our original sample included nearly 24 million

private establishments in 2003/2004. Excluding territories and countries with fewer than 10 observations

and those for which the Penn Table 6.1 provides no data left us with observations in 79 countries that

exhibited significant variation in international wealth and resource misallocation, precisely what we

wanted for a study of development accounting.8

        In most of the countries considered, our dataset provides highly satisfactory coverage. To give

some sense, we compared our data with the Statistics of U.S. Businesses collected by the U.S. Census

Bureau. The U.S. 2001-2002 business census records 7,200,770 “employer establishments” with total

sales of $22 trillion; our data include 4,293,886 establishments with more than one employee with total

7
 Consistent capital data at the establishment level is available for few countries in our sample.
8
  The countries in the sample are Algeria, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bangladesh, Belgium, Benin, Bolivia,
Brazil, Cameroon, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Gambia, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, India,
Indonesia, Iran, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Korea, Malawi, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritius,
Mexico, Mozambique, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Norway, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Portugal, Romania, Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, Syria, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Uganda, United Kingdom, United States,
Uruguay, Venezuela, Zambia, Zimbabwe.


                                                                                                               7
sales of $17 trillion. The U.S. census records 3.7 million small (fewer than 10 employees) employer

establishments; our data include 3.2 million U.S. establishments with more than one and fewer than 10

employees.

         We also compare the U.S. owned subsidiaries in the WorldBase data with information on U.S.

owned plants from the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis (see Figures 1a and 1b). The BEA’s U.S.

Direct Investment Abroad: Benchmark Survey, a confidential census conducted every five years, covers

virtually the entire population of U.S. MNCs. The firm level data is not readily available, but the BEA

reports aggregate and industry level information. In 2004, the BEA reported sales (employment) by

foreign affiliates of U.S. MNCs totaling $3,238 billion (10.02 million employees).9 According to D&B

data for 2005, the sum of all sales (employment) by foreign establishments that reported U.S. parents was

$2,795 billion (10.07 million employees). Not only is the total similar, but the distribution across

countries is also consistent. Figure 1a plots the total sales (by country) of the foreign affiliates of U.S.

MNCs as reported in the BEA’s Benchmark Survey 2004 against the total sales (by country) of all plants

in the D&B data that reported a U.S. based parent.10 The correlation is striking, suggesting that the cross-

country distribution of multinational activity in the D&B data matches that found in the U.S. BEA’s

benchmark survey.11

         Although we consider the WorldBase data to be highly informative with respect to the question

we posed, we are nevertheless aware of its limitations. In our final sample, the number of observations per

country ranges from more than 7 million establishments in the United States to fewer than 20 in Malawi.

That this variation reflects differences not only in country size, but also in the intensity with which Dun &

Bradstreet samples in different countries, raises the concern that our measures of size might be affected

by cross-country differences in the sample frame.




9
  See http://bea.gov/bea/di/usdop/all_affiliate_cntry.xls.
10
   See http://bea.gov/bea/di/usdop/all_affiliate_cntry.xls.
11
   This is likely due to errors and differences in the classification of subsidiaries as U.S. or not.


                                                                                                           8
          For example, in countries in which coverage is lower, more established, often older and larger,

enterprises might be overrepresented in the sample, which could bias our results. In particular, we know

that poorer countries typically have a sizeable informal sector populated by small production units

(Schneider and Enste 2000). Because it probably does not capture most of the informal sector, the Dun &

Bradstreet sample tends to underreport the number of smaller establishments in poor countries. To

address this concern, we slice the data in different ways and redo our calculations for many possible

cases.

          To mitigate the potential for bias resulting from not having small establishments in poor countries

represented, we truncate the data for all countries. In our benchmark exercise, we use only information for

establishments with at least 20 employees, but we also work with other thresholds to test the robustness of

the results. Similarly, although in our benchmark exercise we use all countries for which there are more

than 10 observations, we also work with sub-samples in which countries have large numbers of

observations.12

          We depict the main features of the dataset in Figures 2 to 5, in which we measure the size of an

establishment in terms of the logarithm of the number of employees. Income per worker, from the Penn

World Table version 6.1, refers to PPP adjusted dollars. Figures 2, 3, 4, and 5 plot, respectively, the mean,

“coworker mean,”13 variance, and skewness of the establishment size distributions of each country against

income per worker (in logarithm). Note that mean size, coworker mean size, and variance size are

negatively related to income, with correlations equal to -0.73, -0.73, and -0.62, respectively (significant at

the 1% level). Skewness, in contrast, is positively correlated with income (0.52, also significant at the 1%

level).




12
   We thank Daron Acemoglu for pointing out this problem to us and Kei-Mu Yi and Mark Bils for suggesting this
solution. An alternative solution would be to take a stand on the distribution function and artificially complete the
sample for poor countries. The approach of cutting out the plants below a threshold is non-parametric and probably
minimizes distortions.
13
   The “coworker mean” is defined as average firm size that weights each plant by its own size in calculating a
mean; see Davis and Haltiwanger (1991).


                                                                                                                   9
        Figure 6 depicts the relation between mean size of the establishment and size of the market,

measured in terms of the number of employees (as reported in Penn World Table 6.1). Note that these two

variables are not correlated (the correlation is equal to 0.02, which is not significant at the 5% level).

        Some additional intuition can be grasped by directly comparing selected countries’ histograms. In

Figure 7, the horizontal axis refers to intervals for the number of employees; the vertical axis reports the

frequency of firms within each bracket. Notice that, starting with the United States, the curve is always

decreasing, indicating that small plants constitute the most common form of production unit. Typically,

histograms tend to be slightly flat, more like those of Austria or Brazil than that of the United States.

India, in which plants tend to be much larger, is an extreme case, Norway, in which the plant size

distribution is more concentrated in small firms than even in the United States, a curious case.


3 Model


        Our model draws heavily on the work of Melitz (2003), Restuccia and Rogerson (2007), and

Hsieh and Klenow (2007). Plant dynamics and policy distortions are as in Restuccia and Rogerson

(2007), but we assume that production units have constant returns to scale technologies and some degree

of market power, as in Hsieh and Klenow (2007). Because of the degree to which our model borrows

from these previous works, we attempt to be as concise as possible.

        Assume the final output is a C.E.S. aggregate of a continuum of differentiated goods, indexed by

ω:

                                       σ
                     ⎛      σ−1
                                  ⎞ σ−1
                 Y = ⎜ ∫ yi σ d ω ⎟                                                                    (1)
                        ω∈Ω
                     ⎝            ⎠

where the measure of the set Ω represents the mass of available goods. This implies that demand for good

ω is given by

                        Y
                 yω =                                                                                  (2)
                        pωσ



                                                                                                             10
where pω denotes the price of good ω and the price of final output is normalized to one.

        The production unit is the plant (establishment). There exists a continuum of plants, each of

which chooses to produce a different variety ω. Plants’ technologies share the same Cobb-Douglas

functional form, but might differ in their productivity factors, which are indexed by φ:

                 yϕ = AAϕ kϕα lϕ1−α                                                                 (3)

where A is the economy-wide productivity factor, Aφ is the plant-specific productivity factor, kφ and lφ are,

respectively, the capital rented and labor hired by such a plant, and α is the usual capital share parameter.

Conditional on remaining in operation, an incumbent plant maximizes its period profit, which is given by

                 πϕ = (1 − τϕ ) pϕ yϕ − rkϕ − wlϕ                                                   (4)

where τi denotes a plant specific output tax (or subsidy), and r and w denote the rental rates of capital and

labor, respectively. Note that we assume taxes to be a function of a plant’s productivity. Following

Restuccia and Rogerson (2007), one should understand τi to be not literally a tax, but rather a general

distortion. Among the different types of policies that might generate these effects are non-competitive

banking systems, product and labor market regulations, corruption, and trade restrictions.

        Profit maximization, subject to the demand curve, implies the following expressions:

                       yϕ ⎛ (1 − α)r ⎞α
                 lϕ =     ⎜          ⎟                                                              (5)
                      AAϕ ⎝ αw ⎠

                                       1−α
                      y ⎛ αw ⎞
                 kϕ = ϕ ⎜            ⎟                                                              (6)
                     AAϕ ⎝ (1 − α )r ⎠

                 ⎛      r α w1−α ⎡⎣( 1−α α     α 1−α ⎞
                                      α ) + ( 1−α )
                                                    ⎤⎦
                 ⎜ pϕ −                                ⎟
                 ⎜              (1 − τϕ ) AAϕ          ⎟ 1
                 ⎝                                     ⎠=                                           (7)
                                    pϕ                    σ

which correspond to the labor and capital allocation and pricing equation (Lerner’s formula). Plugging the

last expression back into demand (2) gives the amount produced by each plant,




                                                                                                          11
                                                     σ
                ⎛    (σ − 1)(1 − τϕ ) AAϕ       ⎞
         yϕ = Y ⎜ α 1−α                         ⎟                                                           (8)
                ⎜ σr w ⎡ ( 1−α ) α
                                   + (   α 1−α ⎟
                                           )  ⎤
                ⎝        ⎣   α         1−α    ⎦⎠

         The equilibrium will be characterized by a mass M of plants (and thus M goods) and a

distribution μφ of plant productivity factors over a subset of (0, ∞). In such equilibrium, the aggregate

                                                         ∞                        ∞
levels of capital and labor are given by K =         ∫
                                                     0
                                                             Mkϕμ ϕ d ϕ and L = ∫ Mlϕμ ϕ d ϕ . Plugging (8) into (6)
                                                                                 0


and (7) yields expressions for K and H as functions of Y. Combining these expressions with (1) and (8),

we obtain

                                                                σ
                        ⎡ ∞ (1 − τ )σ−1 Aσ−1M μ d ϕ⎤ σ−1
                 Y=A    ⎣⎢ ∫0     ϕ      ϕ     ϕ
                                                   ⎦⎥               K α L1−α                                (9)
                                ∞
                            ∫
                                           σ   σ−1
                                    (1 − τϕ ) A M μ ϕ d ϕ
                                               ϕ
                             0


         This equation will constitute the backbone expression for our calculations. As we will see in the

next section, it is not necessary to specify the rest of the economic environment to use this equation. We

do so, however, to gain a better understanding of the interplay of the different effects of the hypothesis on

the results.

         Following Restuccia and Rogerson (2007), we consider the economy to be populated by an

infinitely lived representative household with preferences over streams of consumption goods that does

not care about leisure. There is also a large (unbounded) pool of plants prospectively entering the

industry. To enter, however, incurs a cost; prospective entrants must make their entry decision knowing

that they face a distribution of potential draws for Aφ (and thus τφ). Although a plant’s productivity and

tax remain constant over time, in any given period each plant faces a constant probability of death.

         The steady-state equilibrium of this model is obtained as follows. As usual, the consumer

problem determines the rental rate of capital, which is a function of the time discount factor and capital

depreciation rate. Given the rental rate of capital, the zero profit condition for plant entry determines the

steady-state wage rate. Labor supply being inelastic, in equilibrium, total labor demand must be equal to

one. It turns out that labor market clearing determines the equilibrium mass of plants.


                                                                                                                  12
4 Calibration


          As noted above, our dataset consists of establishment-size histograms for each country. The

fundamental step in our calibration is thus to find plant-specific tax distortion profiles that make each

country’s artificial economy plant size histogram match the data. That is, we must find the distortions

profile that would make the histogram of the U.S. economy, which is presumably undistorted, the

histogram of another country. To do this, we need to map the plants of each country to the plants of the

U.S. economy, which involves dividing each country’s histogram into a certain (large) number of cells

denoted by N. To achieve this mapping as simply and directly as possible, we make this division such that

all countries’ histograms have the same number of cells. We further give the cells of each histogram the

same mass. As we shall see, however, calibration requires that across countries the cells have different

masses.

          Note that N denotes the number of cells, not the number of establishments, in the sample. In the

case of N much greater than the number of establishments in the sample, there will be many cells for each

establishment.14 The relevant implication here is that we are capturing (at most) N moments of each

distribution.

          Having completed the division of the histograms, we can begin to find plant specific productivity

factors and taxes. Plugging equation (8) into equation (5) and comparing the resulting labor input for two

different plants gives us

                  li (1 − τi )σ Aiσ−1
                     =                                                                                     (10)
                  l j (1 − τ j )σ Aσ−
                                   j
                                     1




where i and j refer to two plants (i.e., two different cells of the histogram). As noted earlier, we assume

the U.S. economy to be sufficiently undistorted to provide a good benchmark against which to assess

14
  For example, consider a country “A” that has two plants with 10 employees and one plant with 20 employees, and
a country “B” that has three plants with 11 employees and one plant with 12 employees. If we choose N = 12, the
“artificial histogram” of country “A” will have eight cells (or plants) with 10 employees and four cells with 20
employees. The artificial histogram of country “B” will have nine cells with 11 employees and three cells with 12
employees. In the case of N not a multiple of the number of plants, parts of different plants will be assigned to the
same cell. But this is not quantitatively relevant given the large number of cells.


                                                                                                                  13
establishment specific productivities. More precisely, we assume τj = 0 for all U.S. establishments, and

use the U.S. data to determine the Aj factors. We do this by normalizing A1 = 1 and using equation (10) to

determine Ai, for i = 2, 3, …, N.

        The next step is to find the distortions for each country, which we accomplish by mapping the

histogram cells of each country to the U.S. histogram cells. This is done the natural way, by sorting the

histogram cells by number of employees (see Figure 8). The mapping between any two countries’

histograms is thus such that the nth smaller cell of one corresponds to the nth smaller cell of the other.15

This approach engenders the minimum distortion possible to our economies, that is, tax distortions affect

establishment size but do not change the size ordering of a country’s establishments. In other words,

distortions never result in more productive establishments having fewer input factors than less productive

establishments.16

        Returning to equation (10), we can use the previously determined Ai’s to obtain τi as a function of

τ1, for i = 2, 3, …, N, for each country. More precisely, using

                    (1 − τi* ) = (1 − τi ) /(1 − τ1 )                                                     (11)

we can obtain τi* for i = 1, 2, 3, …, N. Note that we do not need τ1 to employ equation (9). If we plug

equation (11) into equation (9), the terms on (1 – τ1) in the numerator and the denominator cancel out,

giving equation (9) with τi* replacing τi.

        To calibrate the mass of each country’s plant distribution, we resort to the labor market clearing

                    ∞
equation, L =   ∫0
                        Mlϕμ ϕ d ϕ . In practice, after the histogram divisions, and remembering that we are

normalizing the labor force to unity, this becomes


15
   Continuing with our example, all eight cells with 10 employees of country “A” will be mapped to cells of 11
employees of country “B”. One of the cells of 20 employees of country “A” will be mapped to a cell of 11
employees of country “B”. And the remaining three cells of 20 employees of country “A” will be mapped to the
three cells of 12 employees of country “B”.
16
   We can think of the mapping between histograms as an identification problem that requires some assumption.
Restuccia and Rogerson (2007) analyze various alternatives including the case in which there is no correlation
between distortion and size distribution. The assumption adopted here has the property of minimizing distortion and
thus underestimating the explanatory power of misallocation.


                                                                                                                 14
                              N
                 M = N / ∑ li                                                                       (12)
                          i =1


        We borrow the technology parameters from the literature. As usual, we assume α = 1/3. In our

benchmark calibration, we set σ = 6. This parameter value delivers a 20% mark-up in price over marginal

cost, which is in line with Rotemberg and Woodford (1992).

        To relate our model to Caselli’s (2005) calculations, we substitute labor for “quality adjusted”

work force. With some abuse of notation, we rewrite equation (9) to include the human capital factor h:

                                                     σ
                      ⎡   N
                                    * σ−1 σ−1 ⎤
                                                    σ−1

                      ⎢ ∑ M (1 − τi ) Ai ⎥
                Y = A ⎣ i =1 N                  ⎦         K α ( Lh)1−α                              (13)
                            ∑ M (1 − τi* )σ Aiσ−1
                              i =1


        We then follow Caselli (2005) in calibrating the remaining parameters, the values for Y, K, and h,

for each country. Briefly, Y and K are from the 6.1 version of the Penn World Tables. Capital is calculated

by perpetual inventory method, with depreciation rate equal to 6% and the initial capital determined by

the initial investment rate and its geometric growth over the period. Following Hall and Jones (1999), h is

measured by the formula h = exp(ψ(s)), where, following Barro and Lee (2001), ψ is piecewise linear and

s denotes average number of years of schooling. We continue to normalize the size of the labor force to L

= 1, as we evaluate output in terms of number of workers.

        An interesting aspect of the calibration is that it did not require that we specify many economy

parameters such as the household’s preference discount factor, plants’ entry costs, and the probability that

a plant exits the market. Such specification would have been necessary to obtain a complete

characterization of the equilibrium including determination of factor prices and tax distortions (i.e., τ1).

We would also have had to use the “free entry” condition, which was not required for our purposes.

        For the purposes of this paper, the distribution of plant-size is a summary statistic of the resource

misallocation for each country. That is, in order to employ the chosen model to determine cross-country

income differences, we do not need to know entry costs or the probability that a plant dies, which



                                                                                                           15
presumably depends on the bankruptcy laws. But an analysis of these characteristics is probably essential

for drawing explicit policy implications related to inter plant misallocation of resources.


5 Results


         To perform the calibration, we make the number of cells, N, equal to 100,000. With that, the

artificial histogram becomes a good approximation of the real data histogram even when establishment

size distribution is extremely skewed. We then obtain establishment productivity for the United States, Ai

(Figure 9), and, for each country, the distortions τi (Figure 10).17

         Figure 9 presents the U.S. plant size distribution, Figure 10 the type of distortion needed to

transform that distribution into another country’s plant-size distribution. Remember that τ1, the distortion

of the smallest plants, was normalized to zero for all countries. Thus, one should not understand τj to be

indicative of the aggregate distortion. Rather, Figure 10 indicates, for each country, the magnitude of

distortions over plants relative to the distortions over small plants.

         Note the considerable variety in τ profiles. For some countries, τ is not monotonic in the size of

the plant; for some countries it is positive, for others negative. The cloud of τ profiles also indicates that

the “median” distortion corresponds to negative values for τ, which become more negative with plant

size. That is, the most typical distortion corresponds to subsidies to big plants (or taxes to small plants)

that increase (decrease) with the size of the plant.

         After obtaining the distortions, we calculate the impact of resource misallocation on each

country’s productivity. Analogously to Caselli (2005), we make

                   y = ADk α h1−α                                                                            (14)

where y = Y/L and k = K/L are output per worker and capital per worker, respectively, and D is the

misallocation factor, defined as


17
  Although we chose N = 100,000 for our calculations, due to graphical limitations, the figures depict the results for
N = 100.


                                                                                                                    16
                                                    σ
                     ⎡N            * σ−1 σ−1 ⎤
                                                 σ−1

                     ⎢ ∑ M (1 − τi ) Ai ⎥
                 D ≡ ⎣ i =1 N                  ⎦                                                (15)
                           ∑ M (1 − τi )σ Aiσ−1
                           i =1


        To calculate the measure of the success of our exercise and compare to previous work, we define

the factor-only model, yKH, and the misallocation model, yDKH, as, respectively,

                 yKH ≡ k α h1−α                                                                 (16)

                 yDKH = Dk α h1−α                                                               (17)

        Our measure of success is based on the question: What would the dispersion of incomes be if all

countries had the same A? That is, we define the measure of success of the factor-only model and

misallocation model, respectively, as

                                  Var[log( yKH )]
                 successKH ≡                                                                    (18)
                                   Var[log( y )]

                                   Var[log( yDKH )]
                 successDKH ≡                                                                   (19)
                                    Var[log( y )]

        Before analyzing the results of our benchmark experiment, summarized in Table 1, it is useful to

check their consistency with Caselli’s (2005). Because our sample contains 79 countries and his 94, the

success of the factor-only model in our case is 0.417, slightly greater than the 0.385 obtained in his

calculation. Analogous observations apply to each sub-sample of countries.

        The first and foremost observation about the misallocation model is that it displays a success

measure of 0.58. The 16 percentage points difference, being about 39% higher than the corresponding

figure for the factor-only model, indicates that dispersion of misallocation across countries is

quantitatively important in addition to physical and human capital.

        We further observe that the misallocation model displays high correlation with countries’ income,

equal to 0.95, as shown in Figure 11. In fact, the correlation between the misallocation factor D and




                                                                                                       17
countries’ income (in logarithms) is equal to 0.54. That is, misallocation is not only adding noise to the

model, it is contributing to our understanding of income differences.

        The sub-samples of countries mostly yield conclusions that parallel those reached in Caselli’s

(2005) discussion of the factor-only model. Variation in log income per worker is higher in sub-samples

that are, on average, poorer (non-OECD, Africa). Moreover, it is more difficult to explain precisely the

income differences in sub-samples in which poor countries are involved, which is where a model is most

needed. Unfortunately, as Table 1 indicates, the misallocation model does not help much in this

dimension. Although it can fully account for the income variation of OECD countries, the misallocation

model can explain only about half the dispersion in the non-OECD group.

        For the Asia and Oceania subgroup, on the other hand, the misallocation model performs much

better than the factor-only model. Importantly, this was not driven by a single country. Rather, the

misallocation factor increased the dispersion of incomes in a homogeneous way, displaying a correlation

with actual incomes of 0.93.


6 Robustness


        We test the sensitivity of our results by conducting a series of robustness checks. Specifically, we

change some of the model’s hypotheses and slice the data in different ways. The main results are

unchanged by these manipulations.


6.1 Sampling Intensity


        Our benchmark experiment includes all countries with sample size greater than 10 observations

(i.e., 10 establishments). This enabled us to study a large group of countries, but might raise concerns

about the reliability of the data and of results for countries with fewer observations. We report here the

results obtained when we select only countries with sample sizes greater than 100 establishments, 1,000

establishments, and 10,000 establishments. Reducing the dataset in this way has two effects, (1) it



                                                                                                         18
restricts the sample to countries with higher sample intensity, and (2) it excludes countries in which Dun

& Bradstreet collected little information. The latter tend to be poor countries in which smaller

establishments are likely to be underrepresented. Coincidently, these are the countries in which the dual

market (black market) operates, making the collection of data more difficult. Remember, however, that,

knowing that this could bias our results, we truncated the data in the benchmark exercise.

        Table 2 displays the results. Note that as we reduce the sample of countries, the misallocation

model exhibits similar performance. Although it improves for the sub-sample of more than 1,000

establishments, its explanatory power returns to 0.58 for more restrictive (and reliable) datasets. We take

from this that our original experiment is probably a good quantitative point of reference.


6.2 Elasticity of Substitution


        In our benchmark experiment, we calibrate the elasticity of substitution as σ = 6. Although this is

our preferred calibration, there is considerable uncertainty about this parameter. In this section, we redo

the entire experiment using σ = 3.8 and σ = 10. The former figure, used by Bernard et al. (2003), implies a

36% mark-up in price over marginal cost; the latter figure delivers an 11% mark-up in line with Basu and

Fernald’s (1997) findings.

        Table 3 presents the results for σ = 3.8. The first line of the table, which reports results for the

entire sample, gives a favorable first impression. For this calibration, success increases to 0.755. Such a

reading is, however, misleading. The sub-samples’ analysis indicates that the misallocation model tends

to over-explain the data in many cases. This might be a consequence of the small number of observations

in each sub-sample, or a problem with the data. We believe it to be more reasonable to conclude that the

problem is with the calibration; in our view, with σ = 3.8, the model overestimates the effect of

misallocation.

        Table 4 reports the results for σ = 10. For this calibration, the misallocation model’s success is

0.500 and the sub-samples do not indicate any inconsistencies. The question here is whether this




                                                                                                         19
calibration is more adequate than our benchmark. Although it is hard to know for sure, casual observation

suggests that industries in developing countries tend to be less competitive than those in developed

countries, and are thus characterized by higher mark-ups. With this in mind, and given that σ = 10 was

obtained for the U.S. economy, we think it is reasonable to consider the Table 4 results to be a lower

bound for the actual success of the misallocation model.


6.3 Truncation


        In the benchmark experiment, we truncate our dataset. The rationale for considering only

establishments larger than 20 employees was that differences in the intensity with which Dun &

Bradstreet samples establishments might be affected by cross-country differences and, thus, bias our

results. Poorer countries typically have large, informal sectors characterized by small establishments that

might not be captured in the dataset. Consequently, the dataset might erroneously indicate, for example, a

low mean for the plant size distribution in poor countries.

        Of course, there is no clear indication of the correct threshold for truncating the data. The fact that

the official agency in some countries (such as Netherlands) collects data only for establishments with

more than 20 employees suggests that this is a reasonable threshold. In any case, Tables 5 and 6 address

this question by reporting the experiment results for the cases in which the threshold was 10 employees

and 50 employees, respectively.

        As expected, the results in Tables 5 and 6 are qualitatively the same as those in Table 1. From a

quantitative point of view, these experiments indicate that the results are not very sensitive to the

threshold. For a relatively large change in the threshold, the main success measure varied by less than

10%. Our view is that the benchmark results thus represent a good compass reading.




                                                                                                            20
6.4 Distribution Information


        To calibrate the model in our benchmark experiment we used the plant-size distribution, which

has the advantage of fully exploiting the information contained in the data. A concern, however, is that

potential noise in the data might yield misleading results. To address this issue, we redo our calculations

using only the mean of each country distribution.

        Note that the expression for the misallocation factor D (equation 4) can be split into two factors.

The first has to do with the mean of the distribution, the other with its higher moments. In order to

consider only the mean, we assume the second factor of the expression to be equal for all countries, and

redo the calculations using the first factor in the place of D.


                                                  σ                                            σ
                                                               ⎧ N                                 ⎫
                  ⎡N                           ⎤ σ −1
                                                               ⎪  ⎡                         ⎤ σ −1
                                                                                                   ⎪
                  ⎢∑ M (1 − τ i ) Ai ⎥                            ⎢∑ (1 − τ i ) Ai ⎥ ⎪
                                   * σ −1 σ −1                                  * σ −1 σ −1
                                                           1
                                                               ⎪
                                                               ⎪                            ⎦ ⎪
              D ≡ ⎣ i =1 N                     ⎦      = M σ −1 ⎨ ⎣ i =1 N                          ⎬    (20)
                        ∑
                        i =1
                                      * σ  σ −1
                             M (1 − τ i ) Ai                   ⎪
                                                               ⎪       ∑
                                                                       i =1
                                                                                   * σ  σ −1
                                                                            (1 − τ i ) Ai          ⎪
                                                                                                   ⎪
                                                               ⎪⎩                                  ⎪⎭


        The results that use only the mean, reported in Table 7, are similar to those for the benchmark

case, save that the success rates are slightly smaller (56% rather than 58% for all countries). The exercise

suggests that our findings are not driven by noise in the dataset and that most of the relevant information

is contained in the mean of the distribution.


6.5 Multiple Sectors


        Our benchmark experiment assumes the economy to have only one sector. In this subsection, we

redo our experiment under the assumption that the economy has multiple sectors, as in Hsieh and Klenow

(2007). Specifically, we assume that the final good is produced by combining the output Ys of S

manufacturing industries, according to a Cobb-Douglas technology thus:




                                                                                                               21
               S                          S
        Y = ∏ Ysθs
              s =1
                              where      ∑θ
                                         s=1
                                               s   =1                                               (21)


        Expenditure minimization implies

         s s = θ sY
        PY                                                                                          (22)

where Ps denotes the price of industry s and the final good price normalized to 1. As before, each industry

output is the aggregate of differentiated products

                                   σ
             ⎛          σ−1
                               ⎞ σ−1
        Ys = ⎜ ∫      yi σ d ω ⎟                                                                    (23)
                ω∈Ω s
             ⎝                 ⎠

where the measure of the set Ωs represents the mass of available goods in sector s. There is a continuum

of plants, each of which chooses to produce a different variety ω. These plants share the same Cobb-

Douglas technology functional form, but might differ in their productivity factors (as in equation (3)) and

maximize profits facing a plant-specific output distortion (as in equation (4)).

        To address misallocation distortion in this environment, we calculate the factor D as

                                                              θs
                 ⎧ Ns                                σ
                                                         ⎫
                 ⎪ ⎡ M (1 − τ * )σ−1 Aσ−1 ⎤ ⎪
                                                    σ− 1

             S ⎪ ⎢∑            s      i         i  ⎥ ⎪
                 ⎪ ⎣ i =1                          ⎦ ⎪
        D ≡ ∏⎨            Ns                             ⎬                                          (24)
            s =1 ⎪                                       ⎪
                 ⎪        ∑
                          i =1
                               M s (1 − τ i ) σ σ−1
                                               A i
                                                         ⎪
                 ⎪⎩                                      ⎪⎭

        As in Hsieh and Klenow (2007), we effectively make the misallocation factor equal to the

weighted geometric average of the misallocation factor in each industry s. Note that this way of

calculating the misallocation factor considers only misallocation that occurs within each sector. It does

not consider the eventual misallocation of resources that makes sectors smaller or larger than their

efficient size. A reason for calculating misallocation this way is that countries might specialize in sectors

in which they have comparative advantage, in which case they could have sectors with sizes different

from those of the U.S. economy (our benchmark) and nevertheless be efficient. In any case, it is

noteworthy that calculating distortions this way yields a lower bound of misallocation.



                                                                                                           22
        To implement this exercise, we restrict our attention to countries for which we have at least 10

observations (i.e., 10 establishments) in at least 30 sectors, sector here referring to a two-digit SIC

industry. This leaves a sub-sample of 32 countries. The choice of 30 sectors is arbitrary, but turns out to

be a reasonable compromise between a large number of sectors and a large number of countries.

        As before, the calibration methodology consists of matching model distributions to actual

histograms, but now this is done for each sector of each country. Again taking the U.S. economy as a

benchmark, we find the distortion profiles for other countries. To obtain θs, the share of each sector in the

economy, we use data on establishment revenues for the U.S. economy, also from the WorldBase dataset

and equation (22).

        The results are presented in Table 8, which compares the success measures for the one sector and

multiple sector economies for the same sub-sample of countries. The success of the factor-only economy

is the same in both cases, as this model always contains only one sector. The success of the misallocation

model is comparable in both specifications. Success is smaller in the multiple sector model, but this is

probably a consequence of the way it was formulated. This can be seen as another indication of the

robustness of the results.

        Another interesting observation with regard to the multiple sector experiment is its relationship to

Hsieh and Klenow’s (2007) experiment. Their hypothetical “liberalizations” in China and India consider

the elimination of various intra sector distortions such that capital and labor are hypothetically reallocated

to equalize marginal products to the extent observed in the United States. Although they employ a

different dataset and calibration than we use, that the experiments share the same general framework

invites comparison.

        Hsieh and Klenow (2007) find the gains from reallocating resources to be on the order of 25%-

40% in China and 50%-60% in India. According to our calculations, in the multiple sector experiments,

the gains for India and China are 31% and 35%, respectively. In the one sector experiments, these gains




                                                                                                           23
are, again respectively, 41% and 62%. That our results seem to be fairly consistent with theirs is a final

reassuring sign of the robustness of our experiments.


7 Conclusions


        We calculated the implicit distortion needed to generate size distributions consistent with size

histograms for a sample of 79 countries. We found the loss in output caused by these distortions to be

quantitatively important. For our preferred calibration, the model explains 0.58 of the log variance of

income per worker. This figure should be compared to the 0.42 success rate of the usual model. That is,

when added to differences in resource accumulation (human and physical capital), differences in

misallocation of resources add 0.16 (an increase of about 39%) to the explanatory power of our model of

dispersion in cross-country income per worker. This result seems to be robust to changes in parameter

calibrations and in the sub-samples in which the data are more reliable (i.e., rich countries).

        One potential improvement to our analysis would be to make use of richer datasets. In particular,

a dataset that also contained information on revenues and capital per establishment would support a richer

model with many distortions, as in Hsieh and Klenow (2007). In the present case, it is possible that one

distortion could cancel out or add to the effect of another distortion, thus affecting total misallocation. The

work of Bartelsman, Haltiwanger, and Scarpetta (2006) is a step in this direction.

        There is also potential for improvement in the theoretical framework. Following the literature, we

use the United States as an undistorted benchmark from which we derive other countries’ distortions. An

alternative approach would be to calibrate the distortions observed in the United States and obtain the

characteristics of a truly undistorted economy to be used as a benchmark. This would require more

modeling structure and assumptions.

        Related to this last point, our exercise assumed that all countries share the same distribution of

establishments’ specific productivities as the United States, that is, that establishment productivities are

not correlated with establishments’ distortions. In contrast, richer models of plant dynamics such as that



                                                                                                            24
developed by Ericson and Pakes (1995) consider plants’ development to be associated with “active

learning.” In such models, a plant’s productivity tends to be connected to the distortion it faces. That is,

distortions might lead a plant to invest more or less in R&D, which, in turn, would determine its

productivity. As a consequence, the effects of misallocation might be different from those calculated here.

        Another modeling issue worth exploring concerns the amount of competition among

establishments in an industry. Our model assumes that plants face a symmetric and constant elasticity of

substitution that exogenously determines equilibrium mark-ups. A richer specification could

endogenously determine the distribution of mark-ups and capture the impact of plants’ entry costs on the

degree of concentration in industries.

        Finally, research should also shed light on how particular sources of inefficiency, such as credit

market imperfections, macroeconomic volatility, defective bankruptcy procedures, or a malfunctioning

regulatory environment, are driving cross-country differences in plant size distribution. This would be

fruitful for drawing explicit policy implications. We leave this task to future work.


8 References


Acemoglu, D., Johnson, S., and Mitton, T. (2005) “Determinants of Vertical Integration: Finance,

        Contracts and Regulation,” NBER Working Paper 11424.

Barro, R. J. and Lee, J. (2001) “International Data on Educational Attainment: Updates and Implications,”

        Oxford Economic Papers 53: 541-563.

Bartelsman, E, Haltiwanger, J., and Scarpetta, S. (2005) “Measuring and Analyzing Cross-Country

        Differences in Firm Dynamics,” Unpublished manuscript.

Bartelsman, E, Haltiwanger, J., and Scarpetta, S. (2006) “Cross-Country Differences in Productivity: The

        Role of Allocative Efficiency,” Unpublished manuscript.

Basu, S. and Fernald, J. G. (1997) “Returns to Scale in U.S. Production: Estimates and Implications,”

        Journal of Political Economy 105: 249-283.



                                                                                                         25
Bernard, A. B., Eaton, J., Jensen, J. B., and Kortum, S. (2003) “Plants and Productivity in International

        Trade,” American Economic Review 113: 1268-1290.

Black, S. E. and Strahan, P. E. (2002) “Entrepreneurship and Bank Credit Availability,” Journal of

    Finance 57: 2807-2833.

Caselli, F. (2005) “Accounting for Cross-Country Income Differences,” in Handbook of Economic

        Growth, P. Aghion and S. Durlauf (eds.), Elselvier North Holland, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Caves, R., (1975) Diversification, Foreign Investment, and Scale in North American Manufacturing

    Industries, Ottawa: Economic Council of Canada.

Davis, S. J. and Haltiwanger, J. (1991) “Wage Dispersion Between and Within U.S. Manufacturing

    Plants, 1963-1986” Brookings Papers in Economic Activity. Microeconomics: 115-200.

Davis, S. J. and Henrekson, M. (1999) “Explaining National Differences in the Size and Industry

    Distribution of Employment,” Small Business Economics 12: 59-83.

Ericson, R. and Pakes, A. (1995) “Markov-Perfect Industry Dynamics: A Framework for Empirical

        Work,” Review of Economic Studies 62: 53-82.

Hall, B. and Jones, C. (1999) “Why Do Some Countries Produce So Much More Output Per Worker Than

        Others?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 114(1): 83-116.

Harrison, A., Love, I., and McMillian, M. S. (2004) “Global Capital Flows and Financing Constraints,”

    Journal of Development Economics 75: 269-301.

Howitt, P. (2000) “Endogenous Growth and Cross-Country Income Differences,” American Economic

        Review 90: 829-846.

Hsieh, C-T and Klenow, P. J. (2007) “Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in China and India,”

        Unpublished manuscript.

Keller, W. (2004) “International Technology Diffusion,” Journal of Economic Literature 42: 752-782.

Klenow, P. J. and Rodriguez-Clare, A. (1997) “The Neoclassical Revival in Growth Economics: Has It

        Gone Too Far,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual.




                                                                                                      26
Lipsey, R. (1978) “The Creation of Microdata Sets for Enterprises and Establishments,” Annales de

        l'INSEE 30-31: 395-422.

Lucas, R., (1978) “On the Size Distribution of Business Firms,” The Bell Journal of Economics 9: 508-

        523.

Melitz, M. J. (2003) “The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate Industry

        Productivity,” Econometrica 71: 1695-1725.

Olley, G. S. and A. Pakes (1996) “The Dynamics of Productivity in the Telecommunications Equipment

        Industry,” Econometrica 64: 1263-1297.

Parente, S. L. and Prescott, E. C. (1994) “Barriers to Technology Adoption and Development,” Journal of

        Political Economy, 102: 298-321.

Prescott, E. C. (1998) “Needed: A Theory of Total Factor Productivity,” International Economic Review

        39: 525-551.

Restuccia, D. and Rogerson, R. (2007) “Policy Distortions and Aggregate Productivity with

        Heterogeneous Plants,” NBER Working Paper No. W13018.

Rotemberg, J. J. and Woodford, M. (1992) “Oligopolistic Pricing and the Effects of Aggregate Demand

        on Economic Activity,” Journal of Political Economy 100: 1153-1207.

Schneider, F. and Enste, D. H. (2000) “Shadow Economies: Size, Causes and Consequences,” Journal of

        Economic Literature 38: 77-114.

Sutton, J. (1997) “Gilbrat’s Legacy,” Journal of Economic Literature 35: 50-59.




                                                                                                    27
                               Table 1: Success in Benchmark Experiment


Sub-sample         Obs.    Var[log(y)]    Var[log(yKH )]    Var[log(yDKH )]    SuccessKH    SuccessDKH

All                 79         1.26             .52               .73             .42           .58

OECD                22         .047            .030               .049            .65           1.0

Non-OECD            57          .91             .36               .47             .39           .52

Africa              22          .75             .25               .27             .33           .36

Americas            23          .39             .20               .32             .50           .82

Asia and Oceania    18          .64             .32               .59             .49           .91

Europe              16          .16            .036               .061            .23           .40




                            Table 2: Success in More Reliable Sub-samples


Sub-sample          Obs.    Var[log(y)]    Var[log(yKH )]    Var[log(yDKH )]    SuccessKH   SuccessDKH

More than 10         79         1.26             .53                .72             .42         .58
establishments

More than 100        65          .97             .41                .58             .42         .60
establishments

More than 1,000      41          .44             .18                .32             .41         .73
establishments

More than10,000      27          .23             .087               .13             .38         .58
establishments




                                                                                                         28
                   Table 3: Success in Experiment with Elasticity of Substitution σ = 3.8


Sub-sample            Obs.   Var[log(y)]    Var[log(yKH )]   Var[log(yDKH )]    SuccessKH   SuccessDKH

All                    79        1.26             .52               .95            .42         .75

OECD                   22        .047             .030             .086             .65        1.8

Non-OECD               57         .91             .36               .61            .39         .68

Africa                 22         .75             .25               .32            .33         .42

Americas               23         .39             .20               .46             .50        1.16

Asia and Oceania       18         .64             .32               .87             .49        1.35

Europe                 16         .16             .036              .11            .23         .70




                   Table 4: Success in Experiment with Elasticity of Substitution σ = 10


Sub-sample            Obs.   Var[log(y)]    Var[log(yKH )]   Var[log(yDKH )]    SuccessKH   SuccessDKH

All                    79        1.26             .52               .63            .42         .50

OECD                   22        .047             .030             .037            .65         .78

Non-OECD               57         .91             .36               .41            .39         .46

Africa                 22         .75             .25               .25            .33         .34

Americas               23         .39             .20               .26             .50         .66

Asia and Oceania       18         .64             .32               .45             .49        .70

Europe                 16         .16             .036             .044            .23         .29




                                                                                                         29
               Table 5: Success in Experiment with Minimum Size Equal to 10 Employees


Sub-sample          Obs.   Var[log(y)]   Var[log(yKH )]   Var[log(yDKH )]   SuccessKH   SuccessDKH

All                  79        1.26            .52               .78           .42         .62

OECD                 22        .047           .030              .056           .65         1.2

Non-OECD             57         .91            .36               .49           .39         .54

Africa               22         .75            .25               .27           .33         .36

Americas             23         .39            .20               .34           .50          .86

Asia and Oceania     18         .64            .32               .63           .49         .98

Europe               16         .16           .036              .073           .23         .48




               Table 6: Success in Experiment with Minimum Size Equal to 50 Employees


Sub-sample          Obs.   Var[log(y)]   Var[log(yKH )]   Var[log(yDKH )]   SuccessKH   SuccessDKH

All                  79        1.26            .52               .67           .42         .53

OECD                 22        .047           .030              .049           .65         1.0

Non-OECD             57         .91            .36               .45           .39         .50

Africa               22         .75            .25               .26           .33         .35

Americas             23         .39            .20               .30           .50          .75

Asia and Oceania     18         .64            .32               .52           .49         .81

Europe               16         .16           .036              .058           .23         .37




                                                                                                     30
                                                                                                     Table 7: Success in Experiment with Only Mean Information


                                                                     Sub-sample                   Obs.        Var[log(y)]              Var[log(yKH )]                                                                      Var[log(yDKH )]           SuccessKH          SuccessDKH

                                                                     All                           79              1.26                      .52                                                                                   .71                    .42                 .56

                                                                     OECD                          22              .047                     .030                                                                                   .042                   .65                 .90

                                                                     Non-OECD                      57               .91                      .36                                                                                    .45                   .39                 .49

                                                                     Africa                         22              .75                      .25                                                                                    .26                   .33                 .34

                                                                     Americas                       23              .39                      .20                                                                                    .29                   .50                 .74

                                                                     Asia and Oceania               18              .64                      .32                                                                                    .56                   .49                 .87

                                                                     Europe                         16              .16                     .036                                                                                   .054                   .23                 .35




                                                                                                              Table 8: Success in Experiment with Many Sectors


                                                                     Experiment                       Obs.       Var[log(y)]              Var[log(yKH )]                                                                        Var[log(yDKH )]             SuccessKH         SuccessDKH

                                                                     One sector                          32             0.41                       .14                                                                                    .23                    .33                .55

                                                                     Multiple sectors                    32             0.41                       .14                                                                                    .19                    .33                .46




                                                                                         Figure 1: Comparison U.S. Multinationals — BEA versus Dun & Bradstreet
                                                                                        Figure 1a: Sales of U.S. Multinationals        Figure 1b: Number of U.S.
                                                                                                                          Subsidiaries
                                                                                                                                                   B E A s u bs i d ia r ie s o f U S M N E s ( lo g # o f fir m s )
                                                          30




                                                                                                                                                                                                               10
 B E A s u bs i d ia r ie s o f U S M N E s ( lo g s al e s )




                                                                                                                                 GBR
                                                                                                                                CAN
                                                                                                                        JPN DEU
                                                                                                                                                                                                 8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 GBR
                                                                                                                          FRA
                                                                                                                            NLD                                                                                                                                                                    CAN
                                                                                                                     SGPMEX
                                      25




                                                                                                                   ITA
                                                                                                                BRABEL
                                                                                                                   IRL AUS
                                                                                                                 ESP
                                                                                                                  HKG
                                                                                                                           CHE                                                                                                                                                       DEU     FRA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  NLD
                                                                                                             ARGMYS
                                                                                                            KOR   CHN                                                                                                                                                        MEX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               JPN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              AUS
                                                                                                  THA      AUTNOR                                                                                                                                                               ITA
                                                                                          TURISR
                                                                                        SAU    ZAF VEN PRT
                                                                                                 CHL
                                                                                                  IDN      POL                                                                                                                                                   ESPHKG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      BELBRA
                                                                                                PHL      COL
                                                                                                           NZL
                                                                                                             HUN                                                                                                                                                      CHN CHE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     SGP
                                                                                                   INDCZEFIN
                                                                                                    GRC                                                                                                                                                      ARG IRL
                                                                                                                                                                                    6




                                                                           RUS    NGA     EGY PER LUX         ARE                                                                                                                                                      SWE
                                                                            ECU
                                                                                             CRI                                                                                                                                                 THA CHL  VEN KOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      INDMYS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ZAF                        NORAUT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 DNK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       IDN         PHL COL PRT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             POL  NZL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ISR              RUSTUR       CZE
                   20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               PAN LUX HUN FIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             GRC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            PER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   SAU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  BRB      EGYARE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ECU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                CRI
                                                                                                                                                                    4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           NGA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      HND       DOM
15




                                                                                                                                                     2




                                                                15                     20                        25                         30                                                                         2               4                  6                8                     10
                                                                           Dun and Bradstreet subsidiaries of US MNEs (log sales)                                                                                            Dun and Bradstreet subsidiaries of US MNEs (log # of plants)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            31
                                                                            Figure 2: Mean of Establishment Size against Income per Worker


                                                              7.0




                                                              6.0




                                                              5.0
                                       mean(log(employees))




                                                              4.0




                                                              3.0




                                                              2.0




                                                              1.0




                                                              0.0
                                                                    7             7.5       8      8.5       9        9.5       10           10.5          11

                                                                                                           log(Y)




                                                                        Figure 3: Coworker Mean of Establishment Size against Income per Worker


                                 8.0


                                 7.0


                                 6.0
coworker mean (log(employees))




                                 5.0


                                 4.0


                                 3.0


                                 2.0


                                 1.0


                                 0.0
                                                   7                        7.5         8         8.5         9         9.5          10             10.5        11
                                                                                                           log(Y)




                                                                                                                                                                     32
                                                  Figure 4: Variance in Establishment Size against Income per Worker


                                        5.0


                                        4.5


                                        4.0


                                        3.5
             variance(log(employees))




                                        3.0


                                        2.5


                                        2.0


                                        1.5


                                        1.0


                                        0.5


                                        0.0
                                              7      7.5        8         8.5         9        9.5        10       10.5         11
                                                                                   log(Y)




                                          Figure 5: Skewness of the Establishment Size Distribution against Income per Worker


                                        4.0


                                        3.5


                                        3.0


                                        2.5
skewness(log(employees))




                                        2.0


                                        1.5


                                        1.0


                                        0.5


                                        0.0
                                              7     7.5         8         8.5         9        9.5        10        10.5        11
                                   -0.5


                                   -1.0
                                                                                    log(Y)




                                                                                                                                     33
                                              Figure 6: Mean of Establishment Size against Market Size


                       7.0



                       6.0



                       5.0
mean(log(employees))




                       4.0



                       3.0



                       2.0



                       1.0



                       0.0
                          13.0         14.0           15.0       16.0        17.0        18.0        19.0           20.0             21.0
                                                                          size market




                                                     Figure 7: Histograms of Selected Countries


                       45

                       40
                                                     Norway        U.S.      Austria      Brazil      India
                       35

                       30
      Frequency (%)




                       25

                       20

                       15

                       10

                         5

                         0
                                 20 to 30        31 to 50     51 to 100   101 to 250    251 to 500   500 to 10000          > 10000
                                                                    Number of Employees




                                                                                                                                            34
                                            Figure 8: Mapping Histograms




                                 Country j                                          U.S.




                                      Figure 9: Establishments’ Productivities


    2.40



    2.20



    2.00



    1.80
A




    1.60



    1.40



    1.20



    1.00
           1   5   9   13   17   21   25   29   33   37   41   45   49   53   57    61   65   69   73   77   81   85   89   93   97
                                                           firm size (percentile)




                                                                                                                                      35
                                        Figure 10: Tax Distortions for Sample Countries


             0.50



             0.00
                     1   5   9    13    17   21   25   29   33   37    41   45   49    53   57   61     65   69   73    77   81   85   89   93   97


            -0.50



            -1.00
 tau




            -1.50



            -2.00



            -2.50



            -3.00
                                                                        firm size (percentile)




                                 Figure 11: Misallocation Model against Income per Worker

            6.7000




            6.2000




            5.7000




            5.2000
log(Ykhd)




            4.7000




            4.2000




            3.7000




            3.2000
                     7            7.5             8              8.5               9              9.5              10              10.5               11

                                                                                 log(Y)




                                                                                                                                                           36
