                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             THE PERSISTENCE OF TEACHER-INDUCED LEARNING GAINS

                                           Brian A. Jacob
                                            Lars Lefgren
                                            David Sims

                                        Working Paper 14065
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14065


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2008




We thank Henry Tappen for excellent research assistance. We thank Scott Carrell, John DiNardo,
Jonah Rockoff, Jesse Rothstein and Douglas Staiger as well as seminar participants at Brigham Young
University and the University of California, Davis for helpful comments. All remaining errors are
our own. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Brian A. Jacob, Lars Lefgren, and David Sims. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Persistence of Teacher-Induced Learning Gains
Brian A. Jacob, Lars Lefgren, and David Sims
NBER Working Paper No. 14065
June 2008
JEL No. I2,I21,J20,J24,J38

                                              ABSTRACT

Educational interventions are often narrowly targeted and temporary, and evaluations often focus on
the short-run impacts of the intervention. Insofar as the positive effects of educational interventions
fadeout over time, however, such assessments may be misleading. In this paper, we develop a simple
statistical framework to empirically assess the persistence of treatment effects in education. To begin,
we present a simple model of student learning that incorporates permanent as well as transitory learning
gains. Using this model, we demonstrate how the parameter of interest – the persistence of a particular
measurable education input – can be recovered via instrumental variables as a particular local average
treatment effect. We initially motivate this strategy in the context of teacher quality, but then generalize
the model to consider educational interventions more generally. Using administrative data that links
students and teachers, we construct measures of teacher effectiveness and then estimate the persistence
of these teacher value-added measures on student test scores. We find that teacher-induced gains in
math and reading achievement quickly erode. In most cases, our point estimates suggest a one-year
persistence of about one-fifth and rule out a one-year persistence rate higher than one-third.


Brian A. Jacob                                       David Sims
Gerald R. Ford School of Public Policy               130 Faculty Office Building
University of Michigan                               Brigham Young University
735 South State Street                               Provo, UT 84602-2363
Ann Arbor, MI 48109                                  davesims@byu.edu
and NBER
bajacob@umich.edu

Lars Lefgren
130 Faculty Office Bulding
Brigham Young University
Provo, UT 84602-2363
l-lefgren@byu.edu
1. Introduction

           Educational interventions are often narrowly targeted and temporary, such as

class size reductions in kindergarten or summer school in selected elementary grades.

Because of financial, political and logistical constraints, evaluations of such programs

often focus exclusively on the short-run impacts of the intervention. Insofar as the

treatment effects are immediate and permanent, short-term evaluations will provide a

good indication of the long-run impacts of the intervention. However, prior research

such as the Currie and Thomas work on Head Start (1995) suggests that the positive

effects of educational interventions may fadeout over time. Failure to account for this

fadeout can dramatically change the assessment of the program impact and/or cost

effectiveness.

           Unfortunately, advocates and policymakers often neglect to consider the

persistence of particular interventions in calculating expected benefits. This is

particularly true in the area of teacher effectiveness. In recent years, there has been a

virtual explosion in interest among researchers and policymakers on the extent to which

teacher performance varies across individuals and schools, and a number of districts and

states are experimenting with ways to use teacher “value-added” measures in the design

of hiring, certification, compensation, tenure and accountability policies. An oft-cited

claim is that matching a student with a stream of good teachers (one standard deviation

above the average teacher) for five years in a row would be enough to completely

eliminate the achievement gap between poor and non-poor students (Rivkin, Hanushek

and Kain 2005). This prognosis, however, depends crucially on the persistence of teacher

effects.




                                                                                            2
       In this paper, we develop a simple statistical framework to empirically assess the

persistence of treatment effects in education. To begin, we present a simple model of

student learning that incorporates permanent as well as transitory learning gains. Using

this model, we demonstrate how the parameter of interest – the persistence of a particular

measurable education input – can be recovered via instrumental variables as a particular

local average treatment effect (Imbens and Angrist 1994). We initially motivate this

strategy in the context of teacher quality, but then generalize the model to consider

educational interventions more generally.

       The focus of this paper on the persistence of teacher effects is distinct from

another concern – namely, that teacher value-added measures estimated from

observational data are biased indicators of true teacher contributions to student learning

due to the non-random sorting of students and teachers. Fade out of measured teacher

effectiveness is likely even if one could obtain a completely unbiased measure of teacher

performance. Indeed, as we discuss in more detail below, it is likely that any bias in our

value-added measures stemming from non-random sorting will lead our estimates, which

are already quite small, to overstate persistence.

       While many researchers address the issue of bias arising in the estimation of

teacher effects, only a few empirical papers have explicitly explored the persistence of

teacher-induced learning gains or other educational interventions. Our paper extends the

persistence literature by developing a generalized framework that allows comparison of

persistence across education programs and relative to sensible benchmarks. We provide a

method to estimate persistence that is intuitive and computationally simpler than earlier

models such as Lockwood et al. (2007).




                                                                                             3
       Using an administrative data set that links teachers to student achievement scores,

we construct measures of teacher value-added and estimate the persistence of value-

added effects on student test scores. We find that gains in math and reading test scores

due to the teacher quickly erode. In most cases, our point estimates suggest a one-year

persistence of about one-fifth and rule out a one-year persistence rate higher than one-

third. Our results are robust to a number of specification checks and suggest that this

depreciation applies to almost all student groups. Comparisons with the general

persistence of student ability suggest teacher influence is only a third as persistent as

student knowledge and skills in general. Further estimates suggest that about one-eighth

of the original student gains from a high value-added teacher persist over two years.

       There are many reasons why measured teacher effects might fade out. Some

reasons may not be a source of concern – e.g., if contemporaneous achievement tests do

not perfectly capture the knowledge a student has learned in prior years. Other reasons,

such as the student’s quickly forgetting material that was taught in one period, may be

more troubling. Still other reasons, such as compensating behavior on the part of

teachers and parents, raise complicated questions about the organization of schools and

the design of curriculum and instruction. While we are not able to identify the specific

causes of fadeout in our analysis, we discuss the potential causes and how they would

impact the interpretation of our estimates.

       In general, our evidence suggests that even if value-added models of teacher

quality are econometrically modified to work well in measuring one period gains, the

results will still be misleading in policy evaluation if that single period measure is taken

as an indication of the long-run increase in knowledge. This is not to say that teacher-




                                                                                               4
induced learning gains are less persistent than other common educational interventions

(we view this as an open question), but rather to emphasize that a fair analysis should

measure the benefits of long-run as opposed to transitory gains in student knowledge.

       The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 discusses the

motivation for examining the persistence of teacher value-added, section 3 introduces the

statistical model of student learning, section 4 outlines the data, section 5 presents the

results, section 6 contains a short discussion, while section 7 concludes.



2. Background

A. Teacher value-added

       Despite a widespread belief among education practitioners and the public about

the important role of teachers in promoting student achievement, an initial generation of

research widely confirmed the Coleman Report’s conclusion that there was little

association between measurable teacher characteristics and student achievement

(Coleman et al. 1966). Indeed, with the exception of a notable improvement in teacher

performance associated with the first year or two of experience (Hanushek 1997)

researchers were left to justify why schools and teachers “don’t seem to matter”

(Goldhaber and Brewer 1997).

       More recently, the growing availability of longitudinal, student achievement data

linked to teachers has allowed researchers to calculate sophisticated value-added models

that attempt to isolate an individual teacher’s contribution to student learning. These

studies consistently find substantial variation in teacher effectiveness. For example, the

findings of Rockoff (2004) and Rivkin, Hanushek and Kain (2005) both suggest a one




                                                                                             5
standard deviation increase in teacher quality improves student math scores at least 0.1-

0.15 standard deviations. Aaronson, Barrow and Sander (2007) find similar results using

high school data. In comparison, this suggests that a one standard deviation increase in

teacher quality, as measured by value-added, improves contemporary student test scores

as much as a 4-5 student decrease in class size.

       The results of these studies have led many researchers and policymakers to

promote policies to increase the effectiveness of classroom teachers, such as

compensation policy and tenure reviews (Doran and Izumi 2004, McCaffrey et al. 2004).

Given the poor record of single year test scores (Kane and Staiger 2002) or even principal

evaluations (Jacob and Lefgren 2008) in differentiating among certain regions of the

teacher quality distribution, the increasing use of value-added measures seems likely

wherever the data requirements can be met.

       However, this research measuring the specific contribution of teachers to student

achievement is only one strand of a broader literature utilizing value-added estimation.

The cumulative nature of knowledge suggests that a current test score is in fact a function

of student characteristics combined with the characteristics and policy innovations of all

schools and classrooms the student has been in to date. This creates a serious risk that

unmeasured past factors will bias estimates of any non-experimental intervention. The

most common response since Boardman and Murnane (1979) has been the value-added

approach whereby the researcher accounts for the past achievement of a student, either by

using a within student model differenced across time, or by controlling for a lagged test

score measure. This type of specification was widely believed to substantially reduce the

chance of bias due to historical omitted variables (Hanushek 2003).




                                                                                             6
       A number of recent studies (Andrabi et al. 2008, McCaffrey et al. 2004, Rothstein

2007, Todd and Wolpin 2003, 2006) have highlighted the strong assumptions of the

value-added teacher model and suggested they are unlikely to hold in observational

settings. The most important of these assumptions in our present context is that the

assignment of students to teachers is random. Indeed given random assignment of

students to teachers, many of the uncertainties regarding precise functional form become

less important. If students are not assigned randomly to teachers, positive outcomes

attributed to a given teacher may simply result from teaching better students. In

particular, Rothstein (2007) raises disturbing questions about the validity of current

teacher value-added measurements, showing that the current performance of students can

be predicted by the value-added of their future teachers.

       However, in a recent attempt to validate observationally derived value-added

methods with experimental data, Kane and Staiger (2008) were unable to reject the

hypothesis that the observational estimates were unbiased predictions of student

achievement in many specifications. Indeed, one common result seems to be that models

which control for lagged test scores, such as our model, tend to perform better than gains

models. While we are still concerned about the possible consistency of our value-added

estimates in the presence of possible non-random matching of students to teachers, we

will argue that at a minimum our estimates still present a useful upper bound to the true

persistence of teacher effects on student achievement.




                                                                                            7
B. Persistence

       While there are a host of possible explanations for the fade-out of teacher

influence, or other educational intervention, it is useful to classify them into two groups;

those that involve mismeasurement of student knowledge and those that involve

structural elements of the educational system. The first class of explanations centers on

the proxy nature of test scores as reflections of true student knowledge. That is, test

scores mismeasure student knowledge both in one period and over time for a variety of

reasons. If tests fail to measure knowledge in a cumulative fashion then knowledge may

falsely appear to fadeout as an artifact of test structure. For example, to the extent that the

knowledge and skills involved in geometry and algebra are largely distinct, then the

effect of an excellent Algebra teacher may appear to fadeout in the following year when

the student is tested on geometry. In this case, the apparent fadeout would not be real in

the sense of a loss of knowledge or skills, but would rather be an artifact of the test

construction. On the other hand, certain test management skills may be persistently

helpful in taking multiple choice tests, but may have no social value beyond that narrow

application. Teacher cheating to raise student test scores, such as that observed by Jacob

and Levitt (2003) in Chicago would also fall under this heading.

       The second class of explanations involves actual changes to student knowledge as

a consequence of student, family, and school behavior. For example, students may forget

some of the information that they learned in earlier classes. This may be due to the way in

which this material was taught (e.g., through a focus on memorization rather than deeper,

conceptual understanding). Even in the best case, some forgetting may be inevitable due




                                                                                               8
to physiological constraints, which could be compounded by a lack of complementary

investment on the part of students.

       This class of explanations also includes possible compensatory actions taken by

school teachers and administrators as suggested by Rothstein (2007). To the extent that

teachers target their curriculum and instruction to the median student ability level in their

class, or perhaps even to those students who are below some minimum threshold, a

student that enters a class further ahead may regress to the classroom median over the

course of the school year. Similarly, if teachers and administrators dynamically select

students for remedial programs on the basis of annual performance, then the provision of

supplemental services to lower-achieving students may generate observed fadeout. In

both of the examples above, the fadeout would be generated by the catching up of certain

students rather than the falling back of others.

       Despite the multiple channels by which fadeout might occur, Todd and Wolpin

(2003) note that most early value-added studies implicitly make a strong assumption by

restricting the rate of decay of an input induced achievement gain to either zero or a

constant. More importantly, the model as commonly specified does not recognize that the

rate of decay might depend on the nature of the input. This is important since previous

research on the long-term impacts of educational interventions suggest decay may vary

widely by type of program. For example, long-term follow up studies of some programs

the Tennessee class size experiment (Nye, Hedges and Konstantopoulos 1999; Krueger

and Whitmore 2001) or the Perry preschool project (Barnett 1985) suggest that both had

enduring measurable effects, in the latter case decades after the intervention. On the other

hand, evaluations of other similar programs such as head start (Currie and Thomas 1995)




                                                                                            9
or grade retention for sixth graders (Jacob and Lefgren 2004) find no measurable effects

on students a few years later. Furthermore, these studies provide no systematic way to

think about comparing persistence across programs, or to test hypotheses about

persistence. Most commonly, persistence is inferred as the informal ratio of coefficients

from separate regressions.

       Much of the early research on teacher value-added also fails to consider the

importance of persistence either as an absolute policy parameter or relative to other

programs. Counterfactual comparisons, such as the Rivkin, Hanushek and Kain (2005)

five good teachers scenario assume perfect persistence of student gains due to teacher

quality and treat test score increases from this source as equivalent to those due to

increased parental investment or innate student ability.

       The first paper to explicitly consider the issue of persistence in the effect of

teachers on student achievement was a study by McCaffery et al. (2004). Although their

primary objective is to test the stability of teacher value-added models to various

modeling assumptions, they also provide parameter estimates from a general model that

explicitly considers the one and two year persistence of teacher effects on math scores for

a sample of 678 third through fifth graders from five schools in a large suburban district.

Their results suggest one year persistence of 0.2 to 0.3 and two year persistence of 0.1.

However, due to the small sample the standard errors on ear of these parameter estimates

was approximately 0.2.

       In a later article, Lockwood et al. (2007) produce a Bayesian formulation of this

same model which they use to estimate persistence measures for a cohort of

approximately 10,000 students from a large urban school district over five years. Using




                                                                                            10
this computationally demanding methodology they produce persistence estimates that are

in all cases below 0.25 with relatively small confidence intervals that exclude zero and

appear very similar for both reading and mathematics. They also note that use of models

which assume perfect persistence produce significantly different teacher value-added

estimates.

       These results have combined with a general increase in both the academic interest

in and the policy relevance of teacher value-added measures to produce a new group of

contemporary papers that recognize the importance of persistence although it is not the

primary focus of their research. For example, Kane and Staiger (2008) use a combination

of experimental and non-experimental data from Los Angeles to examine the degree of

bias present in value-added estimates due to non-random assignment of students to

teachers. They note that coefficient ratios taken from their results imply a one year math

persistence of one-half and a language arts persistence of 60-70 percent. Similarly,

Rothstein (2007) mentions the importance of measuring fadeout and presents evidence of

two-year persistence rates of approximately one-half in “classroom effects” for a cohort

of North Carolina students.

       Our paper goes beyond this literature in by considering a generalized framework

that allows comparison of persistence measures across education programs and relative to

sensible benchmarks. It provides a method to estimate persistence that is intuitive and

computationally simpler than earlier models such as Lockwood et al. (2007). Furthermore

we use multiple cohorts to allow us to disentangle one year classroom shocks from

teacher effects.




                                                                                           11
3. A Statistical Model

         This section outlines a simple model of student learning that incorporates

permanent as well as transitory learning gains. Our goal is to explicitly illustrate how

learning in one period is related to knowledge in subsequent periods. Using this model,

we demonstrate how the parameter of interest, the persistence of a particular measurable

education input, can be recovered via instrumental variables as a particular local average

treatment effect (Imbens and Angrist 1994). We initially motivate this strategy in the

context of teacher quality, but then generalize the model to consider educational

interventions.



A. Base Model

         In order to control for past student experiences, education researchers often

employ empirical strategies that regress current achievement on lagged achievement,

namely

(1)      Yt = β Yt −1 + ε t ,

with the common result that the OLS estimate of beta is less than one. This result is

typically given one of two interpretations. One explanation is that the lagged

achievement score is measured with error due to factors such as guessing, test conditions,

or variation in the set of tested concepts. A second explanation involves the depreciation

or decay of knowledge over time, which is typically assumed to be constant.

         In order to explore the persistence of knowledge, it is useful to more carefully

articulate the learning process underlying these test scores. To begin, suppose that true



                                                                                            12
knowledge in any period is a linear combination of what we describe as “long-term” and

“short-term” knowledge, which we label with the subscripts l and s. With a t subscript to

identify time period, this leads to the following representation:

(2). Yt = yl ,t + ys ,t .

         As the name suggests, long-term knowledge remains with an individual for

multiple periods, but is allowed to decay over time. Specifically, we assume that it

evolves according to the following process:

(3)       yl ,t = δ yl ,t −1 + θl ,t + ηl ,t ,

where δ indicates the rate of decay and is assumed to be less than one in order to make yl

stationary.1 The second term, θl ,t , represents a teacher’s contribution to long -term

knowledge in period t. The final term, ηl ,t , represents idiosyncratic factors affecting

long-term knowledge.

         In contrast, short-term knowledge reflects skills and information a student has in

one period that decay entirely by the next period. 2 Short-run knowledge evolves

according to the following process:

(4)       ys ,t = θ s ,t + η s ,t ,

which mirrors equation (3) above when δ , the persistence of long-term knowledge, is

zero. Here, the term θ s ,t represents a teacher’s contribution to the stock of short-term

knowledge and η s ,t captures other factors that affect short-term performance.

1
 This assumption can be relaxed if we restrict our attention to time-series processes of finite duration. In
such a case, the variance of yl ,t would tend to increase over time.
2
  The same piece of information may be included as a function of either long-term or short-term
knowledge. For example, a math algorithm used repeatedly over the course of a school year may enter
long-term knowledge. Conversely, the same math algorithm, briefly shown immediately prior to the
administration of an exam, could be considered short-term knowledge.


                                                                                                           13
        The same factors that affect the stock of long-term knowledge could also impact

the amount of short-term knowledge. For example, a teacher may help students to

internalize some concepts, while only briefly presenting others immediately prior to an

exam. The former concepts likely form part of long-term knowledge while the latter

would be quickly forgotten. Thus it is likely a given teacher affects both long and short-

term knowledge, though perhaps to different degrees.

        While they may suggest different underlying reasons for knowledge fade-out,

observed variation in knowledge due to measurement error and observed variation due to

the presence of short-run (perfectly depreciable) knowledge are observationally

equivalent in this model. For example, both a teacher cheating on behalf of students and

a teacher who effectively helps students internalize a concept which is tested in only a

single year would appear to increase short-term as opposed to long-term knowledge, but

so would a student deterministically forgetting material of a particular nature.3

Consequently the model and our persistence estimates do not directly distinguish between

short-run knowledge that is a consequence of limitations in the ability to measure

achievement and short-run knowledge that would have real social value if the student

retained it.

        In most empirical contexts, the researcher only observes the total of long- and

short-run knowledge, Yt = yl ,t + ys ,t , as is the case when one can only observe a single test

score. For simplicity we initially assume that θl ,t , ηl ,t , θ s ,t , and η s ,t are independently




3
 This presupposes that understanding the concept does not facilitate the learning of a more advanced
concept which is subsequently tested. For example, even though simple addition may only be tested in
early grades, mastery of such material would facilitate the learning of more advanced methods.


                                                                                                       14
and identically distributed, although we will relax this assumption later.4 It is then

straightforward to show that when considering this composite test score in the typical

“value-added” regression model given by equation (1), the OLS estimate of β converges

to:

                                       σ y2                     σ θ2 + σ η2
(5)              (
         p lim βˆOLS = δ )                l

                                   σ y2 + σ y2
                                               = δ                  l       l


                                                   (1 − δ ) (σ θ2 + σ η2 ) + σ θ2 + ση2
                                                                                        .
                                      l       s                 s       s       l     l




Thus, OLS identifies the persistence of long-run knowledge multiplied by the fraction of

variance in total knowledge attributable to long-run knowledge. In other words, one

might say that the OLS coefficient measures the average persistence of observed

knowledge. The formula above also illustrates the standard attenuation bias result if we

reinterpret short-term knowledge as measurement error.

        This model allows us to leverage different identification strategies to recover

alternative parameters of the data generating process. Suppose, for example, that we

estimate equation (3) using instrumental variables with a first-stage relationship given by:

(6)      Yt −1 = π Yt −2 + ν t ,

where lagged achievement is regressed on twice-lagged achievement. We will refer to

the estimate of β from this identification strategy as βˆLR , where the subscript is an

abbreviation for long-run. It is again straightforward to show that this estimate converges

to:

(7)              ( )
         p lim βˆLR = δ ,




4
  Note that both the process for long-run and short-run knowledge accumulation are stationary implying
children have no upward learning trajectory. This is clearly unrealistic. The processes, however, can be
reinterpreted as deviations from an upward trend.


                                                                                                           15
which is simply the persistence of long-run knowledge. Our estimates suggest that this

persistence is close to one.

        Most importantly, consider what happens if we instrument lagged knowledge,

Yt −1 , with the lagged teacher’s contribution (value-added) to total lagged knowledge. The

first stage is given by:

(8)     Yt −1 = πΘt −1 + ν t ,

where the teacher’s total contribution to lagged knowledge is a combination of her

contribution to long- and short-run lagged knowledge, Θt −1 = θl ,t −1 + θ s ,t −1 . In this case, the

second stage estimate, which we refer to as βˆVA converges to:

                                 σ θ2
(9)            ( )
         p lim βˆVA = δ              l

                             σ θ2 + σ θ2
                                         .
                                 l       s




The interpretation of this estimator becomes simpler if we think about the dual role of

teacher quality in our model. Observed teacher value-added varies for two reasons: the

teacher’s contribution to long-term knowledge and her contribution to short-term

knowledge. Given our estimates of δ are roughly equal to one, βˆVA approximates the

fraction of variation in teacher quality attributable to long-term knowledge creation.

        Fundamentally, the differences in persistence identified by the three estimation

procedures above are a consequence of different sources of identifying variation. For

example, estimation of βˆOLS generates a persistence measure that reflects all sources of

variation in knowledge, from barking dogs to parental attributes to policy initiatives. On

the other hand, an instrumental variables strategy isolates variation in past test scores due

to a particular factor or intervention. Consequently, the estimated persistence of




                                                                                                   16
achievement gains can vary depending on the chosen instrument, as each identifies a

different local average treatment effect. In our example, βˆVA measures the persistence in

test scores due to variation in teacher value-added in isolation from other sources of test

score variation while βˆLR measures the persistence of long-run knowledge, that is

achievement differences due to prior knowledge.

         This suggests a straightforward generalization: to identify the coefficient on

lagged test score using an instrumental variable strategy, one can use any factor that is

orthogonal to ε t as an instrument for yit −1 in identifying β . Thus, for any educational

intervention for which assignment is uncorrelated to the residual, one can recover the

persistence of treatment-induced learning gains by instrumenting lagged performance

with lagged treatment assignment. Within the framework above, suppose that

θlt = γ l treatt and θ st = γ s treatt , where γ l and γ s reflect the treatment’s impact on long

and short-term knowledge respectively.5 In this case, instrumenting lagged observed

knowledge with lagged treatment assignment yields an estimator which converges to the

following:

                                  γl
(10)            (        )
         p lim βˆTREAT = δ
                               γl + γs
                                         .


The estimator reflects the persistence of long-term knowledge multiplied by the fraction

of the treatment-related test score increase attributable to gains in long-term knowledge.

         Beyond the assurance that we are recovering the parameter of interest, our

approach has a number of advantages over the informal examination of coefficient ratios

often used to think about persistence. First, it is computationally simple and provides a

5
 While treat could be a binary assignment status indicator, it could also specify a continuous policy
variable such as educational spending or class size.


                                                                                                        17
straightforward way to conduct inference on persistence measures through standard t- and

f-tests.6 Second, the estimates of βˆLR and βˆOLS serve as intuitive benchmarks in

understanding the relative importance of teacher value-added in creating long-term

knowledge. They allow us to examine the persistence of policy induced learning shocks

relative to the respective effects of transformative learning and a “business as usual”

index of educational persistence. Furthermore, because these benchmarks are similar to

those of other studies they give us some confidence that our results are not driven by a

test scaling effect. Finally, the methodology can be applied to compare persistence among

policy treatments including those that that may be continuous or on different scales such

as hours of tutoring versus number of students in a class.



B. Extensions

         Returning to our examination of the persistence of teacher-induced learning gains,

we relax some assumptions regarding our data generating process to highlight alternative

interpretations of our estimates as well as threats to identification. First, consider a

setting in which an intervention’s effect on long and short-term knowledge are not

independent. In that case βˆVA converges to:

                                σ θ2 + cov (θl ,θ s )      cov (θl , Θ )
(11)            ( )
          p lim βˆVA = δ      2
                                   l

                            σ θ + σ θ + 2cov (θl ,θ s )
                                     2
                                                        =δ
                                                              σ Θ2
                                                                         .
                               l       s




While δ maintains the same interpretation, the remainder of the expression is equivalent

to the coefficient from a bivariate regression of θl on Θ . In other words, it captures the



6
 In our framework a test of the hypothesis that different educational interventions have different rates of
persistence can be implemented as a standard test of over-identifying restrictions.


                                                                                                              18
rate at which a teacher’s impact on long-term knowledge increases with the teacher’s

contribution to total measured knowledge.

        Another interesting consequence of relaxing this independence assumption is that

βVA need not be positive. In fact, if cov (θl ,θ s ) < −σ θ2 , βVA will be negative. This can
                                                               l




only be true if σ θ2l < σ θ2s . This would happen if observed value-added captured primarily

a teacher’s ability to induce short-term gains in achievement and this is negatively

correlated to a teacher’s ability to raise long-term achievement. Although this is an

extreme case, it is clearly possible and serves to highlight the importance of

understanding the long-run impacts of teacher value-added.7

        Although, relaxing the independence assumption does not violate any of the

restrictions for satisfactory instrumental variables identification, βVA can no longer be

interpreted as a true persistence measure. Instead, it identifies the extent to which

teacher-induced achievement gains predict subsequent achievement.

        However, there are some threats to identification that we initially ruled out by

assumption. For example, suppose that cov (θl ,t ,ηl ,t ) ≠ 0 , as would occur if school

administrators systematically allocate children with unobserved high learning to the best

teachers. The opposite could occur if principals assign the best teachers to children with

the lowest learning potential. In either case the effect on our estimate depends on the

sign of the covariance, since:

                       σ θ2 + cov (θl ,ηl )
(12)           ( )
         p lim βˆVA = δ l 2
                            σ θl + σ θ2s
                                            .



7
 Jacob and Levitt (2003) find evidence of teacher cheating in Chicago. This cheating, which led to large
observed performance increases, was correlated to poor actual performance in the classroom.


                                                                                                       19
If students with the best idiosyncratic learning shocks are matched with high quality

teachers, the estimated degree of persistence will be biased upwards. In the context of

standard instrumental variables estimation, lagged teacher quality fails to satisfy the

necessary exclusion restriction because it affects later achievement through its correlation

with unobserved educational inputs. To address this concern, we show the sensitivity of

our persistence measures to the inclusion of student-level covariates, which would be

captured in the ηl term.

           Another potential problem is that teacher value-added may be correlated over

time for an individual student. If this correlation is positive (i.e. motivated parents

request effective teachers every period), the measure of persistence will be biased

upwards. One can test the importance of this problem, however, by seeing how the

coefficient estimates change when we control for current teacher effectiveness.



4. Data

A. The Sample

           To measure the persistence of teacher-induced learning gains, we use data from

the 1998-9 to 2004-5 school years for a mid-size school district located in the western

United States.8 The elemental unit of observation is the individual student, for whom

common demographic information such as race, ethnicity, free lunch and special

education status, as well as standardized achievement test scores is available. We can

track these students over time and link them to each of their teachers, creating a panel of




8
    The district has requested to remain anonymous.


                                                                                            20
student level observations. This allows us to calculate a value-added measure of teacher

effectiveness specific to each student to use in our regressions.

       In this district, students in grades 1-6 take a set of “Core” exams in reading and

math. These multiple-choice, criterion-referenced exams cover topics that are closely

linked to the district learning objectives. While student achievement results have not

been directly linked to rewards or sanctions until recently, the results of the Core exams

are distributed to parents via teacher conferences or the mail and published annually. Our

methodology requires a lagged year of test scores to capture the student’s prior

performance and a further lag to serve as a potential instrument for long-run student

ability. This leads us to restrict the sample to grades 3-6 which have twice lagged

achievement test scores available. Because this district uses tracking by ability groups for

some mathematics instruction, we restrict math scores to untracked classrooms.

Furthermore, sixth grade math classes use different evaluation measures based on the

students math level, and are thus excluded from the analysis.

       There may be some concern that the available test scores do not have the nice

psychometric properties of the normal curve equivalent or grade equivalent measures

often used in educational studies. It is likely that the different grade test score measures

are not directly comparable in a strict adding up sense. To account for this, we use a

normalized test score measure, scaled to report standard deviation units relative to the

district, as the outcome variable, and also show that robustness checks with percentile

ranked scores yield similar results. Furthermore, in contrast to informal measures of

persistence, our methodology provides a scaling feature in the form of the βˆLR and βˆOLS

benchmark estimates. These allow us to compare persistence due to teacher value-added



                                                                                               21
with other sorts of persistence measured in terms of the same tests and hence the same

scale. Also, the agreement of these benchmark estimates with those in the literature

suggests that scaling does not appreciably affect our conclusions.

         The summary statistics of Table 1 show that although the Grade 3-6 students in

the district are predominantly white (76 percent), there is a reasonable degree of

heterogeneity in other dimensions. For example, close to half of all students in the

district (44 percent) receive free or reduced price lunch, and about 10 percent have

limited English proficiency.9 Although we do not use teacher characteristics in the

analysis, along observable dimensions the teachers constitute a fairly close representation

of elementary school teachers nationwide.



B. Estimating teacher value-added.

         To measure the persistence of teacher-induced learning gains we must first

estimate teacher value-added. Consider a learning equation of the following form.

(13)     testijt = β testit −1 + X it Γ + θ j + η jt + ε ijt ,

where testit is a test score for individual i in period t, X it is a set of potentially time

varying covariates, θ j captures teacher value-added, η jt reflects period specific

classroom factors that affect performance (e.g., test administered on a hot day or

unusually good chemistry between the teacher and students), and ε it is a mean zero

residual.




9
  Achievement levels in the district are almost exactly at the average of the nation, with students scoring at
the 49th percentile on the Stanford Achievement Test.


                                                                                                            22
        There are two concerns regarding our estimates of teacher value-added. The first,

discussed earlier, is that the value-added measures may be inconsistent due to the non-

random assignment of students to teachers. The second is that the imprecision of our

estimates may affect the implementation of our strategy. Standard fixed effects

estimation of teacher value-added rely on test score variation due to classroom-specific

learning shocks, η jt , as well as student specific residuals, ε ijt . Because of this, the

estimation error in teacher value-added will be correlated to contemporaneous student

achievement and fail to satisfy the necessary exclusion restrictions for consistent

instrumental variables identification.

        To avoid this problem, we estimate the value-added of a student’s teacher that

does not incorporate information from that student’s cohort. Specifically, we estimate a

separate regression for each year by grade cell, and recording the teacher value-added

estimates. In each regression, we control for a linear measure of the student’s prior

achievement in the subject along with the student’s age, race, gender, free-lunch

eligibility, special education placement, limited English proficiency status, and then

measures of class size and school fixed effects. Then for each student we compute an

average of his teacher’s value-added measures across all years in which that student was

not in the teacher’s classroom. The estimation error of the resulting value-added

measures will be uncorrelated to unobserved classroom-specific determinants of the

reference student’s achievement.

        Table 2 presents summary measures of these value-added metrics. Although they

are approximately mean zero by design, the dispersion for our normalized scores is close

to that found in previous studies such as Rockoff (2004) and Aaronson, Barrow and



                                                                                              23
Sander (2007). As discussed later, the results of our estimation are robust to various

specifications of the initial value-added equation. And as previously suggested, it is

likely that non-random sorting of students to teachers will bias our estimates upwards,

leading us to overstate persistence.



5. Results

         This section presents the results of our estimation of the persistence of teacher

value-added induced learning. Table 3 considers the baseline case where we examine

persistence after one year in a specification with the full student and classroom controls

including race, gender, free lunch eligibility, special education status and limited English

status as well as school and year fixed effects. We also control for grade fixed effects

and allow the slopes of all covariates and instruments to vary by grade (the coefficient on

lagged achievement is constrained to be the same for all students). Instrumental

Variables estimates of long-run learning persistence use twice lagged test scores and an

indicator for a missing twice lagged score as excluded instruments. Estimates of the

persistence of teacher value-added use the previously calculated value-added measures

interacted with grade dummies as excluded instruments.

         Our estimate of the general persistence of knowledge from the least squares

regression procedure is 0.66 for reading and 0.62 for math, suggesting that two-thirds of a

general gain in student level test scores is likely to persist after a year.10 Due to the

presence of demographic controls, this estimate differs subtly from βˆOLS , the measure of

persistence from all sources detailed in our statistical model. Namely, the above estimate

10
  This estimate of persistence from all sources is comparable to that of other recent studies such as Todd
and Wolpin (2006) and Sass (2006).


                                                                                                             24
captures only the persistence due to sources of variation orthogonal to the included

demographic controls. In practice, the difference is minor, as regressions that omit all

controls except year and grade effects provide coefficient estimates of 0.72 for reading

and 0.67 for math. In contrast, the estimate of βˆLR , suggests that variation in test scores

caused by prior (long-run) learning is almost completely maintained.

         When compared against these baselines, the achievement gains due to a high

value-added teacher are more ephemeral, with point estimates suggesting that only about

one-fifth of the initial gain is preserved after the first year. However, our results also

statistically reject the hypothesis of zero persistence at conventional significance levels.11

For the latter two coefficient estimates, the table also reports the F-statistic of the

instruments used in the first stage. In all cases, the instruments have sufficient power to

make a weak instruments problem unlikely.

         Table 4 considers the persistence of achievement after two years. The estimation

strategy is analogous to that of Table 3, except that the coefficient of interest is now that

of the second lag of student test scores. All instruments are also lagged an additional

year. In all cases, most of the gains that persist in the first year continue in the second.12

In reading, persistence in test score increases from all sources and persistence of gains

due to teacher value-added drop 6-9 percentage points from their one year levels. Math

scores drop by 3-6 percentage points. In both cases the drop in persistence of gains from

teacher value-added appears to be slightly larger, although not distinguishable

statistically. Long-term learning continues to demonstrate nearly perfect persistence.



11
  Reported standard errors are corrected for classroom level clustering.
12
  There is a sample disparity between the 1 year and 2 year persistence estimates since the latter do not
contain third graders due to the need for an additional lag of test scores.


                                                                                                            25
       It is slightly surprising that after losing four-fifths of the gains from teacher value-

added in the first year, students in the next year only lose a few percentage points. This

suggests that our data-generating model is a good approximation to the actual learning

environment in that much of the achievement gain maintained beyond the first year may

be permanent. However, most of the overall gain attributed to value-added is still a

temporary one-period increase.

       These results are largely consistent with the published evidence on persistence

presented by McCaffery et al. (2004) and Lockwood et al. (2007). Both find one- and

two- year persistence measures between 0.1 and 0.3. However, our estimates are smaller

than those of contemporary papers by Rothstein (2007) and Kane and Staiger (2008),

which both suggest persistence rates of one-half or greater.

       Table 5 presents a series of robustness checks for our estimation of βˆVA . The

primary obstacle to identifying a true measure of the persistence of teacher value-added is

the possible non-random assignment of students to teachers, both contemporaneously,

and in prior years. Although we attempt to deal with this possibility with a value-added

model and the inclusion of student and peer characteristics in the regression, it is still

possible that we fail to account for systematic variation in the assignment of students to

teachers. Row (2) of Table 5 presents estimates of the persistence of value-added when

all controls except for school, grade and year fixed effects are dropped from the

regression model. In all cases the coefficient estimates increase, suggesting that there is

positive selection on observables. This matches with our priors that the assignment

system may favor highly invested parents by assigning their students to better teachers.

However, if there exists a positive selection on unobservables that is not controlled for by



                                                                                              26
our estimation strategy, then βˆVA is actually an upper bound for the true effect. Thus the

most likely identification failure suggests an even lower persistence than we find in

Tables 3 and 4.

       The remainder of the table suggests that our estimates are quite robust to changes

in the regression model. Row 3 adds contemporary classroom fixed effects with only a

slight attenuation of the estimated coefficients, suggesting that principals are not likely

compensating students for past teacher assignments. The next three rows consider the

impact of modifying the procedure for estimating teacher value-added measures. The first

uses a gains specification as opposed to lag specification of value-added while the second

further normalizes those gains by the initial score and the third uses only students in the

middle of the achievement distribution to calculate teacher value-added to minimize the

possible influence of outliers. This last check produces a large increase in the coefficient

for the two-year persistence of math scores. Otherwise all the estimates represent only

small deviations from the baseline. The final specification check measures all test

performance in percentiles of the district distribution and finds the same substantial

persistence pattern.

       There seems to be a clear pattern of evidence for small, non-zero levels of teacher

value-added persistence. However, these measured effects are averages across a

heterogeneous population of students. Table 6 considers the degree to which the

persistence estimates differ across years, grades and some student characteristics. For

each characteristic group, we present a chi-squared statistics for a test of the null

hypothesis that the coefficients are equal across all groups.




                                                                                              27
        The first panel considers the symmetry of persistence for negative versus positive

teacher shocks. In other words, it examines whether the test score consequences of

having an uncommonly bad teacher are more lasting than the benefits of having an

exceptionally good teacher. We are unable to reject equal persistence values for both

sides of the teacher distribution.13

        The next panel considers differences across test years. Thus the row for the year

1999 captures the one-year persistence of knowledge gained in the 1998 school year and

so forth. While the hypothesis of coefficient inequality is formally rejected for the one-

year math persistence only, there appears to be a cross year pattern for all other test score

categories. In general, the 1999, 2002-3 and 2005 have measured effects near the

baseline, 2004 has effects well above the baseline and 2000 and 2001 have widely

ranging estimated effects including some negative estimates. While it is certainly possible

that this is due to actual changes in the persistence across years it also seems possible that

some of the difference may be due to differences in the test instrument or institutional

factors across years.

        The third panel considers cross grade differences. In reading, we reject the

hypothesis that persistence is the same across grades, while we fail to reject this

hypothesis for math persistence. The pattern of coefficients is consistent with the case in

which the carryover in curriculum from one grade to the next may vary across grades.

No matter how good the teacher is, if they are not teaching knowledge that will play a


13
  To perform this comparison, we divide teachers into terciles on the basis of their value-added. When
examining the impact of being assigned a teacher in the top third, we instrument lagged value-added with a
dummy variable that takes on a value of 1 if prior year teacher was in the top third of the value-added
distribution. We include in the second stage a dummy variable indicating whether the prior year teacher
was in the bottom third. Thus we exploit only variation due to assignment to a teacher in the top third of
value-added relative to the middle third (the omitted category). When looking at the impact of assignment
to a poor teacher, we do the opposite.


                                                                                                       28
direct role in the next year’s exams we will see little persistence. Furthermore, the large

significant coefficient on the one-year reading persistence for fourth graders, and the two

year persistence coefficient for fifth graders suggests that the third grade reading

curriculum presents greater opportunities for teachers to convey long-run knowledge than

the curricula of other grades. To the degree that math algorithms tend to have more

general long-term uses compared to what students may do in a reading class, this is not

surprising.

       The final four panels of the table consider the heterogeneity of persistence across

groups of students with different observable characteristics. In all cases, students eligible

for free lunch had lower estimated persistence measures than ineligible students, although

the difference is only significant for one-year math scores. Although this appears to

suggest that disadvantaged students derive less persistent benefits from teacher value-

added, the following two panels suggest the true situation is much more complicated.

Minority students, for example, have a statistically significant advantage in measured

persistence for reading scores, while limited English proficient students have a negative

point estimate of persistence (although we can not reject the hypothesis of no persistence)

for teacher value-added using math scores, but no such disparity in reading. There is no

apparent pattern of differing results across gender groups.



6. Discussion

       After decades of pessimism concerning the lack of connection between the

measurement of observable teacher characteristics and student achievement, the use of

value-added methods has led to renewed optimism about the ability to measure, reward




                                                                                           29
and provide incentives for teacher effectiveness. The primary claim of the teacher value-

added literature is that teacher quality matters a great deal for student achievement. This

claim is based on consistent findings of a large dispersion in teachers’ ability to influence

contemporary student test scores. However, our results indicate that contemporary

teacher value-added measures may overstate the ability of teachers, even exceptional

ones, to influence the ultimate level of student knowledge since they conflate variation in

short-term and long-term knowledge. Given that a school’s objective is to increase the

latter, the importance of teacher value-added measures as currently estimated may be

substantially less than the teacher value-added literature indicates. Note that this does not

mean the average level of teacher value-added is unimportant, rather that the variation in

the distribution of existing teacher value-added is less informative than contemporary test

gains suggest.

       Nevertheless, our results suggest there is some long-run persistence to the gains

induced by teacher value-added, even if it is small compared to the persistence of test

score gains from all sources. Hence, it seems likely that improving teacher value-added

will improve the long-run outcomes of students. Further research comparing the

persistence of value-added with other potential educational interventions is needed to

better understand the relevant policy tradeoffs.

       As discussed earlier, our statistical model will capture knowledge fadeout

stemming from a variety of different sources, ranging from poor measurement of student

knowledge to structural elements in the education system that lead to real knowledge

depreciation. Although it is impossible in the present context to definitively label one or

more explanations as verified, we can make some progress in this area. For example,




                                                                                           30
many of the compensatory theories suggest teachers aim to instruct at a specific,

relatively low point on their class distribution or that principals adjust class assignment to

compensate for past experiences. Our results, however, provide evidence to suggest that

these stories may be a poor fit for explaining fadeout in our district. First, we show that

controlling for the quality of the contemporary teacher does not change conclusions about

persistence. Also, there is very little correlation in our data between the value-added of

students’ lagged and twice lagged teachers such as one would expect if there were some

sort of cyclical, compensating assignment scheme. Finally, the first panel of Table 6

suggests a symmetrical relationship between student catch-up from below average

teachers and fall back from good teachers.

       Another potential explanation is that the results are an artifact of test scores that

are improperly scaled. However, as mentioned above, the benchmark measures in this

paper (i.e., the OLS estimate on lagged achievement and the IV estimate on lagged

achievement that uses twice-lagged achievement as the instrument) come from the same

test scaling. Given that these measures agree with the broader literature, it does not seem

likely that scaling drives the results. In any case, the benchmarks suggest that regardless

of test mechanism, student test score changes due to teacher value-added are only one-

fifth as persistent as those due to long-run knowledge.

       Should the particular explanation for fadeout change how we should think about

the policy possibilities of value-added? To examine this, consider under what

circumstances exceptional teachers could have widespread and enduring effects in ways

that belie our estimates. Three criteria would have to be met: The knowledge that

students could obtain from these exceptional teachers would have to be (1) valuable to




                                                                                               31
the true long-run outcomes of interest (such as wages or future happiness), (2) retained by

the student, and (3) not be tested on future exams. To the degree that all three of these

conditions exist, the implications of this analysis should be tempered.

       While it is certainly possible that these conditions are all met, we believe it is

unlikely that the magnitude of fadeout we observe can be completely (or even mostly)

explained by these factors. For example, there are few instances in the mathematics of

early grades when knowledge is not cumulative. Although fourth grade exams may not

include exercises designed to measure subtraction ability, that ability is implicitly tested,

for example, in problems that require long division. Furthermore, suppose that teachers

are cheating on behalf of students or simply teaching them better techniques for specific

test items that have no general meaning outside the test. At that point, the measured

knowledge on the test is not socially valuable in some ultimate sense and a value-added

policy based on that test score should account for fadeout in the same way it would if the

fadeout was due to student forgetfulness.



7. Conclusion

       In this paper, we develop a simple statistical framework to empirically assess the

persistence of treatment effects in education. We present a simple model of student

learning that incorporates permanent as well as transitory learning gains, and then

demonstrate that an intuitive and computationally simple instrumental variables estimator

can recover the persistence parameter.

       The econometric framework we use to measure the persistence of teacher induced

learning gains is more broadly applicable. It can be used to the measure the persistence




                                                                                            32
of any educational intervention. Relative to the methods previously used, our approach

allows simple statistical inference, clear comparison across policies, and clearly relates to

the empirical results to the assumed data generating process.

       Using administrative data that links teachers to student achievement scores over

multiple years, we calculate value-added measures of teacher effectiveness and use the

methods outlined above to determine the persistence of teacher effects. We find that

teacher-induced test score gains have low persistence relative to the variation in test

scores generated by all sources and the variation induced by long-run learning. Our

estimates suggest that only about one-fifth of the test score gain from a high value-added

teacher remains after a single year. Given our standard errors, we can rule out one-year

persistence rates above one-third. After two years, about one-eighth of the original gain

persists. The observed fadeout is comparable for both math and reading, and is robust to

several specification checks. Furthermore, any positive selection on observables in the

teacher-student matching process suggests that our estimates may be overly optimistic.

       Previous researchers have referenced a counterfactual world in which a series of

high value-added effects for a hypothetical student with a string of good teachers may be

simply added together. Given this scenario, researchers and policymakers have

advocated the widespread use of such value-added measures in a variety of education

policies including teacher compensation and teacher/school accountability. Our results

suggest some caution should be taken in focusing on such measures of teacher

effectiveness. If value-added test score gains do not persist over time, adding up

consecutive gains does not correctly account for the benefits of higher value-added

teachers. Of course, the same caution should be attached to any educational intervention.




                                                                                            33
Hence, the broader implication from this work is that researchers and policymakers

should make greater effort to track the long-run impact of education policies and

programs.




                                                                                     34
                                          References

Aaronson, Daniel, Lisa Barrow, and William Sander. (2007) Teachers and Student
Achievement in the Chicago Public High Schools. Journal of Labor Economics 25 (1),
95-135.

Andrabi, Tahir, Tishnu Das, Asim I. Khwaja, and Tristan Zajonc (2007) “Do Value-
Added Estimates Add Value? Accounting for Learning Dynamics” mimeo.

Barnett, W. S. (1985). Benefit-Cost Analysis of the Perry Preschool Program and Its Policy
Implications. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis (7). 333-342.

Boardman, A. & Murnane, R. (1979), .Using panel data to improve estimates of the
determinants of educational achievement., Sociology of Education 52 (2), 113-121.

Coleman, James S., et al. (1966). Equality of educational opportunity. Washington, DC:
U.S. Government Printing Office.

Currie, Janet., and Duncan Thomas. (1995) Does Head Start Make A Difference?, The
American Economic Review 85 (3), 341-364.

Doran, H. & Izumi, L. (2004). Putting Education to the Test: A Value-Added Model for
California., San Francisco: Pacific Research Institute.

Goldhaber, Dan D., and Dominic J. Brewer. (1997). Why don't school and teachers seem
to matter? Journal of Human Resources 32, no. 3:505–23.

Hanushek, Eric A. (1997). Assessing the effects of school resources on student
performance: An update. Education Evaluation and Policy Analysis 19:141–64.

Hanushek, Eric A. (2003), .The failure of input-based schooling policies., Economic
Journal 113, 64-98.

Imbens, Guido W & Angrist, Joshua D, (1994). "Identification and Estimation of Local
Average Treatment Effects," Econometrica, Econometric Society, vol. 62(2), pages 467-
75, March.

Jacob, Brian A. and Lars Lefgren. (2008) Can Principals Identify Effective Teachers?
Evidence on Subjective Performance Evaluation in Education. Journal of Labor
Economics 26, 101-136..

Jacob, Brian A. and Lars Lefgren. (2007). What Do Parents Value in Education? An
Empirical Investigation of Parents’ Revealed Preferences for Teachers. Quarterly Journal
of Economics 122, 1603-1637.
Jacob, Brian A., and Lars Lefgren. (2004). Remedial Education and Student
Achievement: A Regression-Discontinuity Analysis. Review of Economics and Statistics
(86). 226-44.

Jacob, Brian A. and Steven Levitt, (2003). Rotten Apples: An Investigation of the
Prevalence and Predictors of Teacher Cheating. Quarterly Journal of Economics 118.
843-77.

Kane, Thomas J., and Douglas O. Staiger. (2008). Are Teacher-Level Value-Added
Estimates Biased? An Experimental Validation of Non-Experimental Estimates. Mimeo
March 17.

Kane, Thomas J., and Douglas O. Staiger. (2002). The promises and pitfalls of using
imprecise school accountability measures. Journal of Economic Perspectives 16, no.
4:91–114.

Krueger, Alan B., and Diane M. Whitmore. (2001). The Effect of Attending a Small
Class in the Early Grades on College-Test Taking and Middle School Test Results:
Evidence from Project STAR. Economic Journal (111). 1-28.

Lockwood, J. R., Daniel F. McCaffrey, Louis T. Mariano, and Claude Setodji. (2007)
Bayesian Methods for Scalable Multivariate Value-Added Assessment. Journal of
Educational and Behavioral Statistics (32). 125 - 150.

McCaffrey, Daniel F., J. R. Lockwood, Daniel Koretz, Thomas A. Louis, and Laura
Hamilton (2004) “Models for Value-Added Modeling of Teacher Effects” Journal of
Educational and Behavioral Statistics, Vol. 29, No. 1, Value-Added Assessment Special
Issue., Spring, pp. 67-101.

Nye, Barbara, Larry V. Hedges, and Spyros Konstantopoulos. (1999). The Long-Term
Effects of Small Classes: A Five-Year Follow-Up of the Tennessee Class Size
Experiment. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis (21). 127-142

Rivkin, Steven G., Eric A. Hanushek, and John F. Kain. (2005). Teachers, schools, and
academic achievement. Econometrica 73, no. 2:417–58.

Rockoff, Jonah E., (2004) “The impact of individual teachers on student achievement:
evidence from panel data,” American Economic Review. 247-252.

Rothstein, Jesse. (2007). Do Value-added Models add value? Tracking, Fixed Effects and
Causal Inference. Mimeo. November 20.

Sass, T. (2006). Charter schools and student achievement in Florida. Education Finance
and Policy 1(1), 91-122.

Todd, P. & Wolpin, K. (2003), .On the Speci.cation and Estimation of the Production
Function for Cognitive Achievement., Economic Journal 113, 3-33.


                                                                                        36
Todd, P. & Wolpin, K. (2006), .The Production of Cognitive Achievement in Children:
Home, School and Racial Test Score Gaps., Philadelphia, PA: University of
Pennsylvania, PIER Working Paper pp. 4-19.




                                                                                      37
Table 1: Summary Statistics
Variable                                          Mean
                                               (Std. dev.)
Normalized Reading Score                         -0.018
                                                 (0.985)
Normalized Math Score                             0.026
                                                 (0.976)
Reading Percentile Score                          0.476
                                                 (0.280)
Math Percentile Score                             0.489
                                                 (0.280)
Student Fraction Male                             0.505
                                                 (0.500)
Student Fraction Free Lunch                       0.436
                                                 (0.496)
Student Fraction Minority                         0.239
                                                 (0.427)
Student Fraction Special Ed.                      0.083
                                                 (0.276)
Student Fraction Limited English                  0.101
                                                 (0.301)
Student Age                                      10.921
                                                 (1.157)
Grade 4                                           0.263
                                                 (0.440)
Grade 5                                           0.246
                                                 (0.430)
Grade 6                                            0.217
                                                  (0.412)
Notes: Test scores are normalized relative to the standard
deviation for all students in the district.




                                                             38
Table 2: Summary of Teacher Value-added Measures
Measure                                                                      Mean
                                                                          (Std. Dev.)
Reading normalized value-added of student’s Teacher (t-1)                    0.016
                                                                            (0.212)
Math normalized value-added of student’s Teacher (t-1)                      0.027
                                                                           (0.294)

Reading normalized value-added of student’s Teacher (t-2)                   0.011
                                                                           (0.229)
Math normalized value-added of student’s Teacher (t-2)                       0.009
                                                                            (0.304)
Notes: Test scores are normalized relative to the standard deviation for all students
in the district.




                                                                                        39
Table 3: Estimates of the One-Year Persistence of Achievement
                                    Reading                               Math
                             βˆ       βˆ         βˆ      βˆ               βˆ          βˆVA
                                 OLS        LR         VA        OLS         LR

Prior Year Achievement        0.66**     0.98**     0.22**    0.62**     0.98**     0.19**
Coefficient                   (0.01)     (0.02)     (0.06)    (0.01)     (0.02)     (0.06)

F-Statistic of Instruments               1,412        48                   839         65
                                 --                              --
[p-value]                                [0.00]     [0.00]                [0.00]     [0.00]
Observations                   18,240 18,240 18,240 14,182 14,182 14,182
R-Squared                       0.59      0.51       0.44      0.51        0.41       0.36
Notes: Reported standard errors in parentheses correct for clustering at the classroom
level. ** indicates 5% significance, * 10% significance.


Table 4: Estimates of the Two-Year Persistence of Achievement
                                    Reading                               Math
                             βˆ  OLS  βˆ    LR  βˆ     VAβˆ      OLS      βˆ LR       βˆVA
Two Year Prior                0.60**     0.95**     0.13**    0.59**     0.97**      0.13
Achievement Coefficient       (0.01)     (0.03)     (0.06)    (0.02)     (0.04)     (0.08)

F-Statistic of Instruments                961         55                   439         63
                                 --                              --
[p-value]                                [0.00]     [0.00]                [0.00]     [0.00]
Observations                   10,216 10,216 10,216            7,104      7,104      7,104
R-Squared                       0.54      0.44       0.36      0.49        0.37       0.31
Notes: Reported standard errors in parentheses correct for clustering at the classroom
level. ** indicates 5% significance, * 10% significance.




                                                                                             40
Table 5: Robustness Checks
                                             Reading                       Math
                                       1 Year      2 Year          1 Year       2 Year
                                     Persistence Persistence     Persistence Persistence
                                       0.22**      0.13**          0.19**        0.13
(1) Baseline
                                       (0.06)       (0.06)         (0.06)       (0.08)

    Controlling Only for Grade,
                                       0.32**        0.23**        0.22**         0.19**
(2) School, and Year in Second
                                       (0.06)        (0.06)        (0.06)         (0.08)
    Stage

    Controlling for Classroom
                                       0.19**        0.14**        0.12**         0.11*
(3) Fixed Effects in Second
                                       (0.05)        (0.06)        (0.05)         (0.07)
    Stage

      Value-Added Estimated            0.15**          0.11          0.08          0.08
(4)
      Using Achievement Gains          (0.07)         (0.07)        (0.07)        (0.09)

    Value-Added Estimated
                                       0.16**          0.10        0.16**         0.14*
(5) Using Achievement Gains
                                       (0.06)         (0.07)       (0.07)         (0.08)
    Normalized by Initial Score

    Value-Added Estimated
                                       0.15**        0.14**        0.18**         0.24**
(6) Using Students in Middle of
                                       (0.07)        (0.06)        (0.07)         (0.08)
    Achievement Distribution

     Test Performance Measured
                                        0.17**       0.14**         0.18**         0.14**
(7) in Percentiles of District
                                        (0.07)       (0.05)         (0.05)         (0.06)
     Performance
Notes: Reported standard errors in parentheses correct for clustering at the classroom
level. ** indicates 5% significance, * 10% significance.




                                                                                           41
Table 6: Heterogeneity of Persistence of Teacher Induced Achievement
                                  Reading                         Math
                           1 Year          2 Year         1 Year        2 Year
                         Persistence     Persistence   Persistence    Persistence
Baseline                   0.22**          0.13**        0.19**          0.13
                           (0.06)          (0.06)         (0.06)        (0.08)

                        Positive vs. Negative Teacher Shocks
 Top Third of Teacher
                            0.16            0.21            0.15          0.15
 Quality Compared to
                           (0.12)          (0.13)          (0.21)        (0.14)
 Middle Third

 Bottom Third of
 Teacher Quality            0.42            0.10            0.15          0.14
 Compared to Middle        (0.16)          (0.20)          (0.10)        (0.17)
 Third

χ2 Equal Coefficients       0.99            0.16            0.00          0.00
[P-value]                  [0.32]          [0.69]          [0.99]        [0.98]

                                       Year
 1999                     0.33**                           0.39**
                                              --                           --
                          (0.10)                           (0.08)
 2000                      -0.08          0.30**            -0.21       0.25**
                          (0.18)          (0.14)           (0.19)       (0.10)
 2001                      0.13            0.00              0.08        0.00
                          (0.10)          (0.17)           (0.13)       (0.14)
 2002                     0.31**           0.15              0.01        0.16
                          (0.14)          (0.10)           (0.13)       (0.15)
 2003                     0.30**           0.07            0.32**        0.13
                          (0.12)          (0.19)           (0.09)       (0.15)
 2004                     0.47**           0.16            0.32**       0.27**
                          (0.12)          (0.13)           (0.14)       (0.13)
 2005                     0.37**           0.16            0.41**        0.02
                          (0.15)          (0.17)           (0.13)       (0.22)
χ2 Equal Coefficients      9.22            2.07             15.23        3.46
[P-value]                 [0.16]          [0.84]           [0.02]       [0.63]

                                      Grade
 Third                     0.14                             0.18
                                              --                           --
                          (0.12)                           (0.13)
 Fourth                   0.38**           0.08            0.23**         0.14
                          (0.09)          (0.16)           (0.08)        (0.13)
 Fifth                     -0.19          0.28**            0.06          0.12
                          (0.16)          (0.07)           (0.18)        (0.09)


                                                                                  42
 Sixth                       0.41**            -0.06
                                                                 --               --
                             (0.15)           (0.12)
χ2 Equal Coefficients         11.76            6.89             0.76             0.02
[P-value]                    [0.01]           [0.03]           [0.69]           [0.88]

                                    Free Lunch Status
 No                          0.28**          0.21**            0.33**           0.23**
                             (0.07)          (0.09)            (0.07)           (0.09)
 Yes                         0.19**           0.07              0.03             0.00
                             (0.09)          (0.10)            (0.09)           (0.12)
χ2 Equal Coefficients         0.53            1.15              6.16             2.40
[P-value]                    [0.47]          [0.28]            [0.01]           [0.12]

                                      Minority Status
 No                           0.13              0.07           0.20**            0.15
                             (0.08)            (0.08)          (0.08)           (0.09)
 Yes                         0.45**           0.28**            0.19*            0.04
                             (0.08)            (0.11)          (0.10)           (0.12)
χ2 Equal Coefficients         8.41              2.45             0.01            0.63
[P-value]                    [0.00]            [0.12]          [0.94]           [0.43]

                               Limited English Proficiency
 No                          0.21**          0.14**            0.22**           0.18**
                             (0.07)           (0.07)           (0.07)           (0.08)
 Yes                         0.27**            0.06             -0.02            -0.27
                             (0.12)           (0.20)           (0.17)           (0.20)
χ2 Equal Coefficients         0.19             0.17             1.63             3.74
[P-value]                    [0.67]           [0.68]           [0.20]           [0.05]

                                           Gender
 Female                        0.22**             0.11           0.19**           0.19*
                               (0.08)            (0.09)          (0.08)           (0.10)
 Male                          0.23**            0.16*           0.20**            0.07
                               (0.08)            (0.08)          (0.08)           (0.10)
χ2 Equal Coefficients           0.03              0.12            0.03             0.63
[P-value]                      [0.85]            [0.73]          [0.86]           [0.43]
Notes: Reported standard errors in parentheses correct for clustering at the classroom
level. ** indicates 5% significance, * 10% significance. Figures in brackets are p-values
for the chi-square test of coefficient inequality across groups.




                                                                                         43
