                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             SCHOOLS, SKILLS, AND SYNAPSES

                                         James J. Heckman

                                       Working Paper 14064
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w14064


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2008




This paper was presented as the Presidential Lecture of the Western Economics Association, Seattle
Washington, June 30, 2007. Earlier versions were presented at the U.S. Naval Academy at Annapolis,
September, 2006; at Kansas State University, November 2006; and as the 2006 Leigh Lecture, Washington
State University, November 2007. Heckman is Henry Schultz Distinguished Service Professor of Economics
at the University of Chicago, Professor of Science and Society, University College Dublin, and Senior
Research Fellow, American Bar Foundation. This research was supported by the Committee for Economic
Development with grants from the Pew Charitable Trusts and the Partnership for America's Economic
Success; the JB & MK Pritzker Family Foundation; Susan Thompson Buffett Foundation; Mr. Robert
Dugger; NIH R01-HD043411, NSF 97-09-873, NSF SES-0099195, NSF SES-0241858; and support
from the American Bar Foundation. The views expressed in this paper are those of the author and
not necessarily those of the funders listed here. I thank Pedro Carneiro, Flavio Cunha, Lance Lochner,
Paul LaFontaine, Dimitriy Masterov and Sergio Urzua for helpful collaborations on which this paper
is based. Burton Singer has made many helpful comments over the years on this and related work.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by James J. Heckman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Schools, Skills, and Synapses
James J. Heckman
NBER Working Paper No. 14064
June 2008
JEL No. A12

                                               ABSTRACT

This paper discusses (a) the role of cognitive and noncognitive ability in shaping adult outcomes, (b)
the early emergence of differentials in abilities between children of advantaged families and children
of disadvantaged families, (c) the role of families in creating these abilities, (d) adverse trends in American
families, and (e) the effectiveness of early interventions in offsetting these trends. Practical issues
in the design and implementation of early childhood programs are discussed.


James J. Heckman
Department of Economics
The University of Chicago
1126 E. 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
jheckman@uchicago.edu
                                                                        I INTRODUCTION


                                   I INTRODUCTION

American society is polarizing. Proportionately more American youth are graduating from
college than ever before. At the same time, American-born youth are graduating from high
school at lower rates than 40 years ago.
   This paper reviews and interprets these trends. The origins of inequality are examined
and policies to alleviate it are analyzed. Families play a powerful role in shaping adult
outcomes. The accident of birth is a major source of inequality. Recent research by Cunha
and Heckman (2007a, 2008b) shows that about half of the inequality in the present value of
lifetime earnings is due to factors determined by age 18. Compared to 50 years ago, relatively
more American children are being born into disadvantaged families where investments in
children are smaller than in advantaged families. Policies that supplement the child rearing
resources available to disadvantaged families reduce inequality and raise productivity.
   The argument of this paper is summarized by the following 15 points:

  1. Many major economic and social problems such as crime, teenage pregnancy, dropping
     out of high school and adverse health conditions are linked to low levels of skill and
     ability in society.

  2. In analyzing policies that foster skills and abilities, society should recognize the multi-
     plicity of human abilities.

  3. Currently, public policy in the U.S. focuses on promoting and measuring cognitive
     ability through IQ and achievement tests. The accountability standards in the No
     Child Left Behind Act concentrate attention on achievement test scores and do not
     evaluate important noncognitive factors that promote success in school and life.

  4. Cognitive abilities are important determinants of socioeconomic success.

  5. So are socioemotional skills, physical and mental health, perseverance, attention, moti-
     vation, and self confidence. They contribute to performance in society at large and even

                                              3
                                                                      I INTRODUCTION


    help determine scores on the very tests that are commonly used to measure cognitive
    achievement.

 6. Ability gaps between the advantaged and disadvantaged open up early in the lives of
    children.

 7. Family environments of young children are major predictors of cognitive and socioe-
    motional abilities, as well as a variety of outcomes such as crime and health.

 8. Family environments in the U.S. and many other countries around the world have
    deteriorated over the past 40 years.

 9. Experimental evidence on the positive effects of early interventions on children in
    disadvantaged families is consistent with a large body of non-experimental evidence
    showing that the absence of supportive family environments harms child outcomes.

10. If society intervenes early enough, it can improve cognitive and socioemotional abilities
    and the health of disadvantaged children.

11. Early interventions promote schooling, reduce crime, foster workforce productivity and
    reduce teenage pregnancy.

12. These interventions are estimated to have high benefit-cost ratios and rates of return.

13. As programs are currently configured, interventions early in the life cycle of disad-
    vantaged children have much higher economic returns than later interventions such
    as reduced pupil-teacher ratios, public job training, convict rehabilitation programs,
    adult literacy programs, tuition subsidies or expenditure on police.

14. Life cycle skill formation is dynamic in nature. Skill begets skill; motivation begets
    motivation. Motivation cross-fosters skill and skill cross-fosters motivation. If a child
    is not motivated to learn and engage early on in life, the more likely it is that when
    the child becomes an adult, it will fail in social and economic life. The longer society

                                             4
                                                                        I INTRODUCTION


     waits to intervene in the life cycle of a disadvantaged child, the more costly it is to
     remediate disadvantage.

 15. A major refocus of policy is required to capitalize on knowledge about the life cycle of
     skill and health formation and the importance of the early years in creating inequality
     in America, and in producing skills for the workforce.

   The evidence assembled in this paper substantially amends the analysis of The Bell
Curve by Herrnstein and Murray (1994). Those authors made an important contribution to
academic and policy analysis by showing that cognitive ability as captured by achievement
test scores measured in a child’s adolescent years predict adult socioeconomic success on
a variety of dimensions. Heckman, Stixrud, and Urzua (2006) and Borghans, Duckworth,
Heckman, and ter Weel (2008) demonstrate that personality factors are also powerfully
predictive of socioeconomic success and are as powerful as cognitive abilities in producing
many adult outcomes. Achievement tests of the sort used by Herrnstein and Murray reflect
both cognitive and noncognitive factors.
   The Bell Curve assigned a primary role to genetics in explaining the origins of differences
in human cognitive ability and a primary role to cognitive ability in shaping adult outcomes.
If cognitive ability is genetically determined and is primary in shaping adult outcomes, pub-
lic policy towards disadvantaged populations is limited to compensation. Recent research,
summarized in this paper, establishes the power of socioemotional abilities and an important
role for environment and intervention in creating abilities. The field of epigenetics surveyed
in Rutter (2006) demonstrates how genetic expression is strongly influenced by environmen-
tal influences and that environmental effects on gene expression can be inherited. Evidence
is presented in this paper that high quality early childhood interventions foster abilities and
that inequality can be attacked at its source. Early interventions also boost the productivity
of the economy.
   The plan of this paper is as follows. Section II reviews some evidence on growing polar-
ization in American society. Section III reviews evidence on the importance of cognitive and

                                              5
                  II GROWING POLARIZATION OF AMERICAN SOCIETY AND ITS
                                        IMPLICATIONS FOR PRODUCTIVITY

noncognitive abilities in producing a variety of socioeconomic outcomes. Section IV shows
how the abilities that are so powerfully predictive of adult success and failure emerge early in
the life of a child. This evidence has important implications for policies designed to alleviate
poverty. Section V summarizes the evidence that a greater fraction of American youth is
being born and reared in disadvantaged families compared to 50 years ago. It also discusses
the question of the best way to measure disadvantage. Section VI reviews evidence on the
role of families in producing abilities. Section VII shows the evidence that enriching early
environments can partially compensate for the effects of early adversity, and draws general
lessons from the recent literature on the optimal timing of investment in disadvantaged chil-
dren. Section VIII discusses practical issues that arise in designing and implementing early
childhood interventions. Section IX concludes. An Appendix presents a more technical and
comprehensive version of the discussion about the optimal timing of investment and some
additional evidence.


         II GROWING POLARIZATION OF AMERICAN SOCIETY AND ITS
                            IMPLICATIONS FOR PRODUCTIVITY

The high school graduation rate is one barometer of the performance of American society
and the skill level of its future workforce. Throughout the first half of the 20th century,
each new cohort of Americans was more likely to graduate high school than the preceding
one. This upward trend in secondary education increased worker productivity and fueled
American economic growth (see Aaronson and Sullivan, 2001, and Delong, Katz, and Goldin,
2003).
   In the past 30 years, growing wage differentials between high school graduates and high
school dropouts have increased the economic incentive to graduate from high school. The
real wages of high school dropouts have declined since the late 1970s while those of more
skilled workers have risen (see Autor, Katz, and Kearney, 2005). Heckman, Lochner, and
Todd (2008) show that in recent decades, the internal rate of return to graduating high

                                               6
                  II GROWING POLARIZATION OF AMERICAN SOCIETY AND ITS
                                        IMPLICATIONS FOR PRODUCTIVITY


school compared to dropping out has greatly increased and is now over 50 percent per year.
   It is thus surprising and disturbing that, at a time when the premium for skills has
increased and the return to graduating high school has risen, the high school dropout rate
in America is increasing. This trend is rarely noted in academic or policy discussions. The
principal graduation rate issued by the National Center for Educational Statistics (NCES)
– widely regarded as the official rate – would suggest that U.S. students responded to the
increasing demand for skill by completing high school at increasing rates and that a greater
fraction of high school graduates go to college and complete it. According to what many
regard as the official high school graduation rate, U.S. schools now graduate nearly 88 percent
of students and black graduation rates have converged to those of non-Hispanic whites over
the past four decades.
   The evidence in Heckman and LaFontaine (2008a) challenges these claims and establishes
that the high school dropout rate has increased among native-born American children. Using
a wide variety of data sources, they estimate U.S. graduation rates. They establish that (1)
the U.S. high school graduation rate peaked at around 80 percent in the late 1960s and
then declined by 4-5 percentage points. (2) About 65 percent of blacks and Hispanics leave
school with a high school diploma. Minority graduation rates are substantially below the
rates for non-Hispanic whites. Contrary to claims based on the official statistics, they find
no evidence of convergence in minority-majority graduation rates for males over the past
35 years. (3) Exclusion of incarcerated populations from the official statistics substantially
biases upward the reported high school graduation rate for black males.
   The contrast between the “official” rate and the true rate is demonstrated in Figure 1.
The official rate is plotted as the line with circles in Figure 1. The dropout rate has steadily
declined since 1968. However, the dropout rate adjusted for high school dropouts who are
exam certified as high school equivalents, but who perform in the labor market at or near
the level of high school dropouts who do not certify, is very different.1 The adjusted rate,
plotted in the line with closed circles, has risen.


                                                7
                  II GROWING POLARIZATION OF AMERICAN SOCIETY AND ITS
                                        IMPLICATIONS FOR PRODUCTIVITY


   The slowdown in the rate of growth of college attendance that has been noted by many
scholars is not primarily due to a slowdown in the rate of growth of college attendance
among high school graduates.2 The curve marked “∆” in Figure 2 shows that the college
attendance rate among high school graduates has not slowed down as much as the rate for
college attendance. The primary source of the slowdown is the growth in the high school
dropout rate (see the curve with the light rectangles). This pattern is mainly due to males.
(Compare Figures 3 and 4 which is on a format comparable to Figure 2.) A gap has emerged
in the education of men and women. This is another source of the growth of inequality in
America. Black female college enrollment is converging to that of white male enrollment.
Across all ethnic groups, women are doing better than men.3 For recent birth cohorts,
the gap in college attendance between males and females is roughly ten percent. However,
the gap in college attendance given high school graduation is only five percent. Half of
the growing gender gap in college attendance documented by Goldin, Katz, and Kuziemko
(2006) can be explained by the declining rate of male high school graduation (Heckman and
LaFontaine, 2008a).
   Table 1 performs standard growth accounting, decomposing the change in college gradu-
ation into the change due to high school graduation, the change in college attendance given
high school graduation, and the change in college graduation given college attendance. The
table shows that in the first half of the 20th century, growth in high school graduation was
the driving force behind increased college enrollments. Growth in high school graduation no
longer contributes to growth in college attainment for cohorts born after 1950, especially for
men. High school graduation as a source of growth in educational attainment diminishes
and turns negative for more recent cohorts of Americans. The decline in high school grad-
uation rates since 1970 (for cohorts born after 1950) has flattened college attendance and
completion rates and has slowed growth in the skill level of the U.S. workforce at a time
when the economic return to skill has increased. (See Figure 5.)
   The trends in high school graduation rates reported in Figures 2-4 are for persons born in


                                              8
                  II GROWING POLARIZATION OF AMERICAN SOCIETY AND ITS
                                        IMPLICATIONS FOR PRODUCTIVITY


the United States and exclude immigrants. The recent growth in unskilled migration to the
U.S. increases the proportion of unskilled Americans in the workforce apart from the decline
in skills due to a rising high school dropout rate. This trend further reduces the growth in
workforce productivity, and promotes inequality in society at large. Estimates by Aaronson
and Sullivan (2001) and Delong, Katz, and Goldin (2003) suggest that annual growth in
labor productivity has slowed by 0.17 to 0.35 percent per year due to trends that reduce the
growth of labor force quality.
   A greater percentage of the workforce of tomorrow will come from traditional minority
populations where the levels of educational attainment are lower and the growth in the
supply of skills for males is weaker. Table 2 taken from Ellwood (2001) shows that in the
period 2000–2020, American society will generate less than half of the number of college
graduates that it produced in the previous 20 years despite growth in the size of the total
population.
   Trends in the production of skills from American high schools coupled with a growing
influx of unskilled immigrants have produced more people with low skills in U.S. Consider the
performance of the American workforce on a basic level of literacy. (See Figure 5.) At level
1, depicted in the figure, a person cannot understand the instructions written in a medical
prescription. American (and UK) workers perform poorly by this measure both absolutely
and in comparison with Germany and Sweden. More than 20 percent of American workers
do not possess this basic competence.
   What forces have produced these low levels and adverse trends? Are the public schools
responsible? Can we look to school reform to fix the problem? Are higher college tuition
costs to blame? I argue that the answer is “No” to all of these questions. Contrary to widely
held views, accounting for the ability of a child at the age college decisions are made, tuition
costs and schooling quality explain trivial fractions of the gaps in educational attainment by
socioeconomic status.




                                               9
         III THE IMPORTANCE OF COGNITIVE AND NONCOGNITIVE ABILITIES


    III THE IMPORTANCE OF COGNITIVE AND NONCOGNITIVE ABILITIES

Cognitive and noncognitive abilities are important determinants of schooling and socioeco-
nomic success. In the U.S. and many countries around the world, schooling gaps across
ethnic and income groups have more to do with ability deficits than family finances in the
school-going years. A substantial body of research shows that earnings, employment, la-
bor force experience, college attendance, teenage pregnancy, participation in risky activities,
compliance with health protocols and participation in crime are strongly affected by cogni-
tive and noncognitive abilities.4 By noncognitive abilities I mean motivation, socioemotional
regulation, time preference, personality factors and the ability to work with others.
   American public policy currently focuses on cognitive test scores or “smarts.” The No
Child Left Behind Act in the U.S. focuses on achievement test scores to measure success
or failure in schools. Yet an emerging literature shows that, as is intuitively obvious and
commonsensical, much more than smarts is required for success in life. Motivation, sociability
(the ability to work with others), the ability to focus on tasks, self-regulation, self esteem,
time preference, health and mental health all matter.
   The importance of noncognitive skills tends to be underrated in contemporary policy
discussions. Only recently have such traits been measured and there are competing measure-
ment systems.5 Recent evidence shows that the workplace is increasingly oriented towards
a greater valuation of the skills required for social interaction and for sociability.6,7
   Compelling evidence on the importance of noncognitive skills comes from the GED
program (Heckman and LaFontaine, 2008b; Heckman and Rubinstein, 2001). GEDs are
dropouts who pass a test to certify that they are equivalent to high school graduates. Partic-
ipation in the GED program is growing. Currently 14 percent of U.S. high school certificates
issued are to GEDs. The GED is successful in terms of measuring performance on tests of
scholastic ability.
   Heckman, Hsee, and Rubinstein (2001) and Heckman and Rubinstein (2001) show that
GED test scores and the test scores of persons who graduate high school but do not go on

                                               10
         III THE IMPORTANCE OF COGNITIVE AND NONCOGNITIVE ABILITIES


to college are comparable. Figure 7 displays the distribution of achievement test scores for
regular high school graduates who do not go on college (the graph with dark rectangles) and
GEDs (the circles). The two distributions are very similar for all ethnic and gender groups.
Yet GEDs earn at the rate of high school dropouts (see Heckman and LaFontaine, 2006;
2008b). GEDs are as “smart” as ordinary high school graduates, yet they lack noncognitive
skills.8 The GEDs are the wise guys who cannot finish anything. They quit the jobs and
marriages they start at much greater rates than ordinary high school graduates. Most
branches of the U.S. military recognize this in their recruiting strategies. Until the recent war
in Iraq, the armed forces did not generally accept GEDs because of their poor performance
in the military (Laurence, 2008). This and other evidence shows that both cognitive and
noncognitive skills matter in a variety of aspects of life.
   It is useful to summarize additional evidence on the power of noncognitive skills.9 Con-
sider the effects of both cognitive and noncognitive skills on many measures of social perfor-
mance. Heckman, Stixrud, and Urzua (2006) examine the effects of a core set of cognitive
and noncognitive factors on a variety of outcomes. Figures 8 and 9, excerpted from their
paper, show how the outcome measure written at the base of each figure varies with cogni-
tive and non-cognitive skills.10 For many social outcomes, both cognitive and noncognitive
skills are equally predictive in the sense that a one percent increase in either type of ability
has roughly equal effects on outcomes across the full distribution of abilities. Figure 8(a)
shows that those with low levels of cognitive and noncognitive skills are much more likely
to be incarcerated and that an increase in both cognitive and noncognitive skills reduces
the probability of teenage pregnancy. For the lowest deciles, the drop off in incarceration
with increasing noncognitive ability is greater than it is for cognitive ability. For teenage
pregnancy, the drop off in the rate is about the same for both types of skills. Figure 9 shows
similar patterns for high schooling dropping out, four year college graduation, daily smoking
and log wages.
   Cameron and Heckman (2001) and the papers they cite show that tuition costs explain


                                               11
                                             IV ABILITY GAPS OPEN UP EARLY IN LIFE


little of the gap in college going between the affluent and less affluent, between rich and
poor, and between majorities and minorities. Controlling for cognitive ability measured at
the age college decisions and high school dropout decisions are made, minorities are more
likely than whites to be at normal grade level in high school. See Table 3. The top row in
each panel shows the raw gap in educational attainment for the indicated schooling level.
The bottom row shows the gap, adjusting for cognitive ability. Tuition costs explain little
of the dramatic gaps in high school dropping out across minority and majority groups that
are actually bigger than what are seen in the official statistics.11


                     IV ABILITY GAPS OPEN UP EARLY IN LIFE

Gaps in the abilities that play an important role in determining diverse adult labor market
and health outcomes open up very early across socioeconomic groups. Consider the evolution
of both cognitive and noncognitive scores over the life of children, stratifying by social
background.
   Figure 10 shows the gap in cognitive test scores by age of low birth weight children
stratified by the mother’s education. Gaps in ability emerge early and persist. Most of the
gaps at age 18 that help to explain gaps in adult outcomes are present at age five. Schooling
plays a minor role in creating or perpetuating gaps. Even though American children go
to very different schools depending on their family background, test scores are remarkably
parallel.
   Figure 11(a) plots ranks of math scores by age by income class. The salient feature of
this figure, as for Figure 10, is that the gaps in achievement at age 12 are mostly present
at age 6, when children enter school. Again, schooling after the second grade plays only a
minor role in alleviating test score gaps.
   A similar pattern appears for socioemotional skills. Figure 12(a) plots ranks on an anti-
social score — a measure of behavior problems. In this figure, a high score is an indicator
of behavior problems. Gaps by socioeconomic status open up early and persist. High scores

                                                12
                                          IV ABILITY GAPS OPEN UP EARLY IN LIFE


(worse behavior problems) are associated with lower socioeconomic status. Again, schools
do not account for much of this pattern.
   How do these early and persistent differences in abilities arise? Is the difference due
to genes as Herrnstein and Murray claimed in The Bell Curve? Recall that they used an
achievement test score measured in the adolescent years to claim that genes are important
determinants of ability. They implicitly claim that compensation for early deficits is not
possible. The test score they use has been shown to be caused in part by schooling and
family environments (Hansen, Heckman, and Mullen, 2004; Neal and Johnson, 1996). In
Section VII, I summarize the experimental evidence that test scores and adult achievement
can be improved by high quality interventions.
   Evidence from epigenetics suggests that the genes vs. environment distinction that is
so much in vogue in popular discussions of the origins of inequality is obsolete, as is the
practice of additively partitioning outcomes due to “nature” and “nurture” that is common
in many papers in economics. An extensive recent literature suggests that gene-environment
interactions are central to explaining human and animal development. Rutter (2006) provides
an accessible introduction to this literature.12
   For example, recent work by Caspi, Williams, Kim-Cohen et al. (2007) shows that chil-
dren’s intellectual development is influenced by both genetic and environmental factors.
Breast-fed children attain higher IQ scores than non-breast fed children. This relationship
is moderated by a gene (FADS2) that controls fatty acid pathways. Fraga, Ballestar, Paz
et al. (2005) show how monozygotic (identical) twins are affected by life experience that
substantially differentiates the genetic expression of adult twins.13 Caspi, Sugden, Moffitt
et al. (2003) show that one gene (a serotonin transporter 5-HTT) moderates the influence
of stressful life events on depression. Caspi, McClay, Moffitt et al. (2002) show that the im-
pact of growing up in a harsh or abusive environment on adult antisocial behavior depends
on the presence of a particular variant of the MAOA gene. Cole, Hawkley, Arevalo et al.
(2007) show the effect of social environments (isolation) on gene expression that moderates


                                               13
       V THE DECLINE OF THE AMERICAN FAMILY AND THE RISE OF SOCIAL
                                                         PROBLEMS


adverse health outcomes. Turkheimer, Haley, Waldron et al. (2003) find a powerful role of
environment in determining heritability of IQ.
   The research on animals by Champagne and Curley (2005) and Champagne, Weaver,
Diorio et al. (2006) shows that environmental effects are inherited across generations, and
that early environmental influences are especially important. Suomi (1999; 2003) reports
parallel findings on genetic moderation of environmental influences for rhesus monkeys that
have 95 percent of human genes.
   When one controls for early family background factors (mother’s education and ability)
using regression analysis, the gaps shown in Figures 11(a) and 12(a) greatly diminish. See
Figures 11(b) and 12(b), respectively. While such regression adjustments cannot establish
causality, a causal interpretation of this evidence is supported by the experimental evidence
discussed in Section VII.


   V THE DECLINE OF THE AMERICAN FAMILY AND THE RISE OF SOCIAL
                                         PROBLEMS

The evidence on the importance of family factors in explaining ability gaps is a source of
concern because a greater proportion of American children is being born into disadvantaged
families. A divide is opening up in American society. Those born into disadvantaged environ-
ments are receiving relatively less stimulation and resources to promote child development
than those born into more advantaged families. Figure 13(a) shows the dramatic rise in
the proportion of children living in single parent families. The greatest contributor to this
growth is the percent living in families with never married mothers. (See the top category.)
Such families are much less likely to invest in their children (Moon, 2008). Figure 13(b)
shows that the percentage of all children less than age 5 with a never married mother is
over 25% for children born into families with dropout mothers. Figure 13(c) shows that this
phenomenon is especially pronounced for African American families.
   A gap has emerged between the environments of children of more educated women and

                                             14
       V THE DECLINE OF THE AMERICAN FAMILY AND THE RISE OF SOCIAL
                                                         PROBLEMS


the environments of children of less educated women. More educated women are having their
children later after they have completed their education and have a steady flow of resources
from their own income and that of their spouses (McLanahan, 2004).
   More educated women are working disproportionately more than less educated women.14
Fewer than ten percent of the more educated women bear children out of wedlock. (See Fig-
ures 13(d) and 13(e), respectively.) In educated families, fathers’ involvement with children
has increased over the past 30 years (McLanahan, 2004). More educated women marry later,
have more resources, fewer children, and provide much richer child rearing environments that
produce dramatic differences in child vocabulary and intellectual performance. (See Hutten-
locher, Haight, Bryk et al., 1991, Huttenlocher, Vasilyeva, Waterfall et al., 2007 and Hart
and Risley, 1992, 1995.) These advantages are especially pronounced for children of two
parent stable marriages.15 Children of such marriages appear to be at a major advantage
compared to children from other unions
   A comprehensive survey by Bianchi, Robinson, and Milkie (2006) of the evidence from
time diary studies shows that college-educated mothers devote more time to child rearing
than less-educated mothers, especially in child enrichment activities. They spend more time
reading to children and less time watching television with their children. College-educated
mothers spend more time in child care.16
   In the words of McLanahan (2004), children from different family backgrounds face “di-
verging destinies.” While more educated women are working more, their families are more
stable and the mothers in these families are also devoting more time to child development
activities than less educated women. Children in affluent homes are bathed in financial
and cognitive resources. Those in less advantaged circumstances are much less likely to
receive cognitive and socioemotional stimulation and other family resources. The family
environments of single parent homes compared to intact families are much less favorable for
investment in children. See Table 4, taken from McLanahan (2004). The patterns of single
motherhood, employment and age at first birth of the child by mother’s educational status


                                             15
       V THE DECLINE OF THE AMERICAN FAMILY AND THE RISE OF SOCIAL
                                                         PROBLEMS


are found in many countries around the world (see McLanahan, 2004), so this analysis is
relevant for other Western countries.
   Adverse backgrounds produce much greater risk for the persons involved and their chil-
dren (Felitti and Anda, 2005; Krein and Beller, 1988; McLanahan and Sandefur, 1994). An
emerging literature establishes the lower quality of the early environments of children born
to less educated mothers and especially teenage mothers and their consequences for adult
outcomes.17 Both family structure and age of the mother appear to play a role (Francesconi,
2007). Fetal alcohol ingestion alone, which is more frequent with teenage and less educated
mothers, appears to have substantial deleterious consequences on adult outcomes. (See
Nilsson, 2008; Streissguth, 2007; Zhang, Sliwowska, and Weinberg, 2005.)18
   The available evidence from psychology and sociology suggests that the conventional
measures of family disadvantage used by many social scientists to study child outcomes,
such as “broken home” or family income, are very crude proxies for the real determinants
of child outcomes (Harris, Brown, and Bifulco, 1986; Mayer, 1997; Rutter, 1971). Presence
of a father can be a negative factor if he shows antisocial tendencies (Jaffee, Caspi, Moffitt,
Dodge, Rutter, Taylor, and Tully, 2005). A substantial body of evidence suggests that a
major determinant of child disadvantage is the quality of the nurturing environment rather
than just financial resources available or presence or absence of parents (see Rutter, 2006).
This evidence is supported by the evidence on the effects of early parenting enrichment
programs summarized in Section VII.
   Strengthening the observation that current measures of childhood adversity are inaccu-
rate is a study by Costello, Compton, Keeler et al. (2003). An American Indian population
enriched by the opening of a casino showed substantial improvements in baseline measures
of disruptive behavior of their children. The beneficial effects of the intervention were medi-
ated by changes within the family. Parental supervision of children improved and there was
greater parental engagement. In this natural experiment, income improved parenting, but
it was parenting that reduced disruptive behavior. A proper measure of disadvantage would


                                              16
   VI ADDITIONAL EVIDENCE ON THE CONSEQUENCES OF ADVERSE EARLY
                     CIRCUMSTANCES ON CHILD AND ADULT OUTCOMES


account for parenting inputs. However, time series on parenting is limited. This evidence
raises a serious policy question. Should one target income or should one target parenting?
The successful early intervention programs discussed in Section VII target parenting. How-
ever, targeting parenting raises difficult political and cultural issues that are discussed in
Section IX.
   Adverse trends in family environments raise an environmental version of concerns about
the quality of the future population analogous to the concerns expressed by the eugenics
movement a century ago. Then the concern was expressed that “genetically inferior” pop-
ulations were breeding at a higher rate and diluting population quality. Since genetics was
assumed to be beyond the control of intervention, the eugenicists forecast a dim future for
the human race.
   Recent evidence suggests that early environments play a powerful role in shaping adult
outcomes. Disproportionately more American children are growing up in adverse environ-
ments and this will have adverse consequences for American society. The good news in all
of this is that environments can be enhanced to promote the quality of children in ways that
were thought impossible under the traditional view of genetic determination. The recent
literature suggests that early environments powerfully affect genetic expression, and that
society need not passively watch its own decline. Policy can matter. Before turning to the
evidence, I bolster the case made in this section.


 VI ADDITIONAL EVIDENCE ON THE CONSEQUENCES OF ADVERSE EARLY
                  CIRCUMSTANCES ON CHILD AND ADULT OUTCOMES

Many scholars, including Plato (1991, reprinted) and Freud (1935, reprinted), have discussed
the importance of early childhood environments on adult outcomes. Felitti and Anda (2005)
present some empirical support for Freud, Plato and the numerous thinkers who have stressed
the importance of the early years. They use retrospective data to examine the effects of
adverse childhood experiences on health and human development over the lifespans of 17,337

                                             17
   VI ADDITIONAL EVIDENCE ON THE CONSEQUENCES OF ADVERSE EARLY
                     CIRCUMSTANCES ON CHILD AND ADULT OUTCOMES


participants. The cohorts they analyze are born as early as the 1900s. Their studies show
the long-term effects of adverse early childhood environments. They have not yet established
exact neural or genetic mechanisms, nor do they demonstrate what aspects of early trauma
or adverse environments affect child outcomes. Their use of recall data on adversity in
childhood is potentially very problematic. Nonetheless, their evidence is strongly suggestive
of an important role for early family factors in determining child outcomes that is consistent
with a large body of evidence from a variety of literatures.
   Felitti and Anda (2005) define Adverse Childhood Experiences (ACE) as experiences in
childhood or adolescence such as childhood abuse and neglect, and growing up with domestic
violence that generate medical or social problems such as substance abuse, mental illness,
parental loss, or crime in the home. Their studies based on ACE show that adverse childhood
life experiences are correlated with adult disease burden and medical care costs; well-being,
depression, and suicide rates; alcoholism and drug use; job performance and disability; social
function; and the performance of subsequent generations. They compute a score based on the
extent of adverse childhood circumstances. Two out of three adults experience at least one
category of ACE and 11% experience five or more. Their results are striking. Figures 14(a)-
14(d) show the adult consequences of adverse childhood circumstances.
   This evidence is bolstered by a large body of research in developmental psychology (Watt,
Ayoub, Bradley, and Puma, 2008). Lack of a specific sensory input during early child
development results in abnormal development of the brain. The abnormal development is
in those brain systems which sense, perceive, process, “interpret”, and “act on” information
related to that specific sensory deprivation.
   Studies of Romanian infants show the importance of the early years. A perverse natural
experiment, described in detail in Cunha, Heckman, Lochner et al. (2006), placed many
Romanian children in state run orphanages at birth. Conditions in the orphanages were
atrocious. Children received minimal social and intellectual stimulation. They were adopted
out at different ages (length of exposure).19 Children raised in these institutions demon-


                                                18
 VII ENRICHING EARLY ENVIRONMENTS CAN PARTIALLY COMPENSATE FOR
                                               EARLY ADVERSITY


strated cognitive delays, serious impairments in social behavior and abnormal sensitivity
to stress. Young children adopted out of institutional care often have persisting cognitive,
socioemotional and health problems.20
   The somatosensory bath of early childhood provides the major sensory cues responsible
for organizing key areas in the brain. Absent these sensory experiences, abnormal develop-
ment results. This is vividly illustrated in the smaller head size compared to normal children,
enlarged ventricles and cortical atrophy found in neglected three year olds. (See Figure 15.)
The later the Romanian orphans were adopted out, the poorer their recovery on average,
although there are important variations among the children which are related to the quality
of orphanages and adopted home environments. See Smyke, Koga, Johnson, Fox, Marshall,
Nelson, Zeanah, and the BEIP Core Group (2007) for comprehensive discussions of these
issues.


VII ENRICHING EARLY ENVIRONMENTS CAN PARTIALLY COMPENSATE FOR
                                      EARLY ADVERSITY

Experiments that enrich the early environments of disadvantaged children demonstrate
causal effects of early environments on adolescent and adult outcomes and provide powerful
evidence against the genetic determinism of Herrnstein and Murray (1994). Enhancements
of family environments improve child outcomes and affect both cognitive and noncognitive
skills. Noncognitive skills — personality factors, motivation and the like — are an important
channel of improvement.
   The most reliable data come from experiments that substantially enrich the early envi-
ronments of children living in low-income families. Two of these investigations, the Perry
Preschool Program and the Abecedarian Program, are very informative for the purposes of
this discussion because they use a random assignment design and collect long-term follow-up
data.
   These longitudinal studies demonstrate substantial positive effects of early environmental

                                              19
 VII ENRICHING EARLY ENVIRONMENTS CAN PARTIALLY COMPENSATE FOR
                                               EARLY ADVERSITY


enrichment on a range of cognitive and non-cognitive skills, schooling achievement, job per-
formance, and social behaviors, long after the interventions ended. Data from Olds’ Nurse
Family Partnership Program (2002) and from non-controlled assessments of Head Start and
the Chicago Child-Parent Centers programs confirm these findings.21
   The Perry Program was an intensive preschool program that was administered to 58
disadvantaged black children in Ypsilanti, Michigan between 1962 and 1967. The treatment
consisted of a daily 2.5 hour classroom session on weekday mornings and a weekly 90 minute
home visit by the teacher on weekday afternoons. The length of each preschool year was 30
weeks. The control and treatment groups have been followed through age 40.
   The Abecedarian Program studied 111 disadvantaged children, born between 1972 and
1977, whose families scored high on a risk index. The mean age at entry was 4.4 months.
The program was a year-round, full-day intervention that continued through age 8. The
children were followed through age 21, and an age 30 follow-up study is in preparation.
   In both the Perry and Abecedarian Programs there was a consistent pattern of successful
outcomes for treatment group members compared with control group members.22 For the
Perry Program, an initial increase in IQ disappeared gradually over 4 years following the
intervention. Such IQ fadeouts have been observed in other studies. Figure 16 shows that
the initial surge in IQ for treatment group members fades out by age ten. Heckman, Moon,
Pinto, Savelyev, and Yavitz (2008) establish that Perry operates primarily through improving
noncognitive traits. These improvements explain the treatment effects graphed in Figure 17.
Even though their IQs are not higher, the Perry treatment group does better on achievement
tests at age 14 than the controls. (See the second set of bar charts in Figure 17(a).)
   Positive effects of these interventions were also documented for a wide range of social
behaviors, even though IQ is not any higher. At the oldest ages tested (Perry: 40 yrs;
Abecedarian: 21 yrs), individuals scored higher on achievement tests, attained higher levels
of education, required less special education, earned higher wages, were more likely to own a
home, and were less likely to go on welfare or be incarcerated than controls. Intervening at


                                             20
 VII ENRICHING EARLY ENVIRONMENTS CAN PARTIALLY COMPENSATE FOR
                                               EARLY ADVERSITY


an early enough age might even raise the IQ of participants. In the more intensive, earlier
starting, Abecedarian program, IQ gains were found that last into early adulthood.
   An estimated rate of return (the return per dollar of cost) to the Perry Program is in
excess of 10%.23 This high rate of return is higher than standard returns on stock market
equity (7.2%) and suggests that society at large can benefit substantially from these kinds
of interventions. These are underestimates of the rate of return because they ignore the
economic returns to health and mental health. Cunha, Heckman, Lochner, and Masterov
(2006) present a comprehensive survey of the early intervention programs.
   Several observations about the evidence from the intervention studies and nonexperi-
mental longitudinal studies are relevant. Skills beget skills and capabilities foster future
capabilities. All capabilities are built on a foundation of capacities that are developed ear-
lier. This principle stems from two characteristics that are intrinsic to the nature of learning:
(a) early learning confers value on acquired skills, which leads to self-reinforcing motivation
to learn more and (b) early mastery of a range of cognitive, social, and emotional compe-
tencies makes learning at later ages more efficient and therefore easier and more likely to
continue.
   As currently configured, public job training programs, adult literacy services, prisoner
rehabilitation programs, and education programs for disadvantaged adults at current levels
of expenditure produce low economic returns.24 Moreover, for studies in which later inter-
vention showed some benefits, the performance of disadvantaged children was still behind
the performance of children who experienced earlier interventions in the preschool years. If
the base is weak, the return to later investment is low.
   The advantages gained from effective early interventions are best sustained when they are
followed by continued high quality learning experiences. The technology of skill formation
developed in Cunha and Heckman (2007b) and Heckman (2007) shows that the returns on
school investment are higher for persons with higher ability, where ability is formed in the
early years. Figure 18 shows the return to a marginal increase in investment at different


                                               21
 VII ENRICHING EARLY ENVIRONMENTS CAN PARTIALLY COMPENSATE FOR
                                               EARLY ADVERSITY


stages of the life cycle starting from a position of low but equal initial investment at all
ages.25
   Due to dynamic complementarity, or synergy, early investments must be followed by
later investments if maximum value is to be realized. The Appendix to this paper presents
a formal derivation of this curve and the associated optimal investment strategy. It draws
on the analyses of Cunha and Heckman (2007b), Heckman (2007) and Cunha, Heckman,
Lochner et al. (2006). One unusual feature of early interventions that is stressed in Cunha and
Heckman (2007b) and Heckman and Masterov (2007) is that the traditional equity-efficiency
tradeoff that plagues most policies is absent. Early interventions promote economic efficiency
and reduce lifetime inequality. Remedial interventions for disadvantaged adolescents who do
not receive a strong initial foundation of skills face an equity-efficiency tradeoff. They are
difficult to justify on the grounds of economic efficiency and generally have low rates of
return.
   Cunha and Heckman (2008a) and Cunha, Heckman, and Schennach (2007) estimate
technologies of skill formation to understand how the skills of the children evolve in response
to (1) the stock of skills children have already accumulated; (2) the investments made by
their parents; and (3) the stock of skills accumulated by the parents themselves. In the text,
I sketch the framework. It is formally developed in the Appendix.
   Let Ct be the stock of cognitive skill of the child at age t. Nt is the stock of noncognitive
skill of the child at age t. It is the parental investment at age t. CM is mother’s cognitive
skill. NM is mother’s non-cognitive skill.
   Cunha, Heckman, and Schennach (2007) and Cunha and Heckman (2008a) estimate two
equations. One is a technology for the production of cognitive skills:


                               Ct+1 = FC,t (Nt , Ct , It , CM , NM ).




                                                22
 VII ENRICHING EARLY ENVIRONMENTS CAN PARTIALLY COMPENSATE FOR
                                               EARLY ADVERSITY


Another equation is a technology for the production of non-cognitive skills:


                                Nt+1 = FN,t (Nt , Ct , It , CM , NM ).


The framework developed in the appendix includes health as a third output of a develop-
mental process.
   Cunha, Heckman, and Schennach (2007) estimate the elasticity of substitution parame-
ters for inputs at different periods that govern the trade-off of investment between the early
years and the later years. They find much stronger yields of investment in the early years,
supporting the shape of the curve displayed in Figure 18(a). Different stages of the life cycle
are sensitive periods for different outcomes. Sensitive periods for cognitive skills come early
in life. Sensitive periods for noncognitive skills come later in the life of the child.26
   Figure 18(b) shows the return to an extra dollar of investment at age three under two
different scenarios. In the first scenario (depicted by the tightly-spaced dashed line), optimal
investment up to age three is assumed to have been made. An additional dollar is invested
at each age after age three and the return to the next dollar after that is computed. At
age three, the curve starts below the curve 18(a) that is determined at age zero because
substantial investment is assumed to have been made at age three. This is a manifestation
of diminishing returns. After age three, the return eventually is greater than the initial
curve for Figure 18(a) because of dynamic complementarity. The higher skill base at three
enhances the productivity of later investment.27
   The third curve (the curve with wider dashes) depicts a case with suboptimal investment
in the years zero to three. Assuming that a dollar is initially invested in each year after age
three, the return to the next dollar is less than the return viewed prospectively. When the
initial base is substantially compromised, so are the returns to later investment.28
   Table 5 presents a simulation of the model of Cunha, Heckman, and Schennach (2007).
It considers a population of disadvantaged children with low levels of skills as measured at



                                                 23
 VII ENRICHING EARLY ENVIRONMENTS CAN PARTIALLY COMPENSATE FOR
                                               EARLY ADVERSITY


ages four to six. The investments they receive place them at the bottom decile of the overall
population ability distribution. Their mothers are also at the bottom decile of the distribu-
tion of maternal endowments. For the outcomes listed in the first column, the baseline (no
treatment) performance is presented in the second column “Baseline.” These outcomes are
those of the Perry control group.
   Using an empirically determined technology, Cunha and Heckman (2006) simulate an
intervention that moves children from the bottom decile of family resources to the seventh
decile (from the bottom) in terms of their family environments. This produces the outcomes
displayed in the third column of the table. This intervention essentially produces the out-
comes for the Perry treatment group (see Schweinhart, Montie, Xiang, Barnett, Belfield,
and Nores, 2005). The fourth column of Table 5 is a later adolescent intervention that also
causes children to achieve Perry outcomes. To achieve Perry results in this fashion requires
35-50 percent more investment costs in present value terms discounted back to ages three to
six (the age of the initial intervention). Family resources must be moved from the bottom
decile to the ninth decile to achieve with later interventions what can be achieved with earlier
interventions.
   It is possible to remediate rather than to intervene early, but it is also much more costly.
The outcomes displayed in the final column of the table result from allocating the resources
spent in the adolescent intervention more smoothly over the life cycle of the child. Such
interventions front load investment in the early years, following the logic of Figure 18(a)
and the model developed in the Appendix. Relatively more investment is spent in the early
years, but early investments are supported by later investments. Suppose that the resources
required to produce Perry outcomes solely from adolescent interventions are spread more
smoothly over the life cycle using an optimal investment strategy. This causes Perry-like
children to attain middle class outcomes as is shown in the final column of numbers.
   The evidence summarized in this paper supports the economic efficiency of early initial
investment that is sustained. The optimal policy is to invest relatively more in the early


                                              24
 VIII PRACTICAL ISSUES IN IMPLEMENTING EARLY CHILDHOOD PROGRAMS


years. But early investment must be followed up to be effective. This is a consequence
of dynamic complementarity. See Cunha and Heckman (2007b) and the Appendix. Later
remediation is possible but to attain what is accomplished by early investment is much more
costly. If society intervenes too late and individuals are at too low a level, later investment
can be economically inefficient. Middle class children receive massive doses of early enriched
environments. Children from disadvantaged environments do not.


VIII PRACTICAL ISSUES IN IMPLEMENTING EARLY CHILDHOOD PROGRAMS

A variety of practical issues arise in implementing early childhood programs. I discuss them
in turn.

   • Who should be targeted? The returns to early childhood programs are the highest for
      disadvantaged children who do not receive substantial amounts of parental investment
      in the early years. The proper measure of disadvantage is not necessarily family poverty
      or parental education. The available evidence suggests that the quality of parenting is
      the important scarce resource. The quality of parenting is not always closely linked to
      family income or parental education. Measures of risky family environments should be
      developed that facilitate efficient targeting.

   • With what programs? Programs that target the early years seem to have the greatest
      promise. The Nurse Family Partnership Program (Olds, 2002), the Abecedarian Pro-
      gram and the Perry Program have been evaluated and show high returns. Programs
      with home visits affect the lives of the parents and create a permanent change in the
      home environment that supports the child after center-based interventions end. Pro-
      grams that build character and motivation that do not focus exclusively on cognition
      appear to be the most effective.

   • Who should provide the programs? In designing any early childhood program that
      aims to improve the cognitive and socio-emotional skills of disadvantaged children, it

                                               25
                                                                            IX SUMMARY


     is important to respect the sanctity of early family life and to respect cultural diver-
     sity. The goal of the early childhood programs is to create a base of productive skills
     and traits for disadvantaged children living in culturally diverse settings. By engaging
     private industry and other social groups that draw in private resources, create com-
     munity support, and represent diverse points of view, effective and culturally sensitive
     programs can be created.

   • Who should pay for them? One could make the programs universal to avoid stigmati-
     zation. Universal programs would be much more expensive and create the possibility
     of deadweight losses whereby public programs displace private investments by families.
     One solution to these problems is to make the programs universal but to offer a sliding
     fee schedule to avoid deadweight losses.

   • Will the programs achieve high levels of compliance? It is important to recognize
     potential problems with program compliance. Many successful programs change the
     values and motivation of the child. Some of these changes may run counter to the
     values of parents. There may be serious tension between the needs of the child and the
     acceptance of interventions by the parent. Developing culturally diverse programs will
     help avoid such tensions. One cannot assume that there will be no conflict between
     the values of society as it seeks to develop the potential of the child and the values of
     the family, although the extent of such conflicts is not yet known.


                                     IX SUMMARY

America has a growing skills problem. One consequence of this skills problem is rising
inequality and polarization of society. A greater fraction of young Americans is graduating
from college. At the same time, a greater fraction is dropping out of high school. Another
consequence of the skills problem is the slowdown in growth of the productivity of the
workplace. In designing policies to combat inequality, it is important to recognize that


                                             26
                                                                           IX SUMMARY


about 50% of the variance in inequality in lifetime earnings is determined by age 18. The
family plays a powerful role in shaping adult outcomes that is not fully appreciated by
current American policies.
   Current social policy directed toward children focuses on improving cognition. Yet more
than smarts is required for success in life. Gaps in both cognitive and noncognitive skills
between the advantaged and the disadvantaged emerge early and can be traced in part to
adverse early environments. A greater percentage of U.S. children is being born into adverse
environments.
   The problem of rising inequality and diminished productivity growth are not due mainly
to defects in public schools or to high college tuition rates. Late remediation strategies
designed to compensate for early disadvantage such as job training programs, high school
classroom size reductions, GED programs, convict rehabilitation programs and adult literacy
programs are not effective, at least as currently constituted. Remediation in the adolescent
years can repair the damage of adverse early environments, but it is costly. There is no
equity-efficiency tradeoff for programs targeted toward the early years of the lives of dis-
advantaged children. There is a substantial equity-efficiency tradeoff for programs targeted
toward the adolescent years of disadvantaged youth. Social policy should be directed toward
the malleable early years.
   A proper measure of disadvantage would be based on the quality of the parenting envi-
ronment. Any proposed programs should respect the primacy of the family. Policy proposals
should be culturally sensitive and recognize the diversity of values in American society. Ef-
fective strategies would engage the private sector to mobilize resources and produce a menu
of programs for parents to choose from.




                                             27
  A APPENDIX: SOME FACTS ABOUT HUMAN DEVELOPMENT AND A SIMPLE
                           MODEL THAT SUMMARIZES THE EVIDENCE


 A APPENDIX: SOME FACTS ABOUT HUMAN DEVELOPMENT AND A SIMPLE
                      MODEL THAT SUMMARIZES THE EVIDENCE

Any analysis of human development must reckon with nine facts. The first fact is that ability
matters. A large number of empirical studies document that cognitive ability is a powerful
determinant of wages, schooling, participation in crime and success in many aspects of social
and economic life (Heckman, 1995; Heckman, Stixrud, and Urzua, 2006; Murnane, Willett,
and Levy, 1995) including health (Auld and Sidhu, 2005).
   Second, abilities are multiple in nature. Noncognitive abilities (perseverance, motiva-
tion, time preference, risk aversion, self-esteem, self-control, preference for leisure) have
direct effects on wages (controlling for schooling), schooling, teenage pregnancy, smoking,
crime, performance on achievement tests and many other aspects of social and economic life
(Borghans, Duckworth, Heckman, and ter Weel, 2008; Bowles, Gintis, and Osborne, 2001;
Heckman, Stixrud, and Urzua, 2006). They affect health choices (see the evidence on time
preference and health in Grossman, 2000). Social and emotional factors affect adult health
(Ryff and Singer, 2005).
   Third, the nature versus nurture distinction, while traditional, is obsolete. The modern
literature on epigenetic expression and gene-environment interactions teaches us that the
sharp distinction between acquired skills and ability featured in the early human capital
literature is not tenable (Gluckman and Hanson, 2005; Pray, 2004; Rutter, 2006). Additive
“nature” and “nurture” models, while traditional and still used in many studies of heritabil-
ity and family influence in economics, mischaracterize gene-environment interactions. Recent
analyses in economics that break the “causes” of birthweight into environmental and genetic
components ignore the lessons of the recent literature. Genes and environment cannot be
meaningfully parsed by traditional linear models that assign unique variances to each com-
ponent. Abilities are produced, and gene expression is governed by environmental conditions
(Rutter, 2006; Rutter, Moffitt, and Caspi, 2006). Behaviors and abilities have both a genetic
and an acquired character. Measured abilities are the outcome of environmental influences,

                                             28
  A APPENDIX: SOME FACTS ABOUT HUMAN DEVELOPMENT AND A SIMPLE
                           MODEL THAT SUMMARIZES THE EVIDENCE


including in utero experiences, and also have genetic components.
   The literature on fetal programming emphasizes the importance of the environment in
causing gene expression that gives rise to susceptibility to different diseases, abilities and
personality characteristics. See Gluckman and Hanson (2005) for evidence on gene expres-
sion for disease and Rutter (2006) and Rutter, Moffitt, and Caspi (2006) for evidence on
environmental determinants of psychopathology and cognition. Some adverse early effects
are more easily compensated than other effects. The concepts of remediation and resilience
play prominent roles in economic and psychological analyses but are not featured in current
discussions in health economics.29
   Fourth, ability gaps between individuals and across socioeconomic groups open up at early
ages, for both cognitive and noncognitive skills. So do gaps in health status. We have illus-
trated this in the text of the paper. See Cunha and Heckman (2007b) and their appendices
for much further evidence on this point. Cunha, Heckman, Lochner, and Masterov (2006)
present numerous graphs showing the early divergence of child cognitive and noncognitive
skills by age across children of parents with different socioeconomic status which supple-
ment Figures 10, 11 and 12 in the text. Levels of child cognitive and noncognitive skills
are highly correlated with family background factors like parental education and maternal
ability, which, when statistically controlled for, largely eliminate these gaps (Carneiro and
Heckman, 2003; Cunha, Heckman, Lochner, and Masterov, 2006). Currie (2006) presents
parallel evidence on child health. Case, Lubotsky, and Paxson (2002) show that family in-
come gradients in child health status emerge early and widen with age (see Figure A.1).30
Experimental interventions with long term followup confirm that changing the resources
available to disadvantaged children improves adult outcomes on a number of dimensions.
See the studies surveyed in Cunha, Heckman, Lochner, and Masterov (2006) and Blau and
Currie (2006).
   Fifth, for both animal and human species, there is compelling evidence of critical and
sensitive periods in development. Some skills or traits are more readily acquired at certain


                                             29
   A APPENDIX: SOME FACTS ABOUT HUMAN DEVELOPMENT AND A SIMPLE
                            MODEL THAT SUMMARIZES THE EVIDENCE


stages of childhood than other traits (Knudsen, Heckman, Cameron, and Shonkoff, 2006).
For example, on average, if a second language is learned before age 12, the child speaks
it without an accent (Newport, 1990). If syntax and grammar are not acquired early on,
they appear to be very difficult to learn later on in life (Pinker, 1994). A child born with a
cataract on the eye will be blind for life if the cataract is not removed within the first year
of life.
    Different types of abilities appear to be manipulable at different ages. See the evidence
summarized in Borghans, Duckworth, Heckman et al. (2008). IQ scores become stable by
age 10 or so, suggesting a sensitive period for their formation below age 10. There is evi-
dence that adolescent interventions can affect noncognitive skills (Cunha, Heckman, Lochner,
and Masterov, 2006). This evidence is supported in the neuroscience that establishes the
malleability of the prefrontal cortex into the early 20s (Dahl, 2004). This is the region of
the brain that governs emotion and self-regulation. Rutter (2006) and Rutter, Moffitt, and
Caspi (2006) present comprehensive summaries of age-dependent epigenetic and other gene-
environment interactions for psychopathology — including aggression. Nagin and Tremblay
(1999) show that early aggression predicts adult levels of criminality and violence. Barker
and his coauthors show the powerful influence of the mother’s health, as determined by her
lifetime experiences on child outcomes.
    On average, the later remediation is given to a disadvantaged child, the less effective
it is. A study by O’Connor, Rutter, Beckett, Keaveney, Kreppner, and the English and
Romanian Adoptees Study Team (2000) and their coauthors examined adopted Romanian
infants reared in severely deprived orphanage environments before their adoption. As noted
in the text, the later an orphan was rescued from the social and emotional isolation of the
orphanage, the lower was his or her later cognitive performance. Secondary school classroom
remediation programs designed to combat early cognitive deficits have a poor track record.
    At historically funded levels, public job training programs and adult literacy and educa-
tional programs, like the GED, that attempt to remediate years of educational and emotional


                                              30
  A APPENDIX: SOME FACTS ABOUT HUMAN DEVELOPMENT AND A SIMPLE
                           MODEL THAT SUMMARIZES THE EVIDENCE


neglect among disadvantaged individuals, have a low economic return and produce meager
effects for most persons. Much evidence suggests that returns to adolescent education for
the most disadvantaged and less able are lower than the returns for the more advantaged
(Carneiro and Heckman, 2003; Carneiro, Heckman, and Vytlacil, 2006; Meghir and Palme,
2001).
   The available evidence suggests that for many skills and human capabilities, later inter-
vention for disadvantage may be possible, but that it is much more costly than early reme-
diation to achieve a given level of adult performance (Cunha and Heckman, 2006). Barker
and coauthors document that if intervention is administered in the first year of birth after
the fetal stage, compensation for undernutrition can produce greater risk for later diabetes
and heart disease (Eriksson, Forsen, Tuomilehto, Osmond, and Barker, 2001).31,32
   Sixth, despite the low returns to interventions targeted toward disadvantaged adolescents,
the empirical literature shows high economic returns for remedial investments in young dis-
advantaged children. See Barnett (2004), the evidence in Cunha, Heckman, Lochner, and
Masterov (2006) and the papers they cite. This finding is a consequence of dynamic com-
plementarity and self-productivity captured by the technology described in the next section.
The evidence for interventions in low birth weight children suggests that early interven-
tion can be effective (Brooks-Gunn, Cunha, Duncan, Heckman, and Sojourner, 2006). Olds
(2002) documents that perinatal interventions that reduce fetal exposure to alcohol and
nicotine have substantial long-term effects on cognition, socioemotional skills and on health
and have high economic returns.
   Seventh, if early investment in disadvantaged children is not followed up by later invest-
ment, its effect at later ages is lessened. Investments at different stages of the life cycle are
complementary and require follow up to be effective (Cunha and Heckman, 2006; 2007b).
   Eighth, the effects of credit constraints on a child’s adult outcomes depend on the age at
which they bind for the child’s family. Recent research summarized in Carneiro and Heckman
(2002; 2003); Cunha, Heckman, Lochner, and Masterov (2006) demonstrates the quantitative


                                               31
  A APPENDIX: SOME FACTS ABOUT HUMAN DEVELOPMENT AND A SIMPLE
                           MODEL THAT SUMMARIZES THE EVIDENCE


insignificance of family credit constraints in a child’s college-going years in explaining a child’s
enrollment in college. Controlling for cognitive ability, under policies currently in place in
American society, family income during a child’s college-going years plays only a minor role in
determining socioeconomic differences in college participation, although much public policy
is predicated on precisely the opposite point of view. As noted in the text, controlling for
ability, minorities are more likely to attend college than others despite their lower family
incomes (see Cameron and Heckman (2001), and the references they cite). Augmenting
family income or reducing college tuition at the stage of the life cycle when a child goes
to college does not go far in compensating for low levels of early investment. It is the
shortfall in adolescent abilities and motivations that account for minority college enrollment
gaps. The gaps in health status by income evident in Figure A.1 likely diminish once early
environmental factors are controlled for, but this remains to be rigorously established.
   Credit constraints operating in the early years have lasting effects on adult ability and
schooling outcomes (Dahl and Lochner, 2005; Duncan, Kalil, and Ziol-Guest, 2007; Duncan
and Brooks-Gunn, 1997; Morris, Duncan, and Clark-Kauffman, 2005). Evidence on the
persistent effects of early malnutrition in utero and in the early years on adult health is
consistent with this evidence (Fogel, 1997; 2004; Gluckman and Hanson, 2005).
   Ninth, socioemotional (noncognitive) skills foster cognitive skills and are an important
product of successful families and successful interventions in disadvantaged families. They
also promote healthy behaviors. Emotionally nurturing environments produce more capable
learners. The Perry Preschool Program, which was evaluated by random assignment, did
not boost participant adult IQ but enhanced the performance of participants on a number of
dimensions, including scores on achievement tests, employment and reduced participation in
a variety of social pathologies. See Schweinhart, Montie, Xiang, Barnett, Belfield, and Nores
(2005) and the figures and tables on the Perry program posted at the website for Cunha and
Heckman (2007b).
   Perseverance and motivation are also important factors in explaining compliance with


                                                32
  A APPENDIX: SOME FACTS ABOUT HUMAN DEVELOPMENT AND A SIMPLE
                           MODEL THAT SUMMARIZES THE EVIDENCE


medical protocols. A large body of evidence suggests that a person’s mood and attitudes
as well as his social environment account, in part, for the ability of persons to ward off
and overcome various diseases and to age gracefully (Ryff and Singer, 2005). The evidence
that personality traits affect educational attainment (Heckman, Stixrud, and Urzua, 2006)
helps to explain how education, as a proxy, helps reduce disease gradients by socioeconomic
class, as reported by Smith (2007). Figure A.2 shows how greater cognitive and noncognitive
skills reduce participation in smoking, a major health hazard (Heckman, Stixrud, and Urzua,
2006).


A Model of Investment in Human Capabilities

A model of capability formation unifies this evidence. Agents are assumed to possess a
vector of capabilities at each age including pure cognitive abilities (e.g. IQ), noncognitive
abilities (patience, self control, temperament, risk aversion, time preference), and health
stocks. Health stocks include propensities for mortality and morbidity, including infant
mortality. All capabilities are produced by investment, environment and genes. These
capabilities are used with different weights in different tasks in the labor market and in
social life more generally.33
   The capability formation process is governed by a multistage technology. Each stage
corresponds to a period in the life cycle of a child. While the recent child development liter-
ature in economics recognizes stages of development (Cunha and Heckman, 2007b; Cunha,
Heckman, Lochner, and Masterov, 2006), the early literature on the economics of child de-
velopment and the current literature on the economics of health do not (Becker and Tomes,
1986; Grossman, 2000). In the developmental approach, inputs or investments at each stage
produce outputs at the next stage. Qualitatively different inputs can be used at different
stages and the technologies can be different at different stages of child development.
   The investment model used by Grossman (1972; 2000) focuses on adult investments
in health where time and its opportunity cost play important roles. For investments in

                                              33
  A APPENDIX: SOME FACTS ABOUT HUMAN DEVELOPMENT AND A SIMPLE
                           MODEL THAT SUMMARIZES THE EVIDENCE


childhood health, parents make decisions and child opportunity costs are less relevant (Cunha
and Heckman, 2007b). The outputs at each stage in our technology are the changes in
capability at that stage. Some stages of the technology may be more productive in producing
some capabilities than other stages, and some inputs may be more productive at some stages
than at other stages. The stages that are more effective in producing certain capabilities
are called “sensitive periods” for the acquisition of those capabilities. If one stage alone is
effective in producing a capability, it is called a “critical period” for that capability. See
Cunha and Heckman (2007b).
   The capabilities produced at one stage augment the capabilities attained at later stages.
This effect is termed self-productivity. It embodies the ideas that capabilities are self-
reinforcing and cross-fertilizing and that the effects of investment persist. For example,
emotional security fosters child exploration and more vigorous learning of cognitive skills.
This has been found in animal species (Cameron, 2004; Meaney, 2001; Suomi, 1999) and
in humans (see Duncan, Dowsett, Claessens, Magnuson, Huston, Klebanov, Pagani, Fein-
stein, Engel, Brooks-Gunn, Sexton, Duckworth, and Japeli, 2007; Raver, Garner, and Smith-
Donald, 2007), interpreting the ability of a child to pay attention as a socioemotional skill.
A higher stock of cognitive skill in one period raises the stock of next period cognitive skills.
Higher levels of self-regulation and conscientiousness reduce health risks and avoid accidents.
Higher levels of health promote learning. A second key feature of capability formation is
dynamic complementarity. Capabilities produced at one stage of the life cycle raise the pro-
ductivity of investment at subsequent stages. In a multistage technology, complementarity
implies that levels of investments in capabilities at different ages bolster each other. They
are synergistic. Complementarity also implies that early investment should be followed up
by later investment in order for the early investment to be productive. Together, dynamic
complementarity and self-productivity produce multiplier effects which are the mechanisms
through which capabilities beget capabilities. This dynamic process can account for the
emergence of socioeconomic differentials in health documented by Smith (2007) and Case,


                                               34
   A APPENDIX: SOME FACTS ABOUT HUMAN DEVELOPMENT AND A SIMPLE
                            MODEL THAT SUMMARIZES THE EVIDENCE


Lubotsky, and Paxson (2002).
   Dynamic complementarity and self-productivity imply an equity-efficiency trade-off for
late child investments but not for early investments (Cunha and Heckman, 2007b). These
features of the technology of capability formation have consequences for the design and
evaluation of public policies toward families. In particular, they show why the returns
to late childhood investment and remediation for young adolescents from disadvantaged
backgrounds are so low for many investments, while the returns to early investment in
children from disadvantaged environments are so high.
   Cunha and Heckman (2007b) and Carneiro, Cunha, and Heckman (2003) formalize these
concepts in an overlapping generations model. There is evidence on intergenerational link-
ages in health, personality and skill formation (Bowles, Gintis, and Osborne Groves, 2005;
Carneiro, Cunha, and Heckman, 2003; Currie, 2006). Consider a household which consists
of an adult parent and his/her child. Take parental stocks of skills as given. In a proper
overlapping generations model, as developed in Carneiro, Cunha, and Heckman (2003) and
the website for Cunha and Heckman (2007b), investment in parents is modeled, explaining
the intergenerational transmission of health, personality and cognition.
   Altruistic parents invest in their children. Let It denote parental investments in child
capabilities when the child is t years-old, where t = 1, 2, . . . , T . The first stage can be in utero
investment. The output of the investment process is a skill vector. The parent is assumed to
fully control the investments in the skills of the child, whereas in reality, as a child matures, he
gains control over the investment process.34 Thus, children with greater emotional skills and
conscientiousness are less likely to be involved in risky teenage activities (see Figure A.2 and
the evidence in Heckman, Stixrud, and Urzua (2006)). These capabilities create a platform
of adult capabilities and preferences which affect adult choices. Government inputs (e.g.,
publicly provided schooling) can be modeled as a component of It . It would be desirable
to merge the model of parental investment with the model of adult investment, but that is
beyond the scope of this Appendix.


                                                  35
   A APPENDIX: SOME FACTS ABOUT HUMAN DEVELOPMENT AND A SIMPLE
                            MODEL THAT SUMMARIZES THE EVIDENCE


   At conception, the child receives genetic and environmental initial conditions θ1 . As
documented by Gluckman and Hanson (2005) and Rutter (2006), gene expression is triggered
by environmental conditions. Let h denote parental capabilities (e.g., IQ, genes, education,
income, etc.). These are products of their own parents’ investments and genes. At each stage
t, let θt denote the vector of capabilities. The technology of capability production when the
child is t years old is
                                         θt+1 = ft (h, θt , It ) ,                               (1)

for t = 1, 2, . . . , T .35 More investment produces more capabilities (∂ft /∂It > 0).
   Substituting in (1) for θt , θt−1 ,. . . , repeatedly, one can rewrite the stock of capabilities
at stage t + 1, θt+1 , as a function of all past investments:


                           θt+1 = mt (h, θ1 , I1 , . . . , It ) , t = 1, . . . , T.              (2)


Dynamic complementarity arises when ∂ 2 ft (h, θt , It ) /∂θt ∂It0 > 0, i.e., when stocks of capa-
bilities acquired by period t − 1 (θt ) make investment in period t (It ) more productive. Such
complementarity explains why returns to educational investments are higher at later stages
of the child’s life cycle for more able, more healthy and more motivated children (those with
higher θt ). Students with greater early capabilities (cognitive, noncognitive and health) are
more efficient in later learning of both cognitive and noncognitive skills and in acquiring
stocks of health capital. The evidence from the early intervention literature suggests that
the enriched early preschool environments provided by the Abecedarian, Perry and CPC
interventions promote greater efficiency in learning in school and reduce problem behaviors
(Blau and Currie, 2006; Cunha, Heckman, Lochner, and Masterov, 2006). Enriched early
environments produce healthier babies (Bhargava, 2008; Gluckman and Hanson, 2005).
   Self-productivity arises when ∂ft (h, θt , It ) /∂θt > 0, i.e., when higher levels of capabilities
in one period create higher levels of capabilities in the next period. For capability vectors,
this includes own and cross effects. The joint effects of self-productivity and dynamic com-


                                                     36
  A APPENDIX: SOME FACTS ABOUT HUMAN DEVELOPMENT AND A SIMPLE
                           MODEL THAT SUMMARIZES THE EVIDENCE


plementarity help to explain the high productivity of investment in disadvantaged young
children but the lower return to investment in disadvantaged adolescent children for whom
the stock of capabilities is low and hence the complementarity effect is lower.
   This technology explains the evidence that the ability of the child to pay attention affects
subsequent academic achievement. Healthier children are better learners (Currie, 2006). This
technology also captures the critical and sensitive periods in humans and animals documented
for a number of aspects of development (Knudsen, Heckman, Cameron, and Shonkoff, 2006).
   Suppose for analytical simplicity that there are two stages of childhood, (T = 2). In
reality, there are many stages in childhood, including preconception and in utero stages.
Assume for expositional simplicity that θ1 , I1 , I2 are scalars.36 The adult stock of capability,
h0 (= θ3 ), is a function of parental characteristics, initial conditions and investments during
childhood I1 and I2 :
                                       h0 = m2 (h, θ1 , I1 , I2 ) .                           (3)

   The conventional literature in economics (Becker and Tomes, 1986) assumes only one
period of childhood when it addresses childhood at all. It does not distinguish between early
investment and late investment. A general technology that captures a variety of interesting
special cases of (3) is a CES production function

                                            h                         i1/φ 
                           0                         φ               φ
                         h = m2       h, θ1 , γ (I1 ) + (1 − γ) (I2 )                         (4)


for φ ≤ 1 and 0 ≤ γ ≤ 1, where φ is a measure of how well late inputs substitute for
early inputs. 1/(1 − φ) is called an elasticity of substitution. When φ = 1, I1 and I2 are
perfect substitutes. When φ = −∞, I1 and I2 are perfect complements. The parameter φ
governs how easy it is to compensate for low levels of stage 1 investment in producing later
adult capability. See the analysis of this model in Cunha and Heckman (2007b); Cunha,
Heckman, Lochner, and Masterov (2006). The two polar cases of perfect substitutes and
perfect investments are worth exploring in greater detail.


                                                   37
  A APPENDIX: SOME FACTS ABOUT HUMAN DEVELOPMENT AND A SIMPLE
                           MODEL THAT SUMMARIZES THE EVIDENCE


Case 1

Assume φ = 1:
                                     h = γI1 + (1 − γ)I2 .

This extreme case states that remediation is always possible. However, it may not be cost
effective. This technology is at odds with the evidence from neuroscience, developmental
psychology and economics, summarized in the first section of this Appendix. The polar
opposite case is discussed next.


Case 2

Assume φ → −∞:
                                       h = min{I1 , I2 }.

In this case, if investments in period one are very low, no remediation is possible. Adult
human capital (and consequently adult success) is defined in the first periods of the life of
an individual.
   More generally, when φ is small, low levels of early investment I1 are not easily reme-
diated by later investment I2 . The other face of CES complementarity is that when φ is
small, high early investment should be followed with high late investment if the early in-
vestment is to be harvested. In the extreme case when φ → −∞, (4) converges to a model
of perfect complements. This technology explains why returns to education are low in the
adolescent years for disadvantaged (low h, low I1 , low θ2 ) adolescents but are high in the
early years. Without the proper foundation for learning (high levels of θ2 ) in technology (1),
adolescent interventions have low returns. Bad initial conditions that create physical and
mental impairments produce persistently less healthy adults (Barker, 1998; Eriksson, Forsen,
Tuomilehto, Osmond, and Barker, 2001; Gluckman and Hanson, 2005).
   The CES share parameter γ is a capability multiplier. It captures the productivity of early


                                              38
  A APPENDIX: SOME FACTS ABOUT HUMAN DEVELOPMENT AND A SIMPLE
                           MODEL THAT SUMMARIZES THE EVIDENCE


investment not only in directly boosting h0 (through self-productivity) but also in raising
the productivity of I2 by increasing θ2 through first-period investments. Thus I1 directly
increases θ2 which in turn affects the productivity of I2 in forming h0 . γ captures the net
effect of I1 on h0 through both self-productivity and direct complementarity. In a multiperiod
model, the multiplier could vary across stages. The capability multiplier helps to explain
why capabilities foster capabilities.


The Optimal Lifecycle Profile of Capability Investments

Using technology (4), Cunha and Heckman (2007b) determine how the ratio of early to
late investments varies as a function of φ and γ as a consequence of parental choices under
different market arrangements concerning lending and borrowing. It is fruitful to review
their analysis of the case without binding credit constraints.
   When φ = 1, so early and late investment are perfect CES substitutes, it is always
possible to remediate early disadvantage. However, it is not always economically feasible
to do so. Assume that the price of early investment is $1. The price of late investment is
$1/(1 + r), where r is the interest rate and 1/(1 + r) is a discount factor. The amount of
human capital (including health capital) produced from one unit of I1 is γ, while $ (1 + r)
of I2 produces (1 + r) (1 − γ) units of human capital. Two forces act in opposite directions.
High productivity of initial investment (as captured by the skill multiplier γ) drives the
parent toward making early investments. The interest rate drives the parent to invest late.
It is optimal to invest early if γ > (1 − γ) (1 + r). Epidemiologists are prone to neglect the
costs of remediation when they demonstrate its possibilities.
   As φ → −∞, the optimal investment strategy sets I1 = I2 . In this case, investment
in the young is essential. However, later investment is needed to harvest early investment.
On efficiency grounds, early disadvantages should be perpetuated, and compensatory invest-
ments at later ages are economically inefficient. In the general case where −∞ < φ < 1, the



                                             39
  A APPENDIX: SOME FACTS ABOUT HUMAN DEVELOPMENT AND A SIMPLE
                           MODEL THAT SUMMARIZES THE EVIDENCE


optimal ratio of early to late investment is

                                                             1
                                                            1−φ
                                    I1           γ
                                       =                         .                          (5)
                                    I2     (1 − γ) (1 + r)

Figure A.3 plots the ratio of early to late investment as a function of the skill multiplier γ
under different values of the complementarity parameter φ, assuming r = 0.
   When CES complementarity is high, the skill multiplier γ plays a limited role in shaping
the optimal ratio of early to late investment. High early investment should be followed
by high late investment. As the degree of CES complementarity decreases, the role of the
capability multiplier increases, and the higher the multiplier, the more investment should be
concentrated in the early ages. Cunha and Heckman (2007b) analyze the effects of alternative
credit market arrangements on optimal investment.


Cognitive, Noncognitive and Health Formation

This framework readily accommodates capability vectors. Child development is not just
about cognitive skill formation although a lot of public policy analysis focuses solely on
cognitive test scores to the exclusion of physical health and personality factors. Let θt denote
the vector of capabilities, i.e., cognitive skills, noncognitive skills and health capabilities:
                    
θt = θtC , θtN , θtH . Let It denote the vector of investment in cognitive, noncognitive and
                                                               
health capabilities: It = ItC , ItN , ItH . Use h = hC , hN , hH to denote parental cognitive,
noncognitive and health capabilities. At each stage t, one can define a recursive technology
for cognitive skills (k = C), noncognitive skills, (k = N ), and health (k = H):


                     k
                         = ftk θtC , θtN , θtH , Itk , hC , hN , hH , k ∈ {C, N, H}.
                                                                   
                    θt+1                                                                    (6)


Technology (6) allows for cross-productivity effects: cognitive skills may affect the accumu-
lation of noncognitive skills and vice versa. Health capabilities facilitate the accumulation



                                                  40
  A APPENDIX: SOME FACTS ABOUT HUMAN DEVELOPMENT AND A SIMPLE
                           MODEL THAT SUMMARIZES THE EVIDENCE


of cognitive and noncognitive skills. These technologies also allow for critical and sensitive
periods to differ across different capability investments. Cognitive and noncognitive skills
and health capabilities determine costs of effort, time preference and risk aversion parame-
ters. By investment choices, parents shape preferences that govern the choices of children in
a variety of dimensions.
   Accounting for preference formation explains the success of many early childhood pro-
grams targeted to disadvantaged children which do not permanently raise IQ, but which
permanently boost social performance.37 Conscientiousness, farsightedness, and persistence,
as well as other personality features, affect participation in risky activities, including smok-
ing (Borghans, Duckworth, Heckman, and ter Weel, 2008; Heckman, Stixrud, and Urzua,
2006).


Estimating the Technology: Accounting for the Proxy Nature of Inputs and Outputs

Cunha and Heckman (2008a) and Cunha, Heckman, and Schennach (2007) estimate versions
of technology (6) and show that many of the proxies for investment and outcomes that
are used in the child development and health literatures are only crude proxies for the
true variables they proxy. Systematically accounting for measurement error greatly affects
estimates of technologies of skill formation and other behavioral relationships. Smoking is an
error-laden proxy for noncognitive skill (Heckman, Stixrud, and Urzua, 2006). Many papers
in health economics rely on smoking (and other behaviors) as proxies for time preference
(see the survey in Grossman (2000)). The empirical literature on child development suggests
that accounting for the proxy nature of smoking and adjusting for measurement error will
improve the explanatory power and interpretability of the estimates of time preference on
health choices.




                                              41
  A APPENDIX: SOME FACTS ABOUT HUMAN DEVELOPMENT AND A SIMPLE
                           MODEL THAT SUMMARIZES THE EVIDENCE


Summary of the Appendix

Simple economic models show the importance of accounting for early and late investments
and for examining the technological possibilities and economic costs of late remediation
for early environmental influence. Frameworks that account for the proxy nature of the
measurements of inputs and outputs hold much promise, both in health economics and in
the economics of child development.




                                          42
REFERENCES                                                                REFERENCES


                                       References

Aaronson, D. and D. Sullivan. “Growth in Worker Quality.” Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago
  Economic Perspectives, 25(4), December 2001, 53–74.

Auld, M. C. and N. Sidhu. “Schooling, Cognitive Ability and Health.” Health Economics,
  14(10), October 2005, 1019–1034.

Autor, D. H., L. F. Katz, and M. S. Kearney. “Trends In U.S. Wage Inequality: Re-Assessing
  The Revisionists.” Working Paper 11627, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2005.

Barker, D. J. P. Mothers, Babies and Health in Later Life. 2nd ed. Edinburgh: Churchill
  Livingstone, 1998.

Barnett, W. S. “Benefit-Cost Analysis of Preschool Education.” PowerPoint presenta-
  tion, http://nieer.org/resources/files/BarnettBenefits.ppt, November 2004. URL http:
  //nieer.org/resources/files/BarnettBenefits.ppt.

Becker, G. S. and N. Tomes. “Human Capital and the Rise and Fall of Families.” Journal
  of Labor Economics, 4(3, Part 2), July 1986, S1–S39.

Belley, P. and L. Lochner. “The Changing Role of Family Income and Ability in Determining
  Educational Achievement.” Journal of Human Capital, 1(1), December 2007, 37–89.

Bhargava, A. Food, Economics and Health. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2008.

Bianchi, S. M., J. P. Robinson, and M. A. Milkie. Changing Rhythms Of American Family
  Life. New York, NY: Russell Sage Foundation, 2006.

Blau, D. and J. Currie. “Preschool, Daycare, and Afterschool Care: Who’s Minding the
  Kids?”   In Handbook of the Economics of Education, Handbooks in Economics, vol. 2,
  edited by E. Hanushek and F. Welch, chap. 20. Amsterdam: North-Holland, 2006, 1163–
  1278.


                                           43
REFERENCES                                                               REFERENCES


Borghans, L., A. L. Duckworth, J. J. Heckman, and B. ter Weel. “The Economics and
  Psychology of Personality Traits.” Journal of Human Resources, Fall 2008.

Borghans, L., B. ter Weel, and B. A. Weinberg. “Interpersonal Styles and Labor Market
  Outcomes.” Working Paper 12846, NBER, January 2007.

Bowles, S., H. Gintis, and M. Osborne. “The Determinants of Earnings: A Behavioral
  Approach.” Journal of Economic Literature, 39(4), December 2001, 1137–1176.

Bowles, S., H. Gintis, and M. Osborne Groves, eds. Unequal Chances: Family Background
  and Economic Success. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2005.

Brooks-Gunn, J., F. Cunha, G. Duncan, J. J. Heckman, and A. Sojourner. “A Reanalysis
  of the IHDP Program.”, 2006. Unpublished manuscript, Infant Health and Development
  Program, Northwestern University.

Cameron, J. “Evidence For An Early Sensitive Period For The Development Of Brain
  Systems Underlying Social Affiliative Behavior.”, 2004. Unpublished manuscript, Oregon
  National Primate Research Center.

Cameron, S. V. and J. J. Heckman. “The Nonequivalence of High School Equivalents.”
  Journal of Labor Economics, 11(1, Part 1), January 1993, 1–47.

Cameron, S. V. and J. J. Heckman. “The Dynamics of Educational Attainment for Black,
  Hispanic, and White Males.” Journal of Political Economy, 109(3), June 2001, 455–99.

Card, D. and T. Lemieux. “Dropout and Enrollment Trends in the Post-War Period: What
  Went Wrong in the 1970s?” In Risky Behavior Among Youths : An Economic Analysis,
  edited by J. Gruber. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2001.

Carneiro, P., F. Cunha, and J. J. Heckman. “Interpreting the Evidence of Family Influence
  on Child Development.” In The Economics of Early Childhood Development: Lessons



                                           44
REFERENCES                                                                     REFERENCES


  for Economic Policy. Minneapolis, Minnesota: The Federal Reserve Bank, 2003. Pre-
  sented at ”The Economics of Early Childhood Development: Lessons for Economic Policy
  Conference,” Minneapolis Federal Reserve Bank, Minneapolis, MN. October 17, 2003.

Carneiro, P. and J. J. Heckman. “The Evidence on Credit Constraints in Post-Secondary
  Schooling.” Economic Journal, 112(482), October 2002, 705–734.

Carneiro, P. and J. J. Heckman. “Human Capital Policy.” In Inequality in America: What
  Role for Human Capital Policies?, edited by J. J. Heckman, A. B. Krueger, and B. M.
  Friedman. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2003, 77–239.

Carneiro, P., J. J. Heckman, and E. J. Vytlacil. “Estimating Marginal and Average Returns
  to Education.”, 2006. Under revision.

Case, A., D. Lubotsky, and C. Paxson. “Economic Status and Health in Childhood: The
  Origins of the Gradient.” American Economic Review, 92(5), December 2002, 1308–1334.

Caspi, A., J. McClay, T. E. Moffitt, J. Mill, J. Martin, I. W. Craig, A. Taylor, and R. Poulton.
  “Role of Genotype in the Cycle of Violence in Maltreated Children.” Science, 297(5582),
  August 2002, 851–854.

Caspi, A., K. Sugden, T. E. Moffitt, A. Taylor, I. W. Craig, H. Harrington, J. McClay,
  J. Mill, J. Martin, A. Braithwaite, and R. Poulton. “Influence of Life Stress on Depression:
  Moderation by a Polymorphism in the 5-HTT Gene.” Science, 301(5631), July 18 2003,
  386–389.

Caspi, A., B. Williams, J. Kim-Cohen, I. W. Craig, B. J. Milne, R. Poulton, L. C. Schalkwyk,
  A. Taylor, H. Werts, and T. E. Moffitt. “Moderation of breastfeeding effects on the IQ
  by genetic variation in fatty acid metabolism.” Proceedings of the National Academy of
  Sciences of the United States of America, 104(47), November 20 2007, 18860–18865.




                                              45
REFERENCES                                                                 REFERENCES


Champagne, F. A. and J. P. Curley. “How Social Experiences Influence the Brain.” Current
  Opinion in Neurobiology, 15, 2005, 704–709.

Champagne, F. A., I. C. G. Weaver, J. Diorio, S. Dymov, M. Szyf, and M. J. Meaney.
  “Maternal care associated with methylation of the estrogen receptor-alpha1b promoter
  and estrogen receptor-alpha expression in the medial preoptic area of female offspring.”
  Endocrinology, 147(6), June 2006, 2909–2915.

Charney, D. S. “Psychobiological Mechanisms of Resilience and Vulnerability: Implications
  for Successful Adaptation to Extreme Stress.” American Journal of Psychiatry, 161(2),
  February 2004, 195–216.

Cole, S. W., L. C. Hawkley, J. M. Arevalo, C. Y. Sung, R. M. Rose, and J. T. Cacioppo. “So-
  cial regulation of gene expression in human leukocytes.” Genome Biology, 8(9), September
  13 2007, R189.

Costello, E. J., S. N. Compton, G. Keeler, and A. Angold. “Relationships between poverty
  and psychopathology: a natural experiment.” JAMA : the journal of the American Medical
  Association, 290(15), October 15 2003, 2023–2029.

Cunha, F. and J. J. Heckman. “Investing in our Young People.”, 2006. Unpublished
  manuscript, University of Chicago, Department of Economics.

Cunha, F. and J. J. Heckman. “The Evolution of Uncertainty in Labor Earnings in the U.S.
  Economy.”, 2007a. Unpublished manuscript, University of Chicago. Under revision.

Cunha, F. and J. J. Heckman. “The Technology of Skill Formation.” American Economic
  Review, 97(2), May 2007b, 31–47.

Cunha, F. and J. J. Heckman. “Formulating, Identifying and Estimating the Technology of
  Cognitive and Noncognitive Skill Formation.” Journal of Human Resources, 2008a.




                                            46
REFERENCES                                                                REFERENCES


Cunha, F. and J. J. Heckman. “A New Framework for the Analysis of Inequality.” Macroe-
  conomic Dynamics, 2008b, forthcoming.

Cunha, F., J. J. Heckman, L. J. Lochner, and D. V. Masterov. “Interpreting the Evidence
  on Life Cycle Skill Formation.” In Handbook of the Economics of Education, edited by
  E. A. Hanushek and F. Welch, chap. 12. Amsterdam: North-Holland, 2006, 697–812.

Cunha, F., J. J. Heckman, and S. M. Schennach. “Estimating the Technology of Cog-
  nitive and Noncognitive Skill Formation.”, 2007. Unpublished manuscript, University of
  Chicago, Department of Economics. Presented at the Yale Conference on Macro and Labor
  Economics, May 5–7, 2006. Under revision, Econometrica.

Currie, J. “Healthy, Wealthy, and Wise? The Link Between SES, Children’s Health, and
  Human Capital Development.”, 2006. Presented at the IZA Seminar, April 7, 2006. Bonn,
  Germany. Forthcoming Journal of Economic Literature.

Curtis, W. J. and D. Cicchetti. “Moving Research on Resilience into the 21st Century:
  Theoretical and Methodological Considerations in Examining the Biological Contributors
  to Resilience.” Development and Psychopathology, 15(3), August 2003, 773–810.

Dahl, G. B. and L. J. Lochner. “The Impact of Family Income on Child Achievement.”
  Working Paper 11279, NBER, April 2005. American Economic Review, in press.

Dahl, R. E. “Adolescent Brain Development: A Period of Vulnerabilities and Opportunities.”
  In Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, edited by R. E. Dahl and L. P. Spear.
  New York: New York Academy of Sciences, 2004, 1–22.

Delong, J. B., L. Katz, and C. Goldin. “Sustaining American Economic Growth.” In Agenda
  for the Nation, edited by H. Aaron, J. Lindsay, and P. Nivola. Washington, DC: Brookings
  Institution Press, 2003.




                                           47
REFERENCES                                                                 REFERENCES


Duncan, G., A. Kalil, and K. Ziol-Guest. “Economic Costs of Early Childhood Poverty.”,
  2007. Unpublished manuscript, Northwestern University.

Duncan, G. J. and J. Brooks-Gunn. “Income Effects Across the Life Span: Integration
  and Interpretation.” In Consequences of Growing Up Poor, edited by G. Duncan and
  J. Brooks-Gunn. New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 1997, 596–610.

Duncan, G. J., C. J. Dowsett, A. Claessens, K. Magnuson, A. C. Huston, P. Klebanov, L. Pa-
  gani, L. Feinstein, M. Engel, J. Brooks-Gunn, H. Sexton, K. Duckworth, and C. Japeli.
  “School Readiness and Later Achievement.” Developmental Psychology, 2007. In press.

Ellwood, D. T. “The Sputtering Labor Force of the Twenty-First Century: Can Social
  Policy Help?” In The Roaring Nineties: Can Full Employment Be Sustained?, edited by
  A. Krueger and R. Solow. New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 2001, 421–489.

Eriksson, J. G., T. Forsen, J. Tuomilehto, C. Osmond, and D. J. P. Barker. “Early Growth
  and Coronary Heart Disease in Later Life: Longitudinal Study.” British Medical Journal,
  322(7292), April 2001, 949–953.

Felitti, V. J. and R. F. Anda. The Adverse Childhood Experiences (ACE) Study. Centers for
  Disease Control and Kaiser Permanente, 2005.

Fogel, R. W. “New Findings on Secular Trends in Nutrition and Mortality: Some Implica-
  tions for Population Theory.” In Handbook of Population and Family Economics, vol. 1A,
  edited by M. R. Rosenzweig and O. Stark. Amsterdam: Elsevier Science, 1997, 433–481.

Fogel, R. W. The Escape from Hunger and Premature Death, 1700-2100: Europe, America
  and the Third World. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004.

Fraga, M. F., E. Ballestar, M. F. Paz, S. Ropero, F. Setien, M. L. Ballestar, D. Heine-
  Suer, J. C. Cigudosa, M. Urioste, J. Benitez, M. Boix-Chornet, A. Sanchez-Aguilera,
  C. Ling, E. Carlsson, P. Poulsen, A. Vaag, Z. Stephan, T. D. Spector, Y.-Z. Wu, C. Plass,


                                            48
REFERENCES                                                                  REFERENCES


  and M. Esteller. “Epigenetic differences arise during the lifetime of monozygotic twins.”
  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 102(30),
  July 26 2005, 10604–10609.

Francesconi, M. “Adult Outcomes for Children of Teenage Mothers.” Discussion Paper 2778,
  IZA, May 2007. URL http://ssrn.com/abstract=986353.

Freud, S. A general introduction to psychoanalysis. New York: Permabooks, 1935. Autho-
  rized English Translation of the revised edition by John Reviere, with a preface by Earnest
  Jones and G. Stanley Hall.

Gluckman, P. D. and M. Hanson. The Fetal Matrix: Evolution, Development, and Disease.
  Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2005.

Goldin, C., L. F. Katz, and I. Kuziemko. “The Homecoming of American College Women:
  The Reversal of the College Gender Gap.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 20(4), Fall
  2006, 133–156.

Grossman, M. “On the Concept of Health Capital and the Demand for Health.” Journal of
  Political Economy, 80(2), March-April 1972, 223–255.

Grossman, M. “The Human Capital Model.” In Handbook of Health Economics, vol. 1,
  edited by A. J. Culyer and J. P. Newhouse. Amsterdam: Elsevier, 2000, 347–408.

Hansen, K. T., J. J. Heckman, and K. J. Mullen. “The Effect of Schooling and Ability on
  Achievement Test Scores.” Journal of Econometrics, 121(1-2), July–August 2004, 39–98.

Harris, J. R., ed. Twin Research and Human Genetics: Genetics, Social Behaviors, Social
  Environments and Aging, vol. 10. Australian Academic Press, 2007.

Harris, T., G. W. Brown, and A. Bifulco. “Loss of parent in childhood and adult psychiatric
  disorder: The role of lack of adequate parental care.” Psychological Medicine, 16(3),
  August 1986, 641–659.

                                             49
REFERENCES                                                                 REFERENCES


Hart, B. and T. R. Risley. “American parenting of language-learning children: Persisting
  differences in family-child interactions observed in natural home environments.” Develop-
  mental Psychology, 28(6), November 1992, 1096–1105.

Hart, B. and T. R. Risley. Meaningful differences in the everyday experience of young
  American children. Baltimore, MD: P.H. Brookes, 1995.

Heckman, J. J. “Lessons from The Bell Curve.” Journal of Political Economy, 103(5),
  October 1995, 1091–1120.

Heckman, J. J. “The Economics, Technology and Neuroscience of Human Capability Forma-
  tion.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 104(3), August 2007, 13250–13255.

Heckman, J. J., J. Hsee, and Y. Rubinstein. “The GED is a ’Mixed Signal’: The Effect
  of Cognitive and Noncognitive Skills on Human Capital and Labor Market Outcomes.”,
  2001. Unpublished working paper, University of Chicago, Department of Economics.

Heckman, J. J. and P. A. LaFontaine. “Bias Corrected Estimates of GED Returns.” Journal
  of Labor Economics, 24(3), July 2006, 661–700.

Heckman, J. J. and P. A. LaFontaine. “The American High School Graduation Rate: Trends
  and Levels.”, 2008a. Unpublished manuscript, University of Chicago, Department of Eco-
  nomics.

Heckman, J. J. and P. A. LaFontaine. “Testing the Test: What the GED Reveals and
  Conceals.”, 2008b. Unpublished book manuscript, University of Chicago, Department of
  Economics.

Heckman, J. J. and L. J. Lochner. “Rethinking Myths About Education and Training: Un-
  derstanding the Sources of Skill Formation in a Modern Economy.” In Securing the Future:
  Investing in Children from Birth to College, edited by S. Danziger and J. Waldfogel. New
  York: Russell Sage Foundation, 2000.


                                            50
REFERENCES                                                               REFERENCES


Heckman, J. J., L. J. Lochner, and P. E. Todd. “Earnings Functions and Rates of Return.”
  Journal of Human Capital, 2(1), Spring 2008, 1–31.

Heckman, J. J. and D. V. Masterov. “The Productivity Argument for Investing in Young
  Children.” Review of Agricultural Economics, 29(3), 2007, 446–493.

Heckman, J. J., S. H. Moon, R. R. Pinto, P. Savelyev, and A. Yavitz. “The Rate of Return
  to the Perry Preschool Program.”, 2007. Unpublished manuscript, University of Chicago,
  Department of Economics.

Heckman, J. J., S. H. Moon, R. R. Pinto, P. Savelyev, and A. Yavitz. “The Impact of
  the Perry Preschool Program on Noncognitive Skills of Participants.”, 2008. Unpublished
  manuscript, University of Chicago, Department of Economics.

Heckman, J. J. and Y. Rubinstein. “The Importance of Noncognitive Skills: Lessons from
  the GED Testing Program.” American Economic Review, 91(2), May 2001, 145–149.

Heckman, J. J., J. Stixrud, and S. Urzua. “The Effects of Cognitive and Noncognitive
  Abilities on Labor Market Outcomes and Social Behavior.” Journal of Labor Economics,
  24(3), July 2006, 411–482.

Herrnstein, R. J. and C. A. Murray. The Bell Curve: Intelligence and Class Structure in
  American Life. New York: Free Press, 1994.

Hunt, J. “Do Teen Births Keep American Crime High?” Journal of Law and Economics,
  49(2), October 2006, 533–566.

Huttenlocher, J., W. Haight, A. Bryk, M. Seltzer, and T. Lyons. “Early vocabulary growth:
  Relation to language input and gender.” Developmental Psychology, 27(2), March 1991,
  236–248.

Huttenlocher, J., M. Vasilyeva, H. R. Waterfall, J. L. Vevea, and L. V. Hedges. “The



                                           51
REFERENCES                                                                  REFERENCES


  varieties of speech to young children.” Developmental Psychology, 43(5), September 2007,
  1062–1083.

International Adult Literacy Survey. International Adult Literacy Survey Microdata User’s
  Guide. Ottowa: Statistics Canada, 2002.

Jaffee, S. R., A. Caspi, T. E. Moffitt, K. A. Dodge, M. Rutter, A. Taylor, and L. A. Tully.
  “Nature x nurture: Genetic vulnerabilities interact with physical maltreatment to promote
  conduct problems.” Development and Psychopathology, 17(1), 2005, 67–84.

Knudsen, E. I., J. J. Heckman, J. Cameron, and J. P. Shonkoff. “Economic, neurobiological,
  and behavioral perspectives on building America’s future workforce.” Proceedings of the
  National Academy of Sciences, 103(27), July 2006, 10155–10162.

Krein, S. F. and A. Beller. “Educational Attainment of Children from Single-Parent Families:
  Differences by Exposure, Gender and Race.” Demography, 25(2), May 1988, 221–234.

Laurence, J. H. “The Military Performance of GED Holders.” In The GED and the Problem
  of Noncognitive Skills in America, edited by J. J. Heckman and P. LaFontaine. Chicago:
  University of Chicago Press, 2008. Forthcoming.

Levine, J. A., H. Pollack, and M. E. Comfort. “Academic and Behavioral Outcomes Among
  the Children of Young Mothers.” Journal of Marriage and Family, 63(2), May 2001,
  355–369.

Mayer, S. E. What Money Can’t Buy: Family Income and Children’s Life Chances. Cam-
  bridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1997.

McLanahan, S. “Diverging Destinies: How Children Are Faring Under the Second Demo-
  graphic Transition.” Demography, 41(4), November 2004, 607–627.

McLanahan, S. “Fragile Families and the Reproduction of Poverty.” Working Paper 2008-04-
  FF, Center for Research on Child Wellbeing and Fragile Families, Princeton, NJ, March

                                            52
REFERENCES                                                                  REFERENCES


  2008. Prepared for “The Moynihan Report Revisited: Lessons and Reflections after Four
  Decades.” Harvard University, September, 2007.

McLanahan, S. and G. D. Sandefur. Growing Up with a Single Parent: What Hurts, What
  Helps. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1994.

Meaney, M. J. “Maternal Care, Gene Expression, And The Transmission of Individual
  Differences in Stress Reactivity Across Generations.” Annual Review of Neuroscience,
  24(1), 2001, 1161–1192.

Meghir, C. and M. Palme. “The Effect of a Social Experiment in Education.” Tech. Rep.
  W01/11, Institute for Fiscal Studies, 2001.

Moon, S. H. “Investment in Children by Family Type.”, 2008. Unpublished manuscript,
  University of Chicago, Department of Economics.

Morris, P., G. J. Duncan, and E. Clark-Kauffman. “Child Well-Being in an Era of Welfare
  Reform: The Sensitivity of Transitions in Development to Policy Change.” Developmental
  Psychology, 41(6), 2005, 919–932.

Murnane, R. J., J. B. Willett, and F. Levy. “The Growing Importance of Cognitive Skills in
  Wage Determination.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 77(2), May 1995, 251–266.

Nagin, D. S. and R. E. Tremblay. “Trajectories of Boys’ Physical Aggression, Opposition, and
  Hyperactivity on the Path to Physically Violent and Nonviolent Juvenile Delinquency.”
  Child Development, 70(5), September/October 1999, 1181–1196.

Neal, D. A. and W. R. Johnson. “The Role of Premarket Factors in Black-White Wage
  Differences.” Journal of Political Economy, 104(5), October 1996, 869–895.

Newport, E. L. “Maturational Constraints on Language Learning.” Cognitive Science, 14(1,
  Special Issue), January-March 1990, 11–28.



                                            53
REFERENCES                                                                REFERENCES


Nilsson, J. P. “Does a pint a day affect your child’s pay? The effect of prenatal alcohol
  exposure on adult outcomes.” Working Paper Series 2008:4, Institute for Labour Market
  Policy Evaluation, March 2008. URL http://ideas.repec.org/p/hhs/ifauwp/2008_
  004.html.

O’Connor, T. G., M. Rutter, C. Beckett, L. Keaveney, J. M. Kreppner, and the English and
  Romanian Adoptees Study Team. “The Effects of Global Severe Privation on Cognitive
  Competence: Extension and Longitudinal Follow-Up.” Child Development, 71(2), March-
  April 2000, 376–390.

Olds, D. L. “Prenatal and Infancy Home Visiting by Nurses: From Randomized Trials to
  Community Replication.” Prevention Science, 3(2), September 2002, 153–172.

Perry, B. D. “Understanding Traumatized and Maltreated Children: The Core Concepts.”
  Video Presentation, 2004. The Child Trauma Academy.

Pinker, S. The Language Instinct: How the Mind Creates Language. New York: W. Morrow
  and Co., 1994.

Plato. The Republic of Plato. New York: Basic Books, 1991.

Pray, L. A. “Epigenetics: Genome, Meet your Environment.” The Scientist, 18(13), July
  2004, 14–20.

Raver, C. C., P. W. Garner, and R. Smith-Donald. “The Roles of Emotion Regulation
  and Emotion Knowledge for Children’s Academic Readiness: Are the Links Causal?” In
  School Readiness and the Transition to Kindergarten in the Era of Accountability, edited
  by R. C. Pianta, M. J. Cox, and K. L. Snow. Baltimore, MD: Brookes Publishing, 2007.

Rutter, M. “Parent-Child Separation: Psychological Effects on the Children.” Journal of
  Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 12(4), October 1971, 233–260.




                                           54
REFERENCES                                                                  REFERENCES


Rutter, M. Genes and Behavior: Nature–Nurture Interplay Explained. Oxford, UK: Black-
  well Publishers, 2006.

Rutter, M., T. E. Moffitt, and A. Caspi. “Gene-Environment Interplay and Psychopathology:
  Multiple Varieties but Real Effects.” Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 47(3/4),
  March/April 2006, 226–261.

Rutter, M. and the English and Romanian Adoptees Study Team. “Developmental Catch-
  Up, And Deficit, Following Adoption After Severe Global Early Privation.” Journal of
  Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 39(4), May 1998, 465–476.

Rutter, M. L., J. M. Kreppner, T. G. O. Connor, and English and Romanian Adoptees study
  team. “Specificity and Heterogeneity in Children’s Responses to Profound Institutional
  Privation.” The British Journal of Psychiatry, 179, 2001, 97–103.

Ryff, C. D. and B. H. Singer. “Social Environments and the Genetics of Aging: Advancing
  Knowledge of Protective Health Mechanisms.” Journals of Gerontology B-Psychological
  Sciences and Social Sciences, 60B(Special Issue I), 2005, 12–23.

Schweinhart, L. J., J. Montie, Z. Xiang, W. S. Barnett, C. R. Belfield, and M. Nores.
  Lifetime Effects: The High/Scope Perry Preschool Study Through Age 40. Ypsilanti, MI:
  High/Scope Press, 2005.

Smith, J. P. “Diabetes and the Rise of the SES Health Gradient.” Proceedings of the National
  Academy of Sciences, 2007. In press.

Smyke, A. T., S. F. Koga, D. E. Johnson, N. A. Fox, P. J. Marshall, C. A. Nelson, C. H.
  Zeanah, and the BEIP Core Group. “The Caregiving Context in Institution-Reared and
  Family-Reared Infants and Toddlers in Romania.” Journal of Child Psychology and Psy-
  chiatry, 48(2), 2007, 210–218.




                                            55
REFERENCES                                                                  REFERENCES


Streissguth, A. “Offspring Effects of Prenatal Alcohol Exposure from Birth to 25 Years:
  The Seattle Prospective Longitudinal Study.” Journal of Clinical Psychology in Medical
  Settings, 14(2), June 2007, 81–101.

Suomi, S. J.   “Developmental Trajectories, Early Experiences, and Community Conse-
  quences: Lessons from Studies with Rhesus Monkeys.” In Developmental Health and the
  Wealth of Nations: Social, Biological, and Educational Dynamics, edited by D. P. Keating
  and C. Hertzman. The Guilford Press, 1999, 185–200.

Suomi, S. J. “Gene-Environment Interactions and the Neurobiology of Social Conflict.”
  Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1008, December 2003, 132–139.

Terman, L. M. and M. A. Merrill. Stanford-Binet Intelligence Scale: Manual for the Third
  Revision Form L-M. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1960.

Trivers, R. L. and D. E. Willard. “Natural Selection of Parental Ability to Vary the Sex
  Ratio of Offspring.” Science, 179(4068), January 1973, 90–92.

Turkheimer, E., A. Haley, M. Waldron, B. D’Onofrio, and I. I. Gottesman. “Socioeco-
  nomic Status Modifies Heritability of IQ in Young Children.” Psychological Science, 14(6),
  November 2003, 623–628.

Tyler, J. H. and J. R. Kling. “Prison-Based Education and Re-entry into the Mainstream
  Labor Market.” In Barriers to Reentry? The Labor Market for Released Prisoners in
  Post-Industrial America, edited by S. Bushway, M. Stoll, and D. Weiman. New York, NY:
  Russell Sage Foundation Press, 2007.

Tyler, J. H. and M. Lofstrom. “Modeling the Signaling Value of the GED With an Applica-
  tion in Texas.” Review of Research in Labor Economics, 2008. Forthcoming.

Watt, N. F., C. Ayoub, R. H. Bradley, and J. E. Puma, eds. The Crisis in Youth Mental




                                            56
REFERENCES                                                                REFERENCES


  Health: Reforming the Village and Raises Our Children. Early Intervention Programs and
  Policies, vol. 4. Westport, CT: Praeger Perspectives, 2008.

Wells, J. C. K. “Natural Selection and Sex Differences in Morbidity and Mortality in Early
  Life.” Journal of Theoretical Biology, 202(1), January 2000, 65–76.

Zhang, X., J. H. Sliwowska, and J. Weinberg. “Prenatal Alcohol Exposure and Fetal Pro-
  gramming: Effects on Neuroendocrine and Immune Function.” Experimental Biology and
  Medicine, 230(6), June 2005, 376–388.




                                            57
NOTES                                                                                                   NOTES


                                                       Notes

*       This paper was presented as the Presidential Lecture of the Western Economics Association, Seattle
Washington, June 30, 2007. Earlier versions were presented at the U.S. Naval Academy at Annapolis,
September, 2006; at Kansas State University, November 2006; and as the 2006 Leigh Lecture, Washington
State University, November 2007. Heckman is Henry Schultz Distinguished Service Professor of Economics
at the University of Chicago, Professor of Science and Society, University College Dublin, and Senior Re-
search Fellow, American Bar Foundation. This research was supported by the Committee for Economic
Development with grants from the Pew Charitable Trusts and the Partnership for America’s Economic Suc-
cess; the JB & MK Pritzker Family Foundation; Susan Thompson Buffett Foundation; Mr. Robert Dugger;
NIH R01-HD043411, NSF 97-09-873, NSF SES-0099195, NSF SES-0241858; and support from the American
Bar Foundation. The views expressed in this paper are those of the author and not necessarily those of
the funders listed here. I thank Pedro Carneiro, Flavio Cunha, Lance Lochner, Paul LaFontaine, Dimitriy
Masterov and Sergio Urzua for helpful collaborations on which this paper is based. Burton Singer has made
many helpful comments over the years on this and related work.
    1
        The most significant source of bias in the official statistics comes from including GED recipients as high
school graduates. “GED” refers to General Education Development. GEDs are high school dropouts who
certify as the equivalents of ordinary graduates through passing an exam. Currently 20 percent of all new
high school credentials issued each year are to GEDs. In recent years, inclusion of GEDs as high school
graduates has biased graduation rates upwards of 7-8 percentage points. A substantial body of scholarship
shows that the GED program does not benefit most participants, and that GEDs perform at the level of
dropouts in the U.S. labor market (see Cameron and Heckman, 1993; Heckman and LaFontaine, 2006). The
GED program conceals major problems in American society. See Heckman and LaFontaine (2008b). For
example, a significant portion of the racial convergence in education reported in the official statistics is due
to black males obtaining GED credentials in prison. Research by Tyler and Kling (2007) and Tyler and
Lofstrom (2008) shows that, when released, prison GEDs earn at the same rate as non-GED prisoners, and
the GED does not reduce recidivism.
    2
        Card and Lemieux (2001) and Ellwood (2001) discuss the slowdown in the rate of growth of college
attendance.
    3
        See Heckman and LaFontaine (2008a).
    4
        See the summary of the evidence in Heckman, Stixrud, and Urzua (2006) and in Borghans, Duckworth,
Heckman, and ter Weel (2008).
    5
        See the discussion in Borghans, Duckworth, Heckman, and ter Weel (2008).



                                                         58
NOTES                                                                                                 NOTES


   6
       See Borghans, ter Weel, and Weinberg (2007).
   7
       It is plausible that the change in patterns of sectoral output away from manufacturing has harmed males
more than females. Females appear to be better endowed with noncognitive skills — especially self-control,
motivation, agreeableness and the like. The assembly line is a powerful monitoring device that polices
expression of unproductive traits such as aggression and noncooperation. As employment on the assembly
line declines and employment in the service sector rises, there is less restraint on the unfavorable traits of
males and a growth in demand for the favorable traits of females.
   8
       Heckman, Stixrud, and Urzua (2006) show that, for males, GEDs have worse noncognitive skills than
high school dropouts, although they have the cognitive ability of high school graduates who do not go on to
college. For females, GED recipients have the same low level of noncognitive skills as dropouts who do not
exam certify.
   9
       Borghans, Duckworth, Heckman, and ter Weel (2008) present an extensive summary of the literature.
  10
       Characteristics not varied in these simulations are set at their mean levels. Heckman, Stixrud, and
Urzua (2006) correct for measurement error and reverse causality. In particular, they correct for the effect
on schooling on measured cognitive and noncognitive traits.
  11
       Belley and Lochner (2007) show that family income in the college going years and tuition have become
more important in explaining college enrollment in recent years but cognitive ability still plays a dominant
role in explaining gaps. Their sample is younger than samples previously used in the literature.
  12
       A special issue of Twin Research and Human Genetics (2007) edited by Jennifer Harris provides numer-
ous concrete examples.
  13
       The genetic expression is termed myelination. See Champagne, Weaver, Diorio et al. (2006).
  14
       See McLanahan (2004).
  15
       See McLanahan (2008).
  16
       The evidence for growing differentials of child investment by education and social class of the parent is
less clear.
  17
       See Francesconi (2007); Hunt (2006); Levine, Pollack, and Comfort (2001).
  18
       Some evidence (e.g., Krein and Beller, 1988) suggests that adverse early childhood environments differ-
entially harm boys. Given the growth in the percentage of all births to children in adverse environments,
this is one possible channel that explains the emerging educational gaps between men and women. Much
further research is required to confirm this conjecture. In evolutionary biology (see, e.g., Wells, 2000, and
Trivers and Willard, 1973), a theory has been developed that explains the greater vulnerability of males to
adverse early environments.
  19
       See Rutter and the English and Romanian Adoptees Study Team, 1998 and Smyke, Koga, Johnson et al.,


                                                        59
NOTES                                                                                                     NOTES


2007.
  20
       Rutter, Kreppner, Connor, and English and Romanian Adoptees study team (2001) discuss the wide
variability in the recovery rates among infants. The general rule is that the longer the exposure to adverse
environments, the harder it is to remediate through adoption, at least on average. The more adverse the
early environment, the worse the outcome.
  21
       See Cunha, Heckman, Lochner et al. (2006) for a detailed discussion of these programs.
  22
       See Cunha, Heckman, Lochner et al. (2006).
  23
       See Heckman, Moon, Pinto, Savelyev, and Yavitz (2007).
  24
       See Cunha, Heckman, Lochner, and Masterov (2006) and Heckman and Lochner (2000) for evidence on
the returns to adolescent interventions for disadvantaged youth.
  25
       The curve is not an equilibrium schedule. It is a return to a unit of investment at each age assuming
an initial low and equal investment at all ages that is below the final equilibrium level at each age. The
equilibrium investment policy would allocate more resources to the early years and less to later years.
  26
       See Cunha and Heckman (2008a).
  27
       The curve is drawn assuming moderate dynamic complementarity. In principle, it would be possible
that the interval between three and the crossing age could be made arbitrarily small.
  28
       Many different configurations of the age 3 investment curve are possible depending on the extent of
diminishing returns within a period and the strength of dynamic complementarity of investments over time.
  29
       See, however, Curtis and Cicchetti (2003) and Charney (2004) for analyses of biological and psychobio-
logical mechanisms for resilience.
  30
       Notice that a high “y” value is associated with lower health status on their graph.
  31
       Barker and coauthors only investigate compensation in the first year after birth.
  32
       To date, the health economics literature has not systematically studied the effectiveness of remediation
for adverse early environments, although it evaluates the efficacy of treatments of diseases that may be
influenced by adverse early environments.
  33
       Cunha, Heckman, Lochner, and Masterov (2006) propose a model of comparative advantage in occupa-
tional choice to supplement their model of skill formation.
  34
       A sketch of such a model is discussed in Carneiro, Cunha, and Heckman (2003).
  35
       For analytical convenience, ft is assumed to be strictly increasing in It . I further assume strict concavity
in It and twice continuous differentiability in all of its arguments.
  36
       Cunha, Heckman, Lochner, and Masterov (2006) analyze the vector case. See also the supporting
material on the website for Cunha and Heckman (2007b).




                                                         60
NOTES                                                                                          NOTES


  37
       The Abecedarian early intervention program permanently boosted adult IQ (Cunha, Heckman, Lochner,
and Masterov, 2006).




                                                    61
NOTES                                                                          NOTES


Figure 1 True Dropout Rate vs. NCES Status Dropout Rate, Males and Females 1968-2000.

Figure 2 Educational Attainment Decompositions, Males and Females 1900-1980 Birth Co-
     horts.

Figure 3 Educational Attainment Decompositions, Males 1900-1980 Birth Cohorts.

Figure 4 Educational Attainment Decompositions, Females 1900-1980 Birth Cohorts.

Figure 5 Relative Supply of College Equivalent Labor, 1963-2003 (March CPS).

Figure 6 Percentage of Each Gender Who Perform at Level 1 on the IALS Document
     Literacy Scale.

Figure 7 Density of Age-Adjusted AFQT Scores, GED Recipients and High School Grad-
     uates with Twelve Years of Schooling.

Figure 8 Effects of Cognitive and Noncognitive Skills on the Outcomes Indicated in the
     Table, Measured from Lowest Level to Highest in Percentiles of Skills.

     Figure 8a Ever Been in Jail by Age 30, by Ability (Males)

     Figure 8b Probability of Being a Teenage Mother (Females).

Figure 9 Effects of Cognitive and Noncognitive skills on the Outcomes Indicated in the
     Table, Measured from Lowest Level to Highest in Percentiles of Skills.

     Figure 9a Probability of Being a High School Dropout by Age 30 (Males).

     Figure 9b Probability of Being a 4-Year College Graduate by Age 30 (Males).

     Figure 9c Probability of Daily Smoking by Age 18 (Males).

     Figure 9d Mean Log Wages by Age 30 (Males).

Figure 10 Trend in Mean Cognitive Score by Maternal Education. IHDP Study.



                                             62
NOTES                                                                         NOTES


Figure 11 Evolution by Age of Average Percentile Ranks on the PIAT Math Score by
     Family Income Status: Adjusted and Unadjusted.

     Figure 11a Average Percentile Rank on PIAT-Math Score by Family Income Quar-
         tile.

     Figure 11b After Adjustments (Maternal Education, Maternal AFQT and Broken
         Home).

Figure 12 Evolution by Age of Average Percentile Rank on Behavioral Problems Index
     (BPI) by Family Income Status: Adjusted and Unadjusted.

     Figure 12a Average Percentile Rank on Anti-Social Scores by Income Quartile (Fam-
         ily Income between Ages 6-10).

     figure 12b After Adjustments (Maternal Education, Maternal AFQT and Broken
         Home).

Figure 13 Alternative Measures of the Percentage of Children at Risk and a Measure of
     Trends in Single Motherhood

     Figure 13a Percent of Children Under 18 Living with One Parent By Marital Status
         of Single Parent

     Figure 13b Percent of All Children Less than Five With Never Married Mother by
         Mother’s Education

     Figure 13c Percent of All Children Less than Five With Never Married Mother by
         Race

     Figure 13d Trends in Mothers’ Employment, 1960 to 2000.

     Figure 13e Trends in Single Motherhood, 1960 to 2000.

Figure 14 Effects of Exposure to Adverse Childhood Experience (ACE) on Adult Outcomes



                                          63
NOTES                                                                                   NOTES


     Figure 14a Childhood Experiences vs. Adult Alcoholism.

     Figure 14b ACE Score vs. Intravenous Drug Use.

     Figure 14c ACE Score and Rates of Antidepressant Prescriptions.

     Figure 14d Adverse Childhood Experiences vs. History of STD (Sexually Transmit-
          ted Disease).

Figure 15 Abnormal Brain Development Following Sensory Neglect in Early Childhood.

Figure 16 Perry Preschool Program: IQ, by Age and Treatment Group.

Figure 17 Perry Preschool Program.

     Figure 17a Educational Effects, by Treatment Group. ∗ High achievement defined as
          performance at or above the lowest 10th percentile on the California Achievement
          Test (1970). Source: Barnett (2004).

                                                                            ∗
     Figure 17b Economic Effects at Age 27, by Treatment Group.                 Updated through
          Age 40 using recent Perry Preschool Program data, derived from self-report and
          all available state records. Source: Barnett (2004).

     Figure 17c Arrests Per Person Before Age 40, by Treatment Group. Juvenile arrests
          are defined as arrests prior to age 19. Source: Barnett (2004).

Figure 18 Returns to a unit dollar invested.

     Figure 18a Return to a Unit Dollar Invested at Different Ages, from the Perspective
          of the Beginning of Life, Assuming One Dollar Initially Invested at Each Age

     Figure 18b Returns to One More Dollar of Investment as Perceived at Different Ages
          Initially and at Age 3

Figure A.1 Health and Income for Children and Adults, U.S. National Health Interview
     Survey 1986-1995.


                                            64
NOTES                                                                           NOTES


Figure A.2 Probability of Daily Smoking by Age 18, Males by Decile of Cognitive and
     Noncognitive Factor.

Figure A.3 Ratio of Early to Late Investment in Human Capital as a Function of the Skill
     Multiplier for Different Values of Complementarity.




                                           65
NOTES                                                                                 NOTES




Table 1: Decomposition of the Sources of Change in College Graduation in the Cohorts
Born Between 1900 and 1980. Broken Down by Birth Cohorts 1900-1949 vs. Birth Cohorts
1950-1980.
                                             Change in College    Change in College
                         Change in College    Graduation Rate     Graduation Rate
 Totals Pre- and         Graduation Rate      Due to Change in    Due to Change in    Change Due to
 Post-1950 Cohort        Due to Change in    College Attendance   Finishing College    Interaction
                           High School       Given High School    Given Enrollment
                         Graduation Rate         Graduation          in College
                                               Overall
 Birth Years 1900-1949         8.99%                3.17%               0.81%            0.92%
 % of Total Change           64.71%                22.86%              5.80%             6.63%
 Birth Years 1950-1980        -1.47%                6.70%               5.20%            0.03%
 % of Total Change           -14.05%               64.02%              49.75%            0.28%
                                                Males
 Birth Years 1900-1949       12.38%                 3.81%               0.40%            0.35%
 % of Total Change           73.10%                22.49%              2.36%             2.06%
 Birth Years 1950-1980        -1.59%                2.90%               0.86%            0.08%
 % of Total Change           -70.02%              128.26%              38.14%            3.63%
                                               Females
 Birth Years 1900-1949       7.06%                  3.69%               2.19%            0.78%
 % of Total Change         51.44%                  26.89%              15.98%            5.68%
 Birth Years 1950-1980      -0.94%                  9.50%               6.20%            0.65%
 % of Total Change          -6.13%                 61.70%              40.23%            4.20%
 Source: Heckman and LaFontaine (2008a).




                                              66
NOTES                                                                          NOTES




Table 2: Educational Characteristics of the Labor Force Aged 25 and Over 1980, 2000, 2020.
                               Labor Force Growth Labor Force Growth Labor Force
 Education                        in 1980     1980-2000     in 2000    2000-2020      in 2020
 Less than High School              17.3         -5.3         12.0         0.9          12.9
 High School Only                   31.5          6.3         37.8         3.8          41.6
 Some Schooling
 Beyond High School                 13.8         19.1         32.9         6.2          39.1
 College Degree or More             17.3         18.5         35.8         7.7          43.5
 Total                              79.8         38.7        118.5        18.6         137.1
 Percent with College Degree       21.6%                     30.2%                     31.7%
 Source: Ellwood (2001).




                                          67
NOTES                                                                                NOTES




Table 3: Ability Explains Schooling Gaps. (The gap is the difference in the fraction attaining
the indicated schooling status.)
                                        White-Black Gap White-Hispanic Gap

                          Complete Grade 9 or More by Age 15
          Actual White-Minority Gap        .16 (.02)          .21 (.02)
          Ability Adjusted Gap            -.10 (.03)         -.02 (.07)

                             High School Completion Gap
          Actual White-Minority Gap        .06 (.01)                 .14 (.02)
          Ability Adjusted Gap            -.14 (.03)                -.12 (.04)

                College Entry Probabilities given High School Completion
          Actual White-Minority Gap          .11 (.02)           .07 (.02)
          Ability Adjusted Gap              -.14 (.02)          -.14 (.04)

            Population College Entry Gap (Unconditional on HS Completion)
          Actual White-Minority Gap        .12 (.02)           .14 (.02)
          Ability Adjusted Gap            -.16 (.03)          -.15 (.04)
          Source: Cameron and Heckman (2001).




                                             68
NOTES                                                                                               NOTES




Table 4: Risk Factors Among Less-Educated Families, by Parents’ Relationship Status.
Source: Authors calculations, using data from the Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing
Study. Note: The sample is limited to mothers with a high school degree or less. a Different
from married at p < .05. b Different from cohabiting at p < .05.

                                                              Relationship Status
                                               __________________________________________
    Risk Factor                                Married            Cohabiting               Single
    Mothers’ Health
     Depression                                 10.2                 15.0a                 14.9a
       Prenatal drug use                         1.0                  6.3a                   8.8a,b
       Prenatal smoking                         10.4                 25.5a                 25.9a
    Fathers’ Health
       Substance abuse                           4.3                  4.1a                   7.6a,b
       Disability                                5.8                  7.5a                   6.6
       Violence                                  2.0                  3.5                    6.1a,b
       Incarceration                            12.2                 31.6a                 39.2a,b
    Family structure
      Father has a child with other partner     19.0                 33.5a                 44.1a,b
       Mother has a child with other partner    21.6                 40.8a                 41.5a
       Father not working                        7.8                 19.5a                 39.2a,b
       Income/needs ratio                        2.28                 1.46a                  1.13a,b
       Disrupt by age 1                          8.9                 30.9a                 65.1a,b
       Disrupt by age 3                         16.9                 47.6a                 78.2a,b
    Quality of Mothering
      Child was breast-fed                      62.4                 47.5a                 38.9a,b
       Nonpunitive interaction                   4.79                 4.48a                  4.29a,b
       Language stimulation                      9.29                 9.06a                  9.03a
       S      A h ’        l l        d   f      h        l   l     d Ch ld    llb   S d
Source: McLanahan (2004).




                                                     69
NOTES                                                                                         NOTES




Table 5: Comparison of different investment strategies. Disadvantaged Children: First decile
in the distribution of cognitive and non-cognitive skills at age 6. Mothers are in first decile
in the distribution of cognitive and non-cognitive skills at ages 14-21.
                                                           Adolescent
                                 Changing early           intervention:         Changing initial
                              conditions: changing     moving investments        conditions and
                            investment from the 1st     at last transition   performing a balanced
                               to 7th decile of the      from 1st to 9th     intervention using the
                             overall distribution of     decile of overall      resources of the
 Outcome         Baseline       early investment           investment        adolescent intervention

 High School     0.4109             0.6579                   0.6391                  0.9135
 Graduation
 Enrollment in   0.0448             0.1264                   0.1165                  0.3755
 College
 Conviction      0.2276             0.1710                   0.1773                  0.1083
 Probation       0.2152             0.1487                   0.1562                  0.0815
 Welfare         0.1767             0.0905                   0.0968
                                                             | {z }                  0.0259
                                                          35 − 50%
                                                        more costly*
 Source: Cunha and Heckman (2006). *This is the range produced from a two standard deviation
 confidence interval.




                                                  70
  NOTES                                                                                                                                                                                      NOTES




             Figure 1. True Dropout Rate vs. NCES Status Dropout Rate, Males and Females 1968-2000
  Figure 1: True Dropout Rate vs. NCES Status Dropout Rate, Males and Females 1968-2000.
               30%

               28%

               26%

               24%

               22%
Dropout Rate




               20%

               18%                                                                                                                          True Dropout Rate (Inc. GEDs)

               16%                                                                                                                          NCES Dropout Rate (Exc. GEDs)

               14%

               12%

               10%



                                                                                                  Year

  Source: Heckman and LaFontaine (2008a).
                     Note: The true dropout rate is calculated from NCES and CPS data as the fraction of public and private school 8th graders who do not obtain a regular high school diploma.
                     The NCES status dropout rate indicates the percentage of 16- through 24-year-olds who are not enrolled in high school and who lack a high school credential relative to all
                     16- through 24-year-olds. High school credential includes a high school diploma or equivalent credential such as a General Educational Development (GED) certificate. The
                     status dropout rate is calculated from CPS October 1968-2000 data.




                                                                                                         71
   NOTES                                                                                                                                                                        NOTES




   Figure 2: Educational Attainment Decompositions, Males and Females 1900-1980 Birth
              Figure XIII. Educational Attainment Decompositions, Males and Females 1900-1980 Birth Cohorts
   Cohorts.
               90%
               85%             Graduate HS
               80%             Attend College
               75%             Attend Given HS
               70%             Graduate College
               65%             Graduate Given Attend
               60%
               55%
  Percentage




               50%
               45%
               40%
               35%
               30%
               25%
               20%
               15%
               10%
                5%
                0%



                                                                                               Year of Birth

   Source: Heckman and LaFontaine (2008a).
Notes: 3-year moving averages based on CPS October, Census, CPS March and NCES data. HS graduates are those who obtained a regular public or private HS diploma (excluding GEDs)
from the NCES. "Graduate HS" is the fraction of 8th grade enrollments for a given cohort who report a regular HS diploma. "Attend Given HS" is the fraction of recent HS graduates who
report being enrolled the fall of the year following graduation. "Attend College" is college enrollments of recent HS graduates as a fraction of 18 year old cohort size. College graduates are
those who report a BA or higher by age 25. "Graduate Given Attend" is those who obtained a four year degree as a fraction of the college enrollment total for that cohort. Two-year degrees
are not included. "Graduate College" is the number of college graduates as a fraction of the 18 year old cohort size. Population estimates are from the Census P-20 reports. HS diplomas
issued by sex are estimated from CPS October data after 1982.




                                                                                               72
NOTES                                                                                                                                                                            NOTES




                             Figure XIV.Attainment
               Figure 3: Educational     Educational Attainment Decompositions,Males
                                                        Decompositions,         Males 1900-1980
                                                                                       1900-1980Birth Cohorts
                                                                                                      Birth Cohorts.
               90%
               85%             Graduate HS
               80%             Attend College
               75%             Attend Given HS
               70%             Graduate College
               65%             Graduate Given Attend
               60%
               55%
  Percentage




               50%
               45%
               40%
               35%
               30%
               25%
               20%
               15%
               10%
                5%
                0%



                                                                                                Year of Birth

Source: Heckman and LaFontaine (2008a).
Notes: 3-year moving averages based on CPS October, Census, CPS March and NCES data. HS graduates are those who obtained a regular public or private HS diploma (excluding GEDs)
from the NCES. "Graduate HS" is the fraction of 8th grade enrollments for a given cohort who report a regular HS diploma. "Attend Given HS" is the fraction of recent HS graduates who
report being enrolled the fall of the year following graduation. "Attend College" is college enrollments of recent HS graduates as a fraction of 18 year old cohort size. College graduates are
those who report a BA or higher by age 25. "Graduate Given Attend" is those who obtained a four year degree as a fraction of the college enrollment total for that cohort. Two-year degrees
are not included. "Graduate College" is the number of college graduates as a fraction of the 18 year old cohort size. Population estimates are from the Census P-20 reports. HS diplomas
issued by sex are estimated from CPS October data after 1982.




                                                                                              73
   NOTES                                                                                                                                                                      NOTES




                           Figure XV. Educational Attainment Decompositions, Females 1900-1980 Birth Cohorts
               Figure 4: Educational    Attainment Decompositions, Females 1900-1980 Birth Cohorts.
               90%
               85%             Graduate HS
               80%             Attend College
               75%             Attend Given HS
               70%             Graduate College
               65%             Graduate Given Attend
               60%
               55%
  Percentage




               50%
               45%
               40%
               35%
               30%
               25%
               20%
               15%
               10%
                5%
                0%



                                                                                              Year of Birth

   Source: Heckman and LaFontaine (2008a).
Notes: 3-year moving averages based on CPS October, Census, CPS March and NCES data. HS graduates are those who obtained a regular public or private HS diploma (excluding GEDs)
from the NCES. "Graduate HS" is the fraction of 8th grade enrollments for a given cohort who report a regular HS diploma. "Attend Given HS" is the fraction of recent HS graduates who
report being enrolled the fall of the year following graduation. "Attend College" is college enrollments of recent HS graduates as a fraction of 18 year old cohort size. College graduates are
those who report a BA or higher by age 25. "Graduate Given Attend" is those who obtained a four year degree as a fraction of the college enrollment total for that cohort. Two-year degrees
are not included. "Graduate College" is the number of college graduates as a fraction of the 18 year old cohort size. Population estimates are from the Census P-20 reports. HS diplomas issued
by sex are estimated from CPS October data after 1982.




                                                                                              74
NOTES                                                                                         NOTES




       The same can be observed concerning relative supply figures, such as these by Autor,
       Katz and Kearney (2005) and Card and DiNardo (2001).
    Figure 5: Relative Supply of College Equivalent Labor, 1963–2003 (March CPS).




Source: Autor, Katz, and Kearney (2005).




                                                75
NOTES                                                                                NOTES




Figure 6: Percentage of Each Gender Who Perform at Level 1 on the IALS Document
Literacy Scale.
      




                          0DOHV                              )HPDOHV
      
 3URSRUWLRQ
   
      
      




              86$             *HUPDQ\             86$             *HUPDQ\
                    (QJODQG             6ZHGHQ          (QJODQG             6ZHGHQ

Note: The scale scores were grouped into five levels of increasing difficulty, with Level 1
representing functional illiteracy. Levels 4 and 5 were combined. The sample is restricted to
adults who are between 16 and 65 years of age at the time of the survey (1994 for the U.S.
and Germany, 1996 for the U.K., and 1994–1995 for Sweden). Standard errors are calculated
using the methodology described in International Adult Literacy Survey (2002).




                                                 76
NOTES                                                                                                                                                                                         NOTES




                                                  Figure 2.13
                                    Density of age adjusted AFQT scores,
                    GED recipients and high school graduates with twelve years of schooling
Figure 7: Density of Age Adjusted AFQT Scores, GED Recipients and High School Gradu-
ates with Twelve Years of Schooling.
                                         (a) White males                                                                         (b) White females
                                                                                                                                              35
                                                                                                                                                                          HS graduates
                                                30
                                                                                                                                              30
                                                                                                                                                                          GEDs
                                                25
                                                                                                                                              25

                                                20
                                                                                                                                              20

                                                15
                                                                                                                                              15

                                                10
                                                                                                                                              10

                                                 5
                                                                                                                                               5

                                                 0
                                                                                                                                               0
   -2.5        -2     -1.5        -1     -0.5        0   0.5   1   1.5   2   2.5
                                                                                    -2.5     -2             -1.5           -1      -0.5            0   0.5      1         1.5       2     2.5




                                        (c) Black males                                                                                       (d) Black females
                                                35
                                                                                                                                                       40

                                                30
                                                                                                                                                       35

                                                25                                                                                                     30


                                                20                                                                                                     25


                                                                                                                                                       20
                                                15

                                                                                                                                                       15
                                                10
                                                                                                                                                       10

                                                 5
                                                                                                                                                        5

                                                 0                                                                                                      0
-2.5      -2        -1.5     -1         -0.5         0   0.5   1   1.5   2    2.5    -2.5              -2           -1.5          -1           -0.5         0       0.5         1       1.5




                                       (e) Hispanic males                                                                       (f) Hispanic females

                                                30                                                                                            35


                                                                                                                                              30
                                                25

                                                                                                                                              25
                                                20
                                                                                                                                              20

                                                15
                                                                                                                                              15

                                                10
                                                                                                                                              10


                                                 5                                                                                             5


                                                 0                                                                                             0
 -2.5      -2        -1.5    -1          -0.5        0   0.5   1   1.5   2   2.5      -2.5        -2         -1.5           -1         -0.5        0    0.5     1         1.5       2     2.5




Source: Heckman, Hsee, and Rubinstein (2001).

Source: Heckman, Hsee and Rubinstein (2001).




                                                                                    77
NOTES                                                                                                                         NOTES




Figure 8: Effects of Cognitive and Noncognitive Skills on the Outcomes Indicated in the
Table, Measured from Lowest Level to Highest in Percentiles of Skills
                        Ever in Jail by Age 30, by Ability îî Males
                                   (a) Ever Been in Jail by Age 30, By Ability (Males).

                   .15




                    .1
     Probability




                   .05




                    0
                         0î20           21î40                      41î60                       61î80                         81î100
                                                                  Percentile

                                                     Cognitive           NonîCognitive
                                Probabilty of Being Single with Children îî Females
     Note: This figure plots the probability of a givenofbehavior
                                 (b) Probability          Being aassociated
                                                                   Teenage  with moving(Females).
                                                                              Mother    up in one ability distribution for
     someone after integrating out the other distribution. For example, the lines with markers show the effect of
           .1 noncognitive ability after integrating the cognitive ability. Source: Heckman, Stixrud, and Urzua (2006).
     increasing



                   .08
     Probability




                   .06



                   .04



                   .02
                         0î20           21î40                      41î60                       61î80                         81î100
                                                                  Percentile

                                                     Cognitive           NonîCognitive

   Note: This figure plots the probability of a given behavior associated with moving up in one ability distribution for
   someone after integrating out the other distribution. For example, the lines with markers show the effect of
Note:  This noncognitive
   increasing figure plots       the
                            ability     probability
                                    after integrating the of a given
                                                          cognitive ability. Source: Heckman,
                                                                          behavior     associated
                                                                                              Stixrud,with
                                                                                         in one             moving
                                                                                                      and Urzua (2006). up
ability distribution for someone after integrating out the other distribution. For example,
the lines with markers show the effect of increasing noncognitive ability after integrating the
cognitive ability. Source: Heckman, Stixrud, and Urzua (2006).



                                                                 78
                                                                                                1


                                                                                            0.8

NOTES                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             NOTES
                                                                                            0.6




                                                                              Probability
                                                                                            0.4


                                                                                            0.2
Figure 9: Effects of Cognitive and Noncognitive Skills on the Outcomes Indicated in the
Table, Measured from 0 Lowest
                         2
                              Level to Highest in Percentiles of the Skills2
                                                                                                                          4                                                                              4
                                                                                                                                  6                                                           6
                                                                                                                                               8                             8
                                                                     (a) Probability of Being     a High School
                                                                                          Decile of Cognitive
                                                                                                              10 Dropout
                                                                                                                  10     by     Age
                                                                                                                         Decile of       30 (Males).
                                                                                                                                   Noncognitive

                                                                            ii. By Decile of Cognitive Factor                                                                       iii. By Decile of Noncognitive Factor
                                             1                                                                                                                1
   Confidence Interval (2.5-97.5%)




                                     0.8                                                                                                                 0.8
           Probability and




                                     0.6                                                                                                                 0.6

                                     0.4                                                                                                                 0.4

                                     0.2                                                                                                                 0.2

                                             0                                                                                                                0
                                                       1       2        3                   4        5            6       7   8       9   10                         1       2        3           4     5             6   7        8          9   10
                                                                                                         Decile                                                                                              Decile
                                                 Notes: The data are simulated from the estimates of the model and our NLSY79 sample. We use the standard convention that higher deciles are associated with higher values of the variable.
                                                                   (b) Probability of Being a 4-year College Graduate by Age 30 (Males).
                                                 The confidence intervals are computed using bootstrapping (200 draws).


                                                                            ii. By Decile of Cognitive Factor                                                                       iii. By Decile of Noncognitive Factor
                                             1                                                                                                                1
   Confidence Interval (2.5-97.5%)




                                     0.8                                                                                                                 0.8
           Probability and




                                     0.6                                                                                                                 0.6

                                     0.4                                                                                                                 0.4

                                     0.2                                                                                                                 0.2

                                             0                                                                                                                0
                                                       1       2        3                   4        5            6       7   8       9   10                         1       2        3           4     5             6   7        8          9   10
                                                                                                         Decile                                                                                              Decile


                                                                                                    (c) Probability of Daily Smoking by Age 18 (Males).
                                                                            ii. By Decile of Cognitive Factor                                                                       iii. By Decile of Noncognitive Factor
                                             1                                                                                                                1
   Confidence Interval (2.5-97.5%)




                                     0.8                                                                                                                 0.8
           Probability and




                                     0.6                                                                                                                 0.6

                                     0.4                                                                                                                 0.4

                                     0.2                                                                                                                 0.2

                                             0                                                                                                                0
                                                       1       2        3                   4        5            6       7   8       9   10                         1       2        3           4     5             6   7        8          9   10
                                                                                                         Decile                                                                                              Decile


                                                                                                                  (d) Mean Log Wages by Age 30 (Males).
                                                                         i. By Decile of Cognitive Factor                                                                ii. By Decile of Non-Cognitive Factor
          Confidence Interval (2.75-97.5%)




                                                  3                                                                                                      3
                  Log Wages and




                                                 2.5                                                                                                    2.5



                                                  2                                                                                                      2
                                                              2                                 4                     6           8                10               2                     4                    6                 8                10
                                                                                                           Decile                                                                                     Decile




Notes: The data are simulated from the estimates of the model and our NLSY79 sample.
We use the standard convention that higher deciles are associated with higher values of the
variable. The confidence intervals are computed using bootstrapping (50 draws). Source:
Heckman, Stixrud, and Urzua (2006).


                                                                                                                                                   79
NOTES                                                                                            NOTES




     Figure 10: Trend in Mean Cognitive Score by Maternal Education. IHDP Study.
                                 1
          Mean cognitive score
                                 .5
                                 0




                                      3         5     8                                  18
                                                          Age (years)
                                      College grad   Some college       HS Grad   Less than HS



Note: Using all observations and assuming that data are missing at random.
Source: Brooks-Gunn, Cunha, Duncan, Heckman, and Sojourner (2006).




                                                           80
NOTES                                                                                                                                                    NOTES




Figure 11: Evolution by Age of Average Percentile Ranks on the PIAT Math Score by Family
Income Status: Adjusted and Unadjusted
                    (a) Average Percentile Rank on PIAT-Math Score by Family Income Quartile.
                                65



                                60



                                55
            Score Percentile




                                50



                                45



                                40



                                35
                                               6                            8                                10                           12
                                                                                              Age
                                      Lowest Income Quartile       Second Income Quartile           Third Income Quartile      Highest Income Quartile


                                     D . Residualized Average PIAT-Math Score Percentiles by Income Quartile*
          (b) After Adjustments (Maternal Education, Maternal AFQT and Broken Home).
                               65



                               60



                               55
          Score percentile




                               50



                               45



                               40



                               35
                                           6                            8                                  10                            12
                                                                                      Age
                                      * Residualized on maternal education, maternal AFQT (corrected for the effect of schooling) and broken
                                                                                home at each age

                                          Lowest income quartile     Second income quartile         Third income quartile   Highest income quartile




Source: Carneiro and Heckman (2003), but reformatted.




                                                                                      81
NOTES                                                                                                                                              NOTES




Figure 12: Evolution by Age of Average Percentile Rank on Behavioral Problems Index
(BPI) by Family Income Status: Adjusted and Unadjusted

         (a) Average Percentile Rank on Anti-Social Scores by Income Quartile (Family In-
                     G. Average Percentile Rank on Anti-Social Score, by Income Quartile*
         come between Ages 6-10).
                             55


                             50


                             45
          Score percentile




                             40


                             35


                             30


                             25


                             20
                                     4                        6                            8                        10                      12
                                                                                           Age

                                    Lowest income quartile        Second income quartile         Third income quartile   Highest income quartile


                                  J. Residualized Average Anti-Social Score Percentile by Income Quartile*
         (b) After Adjustments (Maternal Education, Maternal AFQT and Broken Home).
                             60

                             55

                             50

                             45
          Score percentile




                             40

                             35

                             30

                             25

                             20
                                     4                        6                            8                       10                      12
                                                                                  Age
                                  * Residualized on maternal education, maternal AFQT (corrected for the effect of schooling) and broken
                                                                            home at each age
                                     Lowest income quartile       Second income quartile         Third income quartile   Highest income quartile




Source: Carneiro and Heckman (2003), but reformatted.




                                                                                     82
NOTES                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              NOTES


Figure 13: Alternative Measures of the Percentage of Children at Risk and a Measure of
Trends in Single Motherhood
         (a) Percent of Children Under 18 Living with One Parent By Marital Status of Single
         Parent


                                                                                             35%
                                          % of Children Under 18 in Single Parent Families




                                                                                             30%



                                                                                             25%


                                                                                                                                                                            Never Married
                                                                                             20%


                                                                                                                                                                            Widowed
                                                                                             15%


                                                                                                                                                                            Married, Spouse Absent
                                                                                             10%


                                                                                                                                                                            Divorced
                                                                                              5%



                                                                                              0%
                                                                                                   1968

                                                                                                           1970

                                                                                                                  1972

                                                                                                                         1974

                                                                                                                                  1976

                                                                                                                                         1978

                                                                                                                                                1980

                                                                                                                                                       1982

                                                                                                                                                              1984

                                                                                                                                                                     1986

                                                                                                                                                                            1988

                                                                                                                                                                                   1990

                                                                                                                                                                                           1992

                                                                                                                                                                                                  1994

                                                                                                                                                                                                         1996

                                                                                                                                                                                                                1998

                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2000

                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2002

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2006
                                                                                                                                                                       Year




         (b) Percent of All Children Less than Five With Never Married Mother by Mother’s
         Education



                                                                                45%
                                                                                                           <HS
                % of Children <5 Living With Never Married Mother




                                                                                                           HS
                                                                                40%
                                                                                                           some college
                                                                                                           College+
                                                                                35%


                                                                                30%


                                                                                25%


                                                                                20%


                                                                                15%


                                                                                10%


                                                                                             5%


                                                                                             0%
                                                                                                          1940                  1950             1960                1970                 1980              1990               2000
                                                                                                                                                                     Year




                                                                                                                                                                83
NOTES                                                                                                                                                     NOTES




            (c) Percent of All Children Less than Five With Never Married Mother by Race




                                                                              45%
                                                                                           Whites
                          % of Children <5 Living With Never Married Mother




                                                                              40%          Blacks
                                                                                           Hispanics
                                                                              35%


                                                                              30%


                                                                              25%


                                                                              20%


                                                                              15%


                                                                              10%


                                                                              5%


                                                                              0%
                                                                                      1940         1950          1960    1970   1980     1990   2000
                                                                                                                         Year




                                                                                       (d) Trends in Mothers’ Employment, 1960 to 2000.
                     70

                                                                                       Low education
                     60
                                                                                       Middle education
                                                                                       High education
                     50
        Percentage




                     40

                     30

                     20

                     10

                     0
                                                                                    1960                  1970           1980          1990        2000
                                                                                                                         Year




                                                                                                                        84
NOTES                                                                                      NOTES




                                   (e) Trends in Single Motherhood, 1960 to 2000.
                       60

                               Low education
                       50      Middle education
                               H igh education
                       40
          Percentage




                       30


                       20


                       10


                        0
                            1960            1970           1980          1990       2000
                                                             Year


Notes: Figure 13(a) is from Heckman and LaFontaine (2008b). Figures 13(b) and 13(c) are
from Heckman and LaFontaine (2008b). 13(d) Employment is defined as working at least 27
weeks per year for 15 hours per week. Source: PUMS (1960–2000). 13(e) Single motherhood
is defined as not being married or not living with a spouse. Source: PUMS (1960–2000).




                                                        85
NOTES                                                                         NOTES




Figure 14: Effects of Exposure to Adverse Childhood Experience (ACE) on Adult Outcomes
                       (a) Childhood Experiences vs. Adult Alcoholism.




                          (b) ACE Score vs. Intravenous Drug Use.




                                             86
NOTES                                                                                      NOTES




                     (c) ACE Score and Rates of Antidepressant Prescriptions.




         (d) Adverse Childhood Experiences vs. History of STD (Sexually Transmitted Dis-
         ease).




Source: Felitti and Anda (2005).




                                               87
NOTES                                                                             NOTES




Figure 15: Abnormal Brain Development Following Sensory Neglect in Early Childhood.


                           3 Year Old Children




                   Normal                           Extreme Neglect

Note: These images illustrate the negative impact of neglect on the developing brain. The
scan on the left is an image from a healthy three year old with an average head size (50th
percentile). The image on the right is from a three year old child suffering from severe
sensory-deprivation neglect. This child’s brain is significantly smaller than average (3th
percentile) and has enlarged ventricles and cortical atrophy. Source: Perry (2004).




                                           88
NOTES                                                                                                                NOTES




        Figure 16: Perry Preschool Program: IQ, by Age and Treatment Group.

               100

                               95.5              94.9
               95
                                                                 91.3         91.7
               90                                                                              88.1   87.7
          IQ




                                                                              87.1                              85
               85                                                86.3                     86.9        86.8
                                                                                                             84.6
                                    83.3         83.5
                        79.6
               80
                        78.5
               75
                     Entry      4            5               6            7                8           9        10
                                                                    Age
                                           Treatment Group                           Control Group



Source: Perry Preschool Program. IQ measured on the Stanford Binet Intelligence Scale
(Terman and Merrill, 1960). Test was administered at program entry and each of the ages
indicated.




                                                             89
NOTES                                                                                                                            NOTES




                           Figure 17: Perry Preschool Program.
        (a) Educational Effects, by Treatment Group. ∗ High Achievement
        Defined as Performance At or Above the Lowest 10th Percentile on
        the California Achievement Test (1970). Source: Barnett (2004).

                   Special                             15%
                 Education                                                      34%


          High Achievement                                                                        49%
                 at Age 14*                            15%


           OnîTime Grad.                                                                                               66%
                from HS                                                                     45%


                                 0%             10%          20%         30%          40%        50%           60%         70%

                                                       Treatment                       Control


        (b) Economic Effects at Age 27, by Treatment Group. ∗ Updated
        through Age 40 using recent Perry Preschool Program data, derived
        from self-report and all available state records. Source: Barnett
        (2004).

            Earn +$2,000                                                                           29%
                 Monthly                          7%


              Own Home                                                                                               36%

                                                               13%


         Never on Welfare                                                                          29%
                as Adult*                                          14%



                             0%                        10%                 20%                    30%                      40%

                                                       Treatment                       Control


        (c) Arrests Per Person before Age 40, by Treatment Group. Juve-
        nile arrests are defined as arrests prior to age 19. Source: Barnett
        (2004).


             Control             2.1                                        6.7                                 .6




          Treatment        1.2                         3.9                 .4




                       0                    2                  4                  6                    8                   10

                                       Felony                      Misdemeanor                      Juvenile




                                                                   90
NOTES                                                                                                                 NOTES


                                       Figure 18: Returns to a Unit Dollar Invested.
        (a) Return to a Unit Dollar Invested at Different Ages from the Perspec-
        tive of the Beginning of Life, Assuming One Dollar Initially Invested at
        Each Age




        (b) Returns to One More Dollar of Investment as Perceived at Different
        Ages, Initially and at Age 3
        Rate of Return to Investment




                                0                  3                                           Age in Years
                                          Return to an extra dollar as viewed at age zero assuming one dollar of
                                          investment at each age and optimal equilibrium investment is greater
                                          than one dollar
                                          Return to an extra dollar of investment as viewed at age 3 if optimal
                                          investment is made in the first three years (complementarity not too
                                          strong) and a dollar of investment is made at all ages (and is assumed
                                          to be less than the equilibrium amount)
                                          Return to an extra dollar of investment as viewed at age 3 if suboptimal
                                          investment is made in the first three years and a dollar of investment is
                                          made at all ages (and is assumed to be less than the equilibrium amount).
                                                                      91
NOTES                                                                                                               NOTES




Figure A.1: Health and Income for Children and Adults, U.S. National Health Interview
Survey 1986-1995.

                                                                         ag e s 9 - 1 2
  health status (1 = excellent to 5 = poor)




                                              2 .2 5

                                                                                                 a g e s 1 3 -1 7
                                                 2


                                                           a ge s 4- 8
                                              1 .7 5
                                                                  a g es 0 - 3

                                               1 .5

                                                       8                         9                         10       11
                                                                                 l n ( f a m i ly i n c o m e )

Source: Case, Lubotsky, and Paxson (2002).




                                                                                      92
NOTES                                                                                                           NOTES




Figure A.2: Probability of Daily Smoking by Age 18, Males by Decile of Cognitive and
Noncognitive Factor.




                  1


                 0.8


                 0.6
            y
    Probabilit




                 0.4


                 0.2


                  0
                  1                                                                                             2
                       2   3                                                                              4
                               4   5        6                                               6
                                                    7       8                      8
                                                                9        10   10
                                       Decileof Cognitive                              Decileof Non-Cognitive




Note: The highest decile of cognitive and noncognitive ability is “10.” “1” is the lowest
decile. Source: Heckman, Stixrud, and Urzua (2006).




                                                                    93
NOTES                                                                            NOTES




Figure A.3: Ratio of Early to Late Investment in Human Capital as a Function of the Skill
Multiplier for Different Values of Complementarity.

          4
                Leontief
                I = - 0.5
                CobbDouglas
        3.5     I = 0.5


          3



        2.5



          2



        1.5



          1



        0.5



          0
          0.1     0.2         0.3   0.4            0.5       0.6   0.7   0.8      0.9
                                          Skill Multiplier (J)


Note: Assumes r = 0. Source: Cunha, Heckman, Lochner et al. (2006).




                                              94
