                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING:
AMERICAN JOBS AND THE RISE OF SERVICE OUTSOURCING TO CHINA AND INDIA

                                            Runjuan Liu
                                            Daniel Trefler

                                        Working Paper 14061
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14061


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2008




We thank Michael Baker, Albert Berry, Gilles Duranton, Linda Goldberg, Ig Horstmann, Gueorgui
Kambourov, and Thomas Lemieux for many helpful comments and suggestions. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Runjuan Liu and Daniel Trefler. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Much Ado About Nothing: American Jobs and the Rise of Service Outsourcing to China and
India
Runjuan Liu and Daniel Trefler
NBER Working Paper No. 14061
June 2008
JEL No. F16

                                              ABSTRACT

We examine the impact on U.S. labor markets of offshore outsourcing in services to China and India.
 We also consider the reverse flow or 'inshoring' which is the sale of services produced in the United
States to unaffiliated buyers in China and India. Using March-to-March matched CPS data for 1996-2006
we examine the impacts on (1) occupation and industry switching, (2) weeks spent unemployed as
a share of weeks in the labor force, and (3) earnings. We precisely estimate small positive effects
of inshoring and smaller negative effects of offshore outsourcing. The net effect is positive.

To illustrate how small the effects are, suppose that over the next nine years all of inshoring and offshore
outsourcing grew at rates experienced during 1996-2005 in business, professional and technical services
i.e., in segments where China and India have been particularly strong. Then workers in occupations
that are exposed to inshoring and offshore outsourcing (1) would switch 4-digit occupations 2 percent
less often, (2) would spend 0.1 percent less time unemployed, and (3) would earn 1.5 percent more.
 These are not annual changes – they are changes over nine years – and are thus best described as small
positive effects.


Runjuan Liu
3-23 Business Building
University of Alberta
Edmonton AB
T6G 2R6
Canada
runjuan.liu@ualberta.ca

Daniel Trefler
Rotman School of Management
University of Toronto
105 St. George Street
Toronto, Ontario M5S 3E6 CANADA
and NBER
dtrefler@rotman.utoronto.ca
Beginning in the mid-1990s, cumulative improvements in information and communications

technologies (ICT) facilitated a dramatic expansion of international trade in services. The

interaction of these improvements with a politically driven increase in the outward orientation of

China and India has had two major consequences for the pattern of world trade. First, educated

U.S. workers are competing for the first time ever with educated but low-paid foreign workers.

Second, the most entrepreneurial of these educated workers are providing key inputs into the

final product so that, as in Antrás (2003) and Antrás and Helpman (2004), these inputs are

provided in outsourcing relationships rather than within multinationals.       In short, educated

American workers are now facing intense competition from the offshore outsourcing of services

to China and India.

   This development has captured just about everyone’s attention.         Samuelson (2004) and

Blinder (2005) have emphasized its potential dangers while Bhagwati, Panagariya and Srinivasan

(2004) and Grossman and Rossi-Hansberg (2008) have pointed to its potential benefits. The U.S.

Senate has taken a dim view of those who speak out against the mounting jobs hysteria (e.g.,

Mankiw and Swagel, 2006) while international organizations have taken a more balanced view

of the costs and benefits (e.g., UNCTAD, 2004; OECD, 2006). Even management consultants

have been in on the act, seeing the potential to attract business through either over-blown claims

(e.g., Forrester Research, 2002) or considered opinion (e.g., Baily and Farrell, 2004). Yet to date

there has not been a multivariate econometric assessment of the impact of offshore outsourcing

on educated, white-collar U.S. workers. We know nothing about what offshore outsourcing of

services to China and India has meant for the incidence of industry and occupation switching, for

weeks spent unemployed, or for education- and experience-adjusted earnings.

   There is, of course, a large related literature on offshore outsourcing spawned by the seminal
work of Feenstra and Hanson (1996, 1999). Much of this literature is concerned with inequality

and the relative demand for skills. See Verhoogen (2008) for a recent contribution. See also

Amiti and Wei (2005a, 2005b, 2006a) for related work on employment and productivity. The

closest paper to ours is Amiti and Wei (2006b). They regress changes in industry-level U.S.

manufacturing employment over the 1992-2000 period on Feenstra-Hanson measures of

outsourcing and find modest employment impacts. We depart from the few existing econometric

studies in several ways.

    First, we focus only on services, only on offshore outsourcing and only on low-wage trading

partners. Most of the literature deals with manufacturing and works with the sum of offshore

outsourcing and foreign direct investment. The literature also usually looks at all trade rather

than just trade with low-wage countries, though see Bernard, Jensen and Schott (2006) and Liu

(2007) for exceptions. Offshore outsourcing of services to low-wage countries is where the

debate has been most intense and where the econometric analysis has been all but absent. The

international trade data we use are international service transactions between unaffiliated parties

for the period 1995-2005. The data are produced by the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA).

    Second, we examine the flip side of offshore outsourcing, namely, the sale of services

produced in the United States to unaffiliated parties in low-wage countries. For brevity we refer

to this as ‘inshoring.’1 It is inappropriate to look only at the costs of offshore outsourcing to low-

wage countries without at the same time looking at the benefits of inshoring to these countries.

    Third, we work with March-to-March matched Current Population Survey (CPS) data for

1996-2006.      This allows us to control for worker characteristics and exploit longitudinal

evidence. Our strategy of combining matched CPS data with trade data has been influenced by


1
 Slaughter (2004) coined the term “insourcing” to refer to foreign direct investment rather than outsourcing. We are
unabashedly stealing his term.


                                                         2
Goldberg and Tracy’s (2003) excellent work on the effect of exchange rates on wages and job

switching. It is the only study we know of that uses matched CPS data to study an international

trade issue. We examine four worker outcomes: (1) industry switching, (2) occupation switching,

(3) annual changes in weeks spent unemployed as a share of total weeks in the labor force (as in

Murphy and Topel, 1987), and (4) changes in earnings.

   Turning to our results, we precisely estimate either small negative effects or zero effects of

offshore outsourcing on all four outcomes. We also precisely estimate small positive effects or

zero effects of inshoring on each of these outcomes. The positive inshoring effects are either as

large as or larger than the negative offshore outsourcing effects so that the net effect is either

slightly positive or zero. Since the small effects are precisely estimated we can say with

confidence that even if service trade with China and India grows at its current clip, the labor-

market implications will be small. In short, we find that the labor-market consequences of

inshoring and offshore outsourcing of services to China and India are, to quote the Bard, much

ado about nothing.

   The remainder of this introduction reviews additional aspects of the related literature. The

observation that there has been almost no econometric research on the effect of inshoring and

offshore outsourcing on our four outcomes should not be misconstrued to mean that there has

been no research at all. Much of the existing research is primarily concerned with counting the

number of U.S. workers who are in industries or occupations that are exposed to inshoring and

offshore outsourcing in services. This is done by concording the classification systems used to

record international trade in services with various industry and occupation classification systems

used to record employment data. See Bardhan and Kroll (2003), Garner (2004), Kirkegaard

(2004), Blinder (2005), van Welsum and Vickery (2005), and van Welsum and Reif (2006a,




                                                3
2006b, 2006c, 2006d). We use the by-now standard concordance that comes out of these studies

to link international trade data with CPS data.

   Jensen and Kletzer (2005) provide a very different and novel way of thinking about exposure

to international service trade. If U.S. production of a service is concentrated geographically

within the United States then it must be that the service is traded across regions within the United

States. Jensen and Kletzer argue that it must therefore be tradable internationally. Using this

insight, they find that about 28 percent of employment is in tradable occupations. This estimate

is very similar to our own estimate of 24 percent.

   This paper is related to two strands of research. Research on worker mobility has found that

human capital is partly specific to industries and occupations e.g., Jacobson, LaLonde and

Sullivan (1993), Neal (1995), and Kambourov and Manovskii (forthcoming). This implies that

human capital will be destroyed by industry and occupation switching that is induced by offshore

outsourcing. Thus, estimates of the impact of service offshore outsourcing on industry and

occupation switching is important for the design of policy. There is also an emerging literature

on the effect of trade openness on individual income volatility. See McLaren and Newman

(2002), Krabs, Krishna and Maloney (2005) and Bergin, Feenstra and Hanson (2007). We do

not examine income volatility though our work has implications for it.

   The paper is organized as follows. Section 1 reviews the trends in outsourced international

service trade. Section 2 describes our March-to-March CPS matching and the concordance

between the BEA international service trade classification and the CPS industry and occupation

classifications. Section 3 describes the key variables. Section 4 provides a simple difference-in-

difference analysis of the impacts of inshoring and offshore outsourcing. Sections 5-7 present

the main econometric results. Section 8 provides a lengthy sensitivity analysis that is entirely




                                                  4
responsible for the unusual length of the paper. The less interested reader who skips section 8

will find this paper to be of average length. Section 9 concludes.



         1. U.S. International Trade in Services: Inshoring and Offshore Outsourcing

We are interested in the labor-market impacts of the offshore outsourcing of services. The usual

data used in studies of service-trade impacts do not distinguish between (1) offshore outsourcing

– which is an arm’s length transaction between unaffiliated parties and (2) offshoring –which is

the sum of affiliated-party and unaffiliated-party trade. 2 See the state-of-the-art studies by Amiti

and Wei (2006b) and van Welsum and Reif (2006d). See also Trefler (2005, forthcoming) and

Helpman and Trefler (2006). Service trade data originate from balance-of-payments surveys.

To isolate offshore outsourcing in services we use BEA data on international service transactions

between unaffiliated parties. See Borga and Mann (2004) for details of the BEA database. As is

standard in the offshoring literature, we only consider the BEA category ‘other private services.’

It is defined as total private-sector services less transportation services, royalties and license fees.

We will henceforth reserve the term offshore outsourcing for international transactions involving

the sale of a foreign-produced service to an unaffiliated U.S. party. Likewise, we will reserve the

term inshoring for international transactions involving the sale of a U.S.-produced service to an

unaffiliated foreign party.3

    We use trade data for the period 1996-2005 or, when using lags, for 1995-2004. 1995 and


2
  Two parties are unaffiliated if neither has a controlling interest in the other.
3
  It would have been interesting to complement our analysis with a parallel analysis of affiliated-party service trade
or even total service trade. Unfortunately, the BEA does not report this information by detailed country and type of
service. On the other hand, there have been a number of studies of affiliated-party trade. Harrison and McMillan
(2006) provide a thorough examination of the outsourcing of manufacturing jobs by U.S. multinationals. They find
that job creation in affiliates located in low-income (high-income) countries substitutes for (complements) job
creation in U.S.-based plants. Using service-sector data, Feinberg and Keane (2006) find that fast-growing U.S.
multinationals tend to expand employment everywhere whereas slow-growing U.S. multinationals tend to contract
employment everywhere.


                                                          5
1996 are convenient starting dates because inshoring and offshore outsourcing with China and

India were at low levels until then. (Recall that offshore outsourcing of services to India came to

prominence during the Y2K scare of the late 1990s.)                        Given the familiar difficulties of

disentangling Mainland Chinese and Hong Kong trade (Feenstra, Lipsey, Deng, Ma, and Mo,

2005), we include Hong Kong in our Chinese trade data.4                     See appendix 1 for additional data

details.

    Table 1 provides some basic statistics on inshoring and offshore outsourcing. The largest

category of U.S. inshoring is business, professional, and technical (BPT) services. This includes

ICT services (e.g., call centers and software development) as well as various legal, engineering,

management consulting, R&D and advertising services. Column 1 reports the dollar value of

these U.S. exports (inshoring) in 2005. Columns 2-4 report the average annual log change in

inshoring over the 1996-2005 period for the world, China plus India, and the G8.5 Columns 7-9

report the corresponding growth rates of offshore outsourcing. China and India’s inshoring and

offshore outsourcing have been growing at 0.11 and 0.02 log points per year, respectively. See

the last row of columns 3 and 8. The slow 0.02 growth of offshore outsourcing will come as a

surprise. It is due to declines in telecommunications, China and India’s largest offshore

outsourcing segment. These declines may be reversed if China’s version of third-generation

wireless telecommunication standards (TD-SCDMA) is adopted in the future. When attention is

focused exclusively on computer and information services, the growth rate of offshore

outsourcing rises to a remarkable 0.39 log points a year.

    There are two notable numbers in the table that will be used repeatedly below. For Chinese


4
  In the robustness section we include all low-wage countries for which bilateral data are available and find that this
does not alter our results. This is to be expected given China and India’s dominance.
5
  The G8 includes Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan and the United Kingdom. We exclude the United States
(the exporter) and Russia (hardly a rich economy) from the G8.


                                                          6
and Indian activities with the highest profile (BPT Services), the growth rates are 0.14 for

inshoring and 0.16 for offshore outsourcing. These growth rates will be used for the ‘rapid-

growth effect’ described below.

    Since cross-industry variation in growth rates for China and India documented in columns 3

and 8 are one of the sources of sample variation exploited in our regression analysis, it is useful

to be reminded of their causes. First, ICT-related technological change has been more relevant

for some industries (such as computer and information services) than others (such as advertising).

Second, for political economy reasons entirely exogenous to the U.S. labor market, China and

India began liberalizing their economies in the early 1990s.6 These exogenous liberalizations

provided U.S. firms with access to skilled but low-paid workers from China and India and this

access had greater cost implications for some industries (such as call centers) than for others

(such as R&D). The liberalization also exogenously provided U.S. firms with access to a

growing market that was in desperate need of some but not all U.S. services e.g., banking and

insurance. It is helpful to separate out these two sources of cross-industry variation because

much of the discussion about offshore outsourcing has been focused not on its general, ICT-

enabled rise with all countries, but on its specific rise with China and India.

    Table 1 allows one to partially disentangle the first source of variation (the pure ICT effect)

from the second source (the interaction of ICT with exogenous liberalizations). Columns 4 and 9

of the table document the growth rates of inshoring and offshore outsourcing for the G8. This

G8 growth was driven by ICT developments and had nothing to do with Chinese and Indian

liberalizations. Indeed, the China-India growth rates in column 3 are not that correlated with the

G8 growth rates in column 4. The correlation is only 0.43. Column 5 looks at the difference


6
 In China, market reforms accelerated in 1992 as a result of Deng Xiaoping’s famous Southern Tour. In India,
market reforms started in July 1991 as a result of a severe balance of payments crisis.


                                                     7
between columns 3 and 4. It shows that there have been large differences between the G8 and

China-India in inshoring growth rates. This suggests that a substantial portion of the cross-

industry variation in growth rates for China and India had less to do with a pure ICT effect and

more to do with how ICT interacted with Chinese and Indian economic liberalizations. As a

result, in our regression analysis we will use G8 trade data in various ways as a control and/or

instrument for the pure effects of ICT-related technological change.



                                2. CPS Data and its Link to Trade Data

We match individuals across consecutive March CPS surveys from 1996 to 2006 in order to

extract longitudinal information about work histories. 7 We start the matching procedure by

extracting the subsample of all civilian adults who were surveyed in March of some year t. We

then apply Madrian and Lefgren’s (2000) two-stage matching algorithm to find a match in the

March survey of year t +1. In the first or ‘naïve’ stage, individuals are matched based on three

variables: a household identifier, a household number, and an individual line number within a

household. If all three variables are the same in two consecutive March surveys then a naïve

match is made. In the second stage, a naïve match is discarded if it fails the S|R|A merge

criterion i.e., if in the two consecutive March surveys the individual’s sex changes, the

individual’s race changes, or the individual’s age changes inappropriately.8 The naïve and final

match rates for each year appear in appendix table A.1. Averaging across all years, the naïve

match rate is 67 percent, the S|R|A discard rate is 5 percent, and the final match rate is 64 percent

(0.67 × 0.95 = 0.64). Note that for 2001-2006 we also discard oversamples in the State Children

7
  For international trade economists who are not familiar with the CPS, the most important thing to understand here
about the structure of the CPS is that, very roughly speaking, an individual is surveyed in March of two consecutive
years and then dropped from the CPS. We track (or match) individuals across the two consecutive years.
8
  Following Madrian and Lefgren (2000), an inappropriate age change is less than –1 or more than 3. See Madrian
and Lefgren (2000) for more detailed information about the matching algorithm.


                                                         8
Health Insurance Program (SCHIP) extended sample files. Our final match rate is similar to the

rates of 62 percent in Goldberg and Tracy (2003) and 67 percent in Madrian and Lefgren (2000).

  Since the actual match rate is lower than the match rate of 100 percent that would obtain in

the absence of mortality, migration, non-response and recording errors, there is obviously a

selection issue associated with using matched CPS data. Neumark and Kawaguchi (2004) partly

dispel this selection concern by comparing the estimation results based on matched CPS data to

results based on the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP) which follows

individuals who move. However, as a precaution, in section 8.3 we model selection as a probit

and simultaneously estimate the selection equation together with our labor-market outcome

regressions. While we cannot reject selection bias, the coefficients we care about are virtually

the same as in OLS specifications.

  Each worker in the CPS sample is linked to a trade flow via the worker’s occupation and

industry of affiliation. We thus need two concordances. One maps the trade categories in table 1

into the Census industry classification. The other maps the table 1 trade categories into the

Census occupation classification.    For example, consider a programmer who works for an

insurance company. Demand for her services will depend on demand in the insurance industry

(the industry link) and on the demand for computer programmers (the occupation link).

  The linking of service-trade data to industries and occupations is now commonplace in the

offshore outsourcing literature e.g., Bardhan and Kroll (2003), Garner (2004), Blinder (2005),

Jensen and Kletzer (2005), Kirkegaard (2005), Mann (2005), van Welsum and Vickery (2005)

and van Welsum and Reif (2006b). For the sake of non-trade economists we emphasize that we

are not breaking new ground here. Appendix tables A.2 and A.3 present our mapping from the

table 1 trade categories into industries and occupations, respectively. The mappings are very




                                               9
similar to those reported elsewhere e.g., van Welsum and Vickery (2005) and van Welsum and

Reif (2006b).9

      Our CPS sample of matched workers consists of 158,291 private workers aged 18-64. 37,550

of these workers or 24 percent are in occupations that map into service-trade categories.

Following the extensive literature cited above, we say that these workers are in occupations that

are exposed to inshoring and offshore outsourcing and refer to them as the occupation-exposed

sample. 24,261 of our 158,291 workers, or 15 percent, are in industries that map into the table 1

service-trade categories i.e., that are exposed to inshoring and offshore outsourcing. We refer to

these 24,261 workers as the industry-exposed sample. These two samples will be important for

what follows. Note that there is overlap between them: 15,183 workers are in both samples.



                                            3. Variable Definitions

Summary statistics for the occupation-exposed sample are presented in table 2. The

corresponding statistics for the industry-exposed sample appear in appendix table A.4. We will

go through the statistics in detail in order to ensure that the definition of key variables is properly

understood. Since each worker appears in two consecutive March surveys we will use t to

denote the year of the first March survey. t is what appears in the ‘Year’ column of table 2.

      Industry and Occupation Switching: In both March surveys the worker is asked about her

occupation in the longest job held last year (t – 1 or t). A worker is a 4-digit occupation switcher

if she worked in both years and had different occupations in years t – 1 and t. This raw

switching rate is notoriously noisy. We thus filter it as suggested by Moscarini and Thomsson




9
    Welsum is the lead OECD researcher on this topic.


                                                        10
(2006). To be a valid switch, the worker must also have (1) changed her class10 or (2) looked for

a job last year or (3) switched industries.11 See appendix 2 for details. The generalization to 1-

and 2- digit switching and to industry switching is immediate.

     Consider column 1 of table 2. It reports 4-digit occupation switching rates for the occupation-

exposed sample. For example, the 1996 row reports that 28 percent of workers switched 4-digit

occupations between 1995 and 1996. From the bottom panel of the table, switching rates

averaged across all years fall to 0.20 at the 2-digit level and 0.17 at the 1-digit level.12

     Our occupation switching rates at the 1- and 2-digit levels are similar to those in Kambourov

and Manovskii (2008) who use 1996 PSID data. They report switching rates of 0.18 at the 2-

digit level and 0.16 at the 1-digit level. We cannot compare our 4-digit rates to anything in their

work because they use older 3-digit 1970 Census codes while we use 4-digit 2002 Census codes.

However, our 4-digit rate of 0.28 is significantly higher than their 3-digit rate of 0.22. Our

higher 4-digit rate may have to do with differences between the 1970 and 2002 Census codes.

The latter introduced new occupations and industries and also coded existing occupations and

industries more finely (especially in services). Thus, there does not appear to be major

unexplained differences between our switching rates and those in the more careful, PSID-based

study by Kambourov and Manovskii. Finally, while switching rates calculated from the CPS are

notoriously too high it is essential to remember that we are not interested in switching levels per

se. We will be using occupation switching rates in a regression framework with occupation and

year fixed effects. Thus, what is potentially problematic for us is the possibility that occupation

miscoding varies systematically with inshoring and offshore outsourcing even after controlling

10
   There are three classes of workers: (i) private, which includes working in a private for-profit company or being
self-employed and incorporated; (ii) self-employed but not incorporated; and (iii) government employee.
11
   Our results are the same with or without the inclusion of this ‘switch-industry’ filter.
12
   The upward blip in 2002 results from the reclassification of Census industry and occupation codes that was
introduced in 2003. All of our results survive the deletion of 2002 from the sample.


                                                        11
for occupation and year fixed effects. There is little reason to expect such systematic miscoding.

Thus, CPS occupation miscoding does not appear to be a major issue in our context. The same

holds for industry switching.13

     Change in Unemployment: Change in unemployment is defined as the change in the

number of weeks unemployed as a proportion of total labor force weeks. This definition of

unemployment is based on retrospective information from the March CPS and was suggested by

Murphy and Topel (1987). Changes in the proportion of labor force weeks spent unemployed

appear in column 4 of table 2.

     Change in Annual Earnings: Annual earnings are defined as CPI-deflated annual income

from wages and salaries. Means for this variable appear in column 7 of table 2.

     Worker Characteristic Controls: In the regression analysis we will be including the usual

controls for worker characteristics. Sample means for these controls appear in appendix table

A.5. Experience is defined as age minus years of schooling minus six. We classify educational

attainment into four groups: (1) high-school drop-outs, (2) high-school graduates, (3) college

dropouts and (4) college graduates.14 Over half of both samples are college graduates. We refer

collectively to groups (1)-(3) as non-college graduates. We also classify workers into four skill

groups: (1) unskilled blue collar, (2) skilled blue collar, (3) less-skilled white collar and (4)

skilled white collar. These groups are defined in appendix 3. As shown in appendix table A.5,

over 95 percent of our occupation- and industry-exposed samples are white-collar workers. The

remaining demographic variables in table A.5 are self-explanatory.




13
  We are indebted to Gueorgui Kambourov for help with defining occupational switching.
14
  A college graduate has one of the following: a degree from college or occupational/vocational program; an
associate degree from college or academic program; a bachelor's degree; a master’s degree, a professional school
degree, or a doctoral degree.


                                                      12
                            4. A Simple Difference-of-Difference Analysis

Before presenting our regression-based estimates of the impact of inshoring and offshore

outsourcing, we begin with a simple difference-in-differences analysis.15 We compare the labor

market outcomes of service workers who were exposed to inshoring and offshore outsourcing to

those who were not. Then we examine whether the difference between the two groups grew over

time as inshoring and offshore outsourcing intensified. In particular, we start with the 115,090

matched workers in private service occupations (Census major occupation codes 1-5) and divide

this group into those in our occupation-exposed sample (37,550 workers) and the remainder

(77,540 workers).

     Consider the results for occupation switching in column 2 of table 2. Positive numbers

indicate that occupation switching was higher for the exposed sample than for the unexposed

sample. However, the differences are not statistically significant (column 3). Further, there is no

upward trend over time in column 2. That is, exposed workers did not switch more relative to

unexposed workers as inshoring and offshoring intensified.16

     Turning to the share of labor force weeks spent unemployed, column 5 of table 2 shows that

the occupation-exposed sample spent more time unemployed than did the unexposed sample.

However, the exposed-unexposed difference is not significant and did not increase over time.

The table therefore provides no support for the claim that exposure to inshoring and offshore

outsourcing raised the share of weeks in the labor force spent unemployed.

     In contrast, table 2 does provide evidence that exposure has lead to lower earnings. From

column 8, earnings changes were smaller for the exposed sample than for the unexposed sample

15
  We are grateful to Thomas Lemieux for this and many other suggestions.
16
  Appendix table A.4 provides the corresponding results for industry switching in the industry-exposed sample. For
the industry-exposed sample we start with the 78,586 matched workers in private service industries (Census major
industry codes 7-12) and divide this group into those in our industry-exposed sample (24,261 workers) and the
remainder (54,325 workers).


                                                       13
and this difference has become more pronounced over time. We will see below that this result is

driven by occupation switchers.

   Section 8.4 revisits this analysis in a regression setting with full controls and finds that none

of the table 2 double differences (exposed versus unexposed and 1996-2000 versus 2001-2005)

is statistically significant.

   The above analysis is more sophisticated than what has appeared in the recent literature on

offshore outsourcing. Nevertheless, by academic standards it is too simplistic. First, it does not

control for differences in worker characteristics between the exposed and unexposed samples.

Appendix table A.5 shows that differences in worker characteristics are important. For example,

exposed workers are more likely to be college graduates, skilled white-collar workers, married,

male, and white. Second, the above analysis does not control for differences in the degree of

exposure: some of the exposed industries have been hard hit while others have been only slightly

affected. Third, it does not and can not distinguish between offshore outsourcing from low-wage

versus high-wage countries. To deal with these issues we turn to a regression framework.



                                5. An Econometric Analysis of Switching

5.1. The Econometric Specification

We begin with some notation. Individual i first appears in the sample in March of year t(i) and

then appears for the second and last time in March of year t(i) + 1. Let j(i) and o(i) be i’s 4-digit

industry and occupation, respectively, in the longest job held last year i.e., in t(i) – 1. We will

work with both industry and occupation switching. However, consider industry switching first

for the sake of concreteness. Let Industry_Switchi,t(i) be a binary indicator equal to 1 if i’s 4-

digit industry of affiliation changes between the longest jobs held in t(i) – 1 and t(i). Let




                                                 14
  j ( i ),t ( i ) −1 be U.S. offshore outsourcing to China and India in service industry j(i) in calendar
M CI

                                                                                                17
year t(i) – 1. Correspondingly, let X CI
                                      j ( i ),t ( i ) −1 be U.S. inshoring from China and India.   Let r(i)

be i’s state of residence in March of year t(i). We estimate a probit of the determinants of

switching:



                Pr( Industry _ Switchi ,t (i ) )
                             (
                      = Φ θWi ,t ( i ) + β ln(M CI
                                                j ( i ),t ( i ) −1 ) + γ ln( X j ( i ),t ( i ) −1 ) + λ j ( i ) + λ o ( i ) + λt ( i ) + λ r ( i )
                                                                               CI
                                                                                                                                                     )   (1)




where Φ is the normal cumulative distribution function, λ j (i ) and λo (i ) are industry and

occupation fixed effects, λt (i ) is a year fixed effect and λ r (i ) is a state fixed effect. Wi,t(i) is a

vector of worker characteristics. 18 Note that we are not using a panel:                                                               each observation

corresponds to a different individual. In what follows we will drop the i arguments of j(i), o(i),
                                                                            19 20
t(i) and r(i). Our focus variables are ln( M CI
                                             j ,t −1 ) and ln( X j ,t −1 ) .
                                                                 CI




      An immediate question about the specification is whether inshoring and offshore outsourcing

should be entered in levels as we have done or in annual log changes. With annual log changes

the sample variation is, somewhat surprisingly, greatest in industries that had consistently low

levels of inshoring and offshore outsourcing. This is because small industries tend to have

highly variable annual growth rates. For example, the level of offshore outsourcing to China and



17
     Restated, M CI
                 j ( i ),t ( i ) −1
                                    is unaffiliated-party U.S. imports of service j(i) from China and India and X CI
                                                                                                                  j ( i ),t ( i ) −1
                                                                                                                                     is
unaffiliated-party U.S. exports of service j(i) to China and India.
18
   These are years of experience, experience squared, years of schooling, as well as dummies for sex, race, marital
status and veteran status.
19
   The trade data are for the calendar year t – 1 while switching occurs sometime during the calendar years t – 1 and t.
It would also make sense to use trade data for the calendar year t. This is done in section 8.6 where it is shown to
slightly improve the precision of our estimates.
20
   While we report probit results, logit results are very similar.


                                                                              15
India in the construction-architecture-engineering category is tiny, yet the category had huge

annual log changes of between –1.57 and 2.08. Since the sample variation in annual log changes

is greatest in industries where levels of inshoring and offshore outsourcing are low, it is not

surprising that annual log changes in inshoring and offshore outsourcing are not significant in

our switching probits.

   The specification in equation (1) – log levels of inshoring and offshore outsourcing together

with fixed effects – exploits a very different source of sample variation than does annual changes.

An industry that experiences sustained inshoring growth has many years for which inshoring is

first well below and then well above the mean level for the industry. Restated, deviations of log

levels around the fixed effect are large. The sample variation exploited in equation (1) is

therefore driven by sustained growth of inshoring and offshore outsourcing. It is this sustained

growth that is most likely to have influenced employer decisions about hiring, firing, and pay

and employee decisions about switching.

   The usefulness of a specification with log levels and fixed effects stems, then, from the fact

that inshoring and offshore outsourcing have been in a prolonged period of sustained growth.

Recall that in 1996 there was very little inshoring or offshore outsourcing with China and India.

India gained prominence only in the late 1990s when it established itself as a home to cheap

programmers who could solve Y2K bugs. Offshore outsourcing of services was not viewed as

an essential business practice until the time of the tech bubble. See the counts of media reports

in Amiti and Wei (2005a). Thus, the big-picture source of sample variation has been the steady

rise of inshoring and offshore outsourcing since 1996, not its annual fluctuations. Our equation

(1) specification exploits this big-picture sample variation.




                                                 16
5.2. Basic Results

The top panel of table 3 reports the probit estimates of equation (1). For all the probits in this

paper, we report marginal probabilities rather than slope coefficients e.g., we report

            j ,t −1 ) rather than β. Consider column 1. It reports the marginal probabilities for the
∂ Φ ∂ ln( M CI


                j ,t −1 ) and ln( X j ,t −1 ) on industry switching for the industry-exposed sample. A
impact of ln( M CI                  CI




one log point increase in ln(M CI
                               j ,t −1 ) raises the probability of switching by 0.025. Most of the



public debate has centered on this offshore outsourcing effect. The often overlooked

phenomenon is inshoring i.e., ln( X CI
                                    j ,t −1 ) . Its marginal probability is –0.031 which indicates that



a one log point increase in inshoring reduces the probability of industry switching by 0.031.

Before discussing coefficient magnitudes there are a few other features of the table that should

be explained. First, coefficients on Wi in equation (1) do not appear in the table, but are reported

in appendix table A.6. Second, we do not report the equation (1) fixed effects. Third, since we

are examining the effects of industry-level variables on individuals, the standard errors are

clustered at the industry level.

   Column 2 of table 7 reports the marginal probabilities of 4-digit occupation switching. It

differs from column 1 in two subtle but important ways. First, the sample has changed from the

industry-exposed sample to the occupation-exposed sample. Second, the trade data are no longer

mapped into Census industries. Instead, they are mapped into Census occupations. (Recall that

appendix tables A.3 and A.4 report the mappings from the BEA’s international trade

classification into Census industries and occupations, respectively.)

   The remaining columns re-estimate the probits for sub-populations i.e., for college graduates,

for all workers excluding college graduates (non-college graduates), for skilled white-collar

workers and for less-skilled white-collar workers. For each of these, a column heading of ‘Ind.’


                                                  17
means industry switching estimated using the industry-exposed sample and industry-level trade

flows. A column heading of ‘Occ.’ means occupation switching estimated using the occupation-

exposed sample and occupation-level trade flows.

     There are a large number of marginal probabilities to examine. It is therefore worth starting

with some broad conclusions. First, the marginal probabilities for ln( M CI
                                                                         j ,t −1 ) are always positive



and the marginal probabilities for ln( X CI
                                         j ,t −1 ) are always negative. This means that the incidence



of switching is raised by offshore outsourcing and lowered by inshoring. For most specifications

the two marginal probabilities are statistically significant and in all but one case they are jointly

significant. See the row labeled ‘p-value for joint sig.’ Second, the marginal probability for

      j ,t −1 ) is the same for all worker types: it is about 0.025 for industry switching and 0.015 for
ln( M CI


                                                                      j ,t −1 ) is about twice as large
occupation switching. In contrast, the marginal probability for ln( X CI

for college graduates and skilled white-collar workers as it is for non-college graduates and less-

skilled white-collar workers.21 This means that non-college workers and less-skilled white-collar

workers are taking a hit from offshore outsourcing without getting the benefits from inshoring.



5.3. Coefficient Magnitudes

Assessing whether the coefficients are large or small can be subjective so we will use several

criteria. The median industry in table 1 experienced annual changes in inshoring and offshore

outsourcing of about 0.10 log points. Multiplying the marginal probabilities in table 3 by 0.10

yields small impacts. Another way of thinking about magnitudes is to ask what would happen if

inshoring and offshore outsourcing trends over the nine-year span of 1996-2005 continued for


21
  To see this either compare the industry switching columns 3 and 7 with 5 and 9 or compare the occupation
switching columns 4 and 8 with 6 and 10.


                                                   18
another nine years. From table 1, inshoring would increase by 0.99 log points and offshore

outsourcing would increase by 0.18 log points.22 From column 1 of table 3, this implies that

offshore outsourcing raised the incidence of switching by a tiny 0.005 (= 0.025 × 0.18) while

inshoring reduced the incidence by a much larger –0.031 (= –0.031 × 0.99). Applying this

analysis to all columns in table 3, it is immediately obvious that the inshoring effect dominates

the offshore outsourcing effect so that the net impact of inshoring and offshore outsourcing is to

reduce the incidence of switching.

      A very different way of assessing coefficient magnitudes is what is best described as a fear-

mongering experiment. It will be used repeatedly in what follows. From table 1, the growth of

offshore outsourcing has been spectacular in business, professional and technical services (BPT).

If all inshoring and offshore outsourcing grew over the next nine years as it did for BPT during

1996-2005, then from table 1 offshore outsourcing would increase by 1.45 log points (≈ 0.16 × 9)

and inshoring would increase by 1.23 log points (≈ 0.14 × 9). We emphasize that this is a fear-

mongering exercise because it extrapolates based on the most rapidly growing major segment of

service trade. Such rapid growth would result in a 0.002 reduction in the incidence of industry

switching: 0.002 = (0.025 × 1.45) – (0.031 × 1.23). This result is reported in the row labeled

‘Rapid-Growth Effect.’ (We find this to be a more neutral term than the ‘fear-mongering effect.’)

Looking across columns, the rapid-growth effect is almost always negative. The two exceptions

are for non-college and less-skilled white-collar industry switchers. Thus, even a fear-mongering

exercise yields overall reductions in switching.

      Since the rapid-growth effects are not statistically significant, we can take fear-mongering the

extra mile by looking at the upper bound of the 95 percent confidence intervals for the rapid-

growth effect. This gives us an upper limit on the worst that could happen to American workers
22
     Multiply by 9 the numbers for China and India in the ‘total’ row of table 1 i.e., 0.99 = 0.11×9 and 0.18 = 0.02×9.


                                                            19
under the already extreme rapid-growth scenario: industry switching would rise by 0.032 and

occupation switching would rise by 0.007. These strike us as small increases in switching for a

worst-case-plus scenario that stretches over nine years.



5.4. Isolating the Low-Wage Effect

As discussed earlier, there are two reasons for the growth of inshoring and offshore outsourcing

with China and India. The first is technological change in ICT which allowed all countries to

engage in inshoring and offshore outsourcing. The second is economic liberalization in China

and India which allowed workers in these low-wage countries to compete with skilled American

workers. It is the latter aspect – low-wage competition for skilled white-collar jobs – that has

caught the public’s attention. It is therefore of interest to isolate it. Let M Gj ,t8−1 be U.S. offshore

outsourcing to G8 countries in industry j in year t – 1 and let X Gj ,t8−1 be the corresponding U.S.

inshoring from the G8. In the lower panel of table 3, we re-estimate equation (1) after replacing

our trade measures with ln (M CI
                              j ,t −1 / M j ,t −1 ) and ln (X j ,t −1 / X j ,t −1 ) . The rationale for dividing by
                                          G8                  CI          G8




G8 flows is that technological change in ICT led to an expansion of inshoring and offshore

outsourcing to all countries so that ln (M CI
                                           j ,t −1 / M j ,t −1 ) captures that component of offshore
                                                       G8




outsourcing that is unique to China and India i.e., that is driven primarily by endowments of low-

paid skilled labor.

   To evaluate this rationale for using the G8 as a control, we constructed a rudimentary measure

of the ICT costs of outsourcing, ICTjt, which builds on work by Bartel, Lach and Sicherman

(2005) and McKinsey Global Institute (2003). See appendix 4 for details. As shown in appendix

figure A.1, ICTjt is highly correlated with ln(M CI
                                                 j ,t −1 ) (t = 7.40) and ln( X j ,t −1 ) (t = 6.31). On the
                                                                                CI




                                                        20
other hand, ICTjt is uncorrelated with ln (M CI
                                             j ,t −1 / M j ,t −1 ) (t = 1.82) and ln ( X j ,t −1 / X j ,t −1 ) (t =
                                                         G8                              CI          G8




                                          j ,t −1 / M j ,t −1 ) and ln (X j ,t −1 / X j ,t −1 ) purges pure ICT
0.69). This supports our claim that ln (M CI          G8                  CI          G8




effects and captures what is unique about China and India, namely, low wages for skilled

workers.

   From the bottom panel of table 3, the coefficients on inshoring and offshore outsourcing have

the expected signs in all but one case and are almost all statistically significant. The magnitudes

have changed somewhat and this is best summarized by the rapid-growth effect row. Little has

changed for the occupation-exposed sample, but the rapid-growth effect for the industry-exposed

sample is more negative than in the upper panel. There is thus more consistency now between

the industry and occupation rapid-growth effects. More importantly, the big picture remains the

same: a small or zero reduction in switching due to inshoring and offshore outsourcing.



5.5. Endogeneity

A final issue is the endogeneity of the service trade flows in the upper panel of table 3. It is

possible that technological change in ICT is driving changes in trade flows and having

independent effects on switching. If so then the trade variables are spuriously picking up the

effects of ICT technology change.             Since we know from section 5.4 and appendix 4 that

developments in ICT are uncorrelated with ln (M CI
                                                j ,t −1 / M j ,t −1 ) and ln (X j ,t −1 / X j ,t −1 ) , we can use
                                                            G8                  CI          G8




                               j ,t −1 ) and ln( X j ,t −1 ) . This leaves us with a just-identified model.
these as instruments for ln( M CI                  CI




The first-stage regressions appear in appendix A.7. The second-stage probits appear in columns

1 and 2 of table 4. We use the two-stage IV procedure described in Wooldridge (2001, p. 474).

The ‘Exogeneity’ rows of table 4 indicate that we cannot reject endogeneity. For industry

switching, the OLS and IV marginal probabilities of inshoring and offshore outsourcing are


                                                        21
nevertheless almost identical. For occupation switching, the IV results are larger than the OLS

results, but the inshoring marginal probability remains much larger than the offshore outsourcing

marginal probability so that the rapid-growth effect for IV (-0.019) and OLS (-0.023) are very

similar. In short, both the OLS and IV estimates imply that inshoring and offshore outsourcing

had no net effect on industry switching (the industry-exposed sample), but did reduce occupation

switching (the occupation-exposed sample).



5.6. Sensitivity Analysis

Our results will turn out to be insensitive to a large variety of specification changes. These

include broadening the list of low-wage countries beyond just China and India (table 7), deleting

the technology-bubble years (table 8), correcting for CPS sample selection (table 9), including all

private sector workers rather than just those exposed to offshore outsourcing and inshoring (table

10), using different definitions of switching (table 11) and more. We defer this discussion until

section 8.



                               6. An Econometric Analysis of Unemployment

We next turn to impacts on weeks spent unemployed as a share of total weeks in the labor force.

This measure of unemployment was proposed by Murphy and Topel (1987). We estimate the

following linear regression:



          unemployed weeksit
     ∆(                          ) = θ ( ∆Wit ) + β ln( M CI
                                                          j ,t −1 ) + γ ln( X j ,t −1 ) + λ j + λo + λt + λr + ε it
                                                                              CI
                                                                                                                      (2)
          weeks in labor forceit


where the dependent variable is the change between t – 1 and t in the share of labor force weeks



                                                            22
spent unemployed. Since we are working in changes, we first difference Wit. This leaves only

experience squared in ∆Wit.23

     Since we will be arguing that the estimates of β and γ in equation (2) are small, we will need a

benchmark for coefficient magnitudes. Let σU, σX and σM be the standard deviations of the

                          j ,t −1 ) and ln( X j ,t −1 ) , respectively. One modest benchmark is to require
dependent variable, ln( M CI                  CI




that one-standard-deviation changes in inshoring or offshore outsourcing change the dependent

variable by at least σU/10. This implies coefficients for inshoring of at least 0.01 in absolute

value and coefficients for offshore outsourcing of at least 0.008. 24 An alternative modest

benchmark would be an effect that reduced the share of time spent unemployed by at least 0.01

over nine years (i.e., over 1996-2005). This implies coefficients on inshoring of at least 0.008 in

absolute value and coefficients on offshore outsourcing of at least 0.007. Summarizing, both

modest benchmarks lead one to expect coefficients of at least 0.007 in absolute value. Any

coefficient less than this would have to be considered tiny relative to all the hype surrounding

offshore outsourcing.

     A quick perusal of table 5 reveals that every coefficient is less than 0.007 in absolute value.

Further, even though statistical significance is often very low, every coefficient has a 1 percent

confidence interval that lies strictly within the interval (–0.007, 0.007). Thus, we have precisely

estimated very small effects of inshoring and offshore outsourcing on the share of labor-force

weeks spent unemployed.

     The rapid-growth effects are mostly negative and, where statistically significant, always

negative. This means that the net of effect of inshoring and offshore outsourcing has been to


23
   The only time-varying variables in Wit are experience and experience squared. The change in experience is always
1 and so ends up in the intercept.
24
   σU = 0.11, σX = 0.97 and σM = 1.43 so that σU / σX = 0.11 and σU / σM = 0.08. These last two numbers are then
divided by 10.


                                                        23
reduce the share of labor-force weeks spent unemployed. Further, the rapid growth effects are

always less than 0.007 in absolute value and so are small as judged by our benchmarks.

   The IV results appear in columns 3 and 4 of table 4 and do not alter these conclusions. For

the industry sample, the IV and OLS coefficients are the same size but the IV coefficients are

much more significant. For the occupation sample, the coefficients are insignificant for both IV

and OLS. To conclude, inshoring and offshore outsourcing combined likely reduced time spent

unemployed and the net effect is precisely estimated to be small.



                                 7. An Econometric Analysis of Earnings

There is by now a very large empirical literature analyzing the impact of trade openness on wage

levels and the distribution of income e.g. Borjas, Freeman and Katz (1992), Lawrence and

Slaughter (1993), Gaston and Trefler (1994, 1997), and Feenstra and Hanson (1996, 1999, 2002).

All of these are limited to manufacturing.                    For the effect of exchange rates on both

manufacturing and services see Goldberg and Tracy (2003). We estimate the effect of service

inshoring and offshore outsourcing on earnings using the following linear regression:



           ∆ ln(earningsit ) = θ∆Wit + β ln( M CI
                                               j ,t −1 ) + γ ln( X j ,t −1 ) + λ j + λo + λt + λr + ε it
                                                                   CI
                                                                                                           (3)



   Table 6 reports the results. Consider column 1 first. It reports the results for the industry-

exposed sample using industry-level imports. The coefficient on offshore outsourcing is small

and implies that even if ln( M CI
                               j ,t −1 ) grew for nine-years at 16 percent a year, as in the rapid-



growth effect, earnings would only fall by 0.01 percent (= –0.0001×0.016×9). This is tiny. The

corresponding number for ln( X CI
                               j ,t −1 ) is an earnings rise of 0.73 percent (= 0.006×0.014×9).




                                                         24
     When the results are broken down by education we find small but precisely estimated effects

for college graduates. For non-college graduates we obtain a surprising reversal of signs. This is

possibly explained by selection.            To explore, we distinguish between switchers and non-

switchers. Column 7 reports results for workers who did not switch industries. For these workers,

inshoring had a small effect on earnings, offshore outsourcing had no effect and the rapid-growth

effect was small (a nine-year earnings increase of 0.7 percent, t = 3.28). Column 8 reports

results for workers who switched from one exposed industry to another. Now the expected sign

pattern appears but the effects are small and insignificant. Column 9 reports results for workers

who switched from an exposed industry to an unexposed industry. There is no effect of either

inshoring or offshore outsourcing for these workers.25

     These results for switchers versus non-switchers are interesting, but do not explain why non-

college graduates have an unexpected sign on the coefficient for offshore outsourcing. Column

10 points to the role of young workers. Workers between the ages of 18 and 24 are the source of

the unexpected sign.

     Returning to the big picture, all the table 6 estimated coefficients are small and have

sufficiently small standard errors that we can have some confidence in claiming that inshoring

and offshore outsourcing have had either zero or small positive effects on earnings, selection

notwithstanding.




25
  Appendix table A.8 presents a transition matrix that tracks where switchers go and what this means for their
earnings. 30 percent of workers in the industry-exposed sample switch their 4-digit industries. 10 of these 30
percentage points involve workers who move to other exposed industries. These workers see their earnings rise by
0.01 log points in the year of transition. This is likely due to selection: at least some of the workers who move from
one exposed industry to another do so because of better prospects in the new industry. Another 9 of these 30
percentage points involve workers who move to unexposed service industries. They experience an earnings loss of
0.11 log points. Finally, 4 of these 30 percent involve workers who switch to wholesale and retail trade and take an
earnings hit of 0.15 log points. Somewhat similar numbers hold for occupation switchers in the occupation-exposed
sample. See appendix table A.8 for details.


                                                         25
                           8. Sensitivity to Alternative Specifications

We have precisely estimated small effects of inshoring and offshore outsourcing on occupation

switching, industry switching, weeks unemployed as a share of labor force weeks, and earnings.

The remainder of this paper shows that our results are not sensitive to (1) the inclusion of other

low-wage countries, (2) the exclusion of the years in which the technology bubble collapsed

(2000-2001), (3) modeling the selection of workers into our March-to-March matched sample, (4)

the inclusion of all private service workers in the analysis, not just exposed private service

workers, (5) alternative definitions of our dependent variables (1-digit switching, transitions

from employment to unemployment, hourly wages), (6) the use of contemporaneous trade flows

rather than lagged trade flows, and (7) exclusion of all industries except business, professional

and technical services.      The results appear in tables 7-13 and are quite stable across

specifications. In the few instances where an estimate becomes significant where previously it

was not (at the 1 percent level) or becomes insignificant where previously it was significant, this

is flagged in boldface in tables 7-13. Since our results are similar for each of these alternative

specifications reported below, there will be no new important insights and a reader who already

believes that our results are robust can jump straight to the conclusions.



8.1. Beyond China and India: Expanding the Set of Low-Wage Countries

When it comes to U.S. trade in services, China and India are by far the major low-wage trading

partners.   The BEA also publishes bilateral service trade data for all countries that have

significant service trade with the United States. Among low-wage countries, data are available

for China, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines and Thailand. We therefore redefine

  j ,t −1 and X j ,t −1 to be service trade with all six of these low-wage countries. Table 7 reports the
M CI            CI




                                                  26
results of re-estimating equations (1)-(3) with this redefinition. Columns 1-3 correspond to

column 1 of tables 3, 5 and 6, respectively. Columns 4-6 correspond to column 2 of tables 3, 5

and 6, respectively. From the bold-faced numbers, significance changes slightly in only three

cases. All three have the right sign. Two become significant (columns 3 and 4) and one

becomes insignificant (column 6).    In all cases there is virtually no change in coefficient

magnitudes.



8.2. Sensitivity to the Technology Bubble

NASDAQ began its precipitous decline in March 2000 and continued to decline until mid-2002.

As noted by Mann (2003), early research on offshore outsourcing was unable to disentangle the

effects of offshore outsourcing from the effects of the bursting bubble. We now have a longer

data series with more post-bubble data. Nevertheless, to eliminate the effects of the bubble we

delete all data for the years 2000 and 2001. Table 8 reports the results. The one change is an

earnings coefficient that becomes insignificant. (See the boldfaced estimate.) However, our

main conclusions are unchanged.



8.3. Sample Selection Resulting from Unmatched Workers

To be in our matched sample a worker must remain in the same dwelling from March of year t to

March of year t + 1. Since offshore outsourcing may encourage workers to move in search of

jobs, our sample may not be randomly chosen and our estimates may be tainted by sample

selection bias. See Neumark and Kawaguchi (2004) and Goldberg and Tracy (2003). In this

section we use maximum likelihood to simultaneously estimate two equations, a selection

equation and a second-stage equation (switching, unemployment or earnings). Our specification




                                              27
of the selection equation borrows from the migration literature which shows that mobility is

strongly tied to family characteristics that have been excluded from our second-stage equations.

These are family size, number of children, home ownership and whether the individual has a

recent history of moving as proxied by whether the individual lived in the same house last year.26

These instruments are drawn from responses in the first of the two March surveys.

     The estimates appear in table 9. Estimates of the second-stage equations appear in the top

panel while estimates of the selection equation appear in the bottom panel. The Wald test for

selection is reported in the row labeled ‘Wald test of indep. Eqns.’ and indicates that in almost

every case selection bias cannot be rejected.27 Selection affects the fixed effects and the worker-

characteristic coefficients, but does not affect our estimates of inshoring and offshore

outsourcing. The latter estimates do not change in any economically significant way.



8.4. Exploiting Differences between Exposed and Unexposed Workers

In section 4, we characterized industries with a binary variable indicating whether or not the

industry was exposed to inshoring and offshore outsourcing. We then compared the labor-force

outcomes of exposed and unexposed workers.                      In sections 5-7, we characterized exposed

industries with continuous measures of exposure ( ln( M CI
                                                        j ,t −1 ) and ln( X j ,t −1 ) ). We then dropped
                                                                            CI




unexposed workers from the analysis and regressed the outcomes of exposed workers on

      j ,t −1 ) and ln( X j ,t −1 ) .
ln( M CI                                In this section we combine the two approaches by including
                          CI




unexposed workers in our regression analysis.


26
   In the first of the two March surveys the individual is asked if he or she lived in the same house last year. The
correlation of this response with whether the individual is matched across March surveys is 0.14. This is a small
correlation and our results are unchanged when this variable is removed from the instrument set.
27
   The Wald test is calculated by comparing the results in table 9 with the results of fitting the second-stage equation
without a selection correction.


                                                          28
      To this end we introduce an exposure dummy for whether the individual is in the exposed

sample (D = 1) or the unexposed sample (D = 0). We also introduce a period dummy for

whether or not the year is in the second half of our sample where offshore outsourcing was at far

higher levels. The period dummy equals 1 in 2001-2006 and 0 in 1996-2000. To obtain a

double difference we interact the exposure and period dummies. We expect the interaction to be

negative for earnings, which means that the earnings of exposed workers relative to unexposed

workers have declined in recent years as offshore outsourcing intensified. Likewise, we expect

the interaction term to be positive for switching and unemployment. The results appear in table

10 where the interactions are statistically insignificant everywhere. See the rows labeled ‘Diff-

of-Diff’.28 Thus, including workers in unexposed industries does not affect our conclusions.



8.5. Alternative Dependent Variables

So far, all of our switching results were based on 4-digit industry switching. In columns 1 and 4

of table 11 we report results for 1-digit switching. We expect these estimates to be smaller and

indeed they are about half the size of the estimates for 4-digit switching. Interestingly, the

inshoring coefficient for the industry-exposed sample now becomes significant. Thus, even at

the 1-digit switching level it remains true that the growth of inshoring and offshore outsourcing

has been associated with small but statistically significant (t = –5.84) reductions in industry

switching.

      So far, we have defined changes in unemployment in terms of changes in the proportion of

labor-force hours spent unemployed.                   An alternative definition is a binary indicator of

28
     The estimates for ln( M CI
                             j ,t −1 )
                                       and ln( X CI
                                                 j ,t −1 ) do not change much from our baselines: the rapid growth effect
continues to imply small but positive impacts of inshoring and offshore outsourcing. There is the issue of what to do
about the trade flows of unexposed workers since by definition these workers have no trade in their industries and
occupations. We therefore set the inshoring and offshore outsourcing variables to zero for unexposed workers. (It
does not matter that it is zero because the fixed effects absorb any time-invariant constant.)


                                                            29
transitioning from employment to unemployment. If the worker is employed in the March

reference week of year t and becomes unemployed in the March reference week of year t + 1, we

assign 1 to the binary indicator of unemployment. If the worker is employed in the March

reference week of year t and the March reference week of year t + 1, we assign 0 to the binary

indicator of unemployment. A worker who is unemployed in the March reference week of year t

is dropped from the sample regardless of employment status in t + 1. (Unemployed workers in t

are dropped only in this subsection.) Columns 2 and 5 of table 11 present estimated marginal

probabilities of a probit for transitioning to unemployment. The only major change from our

previous results is that inshoring now significantly reduces transitions into unemployment for

both the industry- and occupation-exposed samples.              However, the coefficients remain

economically small.

   We also re-estimated our earnings regressions using the change in real hourly wages as the

dependent variable. Hourly wages are defined as real annual earnings divided by hours worked

last year. Hours worked last year is weeks worked last year times hours worked each week. The

inshoring coefficient in column 3΄ is no longer significant (the industry-exposed sample).

However, all of the coefficients remain as small as in our baseline specification.



8.6. Contemporaneous Rather than Lagged Trade Variables

The dependent variables typically involve changes between year t – 1 and t. To reduce issues of

endogeneity, we lagged the trade variables so that ln(M CI
                                                        j ,t −1 ) and ln( X j ,t −1 ) were used in place
                                                                            CI




         jt ) and ln( X jt ) .
of ln( M CI             CI
                                   In table 12, we re-estimate our equations (1)-(3) using

contemporaneous trade variables rather than lagged ones. As is apparent from the table, this

tends to raise t-statistics without altering coefficient magnitudes.



                                                  30
8.7. Business, Professional and Technical (BPT) Services

Much of the press about offshore outsourcing focuses on BPT services to the exclusion of the

other service categories in table 1 such as financial and insurance services. That is, the press

focuses on services for which U.S. comparative advantage is relatively weak. Table 13 presents

estimates of our equations (1)-(3) when only the eight BPT service subcategories are included in

the analysis. One might expect this to increase the coefficients on offshore outsourcing and

decrease the coefficients on inshoring.     This does not happen.      Indeed, for industry and

occupation switching the reverse happens.      Consequently, the net effect of inshoring and

offshore outsourcing on switching is now more favorable to American workers. This can be seen

from the fear-mongering, rapid-growth effect which implies a large reduction in switching:

–0.035 (t = –11.45) for industry switching and –0.065 (t = –1.94) for occupation switching.



8.7. Conclusions from Sensitivity Analysis

As is apparent from tables 7-13, our main conclusions survive the many alternative specifications

presented in this section.



                                        9. Conclusions

The rise of service offshore outsourcing to China and India has brought with it something new –

for the first time ever, educated U.S. workers are competing with educated but low-paid foreign

workers.    Despite the public concern about this development, there has been almost no

econometric work on the subject. Most previous studies have simply counted the number of

workers who are in industries or occupations that are exposed to offshore outsourcing. Many




                                               31
(but not all) of these studies then conclude from the resulting large counts that bad things must

be happening to American workers. We came up with similar large counts using CPS data, but

then went on to ask about actual as opposed to conjectured effects on U.S. labor markets. In so

doing we emphasized that one cannot ignore the reverse flow (inshoring), which is the sale of

services produced in the United States to unaffiliated buyers in China and India.

   Using March-to-March matched CPS data for 1996-2006 we examined the impacts of

inshoring and offshore outsourcing on (1) occupation and industry switching, (2) weeks spent

unemployed as a share of weeks in the labor force, and (3) earnings. We precisely estimated

small positive effects of inshoring and smaller negative effects of offshore outsourcing. The net

effect of inshoring and offshore outsourcing was positive. We quantified this net effect using

something of a fear-mongering experiment which we called the rapid-growth effect. Suppose

that over the next nine years inshoring and offshore outsourcing continued to grow at rates

experienced during 1996-2005 in business, professional and technical services i.e., in segments

where China and India have been particularly strong. Then for workers in occupations that are

exposed to offshore outsourcing (i) 4-digit occupational switching would decline by 2 percent, (ii)

the share of weeks spent unemployed would fall by 0.1 percent and (iii) earnings would rise by

1.5 percent. That is, American workers on average would benefit. Of course, these numbers are

not annual changes – they are changes over nine years – and thus represent small benefits. The

important take away is that this extreme, fear-mongering exercise does not produce adverse

impacts on U.S. workers.

   There are some darker spots in the U.S. labor market experience with offshore outsourcing.

For workers in industries exposed to offshore outsourcing, the effects tend to be smaller (i.e. less

positive). The effects tend to be negative for workers without a college degree or who work in




                                                32
less-skilled, white-collar jobs. As with all labor-market impacts of international trade, there are

winners and losers and, in the current U.S., the losers are less educated. We do not want to

minimize the effect on losers.     The loss of one’s job can be enormously damaging both

financially and psychologically.

   These darker spots should not be allowed to obscure the big picture. All of these effects are

remarkably small given the hype associated with offshore outsourcing. Further, they were

estimated with sufficient precision that even the upper bounds of 95 percent confidence intervals

involved small effects.    The estimates were also shown to hold across a wide variety of

alternative specifications (section 8). There can thus be only one way of describing the hype

surrounding the labor-market impacts of inshoring and offshore outsourcing: Much Ado About

Nothing.




                                                33
                                       Appendix 1. Trade Data
All data are from the ‘other private services’ category of the BEA database. We exclude (i)
Installation, maintenance, and repair of equipment, (ii) Education, and (iii) Other because these
categories are difficult to concord into industries and occupations. In this we follow van Welsum
and Vickery (2005).
   In 2003, the CPS updated its industry and occupation classifications from 1990 Census codes
to 2002 Census codes. To ensure that codes are consistent over our entire sample we converted
the 1990 Census codes into 2002 Census codes. We then linked 2002 Census industry or
occupation codes with BEA types of service trade. In order to do this as accurately as possible
we used (i) the 2002 NAICS manual for detailed industry definitions and the 2000 SOC manual
for detailed occupation definitions, and (ii) Borga and Mann (2004) and U.S. Department of
Commerce (1998) for detailed information about the coverage of each type of trade in services.
   Our measures of inshoring and offshore outsourcing in services come from published BEA
data on U.S. international services cross-border trade and sales through affiliates. Data for early
years are sporadically missing. This could either be because values of less than 0.5 million
dollars are suppressed or because of disclosure concerns. The two likely go hand in hand: even
a quick look through the data for each industry shows that when data are missing in a year there
are usually neighboring years with data and these data involve very small values of trade. We
therefore used linear interpolation to fill in missing data. However, none of our main results
change when we restrict ourselves to non-imputed data.

                                      Appendix 2. Switching
Responses to questions about industry and occupation in the longest job held last year are known
to be frequently miscoded. This leads to overestimation of switching. We therefore clean up the
raw switching data using the yearly equivalent of the criteria in Moscarini and Thomsson (2006).
Specifically, a switch is valid only if at least one of the following three events occurred. (1) The
class of worker changed. (2) There was job search during the period.29 (3) For an industry
(occupation) switch the occupation (industry) changed. Note that in most cases, criterion (3) was
satisfied only when either (1) or (2) were satisfied. That is, criterion (3) does not have much
bite. On a separate issue, see appendix 1 for a discussion of 2003 changes in Census definitions
of occupations and industries.

                                       Appendix 3. Skills
Skills are defined by 1-digit Census major occupations. (1) Unskilled blue-collar workers:
farming, fishing, and forestry occupations; construction and extraction occupations; production
occupations; transportation and material moving occupations. (2) Skilled blue-collar workers:
installation, maintenance, and repair occupations. (3) Less-skilled white-collar workers: service
occupations; sales and related occupations; office and administrative support occupations. (4)
Skilled white-collar workers: management, business and financial occupations; professional and
related occupations.

     Appendix 4. The Relationship of ICT to Inshoring and Offshore Outsourcing
We have argued that ln (M CI
                          jt ) and ln ( X jt ) are determined in part by technical change in ICT
                                          CI




29
 In the variable coding of LOOKED, a worker looked for a job last year if she worked last year (_WORKYN=1),
was a part-year worker (1<=WKSLYR<=51) and looked for work last year (LKEDPY=0).


                                                    34
and in part by political developments in China and India that led to an opening up of these
economies. We also argued that the technical change aspects could be controlled for by
ln (M Gjt 8 ) and ln (X Gjt 8 ) . The argument was that if trends in inshoring and offshore outsourcing
were exclusively driven by technical change then they might be expected to affect all trading
partners equally. In particular, we argued that trends in ln (M CI
                                                                jt / M jt ) and ln (X jt / X jt ) were
                                                                       G8             CI     G8


driven primarily by political developments in China and India. To assess this claim we introduce
a rudimentary measure of the importance of ICT change in industry j. For service industry j let
ICT_Intensityj be investment in ICT equipment and software divided by total new equipment and
software investment. This measure was suggested in U.S. Department of Commerce (2003) and
is used by Bartel, Lach and Sicherman (2005) in their examination of outsourcing and
technological change. We extracted the data for ICT_Intensityj from the BEA 1997 capital flow
table. Let Telecom_Costt be a time trend that captures technical change over time. We obtain
almost identical results whether we use a time trend or the annual leasing cost of a 2 Mbps fiber
cable between New York and Mumbai (McKinsey Global Institute, 2003). Our measure of ICT
in industry j in year t is:
                            ICT jt = ICT _ Intensity j × Telecom _ Costt .
   The top panels of figure A.1 plot ln (M CI  jt ) and ln ( X jt ) against ICTjt .
                                                               CI
                                                                                    Each point is an
industry (see table 1) in one of the 10 years 1996-2005. From the graphs, the correlations are
                                       jt ) and t = 6.31 for ln (X jt ) . The bottom panels of figure
highly significant: t = 7.40 for ln (M CI                            CI


A.1 plot ln (M CI
               jt / M jt ) and ln (X jt / X jt ) against ICTjt. From the plots it is apparent that there
                      G8             CI     G8


is no relationship: t = 1.82 for ln (M CI
                                       jt / M jt ) and t = 0.69 for ln (X jt / X jt ) . This supports our
                                              G8                          CI     G8


claim that the ratio of China-India activity relative to G8 activity is orthogonal to ICT technical
change. The ratio is instead driven by political economy developments unique to China and
India.
    Finally note that if we include ICTjt directly into our regressions it has no effect on our
estimates.




                                                   35
                                        References

Amiti, Mary, and Shang-Jin Wei. 2005a. “Fear of Service Outsourcing: Is It Justified?”
       Economic Policy, 20(42): 308-347.
Amiti, Mary, and Shang-Jin Wei. 2005b. “Service Offshoring, Productivity and Employment:
  Evidence from the United States.” IMF Working Paper No. 05/238.
Amiti, Mary, and Shang-Jin Wei. 2006a. “Service Offshoring and Productivity: Evidence from
  the United States.” NBER Working Paper No. 11926.
Amiti, Mary, and Shang-Jin Wei. 2006b. “Does Service Offshoring Lead to Job Losses?
  Evidence from the United States.” Mimeo.
Antras, Pol. 2003. “Firms, Contracts and Trade Structure.” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
   118(4): 1375-1418.
Antras, Pol, and Elhanan Helpman. 2004. “Global Sourcing.” Journal of Political Economy,
   112(3): 552-580.
Baily, Martin N., and Diana Farrell. 2004. “Exploding the Myths about Offshoring.” The
   McKinsey Quarterly, June.
Bardhan, Ashok D. and Cynthia Kroll. 2003. “The New Wave of Outsourcing.” Fisher Center
   for Real Estate and Urban Economics Working Paper No. 11158.
Bartel, Ann, Saul Lach, and Nachum Sicherman. 2005. “Outsourcing and Technological
   Change.” NBER working Paper No. 11158.
Bergin, Paul R., Robert C. Feenstra, and Gordon H. Hanson. 2007. “Outsourcing and
  Volatility.” NBER Working Paper No. 13144.
Bernard, Andrew B., J. Bradford Jensen, and Peter K. Schott. 2006. “Survival of the Best
   Fit: Exposure to Low-Wage Countries and the (Uneven) Growth of U.S. Manufacturing
   Plants.” Journal of International Economics, 68(1): 219-237.
Bhagwati, Jagdish, Arvind Panagariya, and T.N. Srinivasan. 2004. “The Muddles over
   Outsourcing.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 18(4): 93-114.
Blinder, Alan S. 2005. “Fear of Offshoring.” CEPS working paper No. 119, Princeton
    University.
Borga, Maria, and Michael Mann. 2004. “U.S. International Services: Cross-Border Trade in
   2003 and Sales through Affiliates in 2002.” Survey of Current Business, 84(10): 25-76.
Borjas, George J., Richard B. Freeman, and Lawrence F. Katz. 1992. “On the Labor Market
   Effects of Immigration and Trade.” In Immigration and the Workforce, ed. George J. Borjas
   and Richard B. Freeman, 213-244. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Feenstra, Robert C., and Gordon H. Hanson. 1996. “Globalization, Outsourcing, and Wage
  Inequality.” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 86(2): 240-245.
Feenstra, Robert C., and Gordon H. Hanson. 1999. “The Impact of Outsourcing and High-
  Technology Capital on Wages: Estimates for the U.S., 1979-1990.” Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 114(3): 907-940.


                                            36
Feenstra, Robert C., and Gordon H. Hanson. 2002. “Global Production Sharing and Rising
  Inequality: A Survey of Trade and Wages.” In Handbook of International Trade, ed. E. Kwan
  Choi and James Harrigan, 146-185. Blackwell Publishing.
Robert C. Feenstra, Robert E. Lipsey, Haiyan Deng, Alyson C. Ma, and Hengyong Mo.
  2005. “World Trade Flows: 1962-2000.” NBER Working Paper No. 11040.
Feinberg, Susan, and Michael Keane. 2006. “The Offshore Outsourcing and FDI Strategies of
   American Firms Operating in Canada and Canadian Firms Operating in the U.S.” Mimeo.
Forrester Research. 2002. “3.3 Million US Jobs to Go Offshore.” Cambridge, Mass.,
   November 11.
Friedman, Thomas L. 2005. The world is flat: a brief history of the twenty-first century. New
   York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux.
Garner, C. Alan. 2004. “Offshoring in the Service Sector: Economic Impact and Policy Issues.”
  Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic Review 3: 5-37.
Gaston, Noel, and Daniel Trefler. 1994. “Protection, Trade, and Wages: Evidence from U.S.
   Manufacturing.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 47(4): 574-593.
Gaston, Noel, and Daniel Trefler. 1997. “The Labor Market Consequences of the Canada-U.S.
   Free Trade Agreement.” Canadian Journal of Economics, 30(1): 18-42.
Goldberg, Linda S., and Joseph S. Tracy. 2003. “Exchange Rates and Wages.” Mimeo.
Grossman, Gene M. and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg. 2008. “Trading Tasks: A Simple Theory of
   Offshoring.” Mimeo.
Harrison, Ann E., and Margaret S. McMillan. 2006. “Outsourcing Jobs? Multinationals and
  US Employment.” NBER Working Paper No. 12372.
Helpman, Elhanan and Daniel Trefler. 2006. “The New World Division of Labor.” Mimeo.
Jacobson, Louis S., Robert J. LaLonde, and Daniel G. Sullivan. 1993. “Earnings Losses of
   Displaced Workers.” American Economic Review, 83(4): 685-709.
Jensen, J. Bradford, and Lori G. Kletzer. 2005. “Tradable Services: Understanding the Scope
   and Impact of Services Offshoring.” In Brookings Trade Forum 2005: Offshoring White-
   Collar Work, ed. Susan M. Collins and Lael Brainard. Washington D.C.: Brookings
   Institution Press.
Kambourov, Gueorgui, and Iourii Manovskii. 2008. “Rising Occupational and Industry
  Mobility in the United States: 1968-1997.” International Economic Review, 49(1): 41-79.
Kambourov, Gueorgui, and Iourii Manovskii. forthcoming. “Occupational Specificity of
  Human Capital.” International Economic Review.
Kirkegaard, Jacob F. 2004. “Outsourcing-Stains on the White Collar?” Mimeo.
Krebs, Tom, Pravin Krishna, and William Maloney, 2005. “Trade Policy, Income Risk, and
   Welfare.” Mimeo.
Lawrence, Robert Z., Mathew J. Slaughter. 1993. “International Trade and American Wages
  in the 1980s: Giant Sucking Sound or Small Hiccup?” In Brookings Papers on Economic
  Activity: Microeconomics, ed. Martin Neil Baily and Clifford Winston, 161-211.


                                             37
Liu, Runjuan. 2007. “The Impacts of Globalization on Firms and Workers.” PhD dissertation.
   University of Toronto.
Madrian, Brigitte C., and Lars John Lefgren. 2000. “An Approach to Longitudinally
  Matching Population Survey (CPS) Respondents.” Journal of Economic and Social
  Measurement, 26(1): 31-62.
Mankiw, N. Gregory, and Phillip Swagel. 2006. “The Politics and Economics of Offshore
  Outsourcing.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 53(5): 1027-1056.
Mann, Catherine. 2003. “Globalization of IT Services and White Collar Jobs.” Policy Brief
  PBO 3-11, Institute for International Economics.
Mann, Catherine. 2005. “This is Bangalore Calling: Hang up or Speed Dial?” Economic
  Commentary, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland.
McKinsey Global Institute. 2003. “New Horizons: Multinational Company Investment in
  Developing Economies.” San Francisco.
McLaren, John, and Andrew Newman, 2002. “Globalization and Insecurity,” University
  College London Department of Economics Discussion Paper No. 02-06.
Moscarini, Giuseppe, and Kaj Thomsson. 2006. “Occupational and Job Mobility in the US.”
  Yale Working Papers No. 19.
Murphy, Kevin M., and Robert H. Topel. 1987. “The Evolution of Unemployment in the
  United States: 1968-1985.” In NBER Macroeconomics Annual, ed. Stanley Fischer, 11-58.
  MA: MIT Press.
Neal, Derek. 1995. “Industry-Specific Human Capital: Evidence from Displaced Workers.”
   Journal of Labor Economics, 13(4): 653-677.
Neumark, David, and Daiji Kawaguchi. 2004. “Attrition Bias in Economic Relationships
   Estimated with Matched CPS Files.” Journal of Economic and Social Measurement, 29(4):
   445-472.
OECD, 2006. OECD Information Technology Outlook 2006. OECD, Paris.
Samuelson, Paul A. 2004. “Where Ricardo and Mill Rebut and Confirm Arguments of
   Mainstream Economists Supporting Globalization.” Journal of Economic Perspectives,
   18(3): 135-146.
Slaughter, Matthew. 2005. “Insourcing Jobs: Making the Global Economy Work for America.”
   Mimeo.
Trefler, Daniel. 2005. “Offshoring: Threats and Opportunities.” In Brookings Trade Forum
   2005: Offshoring White-Collar Work, ed. Susan M. Collins and Lael Brainard. Washington
   D.C.: Brookings Institution Press.
Trefler, Daniel, ed. forthcoming. Offshore Outsourcing: Capitalizing on Lessons Learned.
   Industry Canada: Government of Canada.
UNCTAD, 2004. World investment report 2004. United Nations, Geneva.
U.S. Department of Commerce. 1998. “U.S. International Transactions in Private Services: a
   Guide to the Surveys Conducted by the Bureau of Economic Analysis.”


                                           38
U.S. Department of Commerce. 2003. Digital economy. Washington, D.C.
van Welsum, Desiree, and Xavier Reif. 2006a. “Potential Offshoring: Evidence from Selected
   OECD Countries.” In Brookings Trade Forum 2005: Offshoring White-Collar Work, ed.
   Susan M. Collins and Lael Brainard. Washington D.C.: Brookings Institution Press.
van Welsum, Desiree, and Xavier Reif. 2006b. “The Share of Employment Potentially
   Affected by Offshoring: An Empirical Investigation.” DSTI Information Economy Working
   Paper No. DSTI/ICCP/IE(2005)8/FINAL, OECD.
van Welsum, Desiree, and Xavier Reif. 2006c. “Potential Impacts of International Sourcing on
   Different Occupations.” DSTI Information Economy Working Paper No.
   DSTI/ICCP/IE(2006)1/FINAL, OECD.
van Welsum, Desiree, and Xavier Reif. 2006d. “We Can Work It Out – The Globalization of
  ICT-Enabled Services.” NBER working paper No. 12799.
van Welsum, Desiree, and Graham Vickery, 2005. “Potential Offshoring of ICT-Intensive
   Using   Occupations.”   DSTI   Information  Economy      Working      Paper   No.
   DSTI/ICCP/IE(2004)19/FINAL, OECD.
Verhoogen, Eric. 2008. “Trade, Quality Upgrading and Wage Inequality in the Mexican
   Manufacturing Sector.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(2): 489-530.
Wooldridge, Jeffrey M., 2002. Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data. Boston:
  MIT Press.




                                            39
            Table 1. U.S. Unaffiliated Cross-Border Imports and Exports of Other Private Services, Average Annual Log Changes, 1996-2005

                                                                          U.S. Exports (Inshoring)                                U.S. Imports (Offshore Outsourcing)

                                                            2005             Average Annual Log Change                        2005             Average Annual Log Change
                                                                                    China                                                            China
                                                           World        World       & India        G8        CI - G8        World         World      & India         G8       CI - G8
                                                            (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)         (5)           (6)           (7)         (8)           (9)       (10)
Business, professional, and technical services             33,637         0.08        0.14         0.09        0.04          13,490         0.10        0.16         0.10        0.06
  Computer and information service                          6,039         0.09        0.07         0.11       -0.04           2,469         0.20        0.39         0.22        0.18
  Legal services                                            4,306         0.09        0.07         0.08       -0.01             914         0.04        0.01         0.05       -0.04
  Construction, architecture and engineering                4,080         0.02        0.13         0.08        0.06             422        -0.01        0.13         0.00        0.13
  Industrial engineering                                    2,327         0.11        0.01         0.11       -0.10             174        -0.01        0.10         0.00        0.10
  Management consulting and public relations                2,219         0.05        0.12         0.02        0.10           1,694         0.14        0.22         0.12        0.09
  Research, development and testing services                1,295         0.07        0.12         0.09        0.03           2,317         0.20        0.33         0.24        0.09
  Advertising                                                  606        0.01       -0.03         0.00       -0.02           1,005         0.00        0.04        -0.02        0.06
  Other BPT services                                       12,765         0.13        0.19         0.12        0.07           4,495         0.10        0.06         0.07       -0.01

Financial services                                         29,281         0.14        0.11         0.14       -0.03           6,549         0.09        0.07         0.08       -0.01
Insurance                                                   6,831         0.16        0.17         0.15        0.02          28,482         0.18       -0.08         0.11       -0.19
Telecommunications                                          4,724         0.04       -0.02         0.06       -0.07           4,658        -0.06       -0.10        -0.01       -0.09

Total                                                      74,473         0.10        0.11         0.11        0.00          53,179         0.10        0.02         0.09       -0.07
Notes : Columns 1 and 6 are in millions of dollars. All other columns are average annual log changes, 1996-2005. The two numbers in bold are used for the 'rapid-growth effect' described
in section 5.3.
                          Table 2. Summary Statistics and a Simple Differencing Approach

                                                 Occupation-Exposed Sample (N = 37,550)

             4-Digit Occupation Switching                 Change in Unemployment                         Change in Earnings

             Exposed       Exposed - Unexposed          Exposed       Exposed - Unexposed          Exposed       Exposed - Unexposed

               Mean           Mean          t             Mean           Mean          t             Mean           Mean           t

Year            (1)            (2)         (3)             (4)            (5)         (6)             (7)            (8)         (9)

1996            0.28         -0.006       -0.67          -0.003          0.002        0.60           0.047         -0.002       -0.09
1997            0.28          0.002        0.20          -0.003          0.002        0.76           0.047         -0.019       -1.07
1998            0.30          0.019        2.01          -0.002          0.003        1.30           0.057         -0.052       -3.17
1999            0.31          0.023        2.47          -0.001          0.002        0.79           0.014         -0.035       -2.18
2000            0.31          0.020        2.09          -0.002          0.001        0.40           0.042         -0.031       -1.83

2001            0.30          0.006        0.73           0.006          0.002        1.09           0.036         -0.030       -2.00
2002            0.36          0.011        1.16           0.005          0.003        1.41          -0.005         -0.043       -2.75
2003            0.31          0.000       -0.01          -0.003          0.000       -0.15          -0.017         -0.048       -3.35
2004            0.30          0.002        0.24          -0.002          0.003        1.21          -0.018         -0.052       -3.43
2005            0.31          0.013        1.51          -0.003          0.003        1.10          -0.002         -0.054       -3.64

All Years: n -digit occupation switching
4-digit       0.31       0.009    3.03
2-digit       0.20      -0.020   -7.79
1-digit       0.17      -0.021   -8.40
Notes : 'Year' is the year of the individual's first March survey. Columns 1, 4, and 7 report means for the occupation-exposed sample.
Columns 2, 5, and 8 report the difference of means for the exposed sample less the unexposed sample. The unexposed sample consists
of private workers in service occupations that are not exposed to inshoring and offshore outsourcing. See section 4 for details.
Columns 3, 6, and 9 report t -statistics for the differences. The top panel reports occupation switching at the 4-digit level. The bottom
panel reports occupation switching at other levels.
                                   Table 3. Probits for 4-digit Industry and Occupation Switching

                                                       College               Non-College                  Skilled              Less-Skilled
                           All Workers              Graduates                 Graduates              White Collar             White Collar

                           Ind.        Occ.        Ind.       Occ.          Ind.        Occ.         Ind.        Occ.         Ind.        Occ.
                            (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)          (5)         (6)           (7)        (8)           (9)        (10)

ln(M CI )                 0.025       0.013       0.025       0.012         0.025       0.018        0.023       0.015        0.020       0.011
                          (7.01)      (2.15)      (5.93)      (1.36)        (2.53)      (3.97)       (7.59)      (2.12)       (2.43)      (4.51)

ln(X CI )                 -0.031      -0.033      -0.037      -0.036       -0.021      -0.027        -0.037     -0.039       -0.016      -0.020
                          (-1.95)     (-3.34)     (-2.36)     (-2.89)      (-1.17)     (-3.17)       (-2.45)    (-4.27)      (-1.01)     (-0.60)
Worker characteristics
 and fixed effects         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes

p -value for joint sig.   0.000        0.000       0.000      0.008         0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.550

Rapid-growth effect       -0.002      -0.023      -0.009      -0.027        0.011      -0.008        -0.012     -0.026        0.009      -0.010
                          (-0.14)     (-1.44)     (-0.45)     (-1.41)       (1.23)     (-0.52)       (-0.65)    (-1.70)       (0.96)     (-1.20)

Pseudo R 2                0.047        0.028       0.046      0.026         0.061       0.040        0.046       0.028        0.052       0.037
N                         24,261      37,550      13,499      18,679       10,762      18,871        13,848     18,946        9,119      18,604



                           (1')         (2')        (3')        (4')         (5')        (6')         (7')        (8')         (9')        (10')

ln(M CI /M G8 )            0.015      0.021       0.018       0.017         0.009       0.028        0.014       0.021        0.004       0.018
                          (10.28)     (5.84)      (4.87)      (2.90)        (3.40)      (7.33)       (5.29)      (5.82)       (1.38)      (5.01)

ln(X CI /X G8 )           -0.033      -0.045      -0.046      -0.047       -0.008      -0.037        -0.041     -0.050        0.005      -0.039
                          (-3.06)     (-3.64)     (-5.37)     (-2.70)      (-0.57)     (-3.47)       (-4.55)    (-3.32)       (0.41)     (-1.54)
Worker characteristics
 and fixed effects         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes

p -value for joint sig.   0.000        0.000       0.001      0.000         0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.249       0.120

Rapid-Growth Effect       -0.019      -0.025      -0.030      -0.033        0.004      -0.005        -0.030     -0.032        0.012      -0.022
                          (-1.25)     (-1.60)     (-1.93)     (-1.39)       (0.30)     (-0.37)       (-2.02)    (-1.56)       (0.84)     (-1.19)

Pseudo R 2                0.046        0.028       0.046      0.026         0.060       0.041        0.045       0.027        0.051       0.037
N                         24,261      37,550      13,499      18,679       10,762      18,871        13,848     18,946        9,119      18,604

Notes : Each column presents two separate probits, the top panel with M CI and X CI and the bottom panel with M CI /M G8 and X CI /X G8 . Each
probit includes worker characteristics (experience, experience squared, years of schooling and dummies for sex, race, marital status and
veteran status) as well as fixed effects for 2-digit industries, 2-digit occupations, year and state. In odd-numberd columns the dependent
variable is 4-digit industry switching and the sample is the industry-exposed sample. In even-numberd columns the dependent variable is 4-
digit occupation switching and the sample is the occupation-exposed sample. Marginal probabilities are reported. t -statistics adjusted for
clustering at the industry level (odd columns) or the occupation level (even columns) are in parentheses. 'p -value for joint sig.' is the test for
the joint significance of the two trade variables. A number less than 0.01 indicates significance. 'Rapid-growth effect' is 1.45 times the
marginal probability of the offshore outsourcing variable plus 1.23 times the marginal probability of the inshoring variable.
                  Table 4. IV Estimation with M CI /M G8 and X CI /X G8 as Instruments

                                                                       Change in
                                         Switching                   unemployment                  Change in earnings
                                  Ind.            Occ.              Ind.           Occ.              Ind.          Occ.
                                   (1)             (2)               (3)            (4)              (5)            (6)
       CI
ln(M        )                    0.027           0.033             0.0007        -0.0009          -0.0028        -0.0003
                                 (7.90)          (6.49)            (1.96)        (-1.12)          (-2.50)        (-0.05)

ln(X CI )                        -0.031         -0.054            -0.0018        0.0008            0.0068        0.0133
                                 (-2.20)        (-4.68)           (-10.10)       (0.99)            (14.52)       (2.18)
Worker characteristics
    and fixed effects              Yes            Yes               Yes            Yes               Yes           Yes

p -value for joint sig.          0.000           0.000             0.000          0.440             0.002         0.128

Rapid-growth effect              0.001          -0.019             -0.001         0.000             0.004         0.016

Exogeneity (χ2 or F )             6.07            9.35              7.88           8.86             6.82           0.82
 2            2
R or pseudo-R                     0.05            0.03              0.01           0.01             0.01           0.01

N                                24,261         37,550             24,261        37,550            24,261        37,550

Estimation Method                 2SIV           2SIV              2SLS           2SLS              2SLS          2SLS
Notes : 'Ind.' refers to the industry-exposed sample and 'Occ.' refers to the occupation-exposed sample. Marginal
probabilities of probits or OLS coefficients are reported. t -statistics are in parentheses and are clustered at the industry
level (for the industry sample) or the occupation level (for the occupation sample). Columns 1-2 correspond to columns 1-2
of table 3. Columns 3-4 correspond to columns 1-2 of table 5. Columns 5-6 correspond to columns 1-2 of table 6. See the
notes to those tables for additional information about the specification.
                   Table 5. Change in Unemployed Weeks as a Share of Weeks in the Labor Force

                                                   College               Non-College              Skilled              Less-Skilled
                           All Workers            Graduates               Graduates             White Collar           White Collar

                           Ind.       Occ.       Ind.       Occ.        Ind.       Occ.         Ind.       Occ.         Ind.       Occ.
                            (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)          (5)        (6)         (7)         (8)         (9)       (10)

ln(M CI )                 0.0003     0.0006     -0.0009    -0.0002      0.0019     0.0016      0.0001      0.0002      0.0028     0.0029
                          (0.62)     (0.82)      (-1.57)    (-0.14)     (1.28)     (1.00)      (0.13)      (0.21)      (6.65)     (2.01)

ln(X CI )                 -0.0019    -0.0013    -0.0008    -0.0012     -0.0039    -0.0012      -0.0021    -0.0010     -0.0039     -0.0038
                           (-7.08)    (-2.57)    (-2.28)    (-1.43)    (-14.18)    (-1.55)      (-7.25)    (-1.02)     (-5.34)     (-3.87)
Change in worker
 charact. and f.e.s         Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes

p -value for joint sig.    0.012      0.088      0.047      0.217       0.000      0.308        0.008      0.283       0.016       0.294

Rapid-growth effect       -0.002     -0.001     -0.002     -0.002       -0.002     0.001        -0.003     -0.001      -0.001     -0.001
                          (-1.98)    (-0.69)    (-3.35)    (-1.07)      (-0.82)    (0.37)      (-2.82)     (-1.65)     (-1.42)    (-0.17)

R2                         0.006      0.004      0.009      0.006       0.010      0.007        0.009      0.006       0.010       0.005
N                         24,261     37,550     13,499     18,679       10,762     18,871      13,848      18,946      9,119      18,604



                            (1')       (2')       (3')       (4')        (5')        (6')        (7')       (8')         (9')      (10')

ln(M CI /M G8 )           0.0001     -0.0006    -0.0015    -0.0015      0.0021     0.0002      -0.0003    -0.0005      0.0016     -0.0009
                          (0.38)      (-1.08)    (-2.66)    (-0.91)     (5.62)     (0.15)       (-0.72)    (-0.72)     (1.51)      (-1.52)

ln(X CI /X G8 )           -0.0017    0.0007     0.0010     0.0008      -0.0061     0.0007      -0.0009     0.0012     -0.0051     0.0003
                           (-9.95)   (0.93)     (4.17)     (0.73)       (-8.14)    (0.70)       (-2.60)    (0.79)      (-1.85)    (0.46)
Change in worker
 charact. and f.e.s         Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes

p -value for joint sig.    0.000      0.464      0.030      0.650       0.010      0.790        0.142      0.707       0.286       0.370

Rapid-Growth Effect       -0.002      0.000     -0.001     -0.001       -0.004     0.001       -0.002      0.001       -0.004     -0.001
                          (-8.38)    (-0.09)    (-0.99)    (-0.56)      (-5.78)    (0.47)      (-2.36)     (0.46)      (-1.97)    (-0.64)

R2                         0.006      0.004      0.009      0.006       0.011      0.007        0.009      0.006       0.010       0.005
N                         24,261     37,550     13,499     18,679       10,762     18,871      13,848      18,946      9,119      18,604

Notes : The dependent variable is the change in unemployed weeks as a share of total weeks in the labor force. Each column presents
two separate OLS regressions, the top panel with M CI and X CI and the bottom panel with M CI /M G8 and X CI /X G8 . The regressions
include the change in time-varying worker characteristics (change in experience squared) as well as fixed effects for 2-digit industries, 2-
digit occupations, year and state. The sample alternates between columns. The industry-exposed sample is in odd-numberd columns
and the occupation-exposed sample is in even-numberd columns. t -statistics adjusted for clustering at the industry level (odd columns)
or occupation level (even columns) are in parentheses. 'p -value for joint sig.' is the joint test for the significance of the two trade
variables. A number less than 0.01 indicates significance. 'Rapid-growth effect' is 1.45 times the coefficient on the offshore
outsourcing variable plus 1.23 times the coefficient on the inshoring variable.
                                              Table 6. Change in Log Earnings

                                                                                                                  Switchers to:

                                                                          Non-College           Non-     Exposed Non-Exposed
                             All Workers         College Grads              Grads             Switchers Industries Industries Age <25
                            Ind.     Occ.         Ind.      Occ.         Ind.       Occ.         Ind.          Ind.           Ind.          Ind.
                             (1)      (2)         (3)        (4)          (5)        (6)          (7)           (8)           (9)           (10)

ln(M CI )                 -0.0001   -0.002      -0.008     -0.014       0.016      0.025          0.001       -0.010       0.006           0.050
                          (-0.04)   (-0.38)    (-7.54)     (-2.06)      (4.00)     (5.36)        (0.64)       (-1.20)     (0.63)           (6.10)

ln(X CI )                  0.006     0.015       0.008      0.028      -0.003     -0.011          0.005        0.009      -0.007          -0.043
                           (2.13)   (2.83)      (5.87)     (3.29)      (-0.58)    (-1.54)        (5.00)        (0.48)    (-1.13)          (-3.19)
Change in worker
    charact. and f.e.s       Yes      Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes            Yes

p -value for joint sig.    0.146     0.059       0.003      0.018       0.003      0.002          0.033        0.450       0.189           0.009
Rapid-growth effect        0.007     0.015      -0.002      0.014       0.020      0.023          0.007       -0.004       0.000           0.020
                           (1.43)   (1.99)     (-0.61)     (1.04)       (1.66)     (2.81)        (3.28)       (-0.28)    (-0.02)           (0.87)
    2
R                          0.010     0.010       0.016      0.015       0.014      0.013          0.009        0.066       0.034           0.062
N                         24,261    37,550     13,499      18,679      10,762     18,871        16,903         2,472       4,886           1,557


                            (1')      (2')        (3')       (4')        (5')        (6')         (7')         (8')          (9')           (10')

ln(M CI /M G8 )           -0.0004    0.001      -0.006     -0.011       0.008      0.021          0.001       -0.013      -0.003           0.017
                          (-0.35)   (0.24)     (-8.88)     (-1.55)      (2.73)   (10.86)         (0.80)       (-2.30)    (-0.53)           (0.63)

ln(X CI /X G8 )           0.0064     0.011       0.007      0.026       0.004     -0.012          0.007        0.021      -0.016           0.013
                          (10.24)   (2.44)      (3.02)     (1.68)       (1.03)    (-1.28)        (3.35)        (2.04)    (-1.18)           (2.05)
Change in worker
    charact. and f.e.s       Yes      Yes          Yes       Yes          Yes       Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes            Yes

p -value for joint sig.    0.001     0.109       0.007      0.156       0.114      0.000          0.017        0.132       0.530           0.058
Rapid-Growth Effect        0.007     0.015       0.000      0.017       0.017      0.016          0.010        0.008      -0.025           0.041
                           (7.35)   (1.87)     (-0.13)     (0.82)       (1.91)     (1.43)        (5.49)        (0.56)    (-1.25)           (1.20)
R2                         0.010     0.010       0.016      0.015       0.010      0.013          0.009        0.066       0.034           0.060
N                         24,261    37,550     13,499      18,679      10,762     18,871        16,903         2,472       4,886           1,557

Notes : The dependent variable is the change in log earnings. Each column presents two separate OLS regressions, the top panel with M CI
and X CI and the bottom panel with M CI /M G8 and X CI /X G8 . The regressions include the change in time-varying worker characteristics
(change in experience squared) as well as fixed effects for 2-digit industries, 2-digit occupations, year and state. The 'Ind.' columns use the
industry-exposed sample and the 'Occ.' columns use the occupation-exposed sample. t -statistics adjusted for clustering at the industry level
('Ind.' columns) or the occupation level ('Occ.' columns) are in parentheses. 'p -value for joint sig.' is the joint test for the significance of the
two trade variables. A number less than 0.01 indicates significance. 'Rapid-growth effect' is 1.45 times the coefficient on the offshore
outsourcing variable plus 1.23 times the coefficient on the inshoring variable.
                                         Table 7. Robustness:
               Inshoring and Service Offshoring from All Available Low-Wage Countries


                                 Industry-Exposed Sample                         Occupation-Exposed Sample
                                         Change in                                       Change in
                             Industry unemploy- Change in                    Occupation unemploy- Change in
Dependent variable          switching      ment     earnings                 switching      ment      earnings
                                (1)             (2)             (3)               (4)              (5)              (6)

ln(M CI )                     0.030           0.0005         -0.0022            0.019            0.0009          -0.0031
                              (5.29)          (0.55)         (-1.22)            (2.94)           (0.98)          (-0.47)

ln(X CI )                     -0.029         -0.0019          0.0062            -0.039          -0.0017           0.0155
                              (-2.56)        (-8.74)          (2.72)            (-3.65)         (-2.44)           (2.05)
Worker characteristics
 and fixed effects              Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes               Yes              Yes

p -value for joint sig.        0.00             0.00           0.14               0.00             0.11            0.18
Rapid-growth effect            .008            -.002           .004              -.020            -.001            .015
                              (0.59)          (-1.51)         (1.21)            (-1.21)          (-0.70)          (1.36)

R 2 or pseudo-R 2              0.05            0.01            0.01              0.03             0.00             0.01
N                             24,261          24,261          24,261            37,550           37,550           37,550


                                (1')            (2')            (3')              (4')             (5')             (6')
       CI
ln(M        /M G8 )           0.015           0.0002         -0.0019            0.029           -0.0010           0.0017
                              (9.55)          (0.43)         (-0.95)            (7.85)          (-1.69)           (0.34)

ln(X CI /X G8 )               -0.021         -0.0012          0.0041            -0.039           0.0012           0.0031
                              (-3.38)        (-5.95)          (6.71)            (-3.88)          (1.46)           (1.13)
Worker characteristics
  and fixed effects             Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes               Yes              Yes

p -value for joint sig.        0.00            0.02            0.01              0.00             0.20              0.41

Rapid-Growth Effect            -.003           -.001           .002              -.007             .000            .006
                              (-0.32)         (-2.27)         (0.75)            (-0.70)          (-0.05)          (0.93)

R 2 or pseudo-R 2              0.05            0.01            0.01              0.03             0.00             0.01
N                             24,261          24,261          24,261            37,550           37,550           37,550
Notes : In this table the service trade variables have been redefined to include not just China and India, but all other low-
wage countries for which data are available. Marginal probabilities from probits are reported in columns 1 and 4. OLS
estimates are reported in the remaining columns. t -statistics are in parentheses and are clustered at the industry level (for
the industry sample) or the occupation level (for the occupation sample). Columns 1 and 4 correspond to columns 1-2 of
table 3. Columns 2 and 5 correspond to columns 1-2 of table 5. Columns 3 and 6 correspond to columns 1-2 of table 6.
See the notes to those tables for additional information. A bolded estimate means that its statistical significance has
changed from that in the baseline specifications of tables 3, 5, or 6. In particular, the coefficient has gone from
significant to insignificant or from insignificant to significant.
                      Table 8. Robustness: Deleting the Technology-Bubble Years (2000-2001)

                                    Industry-Exposed Sample                                Occupation-Exposed Sample
                                            Change in                                              Change in
                              Industry     unemploy-    Change in                     Occupation   unemploy-    Change in
Dependent variable           switching        ment       earnings                     switching       ment       earnings
                                  (1)                (2)               (3)                  (4)               (5)                (6)
       CI
ln(M        )                   0.019             -0.0005            -0.0018              0.010             0.0004             0.0001
                                (4.73)            (-0.61)            (-1.26)              (1.42)            (0.42)             (0.02)
       CI
ln(X        )                  -0.027             -0.0017            0.0073              -0.030             -0.0009            0.0115
                               (-1.75)            (-6.87)            (1.94)              (-3.06)            (-1.54)            (1.83)
Worker characteristics
 and fixed effects               Yes                Yes                Yes                 Yes                Yes                Yes

p -value for joint sig.          0.00               0.01               0.26                0.00               0.29              0.23
Rapid-growth effect             -.005              -.003               .007               -.023               .000              .014
                               (-0.33)            (-2.29)             (1.41)             (-1.27)            (-0.42)            (1.45)

R 2 or pseudo-R 2               0.05               0.01               0.01                0.03               0.01               0.01
N                              19,178             19,178             19,178              30,446             30,446             30,446


                                 (1')               (2')               (3')                (4')               (5')               (6')

ln(M CI /M G8 )                 0.010             -0.0005            -0.0015              0.020             -0.0008            0.0038
                                (4.57)            (-1.85)            (-1.92)              (4.53)            (-0.96)            (0.70)

ln(X CI /X G8 )                -0.027             -0.0013            0.0093              -0.046             0.0004             0.0062
                               (-2.63)            (-6.26)            (7.50)              (-4.21)            (0.65)             (1.56)
Worker characteristics
  and fixed effects              Yes                Yes                Yes                 Yes                Yes                Yes

p -value for joint sig.          0.00               0.00               0.01                0.00               0.61              0.34
Rapid-Growth Effect             -.018              -.002               .009               -.028              -.001              .013
                               (-1.20)            (-8.47)             (7.73)             (-1.67)            (-0.56)            (1.24)

R 2 or pseudo-R 2               0.05               0.01               0.01                0.03               0.01               0.01
N                              19,178             19,178             19,178              30,446             30,446             30,446
Notes : In this table the years 2000 and 2001 are omitted from the analysis. The table is identical in structure to table 7. See the table 7
notes.
                                                    Table 9. Robustness: Correcting for CPS Sample Selection

                                                   Industry-Exposed Sample                                                   Occupation-Exposed Sample
Dependent                           Industry                Change in                   Change in               Occupation              Change in                 Change in
variable                            switching             unemployment                 log earnings              switching            unemployment               log earnings

                                                                           Second-Stage Equation

ln(M CI )                          0.025                  0.0006                     -0.0004                    0.012                 0.0007                   -0.0009
                                  (6.85)                   (0.61)                     (-0.28)                  (3.27)                  (0.66)                   (-0.29)
ln(X CI )                        -0.030                   -0.0023                     0.0058                  -0.032                 -0.0017                    0.0147
                                 (-1.93)                   (-7.13)                     (2.20)                 (-2.90)                 (-1.15)                    (1.90)
ln(M CI /M G8 )                                0.015                   0.0005                    -0.0012                    0.020                 -0.0002                   0.0013
                                             (11.88)                    (1.26)                    (-1.35)                  (5.89)                  (-0.18)                   (0.50)
ln(X CI /X G8 )                               -0.032                  -0.0024                     0.0077                  -0.043                   0.0000                   0.0109
                                             (-2.92)                   (-3.36)                   (12.32)                  (-2.65)                  (-0.02)                   (1.19)

Worker Charact. and f.e.s           Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes            Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes

N                                38,348       38,348      38,348       38,348         38,348      38,348      58,633      58,633      58,633       58,633      58,633       58,633
uncensored N                     24,949       24,949      24,968       24,968         24,339      24,339      38,259      38,259      38,260       38,260      37,682       37,682
log likelihood                  -37,074      -37,081      -5,859       -5,859        -50,211     -50,210     -57,342     -57,341      -8,147       -8,149     -75,181      -75,186
Wald test of indep. Eqns           2.82         2.50        4.43         4.31          11.77       11.63       26.98       28.62        5.79         5.71        9.31         9.22

                                                                                  Selection Equation
Excluded Regressors
 Family size                     -0.056       -0.056       -0.053      -0.053         -0.052      -0.052      -0.044      -0.044       -0.041      -0.041       -0.038      -0.038
                                 (-7.50)      (-7.41)    (-12.62)    (-12.68)         (-8.57)     (-8.59)     (-5.07)     (-5.07)      (-8.59)     (-8.58)      (-6.60)     (-6.59)
  Number of children              0.013        0.013        0.009       0.009          0.006       0.006       0.009       0.009        0.005       0.005        0.001       0.001
                                  (3.26)       (3.27)       (6.46)      (6.49)         (4.92)      (4.94)      (1.03)      (1.03)       (1.25)      (1.25)       (0.29)      (0.30)
  House owner                     0.618        0.618        0.623       0.623          0.599       0.599       0.606       0.606        0.604       0.604        0.591       0.591
                                (20.76)      (20.61)      (20.57)     (20.56)        (15.43)     (15.42)     (22.37)     (22.35)      (31.65)     (31.65)      (29.66)     (29.68)
  Same house last year            0.038        0.038        0.035       0.035          0.029       0.029       0.079       0.079        0.074       0.075        0.072       0.072
                                  (2.23)       (2.23)       (5.81)      (5.77)         (2.28)      (2.27)      (3.12)      (3.14)       (5.30)      (5.33)       (4.42)      (4.45)
Other Regressors
 Experience                       0.032         0.032       0.032        0.033          0.031       0.031       0.029       0.029       0.030        0.030       0.029        0.029
                                  (8.79)        (8.78)    (14.39)      (14.39)        (11.87)     (12.07)     (12.75)     (12.70)     (21.13)      (21.20)     (25.87)      (25.78)
  Experience squared            -0.0003      -0.0004     -0.0004      -0.0004        -0.0004     -0.0004     -0.0003     -0.0003     -0.0003      -0.0003     -0.0003      -0.0003
                                 (-3.86)       (-3.89)     (-4.69)      (-4.70)        (-4.50)     (-4.52)     (-5.10)     (-5.10)     (-6.55)      (-6.57)     (-6.68)      (-6.68)
  Years of schooling              0.031         0.031       0.031        0.031          0.024       0.024       0.034       0.034       0.033        0.033       0.029        0.029
                                  (6.79)        (6.86)    (20.64)      (20.90)          (7.89)      (7.83)      (7.61)      (7.49)    (15.68)      (15.44)     (12.87)      (12.68)
  Married                         0.180         0.180       0.172        0.172          0.175       0.175       0.154       0.154       0.149        0.149       0.142        0.142
                                  (6.79)      (12.94)     (11.22)      (11.24)        (10.84)     (10.81)     (11.91)     (11.90)     (18.56)      (18.54)     (11.92)      (11.91)
  Male                            0.010         0.009       0.014        0.014         -0.019      -0.019      -0.020      -0.020      -0.015       -0.015      -0.034       -0.034
                                  (0.86)        (0.83)      (0.96)       (0.95)        (-1.23)     (-1.25)     (-1.46)     (-1.52)     (-1.56)      (-1.58)     (-2.99)      (-3.02)
  White                           0.087         0.087       0.087        0.086          0.089       0.088       0.085       0.085       0.082        0.082       0.080        0.080
                                  (3.90)        (3.94)      (8.07)       (8.22)         (5.95)      (5.93)      (3.74)      (3.73)      (6.89)       (6.88)      (6.29)       (6.30)
  Veteran                        -0.037        -0.037      -0.038       -0.038         -0.034      -0.033      -0.016      -0.016      -0.011       -0.012      -0.015       -0.015
                                 (-3.06)       (-3.10)     (-3.40)      (-3.41)        (-2.24)     (-2.22)     (-0.66)     (-0.69)     (-0.95)      (-1.00)     (-0.81)      (-0.85)
  ln(MCI)                        -0.006                   -0.004                      -0.006                  0.018                      0.02                   0.023
                                 (-0.75)                  (-1.30)                     (-1.07)                 (1.71)                   (3.96)                   (4.00)
  ln(XCI)                         0.015                    0.012                      0.012                   -0.003                  -0.004                   -0.004
                                  (1.25)                   (3.18)                     (3.70)                  (-0.19)                 (-0.77)                  (-0.62)
  ln(MCI/MG8)                                 -0.002                   -0.002                     0.000                                             0.009                    0.014
                                              (-0.92)                  (-0.78)                    (0.08)                                            (3.61)                   (3.25)
  ln(XCI/XG8)                                 0.024                    0.020                       0.019                                           -0.003                    0.000
                                              (3.63)                   (4.42)                    (11.22)                                           (-0.54)                   (0.02)

Notes: In this table, second-stage equations are simultaneously estimated together with a selection equation. The latter is a probit for whether a worker entering the sample in
period t is matched in period t +1. For the selection equation, coefficients are reported. For the second-stage equations, marginal probabilities are reported in columns 1 and
4 and coefficients are reported in the remaining columns. t -statistics are in parentheses and are clustered at the industry level (for the industry sample) or the occupation level
(for the occupation sample). Columns 1 and 4 correspond to columns 1-2 of table 3. Columns 2 and 5 correspond to columns 1-2 of table 5. Columns 3 and 6 correspond to
columns 1-2 of table 6. See the notes to those tables for additional information about the second-stage equations. A bolded estimate means that its statistical significance has
changed from that in the baseline specifications of tables 3, 5, or 6. In particular, the coefficient has gone from significant to insignificant or from insignificant to significant.
                                Table 10. Robustness: All Workers in Private Services

                                          Industry-Exposed and                                  Occupation-Exposed and
                                           Unexposed Sample                                       Unexposed Sample

                               Industry        Change in           Change in       Occupation         Change in           Change in
Dependent variable              switch       unemployment           earnings         switch         unemployment           earnings
                                  (1)                (2)               (3)              (4)                (5)                 (6)

ln(M CI )                       0.017             -0.0005           -0.0001           0.014              0.0004             -0.0022
                                (2.10)             (-0.90)           (-0.12)          (1.89)             (0.50)              (-0.56)
       CI
ln(X        )                   -0.027            -0.0012            0.0071           -0.030            -0.0006             0.0044
                                (-1.43)            (-1.38)           (3.17)           (-3.63)            (-1.01)            (0.80)

Exposure dummy                  0.076             0.0141            -0.0517            0.07              0.0032             -0.0269
                                (0.91)            (2.45)            (-3.96)           (1.72)             (1.25)             (-1.17)

Diff-of-Diff                    0.040             0.0004            -0.0130            0.01             -0.0007             -0.0031
                                (2.47)            (0.20)             (-1.28)          (0.41)             (-0.43)             (-0.33)
Worker characteristics
 and fixed effects               Yes                Yes               Yes              Yes                 Yes                Yes

p -value for joint sig.           0.00              0.05              0.00              0.00               0.03               0.03
Rapid-growth effect              -.008             -.002              .009             -.016               .000               .002
                                (-0.46)           (-3.05)            (2.94)           (-1.32)            (-0.11)             (0.23)
  2           2
R or pseudo-R                    0.04              0.00               0.01             0.04               0.00               0.01
N                               78,586            78,586             78,586          115,090            115,090            115,090

                                  (1')              (2')               (3')             (4')               (5')               (6')
       CI
ln(M        /M G8 )             0.008             -0.0006            0.0016           0.021             -0.0008             0.0008
                                (1.55)             (-1.67)           (0.97)           (4.50)             (-1.19)            (0.23)
       CI
ln(X        /X G8 )             -0.030            -0.0012            0.0079           -0.046             0.0013             0.0007
                                (-3.04)            (-1.62)           (5.46)           (-3.92)            (1.80)             (0.15)

Exposure dummy                  -0.019            0.0024             0.0019           -0.056             0.0027             -0.0105
                                (-0.45)           (0.39)             (0.20)           (-2.04)            (1.13)             (-0.36)

Diff-of-Diff                    0.033             -0.0004           -0.0095           0.001             -0.0008             -0.0020
                                (2.20)             (-0.18)           (-0.95)          (0.06)             (-0.52)             (-0.24)
Worker characteristics
 and fixed effects               Yes                Yes               Yes              Yes                 Yes                Yes

p -value for joint sig.           0.00              0.01              0.00              0.00              0.04                0.15
Rapid-growth effect              -.025             -.002              .012             -.026              .000                .002
                                (-1.37)           (-3.57)            (4.08)           (-2.16)            (0.53)              (0.22)
  2           2
R or pseudo-R                    0.04              0.00               0.01             0.04               0.00               0.01
N                               78,586            78,586             78,586          115,090            115,090            115,090
Notes : In this table we add to our sample those private service workers in unexposed industries (columns 1-3) or unexposed
occupations (columns 4-6). 'Exposure dummy' is a dummy for whether the worker is exposed (=1) or not (=0) to inshoring or offshore
outsourcing. 'Diff-of-Diff' is the interaction of the exposure dummy with a dummy for whether the year is in the 2001-2006 period (=
1) or not (= 0). For unexposed workers service trade is by definition 0 so that the inshoring and offshore outsourcing variables are set
to 0. The table is identical in structure to table 7. See the table 7 notes.
                                  Table 11. Robustness: Alternative Dependent Variables

                                      Industry-Exposed Sample                                 Occupation-Exposed Sample
                              1-digit                       Change in                   1-digit                     Change in
                             industry      Transition into  'synthetic'               occupation    Transition into 'synthetic'
Dependent variable          switching      unemployment       wages                    switching   unemployment       wages
                                (1)                 (2)                 (3)               (4)                 (5)                 (6)
       CI
ln(M        )                 0.012               0.0013              0.0037            -0.004              0.0029             -0.0010
                              (1.74)              (1.39)              (2.49)            (-1.11)             (2.46)             (-0.20)

ln(X CI )                     -0.025             -0.0016             -0.0015            -0.016              -0.0041             0.0151
                              (-3.18)            (-3.32)             (-0.49)            (-2.12)             (-3.70)             (3.72)
Worker characteristics
 and fixed effects              Yes                Yes                 Yes                Yes                 Yes                 Yes

p -value for joint sig.         0.00                0.00               0.14               0.11                0.00               0.02
Rapid-growth effect            -.013                .000               .003              -.025               -.001               .017
                              (-5.84)             (-0.02)             (1.14)            (-2.00)             (-0.70)             (1.78)
  2           2
R or pseudo-R                  0.05                0.05                0.01              0.03                0.04                0.01
N                             24,261              23,876              24,261            37,550              37,017              37,550


                                (1')                (2')                (3')              (4')                (5')                (6')

ln(M CI /M G8 )               0.001               0.0005              0.0009             0.004              0.0017             -0.0006
                              (0.46)              (0.89)              (1.57)             (1.10)             (1.08)             (-0.12)
       CI
ln(X        /X G8 )           -0.028             -0.0030              0.0010            -0.021              -0.0025             0.0131
                              (-3.43)            (-2.78)              (0.52)            (-2.28)             (-1.85)             (2.40)
Worker characteristics
 and fixed effects              Yes                Yes                 Yes                Yes                 Yes                 Yes

p -value for joint sig.         0.00                0.00               0.41               0.03                0.18               0.09
Rapid-Growth Effect            -.033               -.003               .003              -.020               -.001               .015
                              (-4.70)             (-4.65)             (0.90)            (-1.56)             (-0.33)             (1.42)

R 2 or pseudo-R 2              0.05                0.05                0.01              0.03                0.04                0.01
N                             24,261              23,876              24,261            37,550              37,017              37,550
Notes : Column 1 (2) is a probit for 1-digit industry (occupation) switching. This differs from the 4-digit switching reported in all other
tables. Column 2 is a probit for a binary dependent variable which equals 1 if the worker went from being employed in March of year t to
being unemployed in March of year t + 1. Column 3 is a linear regression of the growth in hourly wages where hourly wages is defined as
real annual earnings divided by hours worked last year (weeks worked last year times hours worked each week). Marginal probabilities
from probits are reported in columns 1, 2, 4 and 5. OLS estimates are reported in the remaining columns. The table is identical in structure
to table 7. See the table 7 notes.
    Table 12. Robustness: Contemporaneous Inshoring and Offshore Outsourcing Variables
                                 Industry-Exposed Sample                          Occupation-Exposed Sample
                                         Change in                                        Change in
                             Industry unemploy- Change in                     Occupation unemploy- Change in
Dependent variable          switching      ment      earnings                 switching      ment      earnings
                                (1)              (2)             (3)               (4)               (5)              (6)

ln(M CI )                      0.027          -0.0001          0.0002            0.016            0.0004           -0.0018
                              (11.45)         (-0.08)          (0.24)            (2.65)           (0.43)           (-0.52)

ln(X CI )                     -0.034          -0.0019          0.0085            -0.040           -0.0009           0.0135
                              (-2.91)         (-4.29)          (1.88)            (-3.37)          (-1.67)           (2.77)
Worker characteristics
 and fixed effects              Yes             Yes              Yes               Yes              Yes               Yes

p -value for joint sig.         0.00            0.01            0.26               0.00             0.30             0.07
Rapid-growth effect           -0.002          -0.002           0.011             -0.026           -0.001            0.014
                              (-0.13)         (-1.99)          (1.71)            (-1.66)          (-0.45)           (2.11)
  2           2
R or pseudo-R                  0.05            0.01             0.01              0.03             0.00              0.01
N                             24,261          24,261           24,261            37,550           37,550            37,550

                                (1')            (2')             (3')              (4')              (5')             (6')

ln(M CI /M G8 )                0.015          -0.0001         -0.0005            0.021            0.0000            0.0015
                              (11.40)         (-0.20)         (-0.60)            (4.33)           (-0.06)           (0.46)

ln(X CI /X G8 )               -0.031          -0.0020          0.0088            -0.046           0.0001            0.0054
                              (-3.38)         (-2.33)          (7.32)            (-3.46)          (0.17)            (2.80)
Worker characteristics
 and fixed effects              Yes             Yes              Yes               Yes              Yes               Yes

p -value for joint sig.         0.00            0.00            0.01               0.00             0.98             0.06
Rapid-Growth Effect           -0.016           -0.003          0.010             -0.026            0.000            0.009
                              (-1.20)         (-13.74)         (9.13)            (-1.87)           (0.07)           (1.70)

R 2 or pseudo-R 2              0.05            0.01             0.01              0.03             0.00              0.01
N                             24,261          24,261           24,261            37,550           37,550            37,550
Notes : In this table we use imports and exports for year t rather than year t - 1. The table is identical in structure to table
7. See the table 7 notes.
                          Table 13. Robustness: Only Business, Professional and Technical Services

                                        Industry-Exposed Sample                   Occupation-Exposed Sample
                                                Change in                                  Change in
                                    Industry   unemploy- Change in            Occupation unemploy- Change in
Dependent variable                 switching      ment      earnings          switching      ment       earnings
                                      (1)         (2)           (3)                (4)               (5)              (6)
       CI
ln(M        )                        0.021      -0.0006       0.0006             0.000            0.0014           -0.0024
                                     (3.00)      (-1.06)      (0.28)            (-0.01)           (1.38)            (-0.51)
       CI
ln(X        )                       -0.052      -0.0026       0.0109            -0.053            -0.0012          0.0211
                                    (-9.14)      (-5.98)      (4.66)            (-3.46)            (-1.45)         (2.65)
Worker characteristics
 and fixed effects                    Yes         Yes           Yes               Yes               Yes              Yes

p -value for joint sig.               0.00        0.00          0.00              0.00              0.17             0.03
Rapid-growth effect                   -.035       -.004         .014             -.065              .001             .023
                                    (-11.45)    (-10.55)      (26.08)           (-1.94)            (0.29)           (3.31)

R 2 or pseudo-R 2                    0.06        0.01          0.01              0.03              0.00             0.01
N                                   11,927      11,927        11,927            32,481            32,481           32,481

                                      (1')        (2')          (3')               (4')             (5')             (6')

ln(M CI /M G8 )                     -0.017      0.0005        0.0009             0.022            -0.0001          0.0047
                                    (-2.17)     (0.39)        (0.24)             (1.25)            (-0.05)         (0.50)
       CI        G8
ln(X        /X        )              -0.042     -0.0016       0.0049            -0.054            0.0007           0.0170
                                    (-19.40)     (-4.42)      (1.89)            (-2.81)           (0.68)           (1.91)
Worker characteristics
 and fixed effects                    Yes         Yes           Yes               Yes               Yes              Yes

p -value for joint sig.               0.00        0.06          0.03              0.00              0.77             0.02
Rapid-Growth Effect                  -.076       -.001          .007             -.034              .001             .028
                                    (-8.40)     (-0.76)        (2.78)           (-0.73)            (0.19)           (1.15)

R 2 or pseudo-R 2                    0.06        0.01          0.01              0.03              0.00             0.01
N                                   11,927      11,927        11,927            32,481            32,481           32,481
Notes : In this table we only include those service trade categories that feed into Business, Professional, and Technical (BPT)
services. See table 1 for a list of these 8 categories. The table is identical in structure to table 7. See the table 7 notes.
  Table A.1. Matching Rates for CPS Data

                Naïve           Valid          Final
   Year         Match           Match          Match
   1996          71%             95%            67%
   1997          70%             95%            67%
   1998          70%             96%            67%
   1999          69%             96%            66%
   2000          75%             97%            73%
   2001          64%             94%            60%
   2002          65%             92%            60%
   2003          65%             94%            61%
   2004          57%             95%            54%
   2005          59%             94%            55%
 average         67%             95%            64%

Notes : 'Naïve Match' is the proportion of all civilian
adults in March of the indicated year who can be
matched to an individual in March of the subsequent
year. The naïve match is based on a household identifier,
a household number, and an individual line number
within a household. 'Valid Match' is the percentage of
naïve matches that survive the S|R|A (sex, race, age)
merge criterion. 'Final Match' is the final match rate and
equals (naïve match)x(valid match).
                           Table A.2. Concordance between Census Industry Codes and NAICS/BEA Codes
2002                                                                               2002
Census                                                                             NAICS
Codes    2002 Census Categories                                                    Codes                 BEA 'Other Private Service' Codes
7470     Advertising and related services                                          5418                  advertising
7290     Architectural, engineering, and related services                          5413                  construction, architecture, engineering services
6490     Software publishing                                                       5112                  computer and information services
6675     Internet publishing and broadcasting                                      5161                  computer and information services
6692     Internet service providers                                                5181                  computer and information services
6695     Data processing, hosting, and related services                            5182                  computer and information services
6780     Other information services                                                5191 exc. 51912       computer and information services
7380     Computer systems design and related services                              5415                  computer and information services
6870     Banking and related activities                                            521, 52211,52219      finance
6880     Savings institutions, including credit unions                             52212, 52213          finance
6890     Non-depository credit and related activities                              5222, 5223            finance
6970     Securities, commodities, funds, trusts, and other financial investments   523, 525              finance
7370     Specialized design services                                               5414                  industrial engineering
6990     Insurance carriers and related activities                                 524                   insurance
7270     Legal services                                                            5411                  legal services
7390     Management, scientific, and technical consulting services                 5416                  management, consulting, public relation services
7280     Accounting, tax preparation, bookkeeping, and payroll services            5412                  other business, professional and technical services
7490     Other professional, scientific, and technical services                    5419 exc. 54194       other business, professional and technical services
7590     Business support services                                                 5614                  other business, professional and technical services
7780     Other administrative and other support services                           5611, 5612, 5619      other business, professional and technical services
7460     Scientific research and development services                              5417                  research, development and testing services
6680     Wired telecommunications carriers                                         5171                  telecommunication
6690     Other telecommunications services                                         517 exc. 5171, 5175   telecommunication
                Table A.3. Concordance between Census Occupation Codes and NAICS/BEA Codes
2002                                                                    2002
Census                                                                  SOC
Codes    2002 Census Categories                                         Codes     BEA 'Other Private Service' Codes
0040     Advertising and promotions managers                            11-2011   advertising
4800     Advertising sales agents                                       41-3011   advertising
0300     Engineering managers                                           11-9041   construction, architecture, engineering services
1300     Architects, except naval                                       17-1010   construction, architecture, engineering services
1310     Surveyors, cartographers, and photogrammetrists                17-1020   construction, architecture, engineering services
1360     Civil engineers                                                17-2051   construction, architecture, engineering services
1560     Surveying and mapping technicians                              17-3031   construction, architecture, engineering services
0110     Computer and information systems managers                      11-3021   computer and information services
1000     Computer scientists and systems analysts                       15-10XX   computer and information services
1010     Computer programmers                                           15-1021   computer and information services
1020     Computer software engineers                                    15-1030   computer and information services
1040     Computer support specialists                                   15-1041   computer and information services
1060     Database administrators                                        15-1061   computer and information services
1100     Network and computer systems administrators                    15-1071   computer and information services
1110     Network systems and data communications analysts               15-1081   computer and information services
1400     Computer hardware engineers                                    17-2061   computer and information services
5800     Computer operators                                             43-9011   computer and information services
5810     Data entry keyers                                              43-9021   computer and information services
5830     Desktop publishers                                             43-9031   computer and information services
5920     Statistical assistants                                         43-9111   computer and information services
0120     Financial managers                                             11-3031   finance
0830     Credit analysts                                                13-2041   finance
0840     Financial analysts                                             13-2051   finance
0850     Personal financial advisors                                    13-2052   finance
0900     Financial examiners                                            13-2061   finance
0910     Loan counselors and officers                                   13-2070   finance
0950     Financial specialists, all other                               13-2099   finance
4820     Securities, commodities, and financial services sales agents   41-3031   finance
5200     Brokerage clerks                                               43-4011   finance
5230     Credit authorizers, checkers, and clerks                       43-4041   finance
5330     Loan interviewers and clerks                                   43-4131   finance
5340     New accounts clerks                                            43-4141   finance
1350     Chemical engineers                                             17-2041   industrial engineering
1410     Electrical and electronic engineers                            17-2070   industrial engineering
1430     Industrial engineers, including health and safety              17-2110   industrial engineering
1460     Mechanical engineers                                           17-2141   industrial engineering
1550     Engineering technicians, except drafters                       17-3020   industrial engineering
0540     Claims adjusters, appraisers, examiners, and investigators     13-1030   insurance
0860     Insurance underwriters                                         13-2053   insurance
1200     Actuaries                                                      15-2011   insurance
4810     Insurance sales agents                                         41-3021   insurance
5840     Insurance claims and policy processing clerks                  43-9041   insurance
2140     Paralegals and legal assistants                                23-2011   legal services
2150     Miscellaneous legal support workers                            23-2090   legal services
0010     Chief executives                                               11-1011   management, consulting, public relation services
0020     General and operations managers                                11-1021   management, consulting, public relation services
0050     Marketing and sales managers                                   11-2020   management, consulting, public relation services
0060     Public relations managers                                      11-2031   management, consulting, public relation services
0100     Administrative services managers                               11-3011   management, consulting, public relation services
0130     Human resources managers                                       11-3040   management, consulting, public relation services
0140     Industrial production managers                                 11-3051   management, consulting, public relation services
0150     Purchasing managers                                            11-3061   management, consulting, public relation services
0160     Transportation, storage, and distribution managers             11-3071   management, consulting, public relation services
0600     Cost estimators                                                13-1051   management, consulting, public relation services
0710     Management analysts                                            13-1111   management, consulting, public relation services
0730     Other business operations specialists                          13-11XX   management, consulting, public relation services
1220     Operations research analysts                                   15-2031   management, consulting, public relation services
         Table A.3. Concordance between Census Occupation Codes and NAICS/BEA Codes (continued )
2002                                                                      2002
Census                                                                    SOC
Codes    2002 Census Categories                                           Codes     BEA 'Other Private Service' Codes
0800     Accountants and auditors                                         13-2011   other business, professional and technical services
0820     Budget analysts                                                  13-2031   other business, professional and technical services
0940     Tax preparers                                                    13-2082   other business, professional and technical services
3320     Diagnostic related technologists and technicians                 29-2030   other business, professional and technical services
4940     Telemarketers                                                    41-9041   other business, professional and technical services
5000     First-line supervisors/managers of office & admin. support       43-1011   other business, professional and technical services
5010     Switchboard operators, including answering service               43-2011   other business, professional and technical services
5020     Telephone operators                                              43-2021   other business, professional and technical services
5030     Communications equipment operators, all other                    43-2099   other business, professional and technical services
5100     Bill and account collectors                                      43-3011   other business, professional and technical services
5110     Billing and posting clerks and machine operators                 43-3021   other business, professional and technical services
5120     Bookkeeping, accounting, and auditing clerks                     43-3031   other business, professional and technical services
5140     Payroll and timekeeping clerks                                   43-3051   other business, professional and technical services
5150     Procurement clerks                                               43-3061   other business, professional and technical services
5160     Tellers                                                          43-3071   other business, professional and technical services
5210     Correspondence clerks                                            43-4021   other business, professional and technical services
5240     Customer service representatives                                 43-4051   other business, professional and technical services
5260     File Clerks                                                      43-4071   other business, professional and technical services
5310     Interviewers, except eligibility and loan                        43-4111   other business, professional and technical services
5350     Order clerks                                                     43-4151   other business, professional and technical services
5400     Receptionists and information clerks                             43-4171   other business, professional and technical services
5410     Reservation and transportation ticket agents and travel clerks   43-4181   other business, professional and technical services
5420     Information and record clerks, all other                         43-4199   other business, professional and technical services
5600     Production, planning, and expediting clerks                      43-5061   other business, professional and technical services
5700     Secretaries and administrative assistants                        43-6010   other business, professional and technical services
5820     Word processors and typists                                      43-9022   other business, professional and technical services
1320     Aerospace engineers                                              17-2011   research, development and testing services
1330     Agricultural engineers                                           17-2021   research, development and testing services
1440     Marine engineers and naval architects                            17-2121   research, development and testing services
1450     Materials engineers                                              17-2131   research, development and testing services
1600     Agricultural and food scientists                                 19-1010   research, development and testing services
1610     Biological scientists                                            19-1020   research, development and testing services
1640     Conservation scientists and foresters                            19-1030   research, development and testing services
1720     Chemists and materials scientists                                19-2030   research, development and testing services
1740     Environmental scientists and geoscientists                       19-2040   research, development and testing services
1760     Physical scientists, all other                                   19-2099   research, development and testing services
1900     Agricultural and food science technicians                        19-4011   research, development and testing services
1910     Biological technicians                                           19-4021   research, development and testing services
1920     Chemical technicians                                             19-4031   research, development and testing services
  Table A.4. Summary Statistics and a Simple Differencing Approach for the Industry-Exposed Sample

                                                   Industry-Exposed Sample (N = 24,261)

                    Industry Switching                      Change in Unemployment                            Change in Earnings

              Exposed       Exposed - Unexposed            Exposed       Exposed - Unexposed            Exposed       Exposed - Unexposed

               Mean            Mean           t             Mean            Mean           t             Mean            Mean           t

Year             (1)            (2)          (3)             (4)             (5)          (6)             (7)             (8)          (9)

1996             0.27         -0.011       -0.91           -0.005           0.000       -0.07            0.054          -0.020       -0.95
1997             0.26         -0.005       -0.43            0.002           0.009        2.58            0.023          -0.065       -2.96
1998             0.28          0.011        0.99           -0.003           0.004        1.38            0.042          -0.087       -4.32
1999             0.30          0.024        2.12           -0.001           0.006        2.06            0.023          -0.034       -1.67
2000             0.28         -0.007       -0.59           -0.002           0.003        1.05            0.018          -0.084       -4.08

2001             0.30          0.022        2.09            0.005           0.007        2.43            0.017          -0.076       -4.19
2002             0.38          0.069        6.43            0.007           0.009        3.21           -0.031          -0.107       -5.74
2003             0.31          0.023        2.18           -0.003           0.003        0.89           -0.018          -0.053       -2.89
2004             0.31          0.030        2.68           -0.002           0.003        0.96           -0.039          -0.082       -4.24
2005             0.31          0.025        2.28           -0.005           0.000        0.04            0.004          -0.047       -2.46

All Years: n -digit industry switching
4-digit       0.30       0.020     5.67
2-digit       0.25       0.020     6.05
1-digit       0.23       0.022     6.89
Notes : This table is the industry-exposed counterpart to table 2. The table is identical in structure to table 2 so see the table 2 notes.
                                               Table A.5. Sample Statistics

                                              Industry-Exposed Sample                       Occupation-Exposed Sample
                                                    (N = 24,261)                                  (N = 37,550)
                                           Mean       Std. Dev.      Difference            Mean       Std. Dev.      Difference
                                            (1)          (2)             (3)                (4)          (5)             (6)

Industry Switch
  4-digit industry switch                   0.30           0.46       0.020 *
  2-digit industry switch                   0.25           0.43       0.020 *
  1-digit industry switch                   0.23           0.42       0.022 *

Occupation Switch
 4-digit occupation switch                                                                  0.31           0.46       0.009 *
 2-digit occupation switch                                                                  0.20           0.40      -0.020 *
 1-digit occupation switch                                                                  0.17           0.38      -0.021 *

Employment and Earnings
 change in unemployment                     0.00          0.11        0.004   *             0.00          0.11        0.002
 log annual earnings                       10.39         0.90         0.619   *            10.23         0.87         0.310 *
 change in annual earnings                  0.01          0.74       -0.066   *             0.02          0.70       -0.040 *
 experience                                20.04         10.83       -0.449   *            20.79         11.00        0.289 *

Education
 schooling                                 14.48           2.20       0.940   *            14.14           2.06       0.461   *
 high-school dropout                        0.02           0.14      -0.081   *             0.02           0.13      -0.066   *
 high-school graduate                       0.22           0.42      -0.072   *             0.26           0.44      -0.027   *
 college dropout                            0.20           0.40       0.005                 0.22           0.42       0.018   *
 college graduate                           0.56           0.50       0.147   *             0.50           0.50       0.075   *

Skills
 skilled white-collar                       0.57           0.49       0.138 *               0.50           0.50       0.057 *
 less-skilled white-collar                  0.38           0.48      -0.105 *               0.50           0.50      -0.057 *
 skilled blue-collar                        0.03           0.17      -0.002                 0.00           0.00       0.000
 unskilled blue-collar                      0.02           0.15      -0.031 *               0.00           0.00       0.000

Other Demographics
 married                                    0.68           0.47       0.084   *             0.68           0.47       0.066   *
 male                                       0.46           0.50       0.105   *             0.38           0.48      -0.072   *
 white                                      0.88           0.32       0.033   *             0.88           0.32       0.014   *
 veteran                                    0.09           0.28       0.025   *             0.07           0.26      -0.009   *

Notes : Columns 1 and 2 report means and standard deviations for the industry-exposed sample. Column 3 is the difference
between private service workers aged 18-64 in exposed less unexposed industries. See section 4 for a discussion. An asterisk
(*) indicates that the difference is statistically significant at the 1% level. Columns 4-6 are the corresponding statistics for the
occupation-exposed sample.
                                      Table A.6. Worker Characteristic Coefficients

                                   Industry-Exposed Sample                              Occupation-Exposed Sample

                       Industry           Change in          Change in          Occupation            Change in          Change in
                        switch          unemployment          earnings            switch            unemployment          earnings
                          (1)                (2)                 (3)               (4)                   (5)                 (6)

Experience              -0.0067                                                     -0.0076
                         (-4.19)                                                     (-3.99)
             2
Experience            0.000082                                                    0.000092
                         (2.84)                                                      (3.72)
Schooling               -0.0091                                                     -0.0076
                         (-3.40)                                                     (-1.89)
Married                 -0.0398                                                     -0.0387
                       (-14.36)                                                      (-8.00)
Male                    0.0092                                                       0.0093
                         (5.34)                                                       (0.74)
White                   -0.0602                                                     -0.0632
                         (-5.33)                                                     (-7.69)
Veteran                 0.0302                                                       0.0515
                         (1.55)                                                       (3.24)
                 2
∆Experience                                0.000074           -0.0013                                  0.000045            -0.0011
                                              (3.86)           (-4.62)                                    (4.26)          (-15.85)
Notes : This table reports the coefficients on the worker characteristic controls. Columns 1 and 4 go with columns 1 and 2 of table 3,
respectively. Columns 2 and 5 go with columns 1 and 2 of table 5, respectively. Columns 3 and 6 go with columns 1 and 2 of table 6,
respectively. Columns 1 and 4 report marginal probabilities while the remaining columns report OLS coefficients. t -statistics are
clustered at the industry or the occupation levels.
                       Table A.7. First-Stage IV Estimates

                            Industry-Exposed                    Occupation-Exposed
                                 Sample                              Sample

                        ln(M CI )          ln(X CI )           ln(M CI )         ln(X CI )
                            (1)               (2)                 (3)               (4)

ln(M CI /M G8 )            0.92              0.32                0.77              0.08
                         (10.38)            (6.92)             (11.03)            (1.09)
       CI
ln(X        /X G8 )       -0.28              0.82                0.03              0.85
                         (-3.90)            (8.57)              (0.26)            (7.64)

R2                         0.87              0.80                0.87              0.74
N                        24,261            24,261               37,550            37,550

Notes: This table reports the first-stage results for the IV estimates presented in table 4. t
statistics are in parentheses and are clustered at the industry level (for the industry sample)
or the occupation level (for the occupation sample). All the explanatory variables in the
second stage are also included in the first stage, but are not reported here.
             Table A.8. Switchers: Receiving Industry and Change in Annual Earnings


                                    Industry-Exposed Sample
                  Stayers                        Switchers: Receiving Industry

                                               Non-Exposed
                            Exposed Private-   Private-Sector   Wholesale    Manufac-
                             Sector Services      Services      and Retail    turing    Other
Number of
Switchers         16903           2472             2115           1021         869       881
(%)               (70%)          (10%)             (9%)           (4%)        (4%)      (3%)

Change in
Annual Earnings    3%             1%               -11%           -15%           1%      0%



                                   Occupation-Exposed Sample
                  Stayers                Switchers: Receiving Occupation

                                               Non-Exposed
                            Exposed Private-   Private-Sector
                             Sector Services      Services      Production    Other
Number of
Switchers         26022           5459            5,082            346         641
(%)               (69%)          (15%)            (14%)           (1%)        (1%)

Change in
Annual Earnings    3%             4%               -7%            -10%           0%
                                                                                                       Figure A.1. Inshoring and Offshore Outsourcing Plotted Againt ICT


                                          7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   other_bpt
                                                                                                                                                  (coef = 0.33, t-stat = 7.40)                                                                                                                                                                (coef = 0.27, t-stat = 6.31)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             other_bpt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     fin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  other_bpt
                                                                                                                                                                                              ci
                                                                                                                                                                       ci                                                                                                                                               other_bpt                            cae
                                                                                                                                                                                  ci                                                                                                                                                              cae
                                                                                                                                                                            fin                                                                                                                                            fin
                                                                                                                                               ci                                                                                                                                                             other_bpt                                       fin        fin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       fin        fin
                                                                                                                                             other_bpt
                                                                                                                                      other_bpt                                         fin                                                                                                   fin     other_bpt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           cae
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    cae
                                                                                                                  ci other_bpt
                                                                                                              other_bpt    ci other_bpt
                                                                                                                                     ci
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     fin other_bpt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                other_bpt      fin
                                                                                                        other_bpt       fin                                                                                                                                                                           fin
                                                                                   other_bpt    fin
                                                                                           other_bpt      ci                                                                                                                                                              other_bpt
                                                                             other_bpt            other_bpt    fin                finrdt            fin                                                                                                                          other_bpt cae
                                                                                       fin                                                 fin                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ci
                                                                                                        fin                   rdt        mcp
  ln(offshoring to CI)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ci        cae




                                                                                                                                                                                                   ln(inshoring to CI)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              cae    cae                             cae              leg                                      ci
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ci                     ci             ci                                 ci
                                                                                                                                           mcp        cae                                                                                                                                                                     leg
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           leg leg                                              mcp
                                                                           leg leg leg leg leg                       leg leg mcp   leg     leg                                                                                                                                                                                 cae
                                                                                                          rdtmcp               rdt                                                                                                                                                                      ci            leg
                                                                                                  rdt
                                                                                                              leg         mcpadv                                                                                                                                        leg leg leg
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ci     leg leg                        ins
                                                                           ins                                          adv                                                                                                                                                            ci                    ins              ins     mcp
                                                                       adv          adv      mcp     ci          rdt   rdt
                                                                               ie                            adv adv
                                                                              adv                   mcp            mcp
                                                                                      mcpadv                                                                                                                                                      ie ie                              ie               ins               ins
                                                                                                adv adv                                 ins
                                                                          ie mcp            ci                                                                                                                                                                          mcp ie
                                                                                         ie                                                                    cae                                                                                                ie                                 ins mcp
                                                                                                                     ins
                                                                                      ie    rdt   cae                      cae                                                                                                                                    adv           mcp mcp
                                                                                  ie                                                cae                                                                                                                                     ie                                  mcp mcprdt
                                                                       ie            rdt        ins                                ins    cae                                                                                                                        ie ie               ins mcp mcp              adv
                                                                             rdt ins                                        ins                                                                                                                                                                                                          rdt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ins                        adv
                                                   ie                                                   inscaeins                                                                                                                                                                                      rdt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         adv       rdt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ie     ins ins                    rdt         rdt
                                                                                  cae ins                                                                                                                                                                                            rdt
                                                        ie                                                                                                                                                                                                                     rdt       adv
                                                             ie ie                                                                                                                                                                                                      adv                        adv
                                                                                          cae                        cae                                                                                                                                    ie                adv          rdt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   adv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               adv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       rdt
                                          0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2
                                               0                                                                                                                                       12                                                     0                                                                                                                                     12
                                                                                                              ICT                                                                                                                                                                                           ICT



                                                                                    ln(M CI ) versus ICT                                                                                                                                                                         ln(X CI ) versus ICT
                                          -1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1
                                                                                                                                                  (coef
                                                                                                                                                     cae= 0.10, t-stat = 1.82)                                                                                                                                                                (coef = 0.03, t-stat = 0.69)
                                                                                                                                                                       ci                     ci
                                                                           ie ie                                                                                                                                                                                                               cae
                                                                                                                                                         ci                       ci
                                                                                        ie
                                                                                                                ci
                                                                                  leg                                     ci                          mcp
                                                                          leg            leg       cae                                ci         ciother_bpt                fin
                                                                                     ie                                         other_bpt
                                                                                     other_bptleg leg
                                                                             other_bpt                    rdtmcp     leg
                                                                                                              other_bpt
                                                                                                               leg
                                                                                                                             cae
                                                                                                                              leg legother_bpt
                                                                                                                      other_bpt                           other_bpt                                                                                                                                                                               cae
                                                                                               other_bpt
                                                                                                   rdt                                cae
                                                                                                                                     mcp     legrdt                                                                                                                                                                                                          cae
                                                                                                                 rdt                     rdt
  ln(offshoring to CI/offshoring to G8)




                                                   ie                            ie mcp mcp fin                            mcpadv            mcp               cae




                                                                                                                                                                                                   ln(inshoring to CI/inshoring to G8)
                                                                                          fin              cae
                                                                                                       other_bpt         adv
                                                                             mcp            ci       mcp                         rdt                             fin                    fin                                                                                                                                             cae
                                                                       ie          adv                       adv adv   fin         fin                  fin                                                                                                                            cae
                                                                                                      ci      fin mcprdt                      fin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               cae
                                                             ie        adv adv                                     cae                                                                                                                                                                                  cae       cae
                                                        ie                  rdt                                                                 cae                                                                                                                                                                                                other_bpt
                                                                                          adv
                                                                                    rdt     rdt adv adv
                                                                                 cae                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           other_bpt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ie                                                            cae    cae         mcp
                                                                  ie                                                                                                                                                                                                  ie                                                 other_bpt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            other_bpt
                                                                           ins            cae                                                                                                                                                                                ie                                   other_bpt mcp
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ie                ie     ie       other_bpt         other_bpt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ie
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   other_bpt   other_bpt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     other_bpt

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      adv mcp        ie                                       mcp
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       fin      fin                      adv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             leg                   adv      fin                                                      fin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        leg                                    adv                    leg
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               leg leg           leg                 mcp       ci      fin
                                                                                                                                            ins                                                                                                                                   mcp ci      ci       finci     fin           leg                fin         fin
                                                                                   ins                                                                                                                                                                                                                  leg                               ci                        ci
                                                                                                 ins                                                                                                                                                                                   mcp           mcp            ci leg                                               fin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                adv                  adv mcp   leg                                      ci                     ci
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     adv adv       rdt                            rdt                                                      ci
                                                                                                                      ins                                                                                                                                                  adv                             rdt ins
                                                                                         ins            ins                                                                                                                                                                                  mcp                                          rdt
                                                                                                               ins                   ins                                                                                                                                         rdt  rdt      adv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ie                                   ins              rdt     rdt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ie       rdt
                                                                                                                             ins                                                                                                                                                           rdt                                        ins
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ins                    ins
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ins
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -4
                                          -8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ins ins ins                             ins

                                               0                                                                                                                                       12                                                     0                                                                                                                                     12
                                                                                                              ICT                                                                                                                                                                                           ICT

                                                                                         CI
                                                                           ln(M                 / M G8 ) versus ICT                                                                                                                                                      ln(X CI / X G8 ) versus ICT
Notes : See appendix 4.
