NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHO BENEFITS FROM TAX-ADVANTAGED EMPLOYEE BENEFITS?:
EVIDENCE FROM UNIVERSITY PARKING
Michael D. Grubb
Paul Oyer
Working Paper 14062
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14062

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2008

We thank many university parking office employees for providing data from their schools. Grubb
thanks SIEPR's Taube Scholarship Fund Fellowship and the State Farm Companies Doctoral Award
for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Michael D. Grubb and Paul Oyer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Who Benefits from Tax-Advantaged Employee Benefits?: Evidence from University Parking
Michael D. Grubb and Paul Oyer
NBER Working Paper No. 14062
June 2008
JEL No. H25,H32,J32,K35,K49
ABSTRACT
We use university parking permits to study how firms and employees split the value of employee benefit
tax subsidies. Starting in 1998, the IRS allowed employees to pay for parking passes with pre-tax income.
This subsidized the parking pass purchases of faculty and staff, but did not affect students. We show
that the typical university raised its parking rates by 8-10% extra when it implemented a pre-tax payment
system, but that this increase was the same for those affected by the tax change and those that were
not affected. We conclude that university employees captured much of the new tax benefit, that faculty
and staff that purchase permits benefited relative to those that do not purchase permits, and that students
that purchase permits were made worse off relative to those that do not buy permits. We discuss what
these results suggest about universities' objectives in setting their parking prices and about the demand
for university parking.

Michael D. Grubb
MIT Sloan School of Management
50 Memorial Drive, E52-432
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
mgrubb@mit.edu
Paul Oyer
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
518 Memorial Way
Stanford, CA 94305-5015
and NBER
pauloyer@stanford.edu

1

Introduction

Firms provide a variety of bene…ts to their employees. In addition to the often-studied
examples of health insurance and pensions, many employers also provide meals, product
discounts, and numerous other bene…ts. There are several motivations for …rms to provide
these bene…ts, but one important consideration in almost all bene…ts decisions is taxes.1
Firms and employees can save on taxes if the …rm provides a bene…t to the employee and
the employee is not required to report the value of the bene…t as income. In this paper,
we use prices of parking passes at universities to investigate how the bene…ts of these tax
advantages get split between …rms and employees.
If the labor market were perfectly competitive and either tastes for the bene…t were
homogeneous or …rms could adjust individuals’compensation such that each person “paid”
for the amount of the bene…t she consumed, then employees would capture none of the
tax advantages of workplace bene…ts. In fact, if the product market were also competitive,
consumers would capture the bene…t. But if employee valuations of the bene…t di¤er, and
the …rm cannot perfectly price discriminate between employees, then some of the value of the
tax advantage will be distributed unequally among employees rather than being captured by
the …rm or consumers.
We show that, at least in the case of university parking, employees capture a substantial
share of the tax advantages of bene…ts. We focus on an IRS tax code implemented in 1998.
This change allowed employers to set up payroll deduction schemes so that employees could
pay for parking with pre-tax dollars whereas parking was previously paid out of after-tax
income. As a result, if a university charged $100 for a parking pass and an employee had a
marginal tax rate of 25%, the employee had to earn a total of $133 to pay for parking before
the change but only $100 after. The tax change did not a¤ect students, so we are able to
compare changes in sta¤ and faculty rates to changes in student rates.
We show that the tax change led universities to raise their parking prices, but that they
let employees who buy parking passes capture a signi…cant share of the tax advantage. We
…nd that, while parking rates go up somewhat as the tax advantage becomes available, the
increases are on the order of only 8-10%. We show that the bene…ts are not split evenly
1
See Oyer (2008) for a discussion of the factors that lead …rms to o¤er employee bene…ts and Marino and
Zabojnik (2008) for a discussion of optimal pricing of employee bene…ts.

1

among employees. While universities capture some (but not much) of the bene…t of the
tax law change through higher prices, we …nd absolutely no evidence that the tax-changeinduced price increases are greater for faculty and sta¤ than for students. Universities
appear to increase their prices across the board despite the fact that 87% of universities in
our sample price discriminate between faculty and students. This leaves most faculty and
sta¤ that buy parking passes after the change better o¤ than before the change and leaves
most students that buy passes before the change worse o¤. It appears that faculty and sta¤
permit purchases impose a pecuniary externality on students by driving up student permit
prices.
We must qualify our results given some important data limitations. We do not observe
how wages change when parking prices change. We cannot say for sure that universities
do not capture some of the bene…ts of the tax law through lower wages.2 Also, we do not
observe how tuition rates or spending on student services change when parking prices change.
We cannot be sure that students facing higher parking prices are not compensated through
lower tuition or improved campus services. However, we believe it is safe to conclude that
employees captured a considerable amount of the value of the parking law change, that
faculty and sta¤ that buy parking passes bene…ted relative to those that do not buy parking
passes, and that the tax law change made students that buy parking passes worse o¤ relative
to those that do not.
Our results relate to numerous prior papers in public …nance that have studied how
the rents from government subsidies and tax policies get split and how those policies can
a¤ect parties they were not meant to a¤ect. Poterba (1984), for example, shows that the
mortgage interest deduction lowers the cost of home ownership and that this is especially
true when in‡ation is high. As a result, periods of high in‡ation, even holding the tax rate
constant, may lead to increases in the owner-occupied housing stock. Susin (2002) also looks
at the housing market, though he focuses on the e¤ects of government vouchers on the rental
housing market. He …nds that vouchers increase prices for low income renters and, therefore,
are costly to those who are not eligible for government vouchers. This combination of results
2
However, in all our correspondence with university parking o¢ cials, we never heard any suggestion that
parking prices a¤ect wages. Also, we have yet to …nd a university employee that knew the parking rates and
policies at their school before accepting a job. This suggests that universities cannot take the value of the
tax out of wages without making their employment o¤ers look less attractive.

2

mirrors the e¤ects of the parking tax change that we …nd on faculty and students. Goolsbee
(1998a) …nds that increases in government R&D spending have little e¤ect on actual R&D
output because scientists capture most of the additional spending in higher salaries. Both
Susin (2002) and Goolsbee (1998a) argue that inelasticity in the relevant markets drives the
e¤ects. Berger (1993) also …nds that some of the bene…ts of government R&D subsidies
accrue to providers of R&D inputs. Goolsbee (1998b) shows that the U.S. investment tax
credit had the unintended e¤ect of increasing the price of capital goods, at least in the short
term, as producers extracted some of the value of tax subsidies until supply could respond.
Andreoni and Payne (2003) …nd that government donations to charities do not all get used
for their intended purposes because the charities respond by reducing other fund-raising
e¤orts.
The 8-10% increase in university parking prices following the tax law change is smaller
than might be expected. Given heterogeneous tax rates and parking values among its employees and an inability to perfectly price discriminate, no university could be expected to
extract all value from the tax bene…t. Nevertheless, it seems likely that universities could
have extracted more value through a larger price increase. Unfortunately, we have very little
information on parking quantity, so we cannot say for sure that universities are not in fact
capturing some of the value through higher quantity.
After laying out our empirical …ndings, we consider alternative explanations. We focus
on three main possibilities –highly elastic parking demand, a signi…cant “salience”problem,
and the possibility that university parking departments employ average cost pricing policies.
While there are demand functions that can reconcile our empirical results with university
parking departments acting to maximize pro…ts, we argue that this is unlikely. Salience
is a possible contributing factor, though we would expect universities to counter this with
aggressive marketing campaigns. Finally, though it is hard to reconcile with a standard
economic model of universities maximizing pro…ts or social welfare, the patterns we see are
consistent with university parking departments practicing average cost pricing, as Shoup
(2005) suggests.3
3

Our paper adds to the small set of economic studies of parking. Shoup (2005) provides interesting
institutional details on university parking systems, with a focus on UCLA. Arbatskay, Mukhopadhaya and
Rasmusen (2006) use a parking lot as an example of how rents get distributed when agents …ght for access
to an underpriced good. They argue that welfare will be higher if parking lots are built larger than mean
demand. Fisman and Miguel (2007) use diplomats’parking tickets as an indication of social norms in the

3

2

University Parking Pass Background

2.1

1998 Tax Code Change

Many American universities sell parking permits to faculty, sta¤, and students. Before
1998 employees had to pay for these permits with “after-tax income.”4 However, ever since
passage of the Taxpayer Relief Act of 1997 (TRA-97), universities can deduct the price of
parking permits from employees’ income. Employees then pay taxes based on their gross
wages minus the parking permit price. TRA-97, which added the parking bene…t, and the
Transportation Equity Act for the 21st Century (TEA-21) Section 9010(a), which applied
to other transit bene…ts such as commuter vans and mass transit passes, revised Internal
Revenue Code (IRC) Section 132(f) e¤ective January 1, 1998. IRC 132(f) de…nes “quali…ed
transportation fringe” bene…ts provided by an employer to an employee that are excluded
from taxable income, and hence free from federal, social security, and (in most cases) state
taxes. There are limits on how much can be deducted ($115 per month for mass transit
passes and $220 for parking in 2008), but these limits are not relevant for our sample.
In order to allow employees to take advantage of Section 132(f), universities had to …rst
make some changes in their payroll systems to allow for proper pre-tax deductions of parking
pass (or mass transit pass) fees.5 As we show below, most schools we sampled introduced
pre-tax parking for the 1998-1999 or 1999-2000 academic years. It is hard to say exactly
how much tax revenue is lost by the exclusion of parking passes from income because we do
not have an estimate of parking costs at facilities owned by employers. However, employee
parking expenses in general lower tax revenue substantially. The Unites States Government
(2007) estimates that the exclusion for reimbursed employee parking expenses will generate
a $3.04 billion revenue loss in 2008, which is one of the largest revenue losses for IRC Section
132 fringe bene…ts (Gazur 2006). Mass transit pass exclusions lead to an estimated loss of

diplomats’countries.
4

In fact, in 1985 a district court ruled against Marquette University’s refund claim for employment taxes
paid on the value of employee parking paid for via salary deduction in tax years 1973-1978 (Gazur 2006).
5

The change in the tax code also insured that employer contributions to parking expenses did not have
to be declared as income. So, if a university leased a parking spot for $100 per month and sold a pass to
an employee for $60 per month, the employee would not have to pay taxes on the $40 subsidy or the $60 he
spent on the pass. We do not know of any schools in our sample where this subsidy was relevant, however,
because the universities generally own their parking facilities.

4

$0.71 billion.6

2.2

Supply and Demand of University Parking

Figure 1 provides an example of the change in price and quantity of university parking
passes before and after the 1998 tax code change. The University of Washington (UW) in
Seattle provides unusually detailed transportation bene…ts pricing and usage data on their
website (see http://www.washington.edu/commuterservices/programs/upass/reports.php).7
UW is in a central urban area known for tra¢ c problems and congestion, so the school is
unlikely to be typical. However, it does provide a useful example at a school where managing
transportation is important and appears to be taken quite seriously. The …gure shows that,
from 1996 to 2005, the number of permits sold trended down slowly but steadily for both
sta¤ and students. On a percentage basis, the decrease was sharper for student permits.
Faculty/sta¤ permit sales were about …ve times that of students in 1996 and over eight
times as large in 2005. We do not have quantity data for many of the schools in our sample.
Note that such data would not be as useful as we would like, even if we had it, because
sometimes parking passes are rationed. We do not know if this was the case at UW.
UW sells monthly parking permits to students, faculty, and sta¤. The price is the same
for each of these groups. The …gure shows the nominal monthly cost of this permit from
1996 through 2005. Pass prices increased at an average annual rate of 7%. The increases
were somewhat higher in the years after the introduction of the pre-tax plan (about 10%
in 2000, 2001, and 2002). The graph also shows how much a faculty member with a 25%
marginal tax rate would have to earn in order to buy the monthly pass.8 The cost to this
person of the pass dropped signi…cantly with the introduction of the pre-tax plan, while the
cost to students never decreased.
Figure 2 shows similar data for one of the few other schools for which we have both price
and quantity data. This university, which we will call “School 2”, sells a premium pass to
6

See Unites States Government (2007) Table 19-1, page 288.

7

All our UW data was gathered from public sources. Because we gathered data from the other schools
without explicit permission to share it, we do not use the names of other schools.
8

We believe that most parkers at universities in our sample will have had a marginal tax rate of at least
23.65% in 1998. This corresponds to the 15% federal tax bracket, the employee portion of payroll taxes, and
a 1% state income tax. Many faculty or sta¤ will have had higher marginal tax rates.

5

University of Washington Parking Price and Quantity
250

6000

Permits Sold to Faculty/Staff (right scale)
5000
200
Pre-Tax Permit Cost if Tax Rate = 25% (left scale)

150
Nominal Permit Price per Academic Quarter (left scale)

3000

100

Number of Permits

Monthly Cost ($)

4000

2000

50
Permits Sold to Students (right scale)

After-tax payment only

1000

Pre-tax payment available

0

0
96

97

98

99

100

101

102

103

104

105

Figure 1: All data from U of W website. Permits are available to faculty, sta¤, and students
and all groups pay the same price.

6

School 2 Parking Price and Quantity
3500

900

800
3000
700

Premium Pass Price
(left scale)

Permits Sold to Students (right scale)

2500

Permits Sold to Faculty/Staff (right scale)

500

2000

400

1500

Number of Permits

Annual Cost ($)

600

Standard Pass Price (left scale)

300

1000
200
500
100
After-tax payment only

Pre-tax payment available

0

0
1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

Figure 2: The school has two rates: premium permits are only available to faculty and sta¤.
Standard permits are available to faculty, sta¤, and students and all groups pay the same
price.

7

faculty and sta¤ only and standard pass to faculty, sta¤, and students. All purchasers of
standard passes pay the same cash price, but, ever since 1998, faculty and sta¤ have been
able to pay for their parking passes with pre-tax dollars. The price of both types of passes
has increased slowly but steadily. The premium pass price has increased at a 6% annual rate
while the standard pass has increased 3.5%. This university is more suburban than UW,
which may explain why student parking demand is higher.9 More students than employees
buy permits at this university. Faculty and sta¤ permit sales took a one-time drop in 1999
for reasons that we do not know. The graphs of both UW and School 2 suggest that the
change in the tax code may have had some e¤ect on parking pass prices given slightly greater
price increases after the new tax plans were enacted, but the e¤ects do not appear to be
large.

3

Empirical Analysis

3.1

Data

We gathered historical data for the academic years from 1990-1991 through 2006-2007 from
the parking o¢ ces at universities. We sent emails, asking for historical parking rates and the
date the university implemented a pre-tax payroll deduction parking plan, to the parking
o¢ ces at all schools in the Paci…c 10, Big 10, Ivy League, the University of California
system, and the top 25 “National Universities” on the US News and World Report list
of America’s Best Colleges for 2007 (released in the Fall of 2006.) We received usable
information from twenty-three universities covering one hundred and two di¤erent types of
parking passes. This represents a response rate of approximately 50%. A few of the nonrespondents indicated that they had tried, but failed, to …nd historical information. Others
simply ignored our request and follow-up. We believe that the variation in response was due
to historical accident as to who kept data and random di¤erences in parking o¢ ce helpfulness.
Not all parking passes were o¤ered in all years and not all schools could provide complete
9

We have pass quantity information for two other schools. The …rst university, like School 2, is in a
suburban location. A little over half of sales at this school are to faculty and sta¤. The second university,
like UW, is in an urban location. A little over 90% of sales at this school are to faculty and sta¤.

8

historical data for all passes, so we have a total of 1,395 parking pass/year observations.10 Of
the 109 types of parking passes, forty-six (covering 548 pass/years) are available to faculty
and sta¤ only and forty-two (544 pass/years) are available to faculty, sta¤, and students.
In the cases where employees and students can buy passes, students cannot get any tax
advantage. The remaining twenty-one passes were not a¤ected by the change in the tax
code because sixteen of the passes (223 pass years) are available to students only and …ve
passes (80 pass years) are daily or hourly rates for visitors. In order to implement a pre-tax
payroll deduction parking plan, a university needs to make some adjustments to its payroll
systems. Nine of the twenty-three schools implemented this plan for the 1998-1999 academic
year, seven did so the following year, and three did so in 2000-2001.
Table 1 summarizes the prices of the passes. All prices have been converted to annual
real ($2000) amounts and represent the price charged by the parking o¢ ce. The amount
an employee has to earn to purchase the pass may di¤er with whether the tax change has
been put in place, but the prices analyzed here and throughout the paper are the amount
the university receives (or withholds) from the employee.
The average pass sells for $459, but there is considerable variation. One sixth of pass/years
are priced under $100 and 9% are priced above $1,000. Prices are higher for passes that are
limited to faculty and sta¤ or to students because the universities that have o¤erings for
a speci…c population are often in areas where land is expensive (such as Berkeley and Los
Angeles.)
Figures 3 and 4 show the progression of real parking prices over the sample period for the
four types of passes in Table 1. Figure 3 shows the average real price increase for each group.
The graph shows that average increases were fairly steady for faculty-only passes with more
variation in the other types, which is at least partially due to di¤erences in sample sizes.
Note that there is a noticeable bump up in prices at the time of the tax change in 1998.
However, while we might expect this bump to be largest for faculty only passes, this group
seems to have been the least a¤ected. Figure 4 shows the average annual real price for each
of the four groups. To keep the sample consistent, the graph is limited to those passes for
which we have data for each year from 1995 to 2000. The graph does not reveal any major
change in prices around the time of the new tax law.
10

The regressions use a total of 1,391 pass/year observations. One pass had a price of zero for four years,
so the log of the price is unde…ned over that time.

9

10

46
42
16
5

Faculty/Sta¤ Only

Faculty/Student

Student Only

Visitor/Meter

Average Price
1997-2002
Di¤-in-Di¤
All Years 1997
2002 % Increase Increase - Fac/Sta¤ Increase
$459
$448
$558
25.6%
(443)
(383) (511)
(40.4)
$495
$510
$594
14.7%
(309)
(286) (351)
(17.9)
$347
$331
$430
33.1%
18.5%
(349)
(303) (407)
(49.8)
(1.7)
$294
$284
$330
20.5%
5.9%
(235)
(225) (280)
(32.8)
(2.8)
$1,447
$1,220 $1,711
52.9%
38.3%
(813)
(664) (837)
(68.1)
(13.6)

Table 1: Summary Statistics. Pass prices converted to annual real ($2000) units.

109

All Passes

# Passes

.3
Average Pass Increase
0
.1
.2
-.1

1990

1995

2000

2005

Year
Faculty Only
Student Only

Faculty/Student
Visitor/Meter

0

Average Pass Price
500
1000
1500

2000

Figure 3: Average Real Price Increase. Displays the average annual price increase for each
of the four types of parking permits.

1995

2000
Year
Faculty Only
Student Only

2005
Faculty/Student
Visitor/Meter

Figure 4: Average Real Pass Price. Displays the average annualized price (in $2000) of each
type of pass for all passes that where the price is available for all years from 1995-2005.

11

4

Analysis

4.1

Di¤erence-in-Di¤erences Estimates

Our empirical analysis addresses two questions. First, to what extent did universities extract
the surplus created through the transportation tax code change by increasing the parking
prices they charge to employees? Second, did universities limit price increases to the population that could bene…t from the tax change (that is, faculty and sta¤) or were students
a¤ected as well?
The right two columns of Table 1 provide some simple analysis to address these questions.
The next to last column in the table shows the average price increase between 1997 and 2002
for all parking passes and each of the four types of passes. We …nd that the real price of the
average pass increases by 25.6% in this …ve-year period. The average one-year price increase
in the sample is 4.3%, suggesting that the expected …ve-year price change is about 23.4% for
the sample as a whole. The average of 25.6% for 1997 to 2002 appears typical.
There is no evidence to suggest that faculty and sta¤ price increases around the tax
change in 1998 were greater than the increases in prices of passes that were less a¤ected by
the tax change. In fact, passes available only to faculty and sta¤ had the lowest rate of price
increase in this period surrounding the implementation of the new tax law. Student-only
passes increased less than passes that can be bought by students and employees, but more
than the prices of employee-only passes. The visitor sample, though small, had the greatest
increase of all despite purchasers gaining no tax advantages.

4.2

Regressions

The visual evidence in Figures 3 and 4 and the simple di¤erence-in-di¤erence calculations
in Table 1 do not suggest that universities extracted the surplus created by the 1998 tax
law change, nor that prices went up more for those that could claim the tax bene…t than
for those that cannot. In this section, we do a more formal analysis looking at parking price
changes at the exact time each school adopted a pre-tax parking pass plan.
We run regressions of the form
pit =

i

+ t + zit + "it

12

(1)

where pit is the log of the price of parking pass i in academic year t,

i

is a …xed e¤ect for pass

i, and " is a random error term. The variable of interest is zit , which is an indicator variable
that takes the value one if the school has implemented a pre-tax parking payment plan as
of year t. The coe¢ cient

indicates the percentage increase in the pass price after the plan

is adopted relative to before the plan is adopted, controlling for a linear time trend across
plans. We also run regressions that relax the linearity assumption by replacing t with a full
set of year dummies. When we do this, we are identifying

using variation across schools

in when they implement a pre-tax parking plan. Note that in both cases our interpretation
of

assumes that, in the absence of the tax law change, the pattern of price changes would

have been uncorrelated with pre-tax payment plan implementation dates.
Table 2 contains regression results. Column 1 shows that the baseline estimate of

when

…tting equation (1) is 0.089, indicating that schools raised parking prices about 9% upon
implementing a pre-tax payment plan. This coe¢ cient is signi…cant at the 1% level. Column
2 shows a similar regression, but includes a full set of year dummies. The coe¢ cient is now
less precisely estimated because we need to rely on variation in when individual schools
implemented pre-tax plans. As a result,

is estimated using only the few years where some

schools have implemented pre-tax plans and others have not. Nonetheless the estimated
coe¢ cient is nearly unchanged and is signi…cant at the 4% level. Note that these positive
estimates of

di¤er from the conclusions of the graphical and summary data above because,

at many schools, price increases coincided with the implementation of the pre-tax plan rather
than with the change in the tax code.
While the regressions in Columns 1 and 2 indicate that schools raised prices when the tax
advantage was rolled out, it also implies that they did not raise them much. An increase in
parking price of 9% is not very large for many employees. Consider a person with a marginal
tax rate of 40% who is paying $500/year (a little above the sample average) for a parking
pass before the tax change.11 That person had to earn $833, pre-tax, to pay for the parking
pass. If the school raises the cost of the pass by 9%, to $545, the person has to earn $288
less to pay for the pass and enjoys an additional $173 of after-tax income. However, so far
we have no reason to think students at that same school will not have to pay the additional
11

For instance, at Yale in 1998 the average non-tenure track lecturer earned $47,288 (Waters 2001). Filing
single, such a lecturer would be in the 28% federal bracket, 5% Connecticut bracket, for a total marginal tax
rate of 40.65% with payroll taxes.

13

14

0.0937**
(0.0440)

(2)

All

Dummies
Faculty/
Students
0.9741
540

Faculty
Only
0.9843
548

0.0875
(0.0756)

(4)

Dummies

0.0992**
(0.0403)

(3)

Students
Only
0.9570
223

Dummies

0.1228
(0.0987)

(5)

Visitor/
Meter
0.8879
80

Dummies

0.0303
(0.1182)

(6)

n/a

(8)

0.9801
1,391

All

0.9805
1,391

All

0.0590
(0.0613)
0.0726
(0.0708)
0.2600
(0.1819)
Dummies Dummies

0.0118
(0.0432)

n/a

(7)

Table 2: E¤ect of Tax Rule Change on Parking Prices. Coe¢ cients are based on OLS regressions where the dependent variable
is the log of the real price of a parking pass in an academic year between 1990-1991 and 2006-2007. Sample consists of 109
di¤erent parking passes at 23 universities. “Tax Advantage” is an indicator variable that takes the value of one if the school
has implemented a program to allow faculty and sta¤ to pay for parking with pre-tax income. “Faculty ONLY”is an indicator
variable that takes the value of one if the parking pass is only available to faculty and sta¤. “Faculty/Student”is an indicator
variable that takes the value of one if the pass is available to faculty, sta¤, and students. “Visitor/Meter”is an indicator variable
that takes the value of one if the pass is a daily or hourly pass available to everyone. Each speci…cation includes …xed e¤ects for
each type of parking pass. Speci…cations 7 and 8 also include interactions between the Tax Advantage indicator and indicators
for each school. Standard errors (in parentheses) are adjusted for any correlation within parking pass.

0.9760
1,391

All

0.0272*** Dummies
(0.0044)

0.0892***
(0.0302)

R2
0.9756
N
1,391
Signi…cance level: * 10%, ** 5%, *** 1%

Sample

Year

: Tax-Adv*Visitor/Meter

: Tax-Adv*Faculty/Student

: Tax-Adv*Faculty ONLY

: Tax-Advantage Dummy

(1)

$45 per year without the o¤setting tax advantage. We now consider whether this is the case.
If schools are price discriminating, and costs are linear, we would expect that they will
raise prices on faculty and sta¤ permits after the tax change but not on student permits.
However, if costs are convex (as Shoup (2005) suggests) then it is purely an empirical question
how much student prices will change relative to faculty/sta¤ prices. Columns 3-6 run the
speci…cation in equation (1) separately for each of the four permit types. The estimated
e¤ect of the tax law is higher for student permits. Column 3 indicates that faculty/sta¤
permit prices went up by about 10% when the tax advantage came into e¤ect while column
5 shows that prices for student permits went up by 12%. Though this di¤erence may not be
statistically signi…cant, it suggests that the e¤ect of the tax law was not noticeably less for
students.
The …nding in columns 3 and 5 that the estimated e¤ect of the tax law is highest for
student-only permits could be due to the fact that schools that o¤er student-only permits
are also schools that respond to the tax law change more aggressively across the board. In
Column 7, we therefore change the speci…cation in equation (1) slightly to
pit =
where

j

i

+

t

+

j zit

+ (zit fi ) + "it

(2)

is a coe¢ cient speci…c to school j that sells parking pass i, and fi is an indicator

variable that takes the value one if parking plan i is only available to faculty and sta¤. The
coe¢ cient

can be interpreted as the additional percentage change in parking prices after

pre-tax plans are implemented for employee-only parking passes, relative to the other three
types of passes. Note that this interpretation assumes that the di¤erent types of parking
passes would on average have had similar patterns of price changes in the absence of the
tax law change.12 To make sure we compare passes rather than schools when we estimate
, we want to focus on within-school di¤erences between faculty/sta¤ price increases and
other permit price increases. So we estimate a vector of school speci…c coe¢ cients ( j )
of the tax-advantage variable (zit ) when we estimate (2). Column 7 coe¢ cients indicate a
negligible and insigni…cant di¤erence in price adjustment for those that can take advantage
of the tax change relative to those that cannot. Column 8 runs a similar speci…cation, but
12

This assumption can be relaxed by including a full set of year dummies for each type of parking pass,
which yields similar results.

15

simultaneously compares faculty-only, faculty/student, and visitor price increases to studentonly price increases.13 The di¤erence between the four types of parking passes is statistically
insigni…cant. Including all types of passes in one regression leads to the same conclusion:
untargeted across-the-board price increases cannot be rejected.
In unreported analyses, we did several robustness checks and looked at factors that might
explain variation in university parking prices. We did not …nd that being a public university
made a di¤erence, for example. Also, we found that our conclusions are basically unchanged
when using school (rather than parking plan) …xed e¤ects, or when including school-speci…c
linear time-trends (rather than a single linear time-trend). Our analysis so far has assumed
that any price e¤ects of the pre-tax plans started at the same time as the plan. However,
there could be some delay in the price e¤ect if, for example, a school set its prices and then
decided to quickly implement a tax-free plan so that employees could capture the bene…ts
of the plan immediately. We reran the regressions dropping the …rst year of each schools’
pre-tax plan, but found it did not materially e¤ect our results. Finally, we used a more
conservative approach of clustering the standard errors at the school, rather than parking
pass, level. This did not a¤ect any of our conclusions, either.
Our identi…cation strategy implicitly assumes that there was no change in the environment that a¤ected parking prices and was correlated with the implementation of parking
permit pre-tax payment plans. However, in response to the tax law changes made in TRA97 and TEA-21, many universities in our sample introduced pre-tax payment plans for mass
transit passes at the same time as for parking permits. If mass transit is a close substitute for parking, the reduction in after-tax mass transit prices could have limited university
parking departments ability to raise parking prices. This would imply that our estimates
underestimate the e¤ect of the change in tax treatment for parking passes. We …nd this
unlikely however, because the e¤ect of the tax change is nearly identical in urban and rural
sub-samples. If the mass transit pre-tax payment plan were limiting parking permit price increases, we would expect to see a larger price increase on rural campuses which have limited
access to mass transit.14
13

Grouping student-only and visitor/meter passes together pushes point estimates of
and faculty/student passes closer to zero.
14

for faculty-only

Note that we expect that the increased availability of parking provided by competitive third parties in
urban settings would reinforce rather than mask this e¤ect. The presence of close substitutes should make

16

4.3

Interpretation

The regression results lead to several conclusions and speculations. First, as noted above,
the price changes made by these schools after the tax law change leave signi…cant surplus to
those buying parking permits. The increases in parking permit rates are much lower than
the tax bene…ts to many employees. Universities could be extracting some of this surplus
back in the form of lower wages, but it is hard to see why they would adjust the wage rather
than the permit price. In any case, making the reasonable assumption that universities did
not change the salaries of those who buy parking permits relative to those that did not as a
result of the tax change, we can at least conclude that the tax law change gave some amount
of surplus to faculty and sta¤ that buy parking passes relative to those that do not.
Our second conclusion is that students lost surplus as a result of the tax change.15 Universities apparently did not target the price changes to those parties that stood to bene…t
from the tax changes, despite the fact that 20 of 23 universities in our sample price discriminate between faculty and students. Facing price increases, students could have bought
cheaper (and, therefore, more remote) passes or found alternative transportation. But given
they were now choosing an alternative from an inferior set of choices, they were clearly worse
o¤.
Third, we are struck by the apparent limitations on price discrimination of university
parking permits. While some universities have a wide range of permit options, others have
very few choices. We found no evidence of additional permit choices being o¤ered when the
tax law was changed. While tax rates are likely to be quite variable for di¤erent parkers at
a university, we see no di¤erential price treatment based on how the tax bene…ts a¤ected
individuals. Universities could have added more variation in the prices, either based directly
on income or other variables (such as demand for premium parking) that are likely to be
correlated with marginal tax rates. In this case, they might have been able to increase prices
in line with employee tax rates and employees may have sorted themselves accordingly. This
appears to be how investors segment into taxable and tax-free bonds, where the di¤erences
in yields imply investors with tax rates of 25% or more choose tax-free bonds (see Green

residual parking demand more elastic, and hence reduce optimal price increases.
15

Again, there could have been o¤setting di¤erences in terms of tuition or stipends. But, at the least,
students who bought permits lost surplus relative to those that do not.

17

(1993)).
We can only speculate as to why university parking prices reacted the way they did to
the tax law change. We discuss three speci…c explanations for the small but universal price
increases: (1) Parking departments maximize pro…ts and elasticity of demand is high. (2)
Parking departments maximize pro…ts but the tax law change had low salience. (3) Parking
departments practice average cost pricing. We favor the latter two explanations over the
…rst because we do not believe parking demand is su¢ ciently elastic to support the …rst
explanation (although we have only anecdotal evidence for this).
(1) Pro…t maximization and high elasticity: Suppose a university …nds that employees’decisions to take or keep a job are not based on parking pass prices, and directs its
parking department to maximize parking pro…ts in order to maximize the …nancial resources
available for pursuing the university’s educational objectives. Moreover, assume that the
university can charge students and employees di¤erent prices. Both of our primary …ndings,
that student prices increase as much as faculty prices with the tax law change, and that
faculty prices increase by about 8-10% are potentially consistent with this scenario. However, an 8-10% faculty and sta¤ price increase is only consistent with pro…t maximization if
faculty and sta¤ parking pass sales increase substantially.
If all employees have the same marginal tax rate , then the tax law change increases the
employee marginal revenue curve by a factor of

1
1

. Unless marginal parking costs are zero,

it will be optimal to increase aggregate permit sales, and in particular to increase faculty
and sta¤ permit sales. If the marginal cost of parking is constant, then this does not e¤ect
the cost of serving students and the university should not change student prices. However, if
there is a …xed parking capacity or marginal costs are increasing (as Shoup (2005) suggests),
then the marginal cost of serving students increases and so should student prices. This
implies that, despite a university’s ability to price discriminate, student price increases are
a natural consequence of parking department pro…t maximization and that student price
increases need not be smaller than those for faculty and sta¤. For example, if both students
and employees have constant elasticity of demand then student and employee permit prices
will increase by the same percentage.16 In short, the fact that student prices increase as
16

1=

1=

Suppose student demand is Ps = As Qs s and faculty demand is Pf = Af Qf f . Student elasticity is s
and faculty elasticity is f . The tax law change in‡ates faculty demand by a factor 1 1 , but this does not
change their elasticity of demand. Pro…t maximization equates marginal revenue across both groups both

18

much as faculty and sta¤ prices is potentially consistent with parking department pro…t
maximization.
If all parkers have a marginal tax rate of at least , then the university always has
the option of increasing employee permit prices by

1
1

after the tax law change. This

increases revenues from employees who bought before the tax law change by

1
1

, and could

increase permit sales to employees with marginal tax rates above . This is true even if nonuniversity owned garages supply parking competitively near campus, since universities need
not establish pre-tax payment plans for these garages. The optimal employee permit price
increase could be either higher or lower than

1
1

.17 However, a smaller price increase can

only be optimal if employee parking demand is su¢ ciently elastic that total employee permit
revenues still increase by at least

1
1

. In particular, it can be shown that if the university

…nds it optimal to increase nominal employee parking prices by a factor of
employee permit sales must increase by a factor of at least ( 1 1

1

1
1

, then

).18 For instance, if the

minimum tax rate is 25%, then a nominal employee-permit price increase of 10% after the
tax law change is only consistent with pro…t maximization if employee-permit sales increase
by at least 21%. Although we have quantity time series data for only three schools, we have
no evidence that parking demand spiked after the tax law change. This indicates to us that
elasticity is not high enough to justify such small price increases. (In fact, faculty and sta¤
permit sales fell at School 2, as seen in Figure 2, despite a drop in after-tax permit prices
following the tax law change.)
In summary, our empirical …ndings can be reconciled with a model of very highly elastic
university parking. However, while we are not able to estimate parking elasticity carefully,
the indications that we do have suggest that very high elasticity is unlikely to explain our
results.
before and after the tax law change. Because student and faculty elasticities are constant in both quantity
and the tax treatment, price always remains proportional to marginal revenue: M R = P (1 + 1= ). Hence
the percent change in price is equal to the percent change in MR, and therefore equal across both groups.
17

All that can be said without more information about demand is that the optimal price increase is no
higher than one over one minus the highest marginal tax rate.
18
1
1

Denote the initial employee price P0 . Absent a student market, an employee price P0 which is less than
P0 leads to weakly higher sales and costs than a price equal to 1 1 P0 . Hence to be more pro…table it

P0 )
must yield higher revenues: P0 Q ( P0 ) 1 1 P0 Q( 1 1 P0 ). This implies: Q(
Q(P0 )
A similar argument shows the same result in the presence of a student market.

19

1
1

1
P0 )
1 Q( 1
Q(P0 )

1
1

1

.

(2) Pro…t maximization and low salience: Another possible explanation of the
seemingly small price reaction to the parking tax bene…ts is limited salience of the change.
If buyers of permits do not realize that their employer adopted a pre-tax plan, then they
will overestimate the e¤ective price of permits. Thus a low salience of the tax-deduction will
lead to fewer sales and smaller price increases than would otherwise be expected. Finkelstein
(2007) and Chetty, Looney and Kroft (2008) show that reducing the salience of a tax (rather
than a tax deduction) leads to higher prices and demand. Finkelstein (2007) shows that
highway toll rates increase in response to a decrease in tax salience brought on by the
implementation of electronic toll collection. Chetty et al. (2008) show that consumer demand
is higher if pre-tax prices are posted than when posted prices include tax, even if the end
price is exactly the same. In these contexts, sellers of a product had an incentive to hide a
tax from consumers in order to keep demand high.
In the parking context, salience would have the opposite e¤ect on prices and sales because
the salience problem is related to a tax deduction rather than to a tax. Given the sometimes
large amount of revenue available from increasing parking fees, universities have strong
incentives to raise the salience of the tax law change. They might engage in marketing
campaigns to communicate the value of this bene…t if they felt salience was inhibiting their
ability to raise prices. It seems quite possible that limited salience is at least a contributing
factor to universities’limited price response to the parking tax change, but we cannot assess
the exact degree to which salience of the parking tax change a¤ects pricing.
(3) Average cost pricing: The fact that universities left so much of the value of the tax
change to employees is consistent with the use of “average cost pricing”policies. Though it is
di¢ cult to generate an economic model that justi…es this practice, many university parking
o¢ ces operate under the stated goal of breaking even.19 Shoup (2005) focuses on UCLA’s
implementation of average cost pricing for parking. We have spoken with administrators
in other parking o¢ ces that use a similar approach and other schools suggest they use this
method in the literature on their websites. The basic idea of average cost pricing is that the
transportation o¢ ce is told to set fees for parking (and, in some cases, other transportation
19

The uno¢ cial goal may be empire building, in the sense of maximizing permits sold or spaces managed,
subject to a university imposed constraint that the parking o¢ ce not lose money. A parking department with
only one permit price would then charge average cost. However, this objective will lead parking departments
that can set multiple permit prices to price discriminate to extract money from high value parkers to subsidize
the cost of parking to low-value parkers not only below marginal cost, but below average cost as well.

20

services such as shuttle bus rides) so as to cover the costs of providing parking spaces and
other transportation. Some schools attempt to recover the costs of capital while others price
so as to merely break even in terms of operating expenses.
If a school is using average cost pricing for parking, then the tax law change should have
little immediate e¤ect on permit prices. However, given a substantial reduction in e¤ective
parking prices for at least some university employees, demand will increase after the tax law
change. As Shoup (2005) discusses, the marginal price to build a parking space is typically
far higher than the average cost of existing space, so prices would likely have to go up to
sustain the average cost pricing scheme.20 Therefore, we would expect universities that use
average cost pricing for parking to leave their parking prices unchanged, or increase them
slightly, after the tax law change.21 This pattern appears consistent with our empirical
results.
Nearly all universities in our sample price discriminate between faculty/sta¤ and students.
Note that, in addition to changing student and faculty prices at the same rate, rigidity of
price discrimination policies is also found in the fact that almost no schools added additional
types of parking permits or separated faculty/sta¤ and student passes when both populations
were eligible to purchase them. On the one hand, it is not clear how a parking department
that sets prices with the stated goal to break even determines the price di¤erence between
faculty/sta¤ and student permits. On the other hand, the fact that students and faculty
were not di¤erentially a¤ected by the tax change could be driven by budget balanced pricing
policies, as parking o¢ ces may be indi¤erent to where the necessary revenue comes from.

5

Conclusions

According to the Unites States Government (2007), the United States will forgo $3.04 billion
in 2008 tax revenues due to pre-tax employee parking programs made possible by TRA-97.
One possible motivation for this national expense is to remove an incentive for employers to
avoid paying taxes by providing employees with free parking. By removing such an incentive,
20
Average costs that include administrative costs could still fall if …xed administrative costs are large
enough.
21
A slight increase is expected if either the increase in demand is not very large, or the di¤erence between
marginal cost and average cost is not very large.

21

the change in tax law could have increased e¤ective parking prices, and reduced ine¢ ciently
high parking and related tra¢ c congestion. Our results suggest that this was not the outcome
in university parking lots. We …nd that nominal university parking rates go up only 8-10%
as the tax advantage becomes available, so e¤ective parking prices fall for employees with
marginal tax rates above 11%. Although we cannot be de…nitive without quantity or wage
data, under the reasonable assumption that wages were una¤ected by the change in tax code
and that employee parking is relatively inelastic, these moderate price increases imply that
universities capture only a small portion of the tax bene…t. Instead, because price increases
are across the board, the primary bene…ciaries are faculty and sta¤ who buy permits and
have high marginal tax rates, while students who buy permits are actually worse o¤. While
the lack of discrimination between faculty and students can be reconciled with parking
department pro…t maximization, the small price increases for faculty and sta¤ suggest that,
if parking prices maximize university pro…t, parking demand must be highly elastic or the tax
law changes must have very low salience with employees. The results are generally consistent
with the claim by Shoup (2005), and many parking departments themselves, that university
parking departments use average cost pricing.

22

References
Andreoni, James and A. Abigail Payne, “Do Government Grants to Private Charities Crowd
Out Giving or Fund-raising?,” The American Economic Review, 2003, 93, 792–812.
Arbatskay, Maria, Kaushik Mukhopadhaya, and Eric Rasmusen, “The Parking Lot Problem,” 2006. Emory University Working Paper.
Berger, Philip G., “Explicit and Implicit Tax E¤ects of the R&D Tax Credit,” Journal of
Accounting Research, 1993, 31, 141–171.
Chetty, Raj, Adam Looney, and Kory Kroft, “Salience and Taxation: Theory and Evidence,”
2008. University of California at Berkeley Working Paper.
Finkelstein, Amy, “E-ZTax: Tax Salience and Tax Rates,” 2007. MIT Working Paper.
Fisman, Raymond and Edward Miguel, “Corruption, Norms, and Legal Enforcement: Evidence from Diplomatic Parking Tickets,”Journal of Political Economy, 2007, 115, 1020–1048.
Gazur, Wayne M., “Assessing Internal Revenue Code 132 After Twenty Years,” Virginia Tax
Review, 2006, 25, 977–1046.
Goolsbee, Austan, “Does Government R&D Policy Mainly Bene…t Scientists and Engineers?,”
American Economic Review, 1998, 88, 298–302.
, “Investment Tax Incentives, Prices, and the Supply of Capital Goods,”Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 1998, 113, 121–148.
Green, Richard C., “A Simple Model of the Taxable and Tax-Exempt Yield Curves,”Review of
Financial Studies, 1993, 6, 233–264.
Marino, Anthony M. and Jan Zabojnik, “A Rent Extraction View of Employee Discounts
and Pricing,” Journal of Labor Economics, 2008. Forthcoming.
Oyer, Paul, “Salary or Bene…ts?,” Research in Labor Economics, 2008. Forthcoming.
Poterba, James M., “Tax Subsidies to Owner-Occupied Housing: An Asset-Market Approach,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1984, 99, 729–752.
Shoup, Donald, “Parking on a Smart Campus,”in Daniel Mitchell, ed., California Policy Options
2005, Los Angeles: UCLA School of Public A¤airs, 2005.

23

Susin, Scott, “Rent Vouchers and the Price of Low-Income Housing,” Journal of Public Economics, 2002, 83, 109–152.
Unites States Government, Analytical Perspectives, Budget of the Unites States Government,
Fiscal Year 2008, Washington: US Government Printing O¢ ce, 2007.
Waters, Beverly, A Yale Book of Numbers 1976-2000, New Haven, CT: Yale O¢ ce of Institutional
Research, 2001.

24

