NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WELFARE PAYMENTS AND CRIME
C. Fritz Foley
Working Paper 14074
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14074

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2008

I thank Jeff Cronin, Linnea Meyer, and Janelle Prevost for excellent research assistance and police
departments in 12 cities for providing data. Seminar participants at the American Law and Economics
Association Annual Meeting, Harvard University, the NBER Law and Economics Program Meeting,
Wesleyan University, and Yale Law School and numerous others provided very helpful comments.
The Division of Research at Harvard Business School provided generous funding. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by C. Fritz Foley. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Welfare Payments and Crime
C. Fritz Foley
NBER Working Paper No. 14074
June 2008
JEL No. D91,I38,K42
ABSTRACT
This paper tests the hypothesis that the timing of welfare payments affects criminal activity. Analysis
of daily reported incidents of major crimes in twelve U.S. cities reveals an increase in crime over the
course of monthly welfare payment cycles. This increase reflects an increase in crimes that are likely
to have a direct financial motivation like burglary, larceny-theft, motor vehicle theft, and robbery,
as opposed to other kinds of crime like arson, assault, homicide, and rape. Temporal patterns in crime
are observed in jurisdictions in which disbursements are focused at the beginning of monthly welfare
payment cycles and not in jurisdictions in which disbursements are relatively more staggered.

C. Fritz Foley
Harvard Business School
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
ffoley@hbs.edu

1. Introduction
Consider an individual who receives support from monthly welfare payments that
are distributed at the beginning of the month. These payments may be made directly to
this individual or to someone who provides for the individual or transacts with the
individual. Welfare payments are disbursed on a monthly basis, and a series of studies
indicate that the typical recipient of cash assistance increases consumption immediately
following the receipt of payments and exhausts these payments quickly. Poor individuals
are also unlikely to have access to savings or credit that might help cover temporary cash
shortfalls and often have weak earnings prospects in legitimate economic activity.
Consequently, this hypothetical individual might deplete welfare related income quickly
and turn to crime to supplement this income. This paper tests the hypothesis that income
generating criminal activity is increasing in the amount of time that has passed since
welfare payments occurred.
The analysis exploits plausibly exogenous variation in the timing of payments
across cities and differences in the likely motivation of different kinds of crime. The
three welfare programs that provide the largest share of income maintenance benefits to
the poor are considered; these are the Food Stamp program, the Temporary Assistance for
Needy Families (TANF) program, and the Supplemental Security Income (SSI) program.
The sample of reported incidents of crime covers 12 cities in which more than 10% of the
population receives payments from the most inclusive welfare program, the Food Stamp
program. If patterns in crime are influenced by the timing of welfare payments, then
increases in crime over the course of monthly payment cycles should be most pronounced
in cities in which such payments are focused at the beginning of these cycles. If criminal

1

income is used to supplement welfare income, then any increase in crime should be
reflected in Type I Uniform Crime Report (UCR) or Group A National Incident Based
Reporting System (NIBRS) crimes with a direct financial motivation (burglary, larcenytheft, motor vehicle theft, and robbery) and not other Type I UCR or Group A NIBRS
crimes (arson, assault offenses, forcible sex offenses, and homicide).
Two approaches yield results indicating that crime rates do in fact increase in the
amount of time that has passed since welfare payments occurred. The first approach tests
if levels of criminal activity are different in the first ten calendar days of the month; this
timeframe corresponds to the period over which Food Stamp payments occur in cities
where they are focused at the beginning of the month. Rates of crime and counts of
reported incidents are higher after the first ten days of the month in jurisdictions where
welfare payments are focused at the beginning of the month but not in other jurisdictions.
The second approach employs an index that reflects the number of days since welfare
payments occurred in a city. This index takes into account payments related to not only
Food Stamps but also TANF and SSI. Higher values of the index are associated with
more crime.
Both approaches also reveal that increases in crime over the course of monthly
welfare payment cycles are only observed for crimes that are likely to have a financial
motivation and not for other Type I UCR or Group A NIBRS crimes. These findings are
inconsistent with explanations for temporal patterns in crime that are unrelated to the
timing of welfare payments, like explanations related to police officer deployment or
incentives to report crimes as having occurred at certain times.

2

The findings in this paper make a number of contributions. First, they suggest a
role for behavioral considerations in economic explanations for criminal activity. Becker
(1968) provides a framework for analyzing criminal behavior in which criminals
rationally weigh the costs and benefits of illegal activity and are more likely to turn to
crime when they are likely to earn less from legitimate activities. This framework has
received ample empirical support.1 Recent work that shows that cash assistance
recipients typically spend their payments too quickly suggests one mechanism by which a
particular behavioral bias, short-run impatience, could affect the decision to engage in
criminal activity. Shapiro (2005) documents that food stamp recipients experience a
decline in caloric intake and an increase in the marginal utility of consumption in
between food stamp payments. Stephens (2003) finds that households that primarily
depend on social security for income increase spending on goods that reflect
instantaneous consumption in the first few days following the receipt of their check.
Dobkin and Puller (2007) find that welfare recipients increase their consumption of
illegal drugs when their checks arrive at the beginning of the month, spurring an increase
in hospitalizations and deaths. These studies provide evidence of behavior that suggests
short-run impatience and violations of the permanent income hypothesis.2 My results
suggest that this type of consumption behavior is associated with increased criminal

1

Numerous studies including Donohue and Levitt (2001), Raphael and Winter-Ember (2001), and earlier
work summarized in Freeman (1995) have found a significant but small effect of unemployment on
property crimes. Machin and Meghir (2004) and Gould, Weinberg and Mustard (2002) find that changes in
earnings of low wage and unskilled workers in particular affect crime.
2
Phelps and Pollak (1968) develop a simple framework of short-run impatience, and this framework is
employed by Laibson (1997), O’Donohue and Rabin (1999), O’Donohue and Rabin (2001), and Angeletos
et al. (2001) to consider a variety of economic applications. A number of papers provide evidence on the
validity of the permanent income hypothesis by studying the immediate consumption response to changes
in income. Recent work includes Shapiro and Slemrod (2003), Hsieh (2003), and Johnson, Parker, and
Souleles (2006). Lee and McCrary (2005) present evidence that criminals typically have low discount rates
or hyperbolic time preferences.

3

activity later in monthly welfare payment cycles. These types of behavioral effects call
for distinctive public policy responses, as noted by Jolls (2007) and Bertrand,
Mullainathan, and Shafir (2004).
Second, the paper illustrates an effect of the design of welfare programs on crime.
A large literature, parts of which are reviewed in Moffitt (1992) and Blank (2002),
considers the effects of welfare programs on employment, poverty, family structure, and
other factors. Some studies analyze the effects of welfare payments on criminal activity
using cross sectional data. DeFranzo (1996, 1997) and Hannon and DeFranzo (1998a,
1998b) present evidence that welfare payments reduce major crimes. However, Burek
(2005) finds that welfare payments are associated with higher levels of less severe
crimes. These studies typically face challenges controlling for all the characteristics of
jurisdictions that are likely to affect both the use of welfare programs and criminal
activity. The findings in my paper point out that the timing and frequency of welfare
payments have effects that carry policy implications. Staggered, frequent payments
would smooth levels of crime. Police forces might therefore have an easier time fighting
crime because they would be less likely to be overwhelmed during particular periods. If
welfare beneficiaries do exhibit short run impatience when making consumption
decisions, as indicated in the literature, frequent payments would smooth their
consumption and reduce the extent to which they face dire circumstances because they
consumed welfare related income too quickly. Levels of crime would be lower as a
consequence.
This paper also adds to the burgeoning literature on household finance. Campbell
(2006) explores this field. Only a small part of the work in this field specifically

4

considers the personal finances of low-income individuals. Duflo, Gale, Liebman,
Orszag, and Saez (2006) and Beverly, Shneider, and Tufano (2006) argue that lowincome individuals in particular do not save enough. Low savings levels can have
detrimental consequences for the poor, who face severe credit constraints as documented
in Adams, Einav, and Levin (forthcoming), Barr (2004) and elsewhere. My analysis does
not study the income, savings, and consumption behaviors of poor individuals directly,
but it does suggest that individuals who exhaust their legitimate income rapidly and do
not have access to savings or credit attempt to increase their income through criminal
activity.3
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. The next section explains the
hypotheses in more detail, and Section 3 describes the data and the main tests. Section 4
presents the results, and the last section concludes.

2. Hypotheses
Welfare payments are distributed on a monthly basis according to payment
schedules that vary across programs and states. In many jurisdictions, payments from all
the major programs to all recipients occur during a short period within each month,
typically the beginning of the month. Payment schedules are set at the state and federal
level, not the city level, and they have not changed substantially over the last decade.
Conversations with state policy makers suggest that the distribution schedule for
payments was set on the basis of administrative considerations rather than considerations
related to patterns in consumption or criminal activity.

3

Garmaise and Moskowitz (2006) show that weak credit conditions increase crime more generally.

5

Studies of the consumption of cash assistance recipients, including Shapiro
(2005), and Stephens (2003), reveal that recipients do not smooth their consumption but
instead exhibit short run impatience. They appear to spend their monthly payments too
quickly and to experience increasing marginal utility of consumption over monthly
payment cycles. This increase in the marginal utility of consumption in part reflects that
the poor do not have access to savings or credit, as documented in Adamds, Einav, and
Levin (forthcoming), Duflo, Gale, Liebman, Orszag, and Saez (2006), Beverly, Shneider,
and Tufano (2006), and Barr (2004).
As a consequence, in jurisdictions where all welfare payments occur at the
beginning of the month, individuals who are welfare recipients or who transact with or
receive support from a recipient might not have the resources to satisfy their needs later
in the monthly payment cycle. Such individuals may turn to crime to augment their
welfare related income later in payment cycles. Frameworks that account for short-run
impatience, like the one developed in O’Dononhue and Rabin (1999), suggest that such
individuals will delay criminal activity even if they anticipate a cash shortfall at the time
of the payment and plan to make up this shortfall with criminal income. This is because
criminal activity has immediate costs; it requires effort and potentially results in
punishment.
Even an individual who receives support from welfare payments and does not
exhibit short-run impatience may be more likely to engage in criminal activity later
during monthly welfare payment cycles. He may have very low income, a high marginal
utility of consumption, no savings or access to credit, and face uncertainty about the
extent to which he will face a cash shortfall. He may, for example, face unexpected

6

shocks to the prices of the goods he consumes. Given this uncertainty, he would be likely
to delay criminal activity until it is necessary.
These considerations imply predictions for temporal patterns in crime in different
kinds of cities. In cities where payments from welfare programs are focused at the
beginning of the month, criminal activity should increase as the time since payments
occurred increases. Increased criminal activity should reflect increases in types of crime
that have a financial motivation, not other kinds of crime. In cities where welfare
programs make payments to different recipients on different days over longer time
periods or where payments to individuals occur more frequently than once a month, there
should not be any significant monthly temporal pattern in crime.
This discussion has stressed the effect of the timing of welfare payments on the
demand for criminal income. It is worth considering briefly the potential effects of the
timing of payments on the supply of victims. These potential effects tend to work against
the predictions described above. If all welfare payments occurred at a particular point in
time during the month, this might increase the pool of potential victims and the
attractiveness and ease of stealing property. Crime rates could then be higher
immediately following payments. However, most welfare payments are distributed onto
electronic benefit transfer cards, and the funds on these cards are difficult to steal because
recipients must present a valid identification card to use them. Alternatively, potential
victims of crime might respond to changes in the demand for criminal income by taking
additional avoidance measures. For example, potential victims of burglary or robbery
could remain ensconced in their locked homes during periods when such crimes are
expected to be more common. However, most avoidance activities are costly. Therefore,

7

the timing of disbursement is unlikely to have a large effect on the supply of potential
victims.

3. Data and Tests
The basic empirical approach is to study differences in criminal activity over the
course of monthly welfare payment cycles in cities across which there is variation in the
timing of payments. This analysis requires information on the distribution of welfare
payments by jurisdiction and detailed crime data.

3.1 Data on Welfare Programs
The three primary welfare programs that provide income maintenance benefits are
the Food Stamps program, the TANF program, and the SSI program. Each of these
programs provides assistance to poor households that meet income and resource
requirements. The Food Stamp program provides funds that can be used at most grocery
stores, and the TANF program provides income maintenance payments to needy families.
In most states, both of these programs distribute payments electronically through
electronic benefit transfer debit cards, and payments that are not spent in a particular
month are carried forward to the next month. SSI pays benefits to disabled adults and
children who have limited means. SSI payments are distributed by check, which is
mailed to recipients once a month. The Food Stamp program has the broadest coverage
in the sense that TANF and SSI recipients typically meet the eligibility requirements to
receive food stamps. Because of its extensive coverage, I selected a sample of cities on
the basis of participation in the food stamp program.

8

Quantifiable effects of the timing of welfare payments on crime are more likely to
be observed in jurisdictions where a substantial share of the population received such
payments. Fellowes and Berube (2005) compute food stamp program participation rates
in major metropolitan areas and counties. On the basis of their study, I select those
jurisdictions in which at least 10% of the population participates in the Food Stamp
program. This screen yields a sample of 15 cities including Baltimore, MD; Detroit, MI;
El Paso, TX; Fresno, CA; McAllen-Edinburg-Mission, TX; Memphis, TN; Miami, FL;
Milwaukee, WI; New Orleans, LA; New York, NY; Newark, NJ; Philadelphia, PA;
Providence, RI; St. Louis, MO; and Washington, DC. As explained below, data on
reported incidents of crime are not available for Memphis, New York, and McAllenEdinburg-Mission, so the final sample includes 12 cities.
Panels A and B of Table 1 provide information on the use of the three main
welfare programs in each city in the sample. For comparability with the data on the Food
Stamp program which are drawn from Fellowes and Berube (2005), the data on TANF
and SSI programs cover the year 1999.4 On average across cities, the Food Stamp
program serves about twice as many people as TANF programs and more than three
times as many people as SSI. The value of TANF program payments and SSI program
payments often exceed the value of food stamp payments, implying higher payments per
recipient. However, relative to TANF and SSI, Food Stamps have become a more
significant source of income over the 1999-2005 period. Appendix Table 1 provides
information on the value of all three programs from 1999 through 2005. Averaged across
4

Data on the value of family assistance and SSI program payments are taken from the Bureau of Economic
Analysis Local Area Personal Income Database. Numbers of family assistance recipients are obtained from
the offices of state TANF directors. Data on the number of SSI recipients for counties are from SSI
Recipients by State and County, and for MSAs they are drawn from the State and Metropolitan Area
Databook 1997-1998.

9

cities, the compound annual growth rate in the value of food stamps over this period is
8.2% while the rates for TANF and SSI are -0.7% and 2.3%, respectively.
Panel C of Table 1 provides information about the timing of payments for each
program in each city. In most jurisdictions, each of the three programs makes payments
to recipients once a month.5 In some jurisdictions, Food Stamp and TANF payments
occur during time periods. For example, in Fresno, Food Stamps are paid over the first
ten days of the month, with the date of distribution depending on the last digit of the
recipient’s case number. TANF payments occur twice per month in three of the cities in
the sample.

3.2 Data on Criminal Activity
Conducting tests on the effects of the timing of welfare payments on crime across
jurisdictions also requires detailed data on reported incidents of crime. Unfortunately,
comprehensive incident data for the cities in which welfare is widely used are not
available in NIBRS; NIBRS only covers jurisdictions that have agreed to provide data,
and very few large cities have done so. Therefore, obtaining these data required directly
contacting police departments. In order to ensure the comparability of data across
jurisdictions, I attempted to obtain data covering the 2004-2006 period on each incident
that is classified as a Part I UCR offense or a Group A NIBRS offense. These categories
of crime include arson, assault offenses, burglary, forcible sex offenses, homicide,
larceny-theft, motor vehicle theft, and robbery. For each incident, I requested
information about the type, the date and time, and the location of the incident.
5

Cole and Lee (2005) identify the dates on which Food Stamp disbursements occur. I confirmed these
dates and obtained data on the timing of TANF payments from the divisions of state and local governments
that oversee this program.

10

12 of the 15 jurisdictions identified above provided useable data.6 Table 2
provides a description of the crime data obtained from each of the cities included in the
sample. All of the cities except Detroit used the UCR reporting system. Although I
attempted to obtain complete data covering the 2004-2006 period from each jurisdiction,
detailed data from some cities are only available for portions of this time frame, as
indicated in the last column of Table 2.7

3.3 The Tests
The empirical tests consider two measures of crime—crime rates and counts of
reported incidents of crime. Crime rates are computed by taking the number of reported
incidents of crime on a particular day in a particular city and dividing that number by the
sample period average number of daily reported incidents in the city. OLS specifications
are used to analyze crime rates and negative binomial specifications are used to analyze
counts of reported incidents.
Variation in the timing of payments allows me to conduct two kinds of tests. The
first is transparent but somewhat crude. It distinguishes between cities in which Food
Stamp payments are distributed in the first 10 days of the month and those in which
payments are more staggered. Food Stamp payments occur early in the month in Detroit,
Fresno, Newark, Philadelphia, Providence, and Washington, and I refer to this sample as
the Early Payment Sample. Food Stamp payments are more staggered in the month in
6

The three cities that did not provide data are Memphis, New York, and the McAllen-Edinburg-Mission
MSA. Police officers in Memphis and New York denied my requests for data and rejected my appeals of
their denials. McAllen-Edinburg-Mission is not a single city but is a collection of three cities so I excluded
it.
7
In several jurisdictions, changes to computer systems prevented departments from providing me with data
for the full sample period. Certain kinds of crime are not included in the data for some cities. For example,
arson is not covered in the sample for six cities. In some jurisdictions, this type of crime is collected and
aggregated by the fire department and not the police department.

11

Baltimore, El Paso, Miami, Milwaukee, New Orleans, and St. Louis, and I refer to this
sample as the Staggered Payment Sample. Tests explaining levels of crime include a
dummy that is equal to one in the first 10 days of the month and otherwise equal to zero
as well as an interaction between this dummy and a dummy that is equal to one for the
Staggered Payment Sample and zero for the Early Payment Sample. The coefficient on
the time specific dummy reveals if criminal activity is lower in the early part of the
month in cities where welfare payments are focused at the start of the month, and the
coefficient on this variable interacted with the Staggered Payment Dummy reveals if
temporal patterns in crime are any different in cities where payments are more staggered.
Information on the magnitude and timing of TANF payments and SSI payments
raises a concern about distinguishing among cities on the basis of the timing of Food
Stamp payments alone. As indicated in Panel C of Table 1, SSI payments are received on
the 1st of the month in all jurisdictions. TANF programs make payments twice a month
in Detroit, Philadelphia, and Providence, which are all in the Early Payment Sample and
these payments are made on the 1st of the month in Milwaukee, which is classified as part
of the staggered payment sample. In robustness checks, I remove observations from
Detroit, Philadelphia, Providence, and Milwaukee, from the data, leaving a set of cities
for which the classification based on the timing of Food Stamp payments is less subject
to this concern.
The second type of test employs an index that reflects the number of days that
have passed since recipients received their last welfare payment in a particular city. It is
computed using the information on the number of welfare recipients and the dates of
payments. All three of the major welfare programs are taken into account. For programs

12

that make payments over a period of days within a month, I assume that an equal number
of recipients receive payments on each of the days within the period. For each program
on each calendar day, I compute the average number of days that have passed since
recipients received their last payment. For example, if Food Stamp payments occur on
the first and second day of the month, on the fourth day of the month this average will be
two and a half days. I then take a weighted average of these program-specific measures
where weights are set equal to the number of total recipients in each program.8 The
weighted average is divided by 30 to create an index that takes on values between zero
and one. If all welfare recipients received a payment from each program on the 1st of the
month, the index would be zero on that day, and if no additional payments occurred over
the course of the month, the index would be equal to one on the last day of months with
31 days.
To provide further intuition for this index, Figure 1 displays values of the index
by the day of the month for Providence and St. Louis. In Providence, Food Stamps and
SSI payments occur only once a month on the 1st of the month, and TANF payments
occur twice a month on the first and 16th. Therefore, the index for Providence is zero on
the 1st of the month. It increases over the course of the month and drops down on the 16th
to reflect the fact that TANF recipients receive a payment at that time. In St. Louis, SSI
payments occur on the 1st of the month, but Food Stamp and TANF payments are
distributed over the first 22 days of the month with different recipients receiving payment
on different days. As a consequence, there is less variation in the index for St. Louis than
there is for Providence, and it declines over the first 22 days of the month before
increasing. One benefit of using this index in specifications that identify patterns in
8

Similar indices and results are obtained if the values of program payments are used as weights.

13

criminal activity is that it allows for the use of fixed effects for each calendar day of the
month.
By identifying effects of the timing of welfare program payments off of
differences in payment schedules across cities, the tests rule out explanations for
temporal patterns in crime that are unrelated to welfare payments but that are related to
factors that are likely to be operative in all the cities in the sample. For example, rents
are typically due at the start of the month, and these payments could induce criminal
activity at the end of the month. Paychecks from legitimate employment are also often
issued once or twice a month. Differences in temporal patterns of crime across cities
where the timing of welfare payments differs are not consistent with alternative
explanations for an increase in crime throughout the month based on these kinds of
considerations.
The tests are performed for different types of crime. The main hypothesis makes
predictions about the timing of crimes in which perpetrators are likely to have a direct
financial motivation. I refer to burglary, larceny-theft, motor vehicle theft, and robbery
as financially motivated crimes. I refer to Other Type I or Group A crimes as nonfinancially motivated or other crimes, and they include arson, assault offenses, forcible
sex offenses, and homicide.9
Some factors would give rise to the same temporal patterns for both types of
crime. Police officers may have an incentive to document incidents as occurring at a
9

This distinction is not perfect. For some incidents, a criminal commits more than one offense, and these
incidents are typically classified according to the most serious offense in the data according to a hierarchy
established by the Federal Bureau of Investigation. For example, if a criminal robs and then kills his
victim, this incident is typically classified as a homicide. Therefore, some incidents that are classified as
non-financially motivated crimes may have financial motivations. It is noteworthy that the crime data do
not cover the possession and sale of illegal drugs. Evidence presented in Dobkin and Puller (2007)
suggests that this kind of activity occurs most frequently soon after the distribution of government transfer
payments, when drug users have the resources to increase their consumption.

14

particular time, perhaps the beginning or end of the month. If the deployment of law
enforcement resources varies through the month, criminals of all types might time their
activity so as to minimize the chances of arrest. Criminals might also benefit from
conspiring to commit more of all types of crimes at a particular point in time because
limited enforcement resources could be more easily evaded. Under each of these
scenarios, financially motivated crimes and other types of crime would exhibit similar
temporal patterns. However, if patterns in crime reflect the timing of welfare payments,
then only financially motivated crimes should become more prevalent over the course of
the welfare payment cycles in jurisdictions where payments are focused at the beginning
of these cycles.
In keeping with the analysis of patterns in crime presented in papers like Jacob,
Lefgren, and Morretti (2007) and Jacob and Lefgren (2003), the analysis below controls
for the effects of weather and holidays on crime. Daily data on the average temperature
in degrees Fahrenheit, inches of precipitation, and inches of snowfall are obtained from
the National Climatic Data Center.10 Days that are U.S. federal holiday are identified as
holidays. Table 3 provides descriptive statistics for the variables used in the analysis.

4. Results
Figure 2 presents crime rates, averaged over three day intervals for the Early
Payment Sample and the Staggered Payment Sample. Daily crime rates are computed for
each city and type of crime by dividing the count of reported incidents by the sample

10

For each city, weather measurements are taken from the airport station nearest to the city and missing
data are augmented with data from other nearby stations.

15

period average number of reported incidents in the city.11 Panel A displays rates for all
crimes. The solid line with diamond markers indicates how rates change over the course
of the month in cities in the Early Payment Sample. In the cities in this sample, the
overall crime rate is above average in the middle of the month, and it falls at the
beginning of the month. It reaches its lowest point, 0.97, at the start of the month and
then increases to about 1.01 over the next two weeks, implying an increase of about 4%.
Panel B and C respectively show crime rates for financially motivated crimes and nonfinancially motivated crimes. In cities in the Early Payment Sample, there are
pronounced monthly cycles in the rate of financially motivated crimes but no discernable
trend in other crimes. Financially motivated crime rates increase from around 0.96 at the
beginning of the month to more than 1.02, indicating an increase of about 6%.
The dotted lines with square markers indicate how crime rates change over the
course of the month for cities in the Staggered Payment Sample. In this sample, there is
no apparent trend in overall crime, financially motivated crime, or other crime over the
course of the month. These patterns in Figure 1 are consistent with the theory that
welfare beneficiaries exhaust their welfare related income soon after receiving it and then
attempt to augment their income with income from criminal activity later in the month.
Patterns in crime observed in the Early Payment Sample do not appear to be a
consequence of factors that are also operative in the Staggered Payment Sample.
Table 4 presents the results of specifications that analyze patterns in total reported
incidents of Type I or Group A crimes. The dependent variable studied in the OLS
specifications in columns 1-4 is the crime rate, which is defined as the number of
reported incidents in a city on a particular date divided by average daily reported
11

Jacob, Lefgren, and Morretti (2007) use a similar approach to measure weekly crime rates.

16

incidents in the city. Each specification in Table 4 includes two kinds of fixed effects.12
City*Month*Year fixed effects control for differences across cities even if these vary
month to month. For example, these fixed effects control for local election cycles that
have been shown by Levitt (1997) to affect the size of police forces. City*Day of Week
fixed effects control for differences in criminal activity across days of the week in
individual cities. Standard errors that allow for clustering within each city/month pair
appear in parentheses.13
The coefficients on Dummy for 1st-10th are negative and significant in columns 1
and 2. The -0.0318 coefficient in column 2 implies that the crime rate is 3.2% below
average during the first ten days of the month in cities where welfare payments are
focused in the beginning of the month. The coefficients on the Staggered Payment
Dummy interacted with the Dummy for 1st-10th are positive and significant and of
slightly smaller magnitude than the coefficients on the Dummy for 1st-10th. An F-test
reveals that the sum of the coefficients on Dummy for 1st-10th and on the interaction
terms for each specification is not statistically distinguishable from zero. These results
indicate that there are no discernable increases in reported incidents of crime in cities in
the Staggered Payment sample. Factors that are operative in both the Early Payment
sample and the Staggered Payment sample do not explain increases in crime in the Early
Payment sample.

12

The results in Table 4 and the remainder of the analysis do not appear to depend on the inclusion of these
fixed effects. Using only city fixed effects to control for constant city characteristics yields estimates of the
effects of the timing of welfare payments on crime that are similar.
13
In order to consider the possible effect of serial correlation on the magnitude of the standard errors, I
have also computed these for the OLS specifications using a block bootstrap technique. This approach
yields very similar estimates that do not materially change the significance of the results.

17

The specifications in column 2 include controls for weather and a dummy that is
equal to one on holidays and zero otherwise. Consistent with previous work, crime
appears to increase as temperatures rise and decrease with precipitation and snowfall.
Crime rates are also lower on holidays.
The specifications presented in columns 3 and 4 are similar to those in columns 1
and 2, but they use the Time Since Payment Index to identify the effects of the timing of
welfare payments, and they also include a fixed effect for each calendar day of the
month. These specifications identify the effect of the timing of payments off of
differences in how the index changes over the course of the month across cities. The
results indicate that crime rates increase with the amount of time that has passed since
welfare payments occurred. The 0.1079 coefficient on the Time Since Payment Index in
column 4 implies that, if all welfare payments occurred on the 1st of the month, crime
rates would be 10.8% higher on the 31st of the month relative to the 1st of the month.
Columns 5-8 of Table 4 contain results of negative binomial specifications that
analyze counts of reported incidents as opposed to crime rates. The results in the
specifications are qualitatively and quantitatively very similar to those in columns 1-4.
These findings are consistent with the hypothesis that criminal income supplements
welfare income at the end of monthly welfare payment cycles.
The timing of welfare payments is hypothesized to affect crimes in which
perpetrators have a direct financial motivation and not necessarily other kinds of crime.
The specifications in Table 5 analyze crimes that are likely to have financial motives.
The specifications in this table are the same as those presented in Table 4 except the
dependent variables analyzed are the rate of financially motivated crime in columns 1-4

18

and the count of reported incidents of financially motivated crime in columns 5-8. As in
Table 4, the coefficients on the Dummy for 1st-10th are negative and significant, and the
coefficients on this dummy interacted with the Staggered Payment Dummy are positive
and significant. These results indicate that there are increases in financially motivated
crimes in cities where welfare payments are focused at the beginning of the month. In
cities where welfare payments are more staggered, increases are less pronounced and do
not differ statistically from the null of there being no temporal trend. The coefficients on
the Time Since Payment Index are also positive and significant.
The effects of the timing of welfare payments on financially motivated crimes
appear to be more pronounced than its effects on total crime analyzed in Table 4. The 0.0378 coefficient on the Dummy for 1st-10th in column 2 implies that, in the Early
Payment Sample, the financially motivated crime rate is 3.8% (as opposed to 3.2% for all
crimes) below average in the first 10 days of the month than it is over the rest of the
month. The 0.1254 coefficient on Day of the Month in column 4 indicates that if all
welfare payments occurred on the 1st of the month, the financially motivated crime rate
would be 12.5% (as opposed to 10.8% for all crimes) higher on the 31st of the month
relative to the 1st.
If patterns in crime were attributable to reporting biases or effects of police
deployment that are similar across different types of crime, then the data would indicate
an increase in non-financially motivated crimes over the course of welfare payment
cycles as well. The hypothesis that patterns in crime reflect income needs that arise
during welfare payment cycles does not make this prediction. Table 6 presents results of
specifications that test for temporal trends in non-financially motivated crimes. These

19

specifications are the same as those presented in Tables 4 and 5, but the dependent
variables considered are the non-financially motivated crime rate in columns 1-4 and the
count of reported incidents of non-financially motivated crime in columns 5-8. The
results do not indicate any statistically significant relations between the timing of welfare
payments and non-financially motivated crimes. The coefficients on the Dummy for 1st10th are positive, but they are insignificant and of much smaller magnitude than the
coefficients on this variable in the specifications that explain financially motivated crimes
presented in Table 5. The coefficients on the Time Since Payment Index are also
insignificant, and they are very small in magnitude in columns 7 and 8. These results
suggest that explanations for patterns in crime over monthly welfare payment cycles that
do not differentiate between financially motivated and other crimes are incomplete.
Table 7 displays analysis of financially motivated crimes by type of crime. The
specifications are the same as those presented in columns 7 and 8 of Table 5, but the
dependent variable is the count of reported burglaries in columns 1 and 2, larcenies in
columns 3 and 4, motor vehicle thefts in columns 5 and 6, and robberies in columns 7 and
8. The Time Since Payment Index attracts a positive coefficient in each specification,
and these coefficients are significant for all types of crime except burglary. The
insignificant coefficient on burglary could reflect the fact that burglars often study
potential targets before deciding to enter them and typically attempt to commit their
crimes when properties are unoccupied.14 Therefore, this type of crime may be less
motivated by short run liquidity needs than other kinds of financially motivated crimes.
The implied effect of the timing of welfare payments is particularly pronounced for
robbery. The 0.2224 coefficient on the Time Since Payment Index in column 8 implies
14

Weisel (2002) and Clarke (2002) provide descriptive information about burglary.

20

that robbery rates are 22% higher on the 31st of the month relative to the 1st of the month
in a jurisdiction where all welfare payments occur on the 1st of the month. This result
might reflect the fact that individuals who have exhausted their welfare related income
need liquid assets, and robbery is more likely to yield cash than other financially
motivated crimes.
The results indicate effects of the timing of welfare payments on measures of
crime at the city level. If increases in criminal activity were focused among welfare
beneficiaries and these beneficiaries committed only a fraction of crimes, then increases
in crime among this population would be larger than the aggregate results indicate.
Exploring this possibility would require detailed information on the sources of income of
the perpetrators of crimes. However, such data are not available. According to national
data, only approximately 15% of Part I UCR crimes result in an arrest and detailed
income data are not even collected for arrested individuals.15
Even though detailed income data for perpetrators are not available, it is possible
to compare the demographics of arrested individuals with those who receive support from
welfare payments to determine if it seems plausible that they are behind any temporal
patterns in financially motivated crime. Harlow (1998 and 2000) presents the results of
surveys of jail inmates and finds that individuals who are in jail for committing
financially motivated crimes report very low pre-arrest levels of monthly income and that
more than 75% of them qualify for and receive public counsel. Therefore, the income
profile of criminals is similar to the income profile of welfare recipients.16

15

See Crime in the United States, published by the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
There are some indications of gender differences between welfare recipients and criminals. During the
sample period, 59% of Food Stamp recipients, 57% of SSI recipients, and 60% of TANF recipients were
female, but only 30% of individuals arrested for financially motivated crimes were female. Furthermore, a

16

21

As mentioned in Section II, the distinction between the Early Payment Sample
and the Staggered Payment Sample used in the tests that include the dummy that is equal
to one for the first ten days of the month is subject to some concerns. This distinction is
based on the timing of Food Stamp payments. Although this form of welfare is the
largest in terms of the number of recipients, TANF programs are larger in value terms in
many jurisdictions, and the timing of TANF payments differs from the timing of Food
Stamp payments. In order to confirm that results are robust to using a more strictly
defined sample, I drop Detroit, Philadelphia, Providence, and Milwaukee, from the
sample. These are cities in which either Food Stamp payments are focused at the
beginning of the month but TANF payments are more staggered or Food Stamp payments
are staggered but TANF payments are focused at the beginning of the month.17
The results of some of the specifications presented in Tables 5 and 6, run using
the reduced sample, appear in Appendix Table 2. The results indicate that using the more
strictly defined sample yields estimates suggesting larger effects of the timing of welfare
payments on financially motivated crimes in the Early Payment Sample. Using the more
refined sample, there are, as before, no significant temporal patterns in non-financially
motivated crimes in either the strictly defined Early Payment Sample or Staggered
Payment Sample.
Appendix Table 3 presents results of two other robustness checks. First,
measurement error or reporting biases could give rise to an excessive number of reported

large fraction of the males who received TANF benefits were young children. These patterns suggest that
individuals committing crimes are not solely the direct recipients of payments and include indirect
beneficiaries as well.
17
In this robustness check, I do not drop New Orleans. Food Stamp payments occur during the 5th-14th
period and TANF payments occur from the 1st-5th. This payment schedule is consistent with including this
city in the Staggered Payment Sample. Removing it does not qualitatively or quantitatively change the
results in a significant way.

22

incidents on the first or last day of the month. For example, if there is a delay between
when a crime occurs and when it is discovered or reported, there may be an incentive to
report the crime on the first or last day of the month so it is included in crime statistics for
that month. The results are little changed by dropping observations from the first and last
day of each month from the sample. As a second additional robustness check, New
Orleans is dropped from the sample. The New Orleans data only cover 2006 and
conflating factors related to the aftermath of hurricane Katrina could affect patterns of
crime in the city. The results indicate that removing New Orleans from the sample does
not substantively change the results.

5. Conclusion
Analysis of patterns in crime in 12 large U.S. cities where more than 10% of the
population receive Food Stamps indicates that the timing of welfare payments affects
criminal activity. More crime takes place when more time has passed since welfare
payments occurred. The increase reflects an increase in crimes in which the perpetrator
is likely to have a financial motivation and not other types of Part I UCR or Group A
NIBRS offenses. Temporal patterns in crime are not observed in jurisdictions where
welfare payments are relatively more staggered. These findings are consistent with the
hypothesis that individuals who receive support from welfare payments consume welfare
related income quickly and then attempt to supplement it with income from criminal
activity.
The results suggest a role for behavioral considerations in economic explanations
of crime. Existing research indicates that welfare recipients exhibit short-run impatience

23

and do not smooth their consumption of welfare income. My results suggest this type of
consumption behavior is associated with increased criminal activity later in monthly
welfare payment cycles.
The results also carry implications for the design of welfare programs. Increasing
the frequency of welfare payments would smooth patterns in crime. Smooth levels of
criminal activity might make crime easier to combat because police departments would
be unlikely to be overwhelmed. If welfare beneficiaries do exhibit short-run impatience,
frequent payments would smooth their consumption and reduce the extent to which they
face dire circumstances because they consumed welfare related income too quickly. As a
result, more frequent payments would also lower crime rates. Nearly all jurisdictions
now distribute Food Stamp and TANF payments on electronic benefit transfer cards, so
the costs of more frequent payments would be likely to be low. Shaprio (2005), Wilde
and Ranney (2000), and Ohls, Fraker, Martini, and Ponza (1992) also present arguments
in favor of more frequent payments.
Finally, the findings have implications for the deployment of police officers and
the labor laws applicable to law enforcement. In jurisdictions where welfare payments
are focused at the beginning of the month, increased levels of criminal activity at the end
of the month call for increased police protection during this time. However, 1986
amendments to the Fair Labor Standards Act require that law enforcement officers be
compensated with overtime pay for working more than 40 hours a week. As a
consequence, it might be costly for departments to shift resources to times when they are
particularly needed. More flexible labor laws could help police departments alter
deployment schedules to prevent and combat crime.

24

References
Adams, William, Liran Einav, and Jonathan Levin, forthcoming, Liquidity Constraints
and Imperfect Information in Subprime Lending, American Economic Review.
Angeletos, George-Marios, David Laibson, Andrea Repetto, Jeremy Tobacman, and
Stephen Weinberg, 2001, The Hyperbolic Consumption Model: Calibration,
Simulation, and Empirical Evaluation, Journal of Economic Perspectives 15:3, pp.
47-68.
Barr, Michael, 2004, Banking the Poor, Yale Journal of Regulation 21, pp. 121-237.
Blank, Rebecca M., 2002, Evaluating Welfare Reform in the United States, Journal of
Economic Literature 40:4, pp. 1105-1166.
Becker, Gary S., 1968, Crime and Punishment: An Economic Approach, Journal of
Political Economy 76:2, pp. 169-217.
Bertrand, Marianne, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Eldar Shafir, 2004, A Behavior
Economics View of Poverty, American Economic Review 94:2, pp. 419-423.
Beverly, Sondra, Daniel Shneider, and Peter Tufano, 2006, Splitting Tax Refunds and
Building Savings: An Empirical Test, Tax Policy and the Economy 20, pp. 111-161.
Burek, Melissa, 2005, Now Serving Part Two Crimes: Testing the Relationship between
Welfare Spending and Property Crimes, Criminal Justice Policy Review 16:3, pp.
360-384.
Campbell, John, 2006, Household Finance, Journal of Finance 61, pp. 1553-1604.
Clarke, Ronald V., 2002, Burglary of Retail Establishments, U.S. Department of Justice,
Office of Community Oriented Policing Services.
Cole, Nancy and Ellie Lee, 2005, An Analysis of EBT Benefit Redemption Patterns:
Methods for Obtaining, Preparing, and Analyzing the Data, Abt Associates, Inc.
DeFranzo, James, 1996, Welfare and Burglary, Crime and Delinquency 42, pp 223-229.
DeFranzo, James, 1997, Welfare and Homicide, Journal of Research in Crime and
Delinquency 34, pp. 395-406.
Dobkin, Carlos and Stephen Puller, 2007, The Effects of Government Transfers on
Monthly Cycles in Drug Abuse, Hospitalization, and Mortality, Journal of Public
Economics 91:11-12, pp. 2137-2157.

25

Donohue, John, and Steven Levitt, 2001, The Impact of Legalized Abortion on Crime,
Quarterly Journal of Economics 116:2, pp. 379-420.
Duflo, Esther, William Gale, Jeffrey Liebman, Peter Orszag, and Emmanuel Saez, 2006,
Quarterly Journal of Economics 121:4, pp. 1311-1346.
Fellowes, Matt, and Alan Berube, 2005, Leaving Money (and Food) on the Table: Food
Stamp Participation in Major Metropolitan Areas and Counties, The Brookings
Institution Survey Series.
Freeman, Richard, 1995, The Labor Market, in Crime, James Q. Wilson and Joan
Petersilia, eds., San Francisco: ICS Press, pp. 171-192.
Garmaise, Mark, and Tobias Moskowitz, 2006, Bank Mergers and Crime: The Real and
Social Effects of Credit Market Competition, Journal of Finance 61:2, pp. 495-539.
Gould, Eric D., Bruce A. Weinberg, and David B. Mustard, 2002, Crime Rates and Local
Labor Market Opportunities in the United States: 1979-1997, The Review of
Economics and Statistics 84:1, pp. 45-61.
Hannon, Lance, and James DeFranzo, 1998a, Welfare and Property Crime, Justice
Quarterly 15, pp. 273-287.
Hannon, Lance, and James DeFranzo, 1998b, The Truly Disadvantaged, Public
Assistance, and Crime, Social Problems 45, pp. 432-445.
Harlow, Caroline Wolf, 2000, Defense Counsel in Criminal Cases, U.S. Department of
Justice, Office of Justice Programs.
Harlow, Caroline Wolf, 1998, Profile of Jail Inmates 1996, U.S. Department of Justice,
Office of Justice Programs.
Hseih, Chang-Tai, 2003, Do Consumers Respond to Anticipated Income Changes?
Evidence from the Alaska Permanent Fund, American Economic Review 93:1, pp.
397-405.
Jacob, Brian, and Lars Lefgren, 2003, Are Idle Hands the Devil’s Workshop?
Incapacitation, Concentration, and Juvenile Crime, American Economic Review 93:5,
pp. 1560-1577.
Jacob, Brian, Lars Lefgren, and Enrico Morretti, 2007, The Dynamics of Criminal
Behavior: Evidence from Weather Shocks, Journal of Human Resources 42:3, pp.
489-527.

26

Johnson, David S., Jonathan A. Parker, and Nicholas Souleles, 2006, Household
Expenditure and the Income Tax Rebates of 2001, American Economic Review 96:5,
pp. 1589-1610.
Jolls, Christine, 2007, Behavioral Law and Economics, Yale Law School working paper.
Laibson, David, 1997, Golden Eggs and Hyperbolic Discounting, Quarterly Journal of
Economics 112:2, pp. 443-477.
Lee, David S., and Justin McCrary, 2005, Crime, Punishment and Myopia, NBER
Working Paper No. 11491.
Levitt, Steven D., 1997, Using Electoral Cycles in Police Hiring to Estimate the Effect of
Police on Crime, American Economic Review 87:3, pp. 270-290.
Machin, Stephen, and Costas Meghir, 2004, Crime and Economic Incentives, The
Journal of Human Resources 39:4, pp. 958-979.
Moffitt, Robert, 1992, Incentive Effects of the U.S. Welfare System, Journal of
Economic Literature 30:1, pp. 1-61.
O’Donohue, Ted, and Matthew Rabin, 1999, Doing it Now or Later, American Economic
Review 89:1, pp. 103-124.
O’Donohue, Ted, and Matthew Rabin, 2001, Choice and Procrastination, Quarterly
Journal of Economics 116:1, pp. 121-160.
Ohls, James C., Thomas M. Fraker, Alberto P. Martini, and Michael Ponza, 1992, The
Effect of Cash-Out on Food Stamp Use by Food Stamp Participants in San Diego,
Mathmatica Policy Research, Inc.
Phelps, E. S., and R. A. Pollak, 1968, On Second-Best National Saving and GameEquilibrium Growth, The Review of Economic Studies 35:2, pp. 185-199.
Raphael, Steven, and Rudolf Winter-Ember, 2001, Identifying the Effect of
Unemployment on Crime, Journal of Law and Economics, 44:1, pp. 259-283.
Shapiro, Jesse, 2005, Is there a Daily Discount Rate? Evidence from the Food Stamp
Nutrition Cycle, Journal of Public Economics 89:2-3, pp. 303-325.
Shapiro, Matthew, and Joel Slemrod, 2003, Consumer Response to Tax Rebates,
American Economic Review 93:1, pp. 381-396.
Stephens, Melvin, 2003, “3rd of tha Month”: Do Social Security Recipients Smooth
Consumption between Checks?, American Economic Review 93:1, pp. 406-422.

27

Weisel, Deborah Lynn, 2002, Burglary of Single-Family Homes, U.S. Department of
Justice, Office of Community Oriented Policing Services.
Wilde, Park E., and Christine K. Ranney, 2000, The Monthly Food Stamp Cycle:
Shopping Frequency and Food Intake Decisions in an Endogenous Switching
Regression Framework, American Journal of Agricultural Economics 82:1, pp. 200213.

28

Figure 1: This figure displays the values of the Time Since Payment Index for Providence and St. Louis for each day of
the month. The Time Since Payment Index is an index between zero and one that reflects the average number of days
that have passed since welfare recipients received their last payment. It accounts for payments related to Food Stamps,
TANF, and SSI. If a program makes payments over a range of dates, it is assumed that an equal number of recipients
receives payment on each day in the range. The total number of recipients in each program is used to weight the
payment schedules of each program.

0.9

Time Since Payment Index

0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
1

3

5

7

9

11

13

15 17 19
Day of Month

Providence

21

St. Louis

23

25

27

29

31

Figure 2. This figure displays crime rates over the course of the month. Panel A displays rates for all crimes that are classified as Type I crimes
in the UCR reporting system and Group A crimes in the NIBRS reporting system. Panel B display rates for crimes in which the perpetrator is
likely to have a direct financial motivation, specifically burglary, larceny-theft, motor vehicle theft, and robbery. Panel C displays rates for other
crimes, specifically arson, assault offenses, forcible sex offenses, and homicide. The data points displayed are calculated by taking average crime
rates across three day periods for cities in which Food Stamp payments are focused at the beginning of the month and cities in which these
payments are more staggered. Crime rates for each city on each day are computed by taking incident counts and dividing by the sample period
average number of daily reported incidents in the city.
Panel A: Crime Rate--All Crimes
1.04
1.03
1.02

Crime Rate

1.01
1
0.99
0.98
0.97
0.96
0.95

16-18

19-21

22-24

25-27

28-31

1-3

4-6

7-9

10-12

13-15

4-6

7-9

10-12

13-15

4-6

7-9

10-12

13-15

Panel B: Crime Rate--Financially Motivated Crimes
1.04
1.03
1.02
Crime Rate

1.01
1
0.99
0.98
0.97
0.96
0.95
16-18

19-21

22-24

25-27

28-31

1-3

Panel C: Crime Rate--Other Crimes
1.04
1.03
1.02
Crime Rate

1.01
1
0.99
0.98
0.97
0.96
0.95
16-18

19-21

22-24

25-27

28-31
1-3
Day of Month

Early Payment Sample

Staggered Payment Sample

Table 1
Welfare Program Details by City
This table provides details about welfare programs in the twelve cities in the sample. Panel A lists city populations and the percent of the
population receiving Food Stamps, TANF payments, and Supplemental Security Income. Panel B provides data on the value of payments (in
thousands of dollars) for each of these programs and Panel C lists the dates in the month on which these payments are distributed. Population data
and data on the number of recipients and the value of payments are all for the year 1999, except the number of SSI recipients in Miami, FL and El
Paso, TX are for the year 1995. Data from Detroit, MI cover Wayne County, Fresno, CA Fresno County, Newark, NJ Essex County, Philadelphia,
PA Philadelphia County, Providence, RI Providence County, Washington, DC District of Columbia County, Baltimore, MD Baltimore City, El
Paso, TX El Paso MSA, Miami, FL Miami MSA, Milwaukee, WI Milwaukee County, New Orleans, LA Orleans Parish, St. Louis, MO St. Louis
County.

Panel A: Population and Share of Population Receiving Welfare Payments
City
Early Payment Sample
Detroit, MI
Fresno, CA
Newark, NJ
Philadelphia, PA
Providence, RI
Washington, DC
Staggered Payment Sample
Baltimore, MD
El Paso, TX
Miami, FL
Milwaukee, WI
New Orleans, LA
St. Louis, MO

Population

Food Stamps

TANF

SSI

2,061,162
799,407
793,633
1,517,550
621,602
572,059

12.2%
10.2%
11.5%
17.9%
10.0%
14.3%

6.3%
7.3%
5.1%
9.3%
6.6%
8.5%

3.7%
4.5%
3.2%
5.4%
3.4%
3.5%

651,154
679,622
2,253,362
940,164
1,381,652
348,189

15.3%
16.7%
11.3%
10.6%
12.0%
22.4%

7.5%
2.6%
2.7%
3.2%
1.7%
5.6%

5.1%
3.1%
4.8%
3.4%
2.0%
5.3%

Food Stamps

TANF

SSI

214,368
81,530
92,768
264,965
43,410
81,061

407,981
183,609
94,436
288,589
108,703
100,401

394,728
206,600
124,160
436,889
99,618
91,231

103,252
100,659
208,965
71,092
161,504
70,183

139,554
30,488
143,462
165,946
27,150
67,542

162,470
75,551
502,810
204,177
89,401
89,401

Panel B: Value of Welfare Payments
City
Early Payment Sample
Detroit, MI
Fresno, CA
Newark, NJ
Philadelphia, PA
Providence, RI
Washington, DC
Staggered Payment Sample
Baltimore, MD
El Paso, TX
Miami, FL
Milwaukee, WI
New Orleans, LA
St. Louis, MO

Panel C: Delivery Dates of Welfare Payments
City
Early Payment Sample

Food Stamps

TANF

Detroit, MI
Fresno, CA
Newark, NJ

1st - 9th
1st - 10th
1st - 5th

Philadelphia, PA
Providence, RI
Washington, DC

1st-10th
1st
1st - 10th

Twice a month,
staggered
1st
1st
Twice a month,
staggered
1st and 16th
1st

Staggered Payment Sample
Baltimore, MD
El Paso, TX
Miami, FL
Milwaukee, WI
New Orleans, LA
St. Louis, MO

6th-15th
1st-15th
1st - 15th
2nd-15th
5th - 14th
1st - 22nd

1st-15th
1st-15th
1st - 15th
1st
1st-5th
1st - 22nd

SSI

1st
1st
1st
1st
1st
1st

1st
1st
1st
1st
1st
1st

Table 2
Crime Data Coverage
This table displays information about the crime data obtained from each city in the sample.

City

Type of Crimes Covered

Sample Period

Detroit, MI
Fresno, CA
Newark, NJ
Philadelphia, PA
Providence, RI
Washington, DC
Baltimore, MD
Milwaukee, WI
St. Louis, MO
Miami, FL
New Orleans, LA
El Paso, TX

All Group A NIBRS Crimes
All Part I UCR Crimes
All Part I UCR Crimes except Rape and Arson
All Part I UCR Crimes except Arson
All Part I UCR Crimes except Arson
All Part I UCR Crimes
All Part I UCR Crimes except Arson and Homicide
All Part I UCR Crimes
All Part I UCR Crimes
All Part I UCR Crimes
All Part I UCR Crimes except Arson, Homicide, and Rape
Robbery, Burglary, Theft, Motor Vehicle Theft

2005-2006
2004-2006
2005-2006
2004-2006
2004-2006
08/01/2004-09/30/2005, 2006
2006
2005-2006
2004-2006
2004, 08/01/2005-12/31/2006
2006
07/01/05-12/31/06

Table 3
Descriptive Statistics
The crime data include reported incidents of all crimes that are classified as Type I crimes in the UCR reporting system and Group
A crimes in the NIBRS reporting system. Financially motivated crimes include reported incidents of crimes in which the
perpetrator is likely to have a direct financial motivation, specifically burglary, larceny-theft, motor vehicle theft, and robbery.
Other crimes include arson, assault offenses, forcible sex offenses, and homicide. Crime rates for each city on each day are
computed by taking incident counts and dividing by the sample period average number of daily reported incidents in the city.
Dummy for 1st-10th is a dummy that is equal to one in the first ten days of the month and zero otherwise. Time Since Payment
Index is an index between zero and one that reflects the average number of days that have passed since welfare recipients received
their last payment. Average temperature is the average temperature in degrees Fahrenheit. Precipitation and snowfall are measured
in inches. The Holiday Dummy is equal to one on U.S. federal holidays and zero otherwise.

Mean

Median

Standard
Deviation

1.000

0.999

0.181

107.747

96.000

65.975

Crime Rate--Financially Motivated Crimes

1.000

0.996

0.215

Count of Reported Incidents--Financially Motivated Crimes

91.633

75.000

60.017

Crime Rate--Other Crimes

1.000

0.947

0.539

Count of Reported Incidents--Other Crimes

15.673

12.000

12.118

Count of Reported Incidents--Burglary

16.904

13.000

14.679

Count of Reported Incidents--Larceny

45.478

42.000

29.708

Count of Reported Incidents--Motor Vehicle Theft

20.001

16.000

14.657

Count of Reported Incidents--Robbery

9.251

6.000

9.503

Dummy for 1st-10th

0.329

0.000

0.470

Time Since Payment Index

0.470

0.455

0.178

Average Temperature

59.802

62.000

17.930

Precipitation

0.108

0.000

0.342

Snowfall

0.051

0.000

0.504

Holiday Dummy

0.032

0.000

0.176

Crime Rate--All Crimes
Count of Reported Incidents--All Crimes

Table 4
The Effects of the Timing of Welfare Payments on Crime
The dependent variable in columns 1-4 is the crime rate, and for columns 5-8 it is a count of the total reported incidents of crime. The crime data include reported incidents of all crimes that are
classified as Type I crimes in the UCR reporting system and Group A crimes in the NIBRS reporting system. Crime rates for each city on each day are computed by taking incident counts and
dividing by the sample period average number of daily reported incidents in the city. The specifications presented in columns 1-4 are OLS specifications, and those in columns 5-8 are negative
binomial specifications. Each specification includes fixed effects for each city/month/year combination and each city/day of the week pair, and the specifications in columns 3, 4, 7, and 8 also
include fixed effects for each day of the month. Dummy for 1st-10th is a dummy that is equal to one in the first ten days of the month and zero otherwise. Staggered Payment Dummy is equal to
one for cities where Food Stamp payments are not exclusively made during the first ten days of the month. Time Since Payment Index is an index between zero and one that reflects the average
number of days since welfare recipients received their last payment. Average temperature is measured in degrees Fahrenheit. Precipitation and snowfall are measured in inches. The Holiday
Dummy is equal to one on U.S. federal holidays and zero otherwise. Heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors that allow for clustering within each city-month appear in parentheses.

Dependent Variable:
(1)

Crime Rate
(2)
(3)

Constant

0.9921
(0.0038)

0.8744
(0.0185)

Dummy for 1st-10th

-0.0292
(0.0063)

Staggered Payment Dummy *
Dummy for 1st-10th

0.0255
(0.0092)

0.9231
(0.0253)

(4)

3.3180
(0.0265)

4.5112
(0.0145)

-0.0318
(0.0061)

-0.0234
(0.0053)

-0.0256
(0.0051)

0.0266
(0.0089)

0.0170
(0.0083)

0.0176
(0.0079)

0.1044
(0.0266)

Time Since Payment Index

0.7699
(0.0314)

(5)

Count of Reported Incidents
(6)
(7)

0.1079
(0.0262)

(8)

3.6260
(0.0353)

4.4797
(0.0311)

0.0802
(0.0247)

0.0819
(0.0240)

Average Temperature

0.0026
(0.0003)

0.0026
(0.0003)

0.0028
(0.0003)

0.0027
(0.0003)

Precipitation

-0.0175
(0.0046)

-0.0169
(0.0046)

-0.0182
(0.0041)

-0.0175
(0.0042)

Snowfall

-0.0303
(0.0029)

-0.0310
(0.0030)

-0.0368
(0.0042)

-0.0375
(0.0042)

Holiday Dummy

-0.0977
(0.0112)

-0.1014
(0.0110)

-0.1074
(0.0107)

-0.1111
(0.0102)

City * Month * Year Fixed Effects?
City * Day of the Week Fixed Effects?
Day of Month Fixed Effects?

Y
Y
N

Y
Y
N

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

No. of Obs.
R-Squared
Log Likelihood

9,496
0.3853

9,496
0.4111

9,496
0.3962

9,496
0.4221

Y
Y
N

Y
Y
N

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

9,496

9,496

9,496

9,496

-37,061

-36,767

-36,975

-36,677

Table 5
The Effects of the Timing of Welfare Payments on Crime--Financially Motivated Crimes
The dependent variable in columns 1-4 is the crime rate, and for columns 5-8 it is a count of the total reported incidents of crime. The crime data include reported incidents of crimes in which
the perpetrator is likely to have a direct financial motivation, specifically burglary, larceny-theft, motor vehicle theft, and robbery. Crime rates for each city on each day are computed by taking
incident counts and dividing by the sample period average number of daily reported incidents in the city. The specifications presented in columns 1-4 are OLS specifications, and those in
columns 5-8 are negative binomial specifications. Each specification includes fixed effects for each city/month/year combination and each city/day of the week pair, and the specifications in
columns 3, 4, 7, and 8 also include fixed effects for each day of the month. Dummy for 1st-10th is a dummy that is equal to one in the first ten days of the month and zero otherwise.
Staggered Payment Dummy is equal to one for cities where Food Stamp payments are not exclusively made during the first ten days of the month. Time Since Payment Index is an index
between zero and one that reflects the average number of days since welfare recipients received their last payment. Average temperature is the average temperature in degrees Fahrenheit.
Precipitation and snowfall are measured in inches. The Holiday Dummy is equal to one on U.S. federal holidays and zero otherwise. Heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors that allow for
clustering within each city-month appear in parentheses.

(1)
1.0022
(0.0043)

Crime Rate
(2)
(3)
0.9425
0.9062
(0.0208)
(0.0269)

-0.0353
(0.0066)

-0.0378
(0.0064)

-0.0300
(0.0054)

-0.0322
(0.0051)

0.0313
(0.0098)

0.0325
(0.0095)

0.0239
(0.0088)

0.0248
(0.0083)

Dependent Variable:
Constant
Dummy for 1st-10th
Staggered Payment Dummy *
for 1st-10th

Dummy

0.1226
(0.0285)

Time Since Payment

(4)
0.8202
(0.0347)

Count of Reported Incidents
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
3.2596
4.4191
3.5594
4.3752
(0.0286)
(0.0146)
(0.0377)
(0.0324)

0.1254
(0.0281)

0.0984
(0.0259)

0.0998
(0.0253)

Average Temperature

0.0019
(0.0003)

0.0019
(0.0003)

0.0021
(0.0003)

0.0020
(0.0003)

Precipitation

-0.0082
(0.0056)

-0.0075
(0.0056)

-0.0098
(0.0046)

-0.0091
(0.0047)

Snowfall

-0.0321
(0.0025)

-0.0329
(0.0026)

-0.0393
(0.0044)

-0.0400
(0.0044)

Holiday Dummy

-0.1374
(0.0126)

-0.1411
(0.0126)

-0.1459
(0.0119)

-0.1496
(0.0115)

City * Month * Year Fixed Effects?
City * Day of the Week Fixed Effects?
Day of Month Fixed Effects?

Y
Y
N

Y
Y
N

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

No. of Obs.
R-Squared
Log Likelihood

9,496
0.4715

9,496
0.4925

9,496
0.4799

9,496
0.5010

Y
Y
N

Y
Y
N

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

9,496

9,496

9,496

9,496

-36,191

-35,916

-36,115

-35,836

Table 6
The Effects of the Timing of Welfare Payments on Crime--Other Crimes
The dependent variable in columns 1-4 is the crime rate, and for columns 5-8 it is a count of the total reported incidents of crime. The crime data include reported incidents of arson, assault
offenses, forcible sex offenses, and homicide. Crime rates for each city on each day are computed by taking incident counts and dividing by the sample period average number of daily
reported incidents in the city. The specifications presented in columns 1-4 are OLS specifications, and those in columns 5-8 are negative binomial specifications. Each specification includes
fixed effects for each city/month/year combination and each city/day of the week pair, and the specifications in columns 3, 4, 7, and 8 also include fixed effects for each day of the month.
Dummy for 1st-10th is a dummy that is equal to one in the first ten days of the month and zero otherwise. Staggered Payment Dummy is equal to one for cities where Food Stamp payments
are not exclusively made during the first ten days of the month. Time Since Payment Index is an index between zero and one that reflects the average number of days that have passed since
welfare recipients received their last payment. Average temperature is the average temperature in degrees Fahrenheit. Precipitation and snowfall are measured in inches. The Holiday Dummy
is equal to one on U.S. federal holidays and zero otherwise. Heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors that allow for clustering within each city-month appear in parentheses.

Dependent Variable:
(1)

Crime Rate
(2)
(3)

Constant

0.9199
(0.0112)

0.4595
(0.0459)

Dummy for 1st-10th

0.0065
(0.0199)

Staggered Payment Dummy *
Dummy for 1st-10th

0.0030
(0.0258)

0.8867
(0.0616)

(4)

2.5700
(0.0460)

0.5670
(0.1054)

0.0027
(0.0200)

0.0135
(0.0145)

0.0111
(0.0141)

0.0047
(0.0253)

-0.0142
(0.0197)

-0.0138
(0.0192)

0.0763
(0.0662)

Time Since Payment Index

0.4062
(0.0764)

(5)

Count of Reported Incidents
(6)
(7)

0.0872
(0.0645)

(8)

0.5531
(0.1067)

0.6120
(0.1131)

0.0155
(0.0453)

0.0236
(0.0432)

Average Temperature

0.0080
(0.0007)

0.0079
(0.0008)

0.0074
(0.0005)

0.0072
(0.0005)

Precipitation

-0.0833
(0.0130)

-0.0824
(0.0131)

-0.0770
(0.0124)

-0.0763
(0.0125)

Snowfall

-0.0199
(0.0094)

-0.0200
(0.0096)

-0.0228
(0.0066)

-0.0234
(0.0067)

Holiday Dummy

0.1575
(0.0282)

0.1494
(0.0277)

0.1306
(0.0208)

0.1234
(0.0210)

City * Month * Year Fixed Effects?
City * Day of the Week Fixed Effects?
Day of Month Fixed Effects?

Y
Y
N

Y
Y
N

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

No. of Obs.
R-Squared
Log Likelihood

8,947
0.4194

8,947
0.4351

8,947
0.4224

8,947
0.4371

Y
Y
N

Y
Y
N

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

8,947

8,947

8,947

8,947

-24,312

-24,119

-24,280

-24,100

Table 7
The Effects of the Timing of Welfare Payments by Type of Financially Motivated Crime
The dependent variable is the country of reported incidents of burglary in columns 1 and 2, larceny in columns 3 and 4, motor vehicle theft in columns 5 and 6, and robbery in columns 7 and 8.
The specifications are negative binomial specifications, and each specification includes fixed effects for each city/month/year combination, each city/day of the week pair, and each day of the
month. Time Since Payment Index is an index between zero and one that reflects the average number of days since welfare recipients received their last payment. Average temperature is the
average temperature in degrees Fahrenheit. Precipitation and snowfall are measured in inches. The Holiday Dummy is equal to one on U.S. federal holidays and zero otherwise. Heteroskedasticity
consistent standard errors that allow for clustering within each city-month appear in parentheses.

Dependent Variable:
Type of Crime

Burglary
(1)

(2)

Count of Reported Indcidents
Larceny
Motor Vehichle Theft
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)

Robbery
(7)

(8)

Constant

2.4598
(0.0584)

2.9474
(0.0538)

2.7416
(0.0523)

3.6639
(0.0413)

1.8927
(0.0938)

2.6681
(0.0518)

0.4264
(0.0906)

1.9019
(0.0691)

Time Since Payment Index

0.0655
(0.0477)

0.0708
(0.0468)

0.0795
(0.0322)

0.0806
(0.0316)

0.1126
(0.0469)

0.1132
(0.0468)

0.2222
(0.0622)

0.2251
(0.0625)

Average Temperature

0.0032
(0.0005)

0.0022
(0.0004)

0.0004
(0.0005)

0.0028
(0.0007)

Precipitation

0.0197
(0.0098)

-0.0281
(0.0065)

0.0105
(0.0090)

-0.0141
(0.0111)

Snowfall

-0.0435
(0.0083)

-0.0478
(0.0061)

-0.0247
(0.0055)

-0.0378
(0.0081)

Holiday Dummy

-0.1357
(0.0211)

-0.2013
(0.0146)

-0.0623
(0.0212)

-0.1267
(0.0250)

City * Month * Year Fixed Effects?
City * Day of the Week Fixed Effects?
Day of Month Fixed Effects?
No. of Obs.
Log Likelihood

Y
Y
Y
9,496
-26,183

Y
Y
Y
9,496
-26,100

Y
Y
Y
9,496
-32,078

Y
Y
Y
9,496
-31,831

Y
Y
Y
9,496
-27,813

Y
Y
Y
9,496
-27,796

Y
Y
Y
9,496
-22,007

Y
Y
Y
9,496
-21,967

Appendix Table 1
Welfare Program Details by City
This table displays the value of welfare program payments (in thousands of dollars) over the 1999-2005 period. Data from Detroit,
MI cover Wayne County, Fresno, CA Fresno County, Newark, NJ Essex County, Philadelphia, PA, Philadelphia County,
Providence, RI Providence County, Washington, DC District of Columbia County, Baltimore, MD, Baltimore City, El Paso, TX, El
Paso MSA, Miami, FL, Miami MSA, Milwaukee, WI, Milwaukee County, New Orleans, LA, Orleans Parish, St. Louis, MO, St.
Louis County.

Food Stamps
2002
2003

City
Early Payment Sample
Detroit, MI
Fresno, CA
Newark, NJ
Philadelphia, PA
Providence, RI
Washington, DC

1999

2000

2001

2004

2005

214,368
81,530
92,768
264,965
43,410
81,061

184,614
77,333
81,240
242,318
44,259
74,875

198,103
77,210
75,459
236,811
45,302
70,862

228,424
84,075
73,506
244,870
48,556
77,074

278,983
91,431
77,060
405,520
53,067
95,185

313,485
107,505
85,071
303,778
56,693
96,825

373,735
130,202
95,870
337,227
59,613
103,176

Staggered Payment Sample
Baltimore, MD
El Paso, TX
Miami, FL
Milwaukee, WI
New Orleans, LA
St. Louis, MO

103,252
100,659
208,965
71,092
101,959
70,183

94,394
95,164
229,338
74,277
95,955
71,939

94,263
99,027
230,999
86,645
104,774
78,095

97,190
111,226
246,204
102,435
119,186
85,815

108,055
140,900
270,005
117,257
121,294
96,768

119,352
170,434
371,997
136,054
133,431
110,754

131,438
198,981
424,516
157,348
235,945
118,428

2003

2004

2005

1999

2000

2001

TANF
2002

Early Payment Sample
Detroit, MI
Fresno, CA
Newark, NJ
Philadelphia, PA
Providence, RI
Washington, DC

407,981
183,609
94,436
288,589
108,703
100,401

413,728
202,885
84,603
403,194
110,766
110,064

353,028
195,583
105,935
237,214
106,010
118,644

365,952
181,232
106,050
247,132
108,097
129,304

349,953
194,390
114,466
245,940
101,959
119,402

340,491
203,000
109,579
273,650
101,527
118,165

332,969
196,871
97,639
283,211
109,847
115,150

Staggered Payment Sample
Baltimore, MD
El Paso, TX
Miami, FL
Milwaukee, WI
New Orleans, LA
St. Louis, MO

139,554
30,488
143,462
165,946
27,150
67,542

149,623
32,188
157,218
219,813
26,746
70,109

140,844
31,760
163,535
271,941
30,240
70,747

126,662
30,065
150,467
280,726
33,358
63,650

105,860
34,753
130,201
293,403
27,437
37,134

134,910
28,565
125,873
307,476
23,912
37,839

146,929
29,784
110,398
287,444
20,869
34,890

1999

2000

2001

SSI
2002

2003

2004

2005

Early Payment Sample
Detroit, MI
Fresno, CA
Newark, NJ
Philadelphia, PA
Providence, RI
Washington, DC

394,728
206,600
124,160
436,889
99,618
91,231

422,247
210,216
123,622
444,756
105,204
92,761

421,461
218,411
127,823
475,148
114,169
97,623

414,186
239,892
130,081
504,865
118,562
102,153

431,247
251,222
130,226
518,179
121,949
104,791

443,634
260,226
135,573
539,593
127,133
109,558

453,732
270,260
138,055
559,848
132,877
111,897

Staggered Payment Sample
Baltimore, MD
El Paso, TX
Miami, FL
Milwaukee, WI
New Orleans, LA
St. Louis, MO

162,470
75,551
502,810
204,177
130,870
89,401

162,494
78,536
518,923
197,271
128,394
89,318

166,061
84,434
540,317
200,476
131,192
91,174

163,943
90,222
554,838
207,026
132,440
92,594

161,479
92,043
588,162
212,753
132,242
92,458

158,818
95,113
602,794
219,155
136,489
93,109

151,696
99,558
611,416
220,835
113,814
93,527

Appendix Table 2
The Effects of the Timing of Welfare Payments on Crime: Alternative Sample
The dependent variable in columns 1, 2, 5, and 6 is the crime rate and the specifications in these columns are OLS specifications. The dependent variable in columns 3, 4, 7, and 8 is a count of the
total reported incidents of crime, and the specifications in these columns are negative binomial specifications. Columns 1-4 consider crimes in which the perpetrator is likely to have a financial
motivation, and columns 5-8 consider other crimes. Crime rates for each city on each day are computed by taking incident counts and dividing by the sample period average number of daily
reported incidents in the city. Each specification includes fixed effects for each city/day of the week pair and each city/month/year combination. Dummy for 1st-10th is a dummy that is equal to one
in the first ten days of the month and zero otherwise. Staggered Payment Dummy is equal to one for cities where Food Stamp payments are not exclusively made during the first ten days of the
month. Average temperature is the average temperature in degrees Fahrenheit. Precipitation and snowfall are measured in inches. The Holiday Dummy is equal to one on U.S. federal holidays and
zero otherwise. Heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors that allow for clustering within each city-month appear in parentheses.

Financially Motivated Crimes
Dependent Variable:

Crime Rate
(1)

(2)

Other Crimes

Count of Reported
Incidents
(3)
(4)

Crime Rate
(5)

(6)

Count of Reported
Incidents
(7)
(8)

Constant

0.9959
(0.0051)

0.9213
(0.0286)

4.7406
(0.0162)

3.5178
(0.0449)

0.9294
(0.0149)

0.3487
(0.0749)

2.6190
(0.0332)

2.1234
(0.0432)

Dummy for 1st-10th

-0.0466
(0.0108)

-0.0483
(0.0107)

-0.0426
(0.0093)

-0.0441
(0.0093)

-0.0155
(0.0285)

-0.0174
(0.0289)

0.0012
(0.0135)

0.0012
(0.0139)

Staggered Payment Dummy *
Dummy for 1st-10th

0.0486
(0.0132)

0.0488
(0.0131)

0.0432
(0.0117)

0.0433
(0.0116)

0.0338
(0.0348)

0.0332
(0.0343)

0.0092
(0.0221)

0.0072
(0.0216)

Average Temperature

0.0015
(0.0004)

0.0017
(0.0004)

0.0092
(0.0012)

0.0084
(0.0007)

Precipitation

-0.0160
(0.0069)

-0.0157
(0.0061)

-0.0851
(0.0180)

-0.0859
(0.0145)

Snowfall

-0.0336
(0.0036)

-0.0510
(0.0122)

-0.0210
(0.0215)

-0.0643
(0.0213)

Holiday Dummy

-0.1414
(0.0169)

-0.1492
(0.0167)

0.1710
(0.0409)

0.1271
(0.0269)

City * Month * Year Fixed Effects?
City * Day of the Week Fixed Effects?

Y
Y

Y
Y

No. of Obs.
R-Squared
Log Likelihood

5,844
0.5058

5,844
0.5224

Y
Y

Y
Y

5,844

5,844

-21,775

-21,652

Y
Y

Y
Y

5,295
0.1535

5,295
0.1744

Y
Y

Y
Y

5,295

5,295

-13,526

-13,406

Appendix Table 3
The Effects of the Timing of Welfare Payments on Crime: Additional Robustness Checks
The dependent variable in columns 1, 2, 5, and 6 is the incident count for crimes in which the perpetrator is likely to have a financial motivation. For columns 3, 4, 7, and 8 it is the count for other
crimes. The specifications are negative binomial specifications. The first four specifications remove the first and last day of each month from the sample, and the last four specifications remove
New Orleans observations. Each specification includes fixed effects for each city/month/year combination and each city/day of the week pair, and the specifications in columns 2, 4, 6, and 8 also
include fixed effects for each day of the month. Dummy for 1st-10th is equal to one in the first ten days of the month and zero otherwise. Staggered Payment Dummy is equal to one for cities
where Food Stamp payments are not exclusively made during the first ten days of the month. Time Since Payment Index is an index between zero and one that reflects the average number of days
that have passed since welfare recipients received their last payment. Average temperature is the average temperature in degrees Fahrenheit. Precipitation and snowfall are measured in inches. The
Holiday dummy is equal to one on U.S. federal holidays and zero otherwise. Heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors that allow for clustering within each city-month appear in parentheses.

Drop First and Last Day of Month
Type of Crime:
Constant

Financially Motivated
(1)
(2)
4.3832
3.0718
(0.0191)
(0.0377)

Other

Drop New Orleans

(3)
0.0354
(0.1059)

Financially Motivated
(4)
(5)
(6)
2.1020
4.4921
4.4140
(0.0611)
(0.0171)
(0.0295)

Other
(7)
2.3371
(0.0531)

Dummy for 1st-10th

-0.0245
(0.0113)

0.0133
(0.0281)

-0.0428
(0.0113)

-0.0136
(0.0250)

Staggered Payment Dummy * Dummy
for 1st-10th

0.0168
(0.0084)

-0.0091
(0.0194)

0.0227
(0.0083)

-0.0155
(0.0193)

0.0913
(0.0251)

Time Since Payment Index

0.0220
(0.0484)

0.0967
(0.0257)

(8)
2.1787
(0.0440)

0.0189
(0.0437)

Average Temperature

0.0021
(0.0003)

0.0022
(0.0003)

0.0068
(0.0005)

0.0068
(0.0005)

0.0020
(0.0003)

0.0021
(0.0003)

0.0072
(0.0005)

0.0072
(0.0005)

Precipitation

-0.0085
(0.0048)

-0.0087
(0.0047)

-0.0786
(0.0130)

-0.0786
(0.0130)

-0.0076
(0.0048)

-0.0078
(0.0047)

-0.0764
(0.0126)

-0.0764
(0.0126)

Snowfall

-0.0401
(0.0046)

-0.0399
(0.0046)

-0.0214
(0.0071)

-0.0214
(0.0071)

-0.0403
(0.0044)

-0.0401
(0.0044)

-0.0233
(0.0067)

-0.0234
(0.0067)

Holiday Dummy

-0.1523
(0.0121)

-0.1524
(0.0121)

0.0902
(0.0222)

0.0901
(0.0222)

-0.1464
(0.0117)

-0.1465
(0.0116)

0.1205
(0.0210)

0.1205
(0.0211)

City * Month * Year Fixed Effects?
City * Day of the Week Fixed Effects?
Day of Month Fixed Effects?
No. of Obs.
Log Likelihood

Y
Y
N
8,873
-33,334

Y
Y
Y
8,873
-33,324

Y
Y
N
8,360
-22,444

Y
Y
Y
8,360
-22,444

Y
Y
N
9,132
-34,627

Y
Y
Y
9,132
-34,618

Y
Y
N
8,583
-23,450

Y
Y
Y
8,583
-23,451

