NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DOMESTIC AND FOREIGN DISTURBANCES IN AN OPTIMIZING
MODEL OF EXCHANGE RATE DETERMINATION

Stephen J. Turnovsky

Working Paper No. l4O7

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEABCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 1984

This paper was presented at the Midwest International Economics
Conference held at the University of Illinois at Urbana—Champaign in
I am grateful to the discussants of the paper, Jagdeep
April 19814.
Bhandari and Jonathan Eaton, for their comments. The suggestions
of the referees are also gratefully acknowledged. The research
reported here is part of the NBER's research program in
International Studies and project in Productivity (World Econony).
Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those, of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #1407
July 1984

Domestic and Foreign Disturbances in an Optimizing
Model of Exchange Rate Determination

kB S TRACT

This paper analyzes the effects of various disturbances of
domestic and foreign origin in a small open economy under imperfect
capital mobility in which the behavioral relationships are derived from

optimization by the private sector. In this model the domestic economy
jumps instantaneously to its new equilibrium following a change in either
the domestic monetary growth rate or domestic fiscal policy. In response
to a disturbance in either the foreign interest rate or inflation rate,

the economy undergoes an initial partial jump towards its new equilibrium,

which it thereafter approaches gradually. The implications of these
results for exchange rate adjustment and the insulation properties of
flexible exchange rates are discussed.

Stephen J.
Department
University
1206 South

Turnovsky
of Economics
of Illinois
Sixth Street

Champaign, IL 61820
217—333—2354

1. INTRODUCTION
Much has been written recently on analyzing exchange rate determination

in small open economies under flexible exchange rates. The models developed
typically consider the effects of different disturbances on the behavior of the

economy both in the short run and over time. The disturbances usually analyzed
are domestic monetary and fiscal policy changes on the one hand, and foreign

interest rate and price changes, on the other. Two issues which have received

a lot of attention include: the adjustment of the exchange rate to monetary dis—
turbances, and the degree to which flexible rates insulate the domestic economy

against foreign disturbances. The overwhelming bulk of the existing literature
employs ad hoc models of an essentially arbitrary nature. As a consequence, many
of the conclusions with respect to these and other issues depend upon the chosen

specification of the model. Indeed much of the thrust of the existing literature is
to investigate the sensitivity of various propositions to specific assumptions.-'
Two exceptions to the above characteristics of the literature are papers
by Obstfeld (1981) and Hodrick (1982), which analyze the impacts of various domestic
policy disturbances in a model in which the behavioral functions are derived from

explicit optimization on the part of agents in the economy.1 Both studies are
based on the assumptions of purchasing power parity (PPP) and uncovered interest
parity (JJIP). In the Hodrick analysis, which is based on the assumption of a
constant rate of consumer time preference, the disturbances lead to instantaneous

jumps in the economy from one steady state to another. There is no transitional
dynamics as is typically the case in ad hoc models based on similar assumptions.
By contrast, the Obstfeld analysis endogenizes the rate of time preference in a
manner suggested by Uzawa (1968) and finds the optimizing system to exhibit saddle—
point behavior.

In this paper we analyze the effects of both domestic and foreign dis—
turbances using an optimizing approach under the more plausible empirical assumption

—2—

that capital is only imperfectly mobile internationally, in the sense that UIP

does not hold.-' The framework we employ is an adaptation of the Brock and
Turnovsky (1981) perfect foresight equilibrium. This is characterized by:
(i) all relationships are derived from optimizing behavior; (ii) all expectations

are realized; (iii) all markets clear. We retain the assumption of PPP, as the
degree of substitutability between domestic and foreign goods is inessential to
the results we obtain.

The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 outlines the
framework, spelling out the optimization and deriving the perfect foresign equilibrium.
The steady state equilibrium is discussed in Section 3, while the transitional

dynamics is considered in the following section. Section 5 analyzes the short—run
effects on the domestic economy of the various domestic and foreign disturbances.
The main findings of the study are reviewed in the final section, where some
generalizations of the analysis are also discussed.

2.

THE FRAMEWORK
The model contains three sectors:

(i) consumers, (ii) firms,

and

(iii) the

government. To preserve analytical tractability we assume that all consumers and firms
are identical, enabling us to focus on the representative individual in each group.

A. Structure of Economy
We assume that the domestic economy is small. It produces a single traded
good, the foreign price of which is given on the world market. In percentage change
terms, the PPP relationship implies

pq+e
where
p =

rate

of inflation of the good in domestic currency,

q =

rate

of inflation of the good in foreign currency,

e =

rate

of exchange depreciation.

(1)

—3—

We assume that domestic residents may hold three assets. The first is

domestic money, which is not held by foreigners. Secondly, they may hold a non—
traded bond, issued by the domestic government, which is denominated in terms of

domestic currency and pays a nominal interest rate r. Thirdly, they may hold (or
issue) a traded bond denominated in foreign currency and paying an exogenous world
interest rate r*.

The representative consumer's plans are obtained by solving the follow—

ing intertemporal optimization problem'

Max J

et[U(c,)

+ V(m)}dt

Uc >

0

,

U

<

0

,

V'

>

0

U<O,U<O,U<O,V"<O

(la)

subject to

c+ i +

1 + a = w9 + r + (r*_q)b + (r—q—e)a — (q+e)m
—

and

qb —-czb2

(ib)

T

—

initial conditions
m(0) =

p(O)

;

a(0) =

P)

;

(lc)

b(0) =

where
c =

real

consumption,

m =

real

money balances; M = nominal money balances,

b =

real

stock of traded bonds; B =

a =

real

=

nominal stock of traded bonds,

stock of non—traded bonds; A =
traded bonds,

nominal stock of non—

labor,

-

w =

real

wage rate, taken as parameterically given,

=

real

profit, taken as parameterically given,

r =
r* =

domestic nominal interest rate,

foreign

nominal interest rate,

—4—
e =

anticipated

T =

lump sum tax,

=

P =

rate of exchange depreciation, which is equal
to the actual rate of exchange depreciation,

rate

of time preference, taken to be constant,

domestic price level; Q = foreign price level.

The budget constraint is straightforward, although several features merit

comment. First, since the analysis is based on perfect foresight, the anticipated
rate of exchange depreciation is assumed equal to the actual rate of exchange

depreciation. Secondly, since the domestic assets are denominated in domestic
currency, they are subject to the unit rate of capital loss of p = q + e. By con-

trast, since the traded bond is denominated in foreign currency, the corresponding

rate of capital loss is q. Thirdly, the budget constraint includes a cost item
1/2 otb2.

This term is meant to capture, in a certainty equivalent framework, the

imperfect substitutability between domestic and foreign bonds. In a stochastic
model the cost parameter a would be a function of the degree of exchange risk

and the degree of risk aversion of dmestic investors. While our representation of imperfect capital mobility is restrictive, it will be seen below that it
is perfectly sensible in the sense that the demand function it yields for traded

bonds is precisely equivalent to those derived from standard stochastic optimization models.

The utility function is assumed to be concave in its arguments c, Q, and

m. The assumption U < 0 that the marginal utility of consumption decreases with
labor (increases with leisure) is a plausible one and renders the results more

determinate. The separability of utility into a function of c and Z on the one
hand and m on the other is made primarily for expositional simplicity. It leads
to a separation of the real part of the system from the nominal. In the concluding section we note how relaxing this assumption changes our results in a minimal
way.

—5—

In determining his optimal plans for c, £, m, b, and a, the consumer is
assumed to take e, q, Tr, T, w, r, r*, the price level P and the exchange rate E,

as parameterically given. The initial conditions in (lc) relate to the initial
stocks of real bonds and real stock of money balances held by consumers. By
definition these are the corresponding initial nominal stocks, divided by the
initial price level.

Firms are assumed to produce output by hiring labor to maximize real profit

=

f(2,)

—

w2

(2)

where f(9) is the firm's production function, assumed to possess the usual neoclassical property of positive, but diminishing, marginal product of labor.
The domestic government's budget constraint, expressed in real terms is

m+a=g+ra—T—(q+e)(m+a)

(3)

where g denotes real government expenditure and all other variables are defined above.
This equation asserts that total real expenditures, including interest payments, less
the lump sum tax and 'inflation tax' revenues, must be financed either through
printing money or by issuing bonds.
The rate of accumulation of traded bonds is by definition equal to the
balance of payments on current account, which in turn equals the balance of trade

plus the real interest payments on the net holdings of foreign debt. With a single
traded commodity the balance of trade is simply the excess of domestic production

over domestic absorption by the domestic private and government sector. In real
terms the relationship is given by

b =

f(2)

— c — g ÷

(r*_q)b

(4)

Ignoring the term -- cLb2, which is an attempt to express the consumer budget con-

straint in certainty equivalent terms, we can see that the constraints (ib), (2),

(3) and (4) are linearly dependent. One can therefore be ignored

—6--

B. Determination of Perfect Foresight Equilibrium
We consider a perfect foresight equilibrium to the model to be one in
which the planned demand and supply functions that solve the optimization problems,
consistent with the accumulation equations, clear all markets at all points of

time. We now proceed to develop these conditions for the economy.
Beginning with consumers, we write the optimization problem (la)—(lb)
in the Lagrangian form

H et[U(c,) +

V(m)] + 1e t{wZ ÷ ir + (r*q)b + (r-q-e)a — (q+e)m
1

2

—m—b—a—c—ab—qb—r}

(5)

where jet is the associated discounted Lagrange multiplier. The optimality
conditions for consumers are

=0

U(c,l) —

U(c,Q) + w =
V'(m) —

cb

—

0

(6b)

+

—ii

q] = — +

—

(q+e)]

p{r —

=

i(q+e)

=

(6a)

(6c)

ii

(6d)

—+

(6e)

together with the budget constraint (lb) and initial conditions (ic). In addition
there are transversality conditions at infinity

lim

—6t =

lime

urn

—6t =

.

pbe

urn

—t

.

iae

= 0

(of)

Equations (6a)—(6e) are the Euler equations corresponding to the optimization with respect to c, Q, rn, b, a, respectively. Combining equations (6d) and (6e),
we derive

—7—

b =-[r*+e —

r]

(7)

This equation expresses the net demand for foreign bonds by domestic residents as
being proportional to the uncovered interest differential on foreign and domestic

bonds. This form of demand function has been postulated by Driskill and McCafferty
(1980) and Turnovsky and Bhandari (1982), among others. It is essentially analogous
to that derived in a two—period mean—variance stochastic framework by Eaton and

Turnovsky (1981) and Dornbusch (1980). In terms of that framework, a
A is a measure of absolute risk aversion and

Ao2, where

is the one period variance of the

exchange rate. Noting that R = Az, where R denotes the coefficient of relative
risk aversion and z is real wealth, and assuming that R is constant, the demand
function derived using the mean—variance approach can be expressed in terms of a
portfolio fraction.-'
Taking a to be constant, as we shall throughout our analysis, our formulation is essentially a certainty—equivalent specification of constant absolute risk

aversion. On the other hand, postulating a to be inversely proportional to wealth
is analogous to assuming constant relative risk aversion. In either case, the
coefficient a can be used to parameterize the degree of capital mobility. In the
case of perfect capital mobility (no exchange risk or risk neutrality), a = 0
and (7) reduces to the UIP condition

r= r*+e
In the case of zero capital mobility, a -

, so

(7')

that b =

0;

i.e., domestic resi—

dents hold no traded bonds. Thus the specification of the cost term in the
budget constraint gives rise to a demand for foreign bonds which is entirely
reasonable and accords with previous specifications, both derived theoretically
or simply postulated.

—8—

The optimality condition for the representative firm usual marginal
production condition
f'(Z) = w

(8a)

together with the definition of profit

=

f(9)

— w9.

(8b)

To complete the specification, government policy needs to be spelled out.

We assume that the government sets its real expenditure g exogenously. It also sets
a constant rate of nominal monetary growth, e, so that the rate of growth of the
real money stock is
m = (O—q—e)m

(9)

It then sets the lump sum tax T so as to balance its budget, so that the real stock
of government bonds outstanding remains fixed at a = a, with

=

O.'

Combining the optimality conditions (6a)—(6e), (8a), (8b), together with
the accumulation equations (3) and (4), and the policy specification (9), the perfect foresight equilibrium may be expressed by the following independent equations

U(c,9) =

p

U(c,Z) = —f'(2)p
V'(m) =

rp

ob=r*+e—r

b =

f(2)
p =

(lOa)
(lOb)
(lOc)

(lOd)

= (O—q—e)m

(lOe)

—

(lOf)

c — g + (r*_q)b
— (r—q—e)]

(lOg)

—9—

together with the balanced budget condition

g ÷ ra — em —

(q+e)

— T

= 0

(lOh)

Taken in pairs, the first three equations describe the marginal rate
of substitution conditions necessary for consumer optitnality. The marginal rate
of substitution between consumption and labor must equal the real wage
the marginal rate of substitution between consumption and money balances must
equal the nominal rate of interest.

Equations (lOd) to (lOg) are

unchanged from before. Of these, the first three have already been discussed.
The last equation, which we may write as

r —

(q+e) =

— t.rc/Uc

is the usual arbitrage condition for the rate of return on consumption.-'

In general, the evolution of the system proceeds as follows. Equations
(lOa)—(lOd) determine the short—run solutions for c, Z, r, and e in terms of the
marginal utility of consumption ii,

the

real stock of money m, and the real stock

of foreign bonds b, as well as the exogenous parameters g, 0, q, r*. Substituting
these solutions into (lOe)—(lOg) determines the evolution of the state variables

m, b, and u. In addition there is the government budget constraint (lOh). Under
our assumption that a is fixed and that the budget is balanced by the imposition
of the lump sum tax, the required level of T

is

determined residually, enabling

this equation to be ignored.

One further requirement we shall impose is the intertemporal budget constraint on the economy, ruling out the possibility that the country can run up an

indefinite credit or debt with the rest of the world. This is expressed by

lim exp(_(r*_q)t)b(t)

Integrating (lOf) we obtain

0

(11)

—10—
rt

b(t) =

exp((r*_q)t)[b0

+ J

exp(_(r*_q)tt)[f(Z)

—

c —

gjdt']

0

so that the constraint reduces to

b0 + J

exp(_(r*_q)g')[f()

c -

g]dt'

0

(11')

0

With imperfect capital mobility this condition is automatically met. But in the
limiting case of perfect capital mobility it does impose an additional constraint
which need to be taken into account.

The system of equations (lOa)—(lOg) provide the basis for the short—run
and long—run analysis of the system and its response to the various disturbances
undertaken in the following sections.

3. STEADY STATE EQUILIBRIUM
Since the analysis is based on the assumption of perfect foresight, the
transitional dynamic adjustment path of the system is determined in part by the

expectations of the long—run steady state. It is therefore convenient to begin
with a consideration of the steady state and the long—run effects of the various
disturbances.

The steady state equilibrium is attained when m = b =

e9—q ; p6
f(2)

+

b =

c + g

(r*_q)b =

-[r* -

q -

= 0,

implying that

(12a)

(12b)

(l2c)

That is, in steady state equilibrium, the rate of exchange depreciation equals the
difference between the domestic monetary growth rate (equal to the long—run domestic

rate of inflation) and the foreign rate of inflation. Total domestic absorption

o + g is constrained by output augmented by net interest earned on domestic residents'
holdings of foreign bonds. The net demand for foreign bonds is proportional to the

—11—

difference between the real after—tax rate of return on foreign bonds and the rate

of time preference. Combining (12a), (12c) and (lOd) yields

(12d)

the domestic after—tax nominal rate of interest is fixed exogenously by 13 + 0.

In a small open economy, the rate of time preference is in general not

independent of the real rate of interest abroad. Indeed, in the limiting case of
perfect capital mobility (UIP), previous authors have demonstrated that for a well
defined steady—state equilibrium to exist, thetwo must be equal, see, e.g., Hodrick

(1982). More generally, the relationship will depend largely upon the degree of
capital mobility. Given our parameterization of this in terms of a, it seems
reasonable to postulate that 13 is given by the weighted average

13

where

As a

=

a—

1

j-- (r*-q) + -4:—

(13)

13

is taken to be a constant, independent ofthe foreign real interest rate.-'
0 and capital becomes perfectly mobile, 13 --

r*

—

q,

in which case

(l2d) implies the long—run real interest parity relationship

r_0r*_q

(14)

As a - °°, and capital becomes perfectly immobile, 13 -

13,

and the domestic interest

rate becomes independent of the rate abroad.

Using equations (12) and (13) the steady state equilibrium reduces to

U(c,Z) + f'(2Uc(c,2) = 0
V'(m) —

(13+6)U(c,)

f(i) = c + g —

(l+a)b

= 0

(r*_q)b

r* — q —

(15a)

(15b)

(15c)

(15d)

—12—

which determines the four variables c, 9, m, and b in terms of the exogenous policy

parameters and disturbances. The equilibrium is obtained in the following recursive
manner. First, the equilibrium stock of traded bonds is determined from the uncovered
real interest differential (l5d). This determines net real interest income to the
economy. Given this, (15a) and (15c) together determine real activity, namely employ—
ment (and output) and consumption. The real money supply is then obtained residually
from the marginal rate of substitution condition (15b).
Our objective is to analyze the effects of changes in:

(i) The domestic monetary growth rate 0;
(ii) domestic government expenditure g;
(iii) foreign nominal interest rate r*;
(iv) foreign rate of inflation q.
These are summarized in Table 1, which is divided into disturbances of domestic and
foreign origin.

In the steady state an expansion in the monetary growth rate has the usual

neutrality properties. All real activity, as described by output, employment, consumption, and the trade balance, as well as the marginal utility of consumption,

remains unchanged. The real interest rate and the real stock of traded bonds also
do not change, while the real stock of money falls. The domestic nominal after—tax
interest rate, the domestic rate of inflation, and rate of exchange depreciation all
rise proportionately.2'

An increase in government expenditure has no effect on the demand for

traded bonds, or on the real or nominal interest rates. Employment increases, while
consumption falls, implying that the output expenditure multiplier is less than unity.

The reason for this result is simply that in order for the marginal rate of substitution condition (15a) to be met, c and 9 must move in opposite directions. And

the

only

way that the increase in government demand can be accommodated is if output rises while

—13--

consumption falls. The balance of trade of the private sector falls, while the
country's net trade balance, inclusive of government purchases, is zero.

The steady state ceteris paribus effects of changes in the foreign
interest rate and foreign inflation rate are qualitatively equal and opposite to

one another, so that only the former need be discussed. In both cases, the changes
incorporate the induced changes in the domestic rate of time preference , as
indicated by (13). The effect of an increase in the foreign nominal interest rate
r* is to raise the after—tax domestic nominal and real interest rates by a factor
10/

l/(l±a) and the real holdings of foreign bonds by the same amount.— In the case
of perfect capital mobility, the effect on the interest rates is proportional. A
one percentage point increase in r* leads to a one percentage point increase in the
domestic (real and nominal) interest rates. Otherwise, the degree of responsiveness
declines with the degree of capital mobility and in the limiting case there is no effect.
A change in r* impinges on the real part of the system through the real

interest income term _(r*_q)b. Provided b is not too negative, so that the domestic
economy is not too great a debtor to the rest of the world, then the impact effect
through the real interest income term is negative and operates qualitatively like

a decrease in government expenditure. We consider this to be the more likely case,

with the signs in parentheses therefore being "probable" signs. The higher interest
earnings leads to increased consumption, while output and employment falls. Since
government expenditure is assumed fixed, the balance of trade therefore falls. The
domestic steady—state rate of inflation and exchange depreciation are obviously
unaffected by the change.

The effects we have been discussing are reversed in the case of an increase

in the rate of inflation abroad. Furthermore, the rate of exchange depreciation
falls proportionately, while the domestic rate of inflation remains unchanged.

These results on foreign disturbances shed some light on the issue of the
degree of insulation provided by flexible exchange rates against foreign inflationary

—14—

disturbances.

It is evident that flexible rates do not provide complete insulation

againt foreign inflationary pressures alone. This is because a change in the foreign
inflation rate alone constitutes a real disturbance. However, a change in the
foreign inflation rate is likely to be accompanied by a change in the foreign
nominal interest rate, as these two variables respond to the common influences

abroad. A necessary and sufficient condition for a flexible exchange rate to
insulate the domestic economy completely against disturbances in the foreign inflation is:

(i) The rest of the world be ttFisherian't in the sense that the

after—tax nominal interest rate abroad fully adjusts to
the foreign inflation rate, viz.,
dr*
dq

In essence, the Fisherian condition ensures that the foreign price disturbance is

purely nominal.-" Thus, the condition for perfect insulation originally obtained
by Turnovsky (1977) continues to apply in the present optimizing model.

Finally, we wish to make the following observation. A key difference
between the domestic and foreign disturbances is that the equilibrium real stock
of traded bonds is independent of the former, but is responsive to changes in the

latter)' This difference turns out to be crucial in contrasting the dynamic
response of the economy to these two sets of disturbances.

4. TRANSITIONAL DYNANICS: GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS
To analyze the transitional dynamics of the economy we must consider the

short—run equilibrium conditions (10). These yield solutions for the short—run
variables c, 2., e, and r of the

2. =

2.(p)

2.

> 0

(16a)

—15—

a<

c =

c(p)

r =

r(i,m)

e =

e('.i,m,b)

0

(16b)

r < 0

,

e < 0

r
,

<

e

0

< 0

(16c)

eb

,

0

>

(l6d)

The signs of the partial derivatives are as indicated and are derived in the Appendix.

Intuitively, a ceteris paribus increase in the marginal utility of con-

sumption, , means that consumption is reduced and the supply of labor rises.
With the real stock of money fixed, the marginal rate of substitution condition

implies that the after—tax nominal interest rate must fall. Given the real stock
of traded bonds, the uncovered interest differential remains unchanged. The rate
of return on domestic bonds must fall, i.e., the rate of exchange depreciation

must fall. An increase in the money stock leaves c and

unchanged. The marginal

utility of money falls, implying that the domestic interest rate declines and

hence the rate of exchange depreciation falls as well. An increase in b leaves c,
Q, and r unaffected. The rate of return on foreign bonds must rise; i.e., the
rate of exchange depreciation must increase.

Linearizing the differential equations (l0e), (lOf), (lOg) about the
steady state equilibrium, the dynamics may be written in the form

r-em

m1

i

-em

_ebm

=

r*_q

f'Z-c bb

(17)

I

0

Lu

where m, b, , denote the steady state equilibrium determined in Section 3 and the
partial derivatives in (17) are evaluated at steady state. From the matrix in (17)
we see that the three eigenvalues \,, A2, X, have the properties

?1 + A2 + A 3
=

=

r*

ern.ia[f'Z

— e m > 0

(18a)

c]

(18b)

m

—

<

0

—16—

From this pair of inequalities we deduce that there is one negative (stable)
root and two positive (unstable) roots, implying a unique convergent path.

are of the form-'

Focusing on this path, stable solutions for rn, b,

]eXlt

m(t) = [rn(0) -

b(t)

(t) =
where

< 0

b]eAlt

[b0 -

[(0)

-

+ rn

(19a)

+ b

(19b)

]eXlt +

(19c)

is the stable root)" We assume that the real stock of foreign bonds

evolves continuously from its initial level b0, while the initial values of m(0)

and (0) are determined endogenously. With the nominal stock of money being
determined by the monetary growth rule, the initial nominal stock

is pre-

determined, so that the initial real stock m(0) is determined by some appropriate

initial jump in the domestic price level (exchange rate). The initial jump in
(0) takes place through initial jumps in consumption and employment.
Differentiating (19) with respect to t and substituting into (17) yields

—em

—em
b
o

f'2—c b— =

r*_q_X1

0

confirming

that

rn—rn

i-i

_Al

0

(20)

I

is an eigenvalue of (16) with (rn—rn, b—b, i—i.i) being the correspond-

ing eigenvector. Equation (20), which holds for all t, involves three linearly
dependent relationships between the three elements of the eigenvector. Assume that
the system starts out in steady state equilibrium so that b0 = b say. Then, the

first and third equations of (20) considered at time 0, but immediately following
a disturbance, imply

(0)

—

=

[b—b]

0
(1a)

—17—

-am[l —
m(O)

1

—m

(21b)
in'!"

+

where in deriving (21b) we substitute for the partial derivatives e, i =

in, b,

,

from the expressions given in the Appendix, and i, in are evaluated at steady state.
Our objective is to analyze the effects of the various disturbances on

the adjustment path of the economy. The most critical determinant of this is how
the initial jumps in i(O), m(O) respond to these disturbances. This is because
these initial jumps transmit the impacts of these shocks to the other short—run
variables, via the short—run equilibrium relationships (16).

Differentiating equations (21a), (21b) with respect to some arbitrary
variable, x say, yields to the first order of approximation

dj.t(O) —

dx

d —
dx X1dx

(22a)

am 1 dm(O) — din
dx

where henceforth the

dx

+

Al
mV" +

dx

("2b)

on the equilibrium values i, m are omitted. Equations

(22a) and (22b) can be used to determine the short—run impact effects of the various
disturbances, to which we now turn.

5.

ANALYSIS OF DISTURBANCES
In this section we discuss the dynamic adjustment following disturbances

of domestic and foreign origin, in turn.

A. Domestic Monetary Expansion
Consider an increase in the

monetary

tha c

db
dO

which, using (22a) and (22b), imply

di
dO

growth rate 0. From Table 1 we see

—18—
di(O)

0

(23a)

din(0) dm<
dO

(23b

VI'

(16a), (16b) yield that
Equation (23a), together with the short—run solutions
d2(O) —

dc(0)

—

dT(0) —
dO

dO

dO

24

The initial responses of the financial variables are obtained by taking the derivatives
of (lOc) and (lOd) at time 0, to yield
V"dm(0)

dr(O)

dO

dO

=

'

de(O)
dO

25

Combining (23b) and (25) we obtain
de(0) —

dr(0)

dO

=

d6

1

26a

The implied instantaneous jump in the level of the exchange rate E(O) is
—din/dO — —
dE(0)/dO —
- —dm(0)1d6 =

E(0)

m(0)

(26b

in

A change in the monetary growth rate causes the economy to jump instantaneously
to its new steady state. In this new equilibrium all real variables such as employment, output, consumption, and the trade balance remain unchanged. The jump is
brought about by a discrete depreciation of the exchange rate, causing the real
stock of money balances in the economy to fall, doing so by an amount which is
precisely equal to its long—run decline.

As a result of this, the rate of exchange

depreciation and hence the domestic rate of inflation, increases instantaneously

by the amount of the increase in the monetary growth rate. The exchange rate neither
overshoots nor undershoots, in the sense that the real money balances immediately
adjusts to its new equilibrium level.

B. Increase in Domestic Government Expenditure
Referring to Table 1, it is recalled that an increase in government
expenditure leaves the long run position in traded bonds unchanged, while leading

—19—
to an increase in the marginal utility of consumption and a decrease in the real

stock of money. Consequently, equations (22) imply

dii —

dji(O) —

0

dg
dzn(O)

—

dg

din

—

dg

÷e c

(27a)

0

V'1

(27b)

which, together with the short—run solutions (16a), (16b), yield

d9,(O)

d2..

0

(28a)

<0

(28b)

dg =aj>
dc(O) =

dT(O) —

dg

t

dc
dg

d2.

dg

1 — 0

(28c)

Turning to the financial variables and differentiating (lOc) and ClOd)

with respect to g and noting the above relationships we find
deCO) = dr(O) —O
—

dg

dg

(29a)

Thus as in the case of the domestic monetary expansion, there is no trans-

itional dynamics. The expansion in government expenditure causes the exchange
rate to depreciate instantaneously by an amount
dE(O)/E(O.) — —dm(O)/dg > 0

dg

m(O)

(

29b )

Output expands and consumption falls. The private balance of trade increases by
an amount equal to the increase in government expenditures, so that the country's

net balance of trade is unchanged. The rate of exchange depreciation and the
domestic rate of interest also both remain unchanged. Again the reason for the
complete instantaneous adjustment is the fact that the long—run equilibrium stock
of traded bonds, b, which in an important sense drives the short—run dynamics,
is unaffected by the change in government expenditure.

—20—

These findings regarding the instantaneous adjustment of the system to
changes in the domestic policy variables 0 and g are sensitive to certain aspects

of the specification of the model. Under alternative assumptions they cease to
hold. For example, if one assumes that all forms of income, including interest
income, are taxed at a fixed rate and that the budget is balanced through chang—
ing the tax rate, rather than through lump sum taxation, then the equilibrium
stock of traded bonds will be responsive to changes in 9 and g, and the adjust-

ment to the new steady state will be a gradual one. Alternatively, if one assumes
that the cost parameter a varies inversely with the stock of wealth (as it would
with constant relative risk aversion), then the equilibrium stock of traded bonds
is given by the expression

b =

j- (r* — q

—

)(m

+ a + b)

(30)

In this case b is affected by 0 and g through the wealth effect, thereby again
rendering the adjustment to be a gradual one.

C. Foreign Interest Rate Disturbances
Consider now a foreign monetary disturbance, taking the form of an increase

in the foreign nominal interest rate r*. From Table I we see that this leads to an
increase in the equilibrium real stock of traded bonds, namely,

dr*

1+a

0

(31)

Accordingly, the short—run responses p(O), m(0) are given by
di(0) —
dr*

dm(0) = dm
dr*
dr*

+

d

—

______

>

dt

(32a)

Xi(l+a)

l+ct

dr*

(3"b

in Table I. These
where the corresponding steady—state responses are reported
effects imply the following short—run responses of the real part of the economy

—21—

di(O)

d(O) —
dr —

ctj

9.

=

dr*

ji

-.

>

—

(33a)

X1(1+a)
and similarly
C

dc(O)— d
dr*
dr*
dT(O) — dT

dr*

dr*

'Y

Ti

X1(l+CL)

dc
drà

(33b)

>

(33C )

c)aji

—

X1(1+a)

dr*

An increase in the foreign nominal interest rate raises the
equilibrium

stock of traded bonds, b. Hence, the marginal utility of consumption falls less

on impact than it does in the steady state; see (22a). As a consequence, the fall
in domestic employment, the rise in consumption, and the deterioration in the
balance of trade, are all less than they are in steady state.

Indeed, it is possible

for all these impact effects to reverse qualitatively the long—run effects. This
occurs if and only if the positive effect of an increase in r* on steady—state
bonds outweighs the negative effect on the steady—state marginal utility of consumption
The effects on the financial variables are obtained by first differentiating (lOc), (lOd) to yield

'

dm(O) -

dr* —

dr(O)

] dr*

1 + de(O)
dr*

+

r

dp(O)1

dr*J

dr(O)
dr*

and then utilizing (32a), (32b). This result is
dr(O) =

(l){Vm + TixlJ{TiXI
de 0) —

dr*

In

(V' -

V"m +

+ mV"(l±a) +

CV']

0

TiA1)

i+aJ

addition, the effect on the nominal exchange rate E(O) is given by

(34a)

—22—

dE(O)/dr*

—

dm(O)/dr*

>

m(0)

E(0)

0

(34 C)

where the initial jump in the real money stock, derived from (32b) is

dm(0)

dr*

—

(+8)'
V"L

+ j3

It is evident that as long as a

are

(l -

!I

+

mVU

0, so

(÷e)/xi)1

+

( 34d

J

that traded and domestic bonds

less than perfect substitutes, the impact effect of an increase in the foreign

interest rate is to move the domestic economy to a point which does not coincide

with the new steady state. Thereafter, the economy approaches its new equilibrium
asymptotically; there is therefore a gradual dynamic adjustment. With perfect
capital mobility, on the other hand, (ct=0), the economy jumps immediately to
steady state.

Strictly speaking, the immediate response of the domestic interest rate

is indeterminate, although intuitively one would expect it to rise. A sufficient
condition for this to be so is
(35)

fl<-i-

where n = mV"/V' is the elasticity of the marginal utility of money. Clearly, the

higher the degree of capital mobility, the more likely this condition is to be met

and the more likely the domestic rate of interest is to rise. In the other limiting case where there is zero substitutability (a-), it can be shown that dr(0)/dr* -÷ 0.
In general, comparing (34a) with the steady state, we see
dr(0)

dr*

dr —
dr*

ci[mV"

+ V']

(l±a)(mV" +

(36

implying that as long as n < 1 and capital is imperfectly mobile, the interest
rate undershoots its steady state adjustment on impact.

A more intuitive explanation of the initial phases of the dynamic adjust-

ment is the following. Suppose that there is an exogenous increase in the foreign

—23—

interest rate. Generally this gives rise to an instantaneous fall in the trade
balance which is offset by an increase in the flow of interest income if the country

is a net creditor. The net effect on the current account balance is therefore
ambiguous and the domestic economy may initially either accumulate or decuniulate

traded bonds. At the same time, the fall in the rate of exchange depreciation,

e,

implies that the real money stock starts to rise, while the rise in the foreign
interest rate means that through the consumer arbitrage condition, the marginal

utility of consumption starts to fall. This latter effect implies a decrease in
output, accompanied by an increase in consumption, leading to a decrease in the

trade balance. The fall in i,

together

with the increase in m, and the change in

b, has offsetting effects on the rate of exchange depreciation, although on

balance e will rise. The decrease in the trade balance means that the rate of
accumulation of foreign bonds will fall. The adjustment so described is stable and
eventually the economy converges to the steady state described in Section 3.

D. Foreign Inflationary Disturbance
Given the symmetry with which the foreign variables impinge on the domestic
economy, the effects of a unit increase in the foreign inflation rate alone, q, are

identical to those of an equivalent decrease in the foreign interest rate, r*. The
effects on the real and financial variables therefore follow immediately from (32)—

(34) in Section 5.C. In addition we may establish
dp(O)
dq

de(O)
dq

+ =

V]
(l+c)(mV" +

so that the domestic inflation rate rises. As long as domestic and foreign bonds
are less than perfect substitutes, an increase in the foreign inflation rate imposes
an initial jump on the domestic economy, followed by a gradual adjustment towards

the new steady state equilibrium. The economic explanation for this behavior is
identical to that which would stem from a decrease in the foreign interest rate.

—24—

It is evident from these results that the flexible exchange rate does
not in general insulate the domestic economy in the short run against once and

for all increases in the foreign inflation rate. However, it will provide per—
fect short—run insulation against disturbances in the foreign inflation rate if

and only if condition (1) noted in Section 3 applies. That is, the flexible
exchange rate will provide perfect insulation against disturbances in the foreign

inflation rate in the short run as well as the long run if and only if: the
foreign nominal interest rate fully adjusts to theforeign inflation rate.

6. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper we have analyzed the effects of various disturbances of
domestic and foreign origin in a model of a small open economy in which the
behavioral relationships are derived from optimization by the private sector.

The main conclusion of the analysis is a simple one. In this model, the domestic
economy jumps instantaneously to its new equilibrium steady state, following a

change in either the domestic monetary growth rate or domestic fiscal policy. In
response to a disturbance in either the foreign interest rate or inflation rate,
on the other hand, it undergoes an initial jump taking it part way towards its

new equilibrium, which it thereafter approaches gradually. The critical driving
force in determining the nature of the adjustment to a specific disturbance is
the response of the steady state equilibrium stock of traded bonds, to this

disturbance. When one derives the demand for these assets from intertemporal
utility maximization, as we have done, this equilibrium stock turns out to be
independent of the domestic policy variables we consider, but it is dependent

upon both the foreign interest and inflation rates. The magnitude of the initial
jump and the speed of adjustment following disturbances in these latter variables

depends critically upon the degree of capital mobility. In the limiting case where
domestic and foreign bonds are perfect substitutes, the economy adjusts instantaneously
to foreign, as well as domestic, disturbances.

—25—

The results we have obtained are relevant to the issues of exchange rate
adjustment and the insulation properties of flexible exchange rates, noted pre-

viously. The fact that the economy adjusts fully on impact to a change in the
monetary growth rate means that the exchange rate neither overshoots nor undershoots

its long—run response. Moreover, ad hoc equilibrium models of asset accumulation
and imperfect substitutability which involve gradual adjustments to domestic
policy changes may in fact be somewhat misleading, since the adjustments may occur

instantaneously. Secondly, the Fisherian condition obtained previously as being
necessary and sufficient for perfect insulation, holds in the present optimizing
framework.

Of course, the analysis is based on a number of specific assumptions
and in concluding the effects of relaxing a number of these should be noted.
First, the separability of the consumer utility function into consumption and
labor on the one hand, and real money balances, on the other, is made for exposi—

tional convenience. If instead, one assumes a nonseparable function U(c,Q,m) say,
then the only difference is that the recursive nature of the solution breaks down.
As a consequence, the monetary growth rate will have effects on the real variables

such as employment, consumption, and output. In all other respects the nature of
the solution remains unchanges.
Secondly, it is straightforward to relax the assumption of PPP and to
introduce a domestic good which is an imperfect substitute for the traded commodity.
The relative price is introduced as an additional variable, but again, this does
not alter the character of our analysis in any essential way.
Thirdly, as Turnovsky and Brock (1980) argued, it is reasonable to introduce
government expenditure as a direct argument of the utility function to relect the

fact that consumers derive direct utility from public expenditure. Again this
does not affect the character of our analysis, although it does change the specific

—26—

responses to change in g, r*, and q. In the limiting case where consumers view
private and public goods as being perfect substitutes it can be easily established
that fiscal policy has no real effects; there is r;directtu crowding out.

Finally, and most importantly, the instantaneous adjustment of the economy
in response to the domestic policy shocks does depend upon our specification of the

cost parameter c as being constant. If instead, one postulates this to vary
inversely with wealth, then the domestic policy variables will influence the

equilibrium stock of traded bonds through the wealth effect. As a consequence
of this dependence, a change in domestic monetary or fiscal policy will generate
a true dynamic adjustment in the domestic economy.

Thus while models based on ad hoc relationships are often criticized
as being arbitrary, models based on optimizing behavior are not entirely immune

from this criticism either. As our results here indicate, their implications
are also dependent upon specification of the optimization which to some degree
is also arbitrary.

TABLE I

STEADY STATE EFFECTS OF CHANGES IN

Domestic Monetary
Growth Rate

Domestic Government
Expenditure

8

g

On

Traded bonds b

Employment

0

0
—

0

2.

[U

U

Consumption

c

2.2.

0

Trade balance T

0

Marginal utility of consumption

0

+f'U CC

1

+[f"TJc +f!TJ

c9.

0

U

C

Real money stock m

< 0

< 0

After—tax nominal interest
rate (after tax)

1

0

After—tax real interest rate

0

0

Ucc[U

[U2.2. +

2,2.

+ f"U I — U
c

[fU + f'U]J

-

f'[U2.

> a

> 0

+ f'U] >

0

< 0

STEADY STATE EFFECTS OF
UNIT INCREASE IN FOREIGN NOMINAL INTEREST RATE

OR UNIT DECREASE IN FOREIGN INFLATION RATE q
On
Bonds b

1+n

(<

)

Employment

0)

dc

Consumption c

0)

Trade balance T

p[f

,di dc (<0)

Marginal utility of
consumption Uc

(<

Real money stock m

(+6)p

After tax nominal
interest rate

After tax real
interest rate

l+a

Hi

0)

+ (r*_g5

>

(<

< 0

APPENDIX

1. Derivation of Partial Derivatives of Short—Run Solutions (16)

Consider equations (lOa) and(lOb). The differentials of this
pair of equations is given by

the

CC

C

LC

Uu

ira

=

r

J L L'i
H

(A.l)

solution to which is

[fUCC +

U

=

+ fUp

+

U,

<0

(A.2a)

<

(A.2b)

Uf'

where

U[U + f"] -

Differentiating

c

>

(lOc) yields

V"dm =

[rdi

+ idr]

=

< 0

(A.3a)

=

—<0

(A.3b)

so that

Ii

Finally, taking the differential of (lOd)

de = cdb

implying

+

dr

4>.

0

crrD

A

(t

4-'.--

t

4>-

0

A

QQ)

FOOTNOTES

-'The exchange rate overshooting question in particular has generated a voluminous

literature, too extensive to document here. The robustness of the phenomenon
to changes in assumptions about: (i) the degree of capital mobility; (ii) output flexibility; (iii) price flexibility, has been considered by a number of authors.

-'More recently, Obstfeld has applied the intertemporal optimizing model to a

number of issues in international macroeconomics. Some of these are summarized
in the survey paper by Obstfeld and Stockman (1984).
--'The term ttperfect capital mobility' is often used quite loosely. Even if IJIP

does not hold, capital may still be perfectly mobile in the weaker sense of

covered interest parity (CIP); see, e.g., Eaton and Turnovsky (1983). The
empirical evidence supporting the stronger definition of UI? is not particularly

strong. Levich (1978), Bilson (1978) and Hansen and Hodrick (1980) report
systematic deviations from UIP for several exchange rates over long periods,

reflecting risk averse behavior by speculators. Obstfeld (1982) also briefly
considers the case of imperfect capital mobility. However, he does so by
arbitrarily postulating some relationship between the stock of bonds and the
interest rate, rather than deriving such a relationship as an equilibrium condition from the optimizing framework.

We adopt the following notational convention. Except where noted, partial
derivatives are denoted by corresponding lower case letter, while total
derivatives of a function of a single argument are denoted by primes.

More specifically, the two period mean—variance optimization yields a demand
function for foreign bonds of the form

(r* + e —

b
Ao2
e

where z = m + a + b.

r)

=—--Re2e

(r*

+ e -

r)

—F 2—

-'The same results as those derived in this paper are obtained if one assumes

instead, that the government: (i) finances its budget by issuing bonds (ii)
engages in an initial open market operation to ensure that the stock of bonds
generated by the government budget constraint is consistent with the consumers'
transversality conditions.

example, this relationship is equivalent to the optimality condition in
Yaari (1964).

-'This scheme is admittedly a simple one. It is meant to capture the notion that
the more closely the domestic economy is tied financially to the rest of the
world, the less independent the domestic rate of time preference can be.
Alternatively, one could endogenize

along the lines of Obstfeld (1981).

-'The neutrality breaks down if one postulates the cost parameter c to be inversely
dependent upon wealth, so that the alternative bond demand function of footnote 5

applies. By means of the wealth effect, m, b, i, and c are all dependent upon
the monetary growth rate and domestic government expenditure.

-"These propositions are established by considering (12d) and (13), and (15d),
respectively.

one assumes that interest income is taxed by the domestic government, then
certain mild asymmetries between changes in the foreign inflation and interest
rate fully adjusts to the foreign inflation rate, the effects of a unit increase

in the latter are non—neutral. This is because the taxes provide a real transfer from the foreign to the domestic economy. Neutrality is restored if the
taxes on foreign bonds are collected by the foreign government. These issues
are discussed in an earlier version of this paper.
comment regarding the independence of the equilibrium stock of traded bonds
with respect to domestic disturbances applies to e and g. If interest income
is taxed, the equilibrium stock of traded bonds does depend upon the income tax
rate.

—F3—

We prefer to depart from our notational convention and denote d/d by i
rather than by 2.'.

'The

two unstable roots may be either real or complex, while the single stable

root is necessarily real. Thus the stable adjustment path to equilibrium is
necessarily a monotonic one.

'Given the recursivity of the model, the roots are

X

while x1

<

>

0

—

while we assume that r* — q

a ÷

, it

—e /m

2

(unstable)

in

0) are the roots to the quadratic equation

(r*_q)X
>

—

[f'

—

c]a

= U

0.

can be seen from the solution to the characteristic equation given

in footnote 9 that

0(al/2). Thus letting a

fact, it is easily seen that dr(0)Idr*

0.

in (34a) and noting this

REF EREN CES

Bilson, J.
of

F.

0.,

"Rational Expectations and the Exchange Rate," in The Economics

Exchange Rates, (ed. J. A. Frenkel and H. C. Johnson) Reading, Mass., 1978.

Brock, W. A. and S. J.
Foresight

Turnovsky,

"The Analysis of Macroeconomic Policies in Perfect

Equilibrium," International Economic Review, February 1981, 22:

Dornbusch, R., "Exchange Rate Risk ad the Macroeconomics of Exchange Rate Determination," Working Paper No. 493, National Bureau of Economic Research, 1980.
Driskill, R. and S. A. McCafferty, "Exchange Rate Variability, Real and Monetary
Shocks, and the Degree of Capital Mobility under Rational Expectations,"
Quarterly Journal of Economics, November 1980, 95: 577—586.

Eaton, J. and S. J. Turnovsky, "Exchange Risk, Political Risk, and Macroeconomic
Equilibrium," Discussion Paper No. 388, Economic Growth Center, Yale University, 1981.

Eator, J. and S. J. Turnovsky, "Covered Interest Parity. Uncovered Interest Parity
and Exchange Rate Dynamics," Economic Journal, September 1983, 93: 555—575.
Hansen, L. P. and R. J. Hodrick, "Foward Exchange Rates as Optimal Predictors of

Future Spot Rates," Journal of Political Economy October 1980, 88: 829—853.
Hodrick, R. J., "On the Effects of Macroeconomic Policy in a Maximizing Model of
a Small Open Economy," Journal of Macroeconomics, Spring 1982, 4: 195—213.
Levich, R. ,

"Tests

of Forecasting Models and Market Efficiency in the International

Money Market," in The Economics of Exchange Rates, (ed. J. A. Frenkel and
H. G. Johnson), Reading, Mass., 1978.
Obstfeld, M., "Macroeconomic Policy, Exchange Rate Dynamics, and Optimal Asset
Accumulation," Journal of Political Economy, December 1981, 89: 1142—1161.

Obstfeld, M., "Aggregate Spending and the Terms of Trade: Is There a Laursen—
Meltzer Effect?" Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 1982, 97: 251—270.
Obstfeld, M. and A. C. Stockman, Exchange Rate Dynamics, in Handbook of International
Economics, (ed. R. W. Jones and P. B. Kenen), North—Holland, Amsterdam, 1984.

-R2-

Turnovsky, S. J., Macroeconomic Analysis and Stabilization Policy, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, U.K., 1977.

Turnovsky, S. J. and W. A. Brock, "Time Consistency and Optimal Government Policies
in Perfect Foresight Equilibrium," Journal of Public Economics, April 1980,
13: 183—212.

Turnovsky, S. J. and J. S. Bhandari, "The Degree of Capital Mobility and the Stability
of an Open Economy under Rational Expectations,' Journal of Money, Credit, and
Banking, August 1982, 14: 303—326.

Uzawa, H., "Time Preference, the Consumption Function, and Optimum Asset Holdings,"

in J. N. Wolfe (ed.) Value, Capital and Growth: Papers in Honour of Sir
John Hicks, Aldine, Chicago, 1968.

Yaari, N., "On the Consumer's Lifetime Allocation Process," International Economic
Review, September 1964, 5: 304—317.

