                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            HOW SOCIAL PROCESSES DISTORT MEASUREMENT:
 THE IMPACT OF SURVEY NONRESPONSE ON ESTIMATES OF VOLUNTEER WORK

                                        Katharine G. Abraham
                                           Sara E. Helms
                                           Stanley Presser

                                        Working Paper 14076
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14076


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2008




We are grateful to Robert Groves, Howard Schuman, Roger Tourangeau, and three anonymous referees,
as well as participants in the June 2007 Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA) "Nonmarket Uses of
Time" topic week and the 2007 meetings of the International Association for Time Use Research,
for helpful comments on earlier drafts of this paper. Helms received support for her work on this project
from the National Science Foundation through an ADVANCE grant to the University of Alabama
at Birmingham (SBE-0245090). Direct correspondence to Katharine G. Abraham (kabraham@survey.umd.edu)
or Stanley Presser (spresser@socy.umd.edu), Joint Program in Survey Methodology, University of
Maryland, 1218 Lefrak Hall, College Park, MD 20742. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Katharine G. Abraham, Sara E. Helms, and Stanley Presser. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
How Social Processes Distort Measurement: The Impact of Survey Nonresponse on Estimates
of Volunteer Work in the United States
Katharine G. Abraham, Sara E. Helms, and Stanley Presser
NBER Working Paper No. 14076
June 2008
JEL No. J01

                                              ABSTRACT

Estimates of volunteering in the United States vary greatly from survey to survey and do not show the
decline over time common to other measures of social capital. We argue that these anomalies are
caused by the social processes that determine survey participation, in particular the propensity of people
who do volunteer work to respond to surveys at higher rates than those who do not do volunteer work.
Thus surveys with lower responses rates will usually have higher proportions of volunteers, and the
decline in response rates over time likely has led to increasing overrepresentation of volunteers. We
analyze data from the American Time Use Survey (ATUS) -- the sample for which is drawn from
Current Population Survey (CPS) respondents -- together with data from the CPS Volunteering Supplement
to demonstrate the effects of survey nonresponse on estimates of volunteering activity and its correlates.
CPS respondents who become ATUS respondents report much more volunteering in the CPS than
those who become ATUS nonrespondents. This difference is replicated within demographic and other
subgroups. Consequently, conventional statistical adjustments for nonresponse cannot correct the
resulting bias. Although nonresponse leads to estimates of volunteer activity that are too high, it generally
does not affect inferences about the characteristics associated with volunteer activity. We discuss
the implications of these findings for the study of other phenomena.


Katharine G. Abraham                                  Stanley Presser
Joint Program in Survey Methodology                   Department of Sociology and Joint Program
1218 LeFrak Hall                                       in Survey Methodology
University of Maryland                                1218 LeFrak Hall
College Park, MD 20742                                Joint Program in Survey Methodology
and NBER                                              College Park, MD 20742
kabraham@survey.umd.edu                               spresser@socy.umd.edu

Sara E. Helms
Department of Finance,
BEC 317-F
University of Alabama at Birmingham
1530 3rd Ave South
Birmingham, AL 35294
shelms@uab.edu
       Volunteer work is an important component of economic activity in the United States

(Abraham and Mackie 2005) and it also plays a key role in noneconomic spheres of American

society (Wilson 2000). Who volunteers and why? What sorts of work do volunteers perform?

Have the amount and type of volunteer work changed over time? How does volunteering affect

volunteers? What cultural and political factors influence the amount and nature of volunteering

in a society? How does volunteering shape culture and the polity? These are among the

questions that make volunteering of interest across the social sciences.

       Such questions are most often addressed with data from sample surveys. Troublingly,

however, surveys yield widely varying estimates of volunteering. For instance, the 2002

Supplement to the Current Population Survey (CPS), conducted by the Census Bureau, reported

that 28 percent of American adults were volunteers (Boraas, 2003); the 1996 National Household

Education Survey (NHES), conducted by Westat, reported a figure of 39 percent (National

Center for Education Statistics, 1997); and the 1996 Independent Sector (IS) survey, conducted

by the Gallup Poll, estimated 49 percent (Hodgkinson and Weitzman, 1996).

       These surveys differed in many ways (including the precise definition of volunteering),

but one of the most pronounced differences was the proportion of sample members from whom

information was collected. The response rate to the CPS supplement was 82 percent (Census

Technical Documentation); the rate for NHES was 59 percent (National Center for Education

Statistics, 1997); and, although we have been unable to obtain the rate for the IS survey, Gallup

response rates rarely exceeded 40 percent. The variation in these rates corresponds to the

variation in the volunteering estimates – the higher the response rate the lower the volunteering

estimate.

       Although this is, at best, suggestive evidence for the proposition that survey estimates of

volunteering are inversely related to survey response rates, such a proposition makes sense of a
second puzzling survey finding about volunteering: Change over time in volunteering appears

quite different from change over time in other forms of social capital. In Bowling Alone,

Putnam (2000: 127) noted that “Trends in volunteering over the last several decades are more

complicated and in some respects more intriguing than the uniform decline that characterizes

most dimensions of social capital in America in this period.” As shown in Figure 1, nationwide

Gallup surveys recorded a sharp increase between 1977 and 1991 in affirmative responses to the

question “Do you, yourself, happen to be involved in any charity or social service activities, such

as helping the poor, the sick or the elderly?” The percent of affirmative responses rose from 26

percent in 1977 to 46 percent in 1991.1

        If these data are taken at face value, they indicate that volunteering in America almost

doubled in little more than a decade! But over this same period, survey response rates declined

markedly due to increasing difficulties in both contacting people and persuading them to be

interviewed (see Curtin, Presser, and Singer 2005, for the experiences of one major survey).

Response rates are not available for the Figure 1 surveys, but the Gallup Organization

experienced a general decline during this period similar to that of most survey organizations.

Further, the first five surveys shown in Figure 1 (from 1977 through 1986) were conducted face-

to-face, whereas the other four (between 1987 and 1991) were conducted by telephone. Thus,

even apart from the general decline in response rates, the later studies would have had lower

response rates than the earlier ones because response rates are almost always lower on the phone

than in-person (Groves and Kahn, 1979). Moreover, the December 1987 survey, which

produced the highest estimate of volunteering, almost certainly had the lowest response rate, as it


1
  The question wording in two of the surveys contained very minor variations. The December 1987 poll substituted
“Are you involved…” for “Do you, yourself, happen to be involved…” and the November 1989 poll deleted
“yourself” from “Do you, yourself, happen to be involved…” Also, the final entry (1991) is from a survey by
Princeton Survey Research Associates, which had been founded the previous year by individuals who had been
responsible for Gallup’s 1989 volunteering survey.

                                                       2
was conducted over only two days compared to seven days for the May 1987 survey and four

days for all the other surveys. (Shorter field periods produce lower response rates because they

allow less time to contact and persuade respondents.)2

                                          FIGURE 1 ABOUT HERE

         Are there grounds for expecting that a survey’s response rate would affect its estimate of

volunteering? Although the potential for nonresponse bias grows as the level of nonresponse

increases, several recent studies, on a wide range of topics, have found that actual nonresponse

bias is largely unaffected by increases in the nonresponse rate. Keeter et al. (2000), Curtin,

Presser, and Singer (2000), and Merkle and Edelman (2002) report little, if any, link between

nonresponse rates and bias, and a meta-analysis by Groves (2006) shows only a weak

relationship between nonresponse level and bias in studies that had validation measures. These

results suggest that many of the variables measured in surveys are only slightly correlated, if at

all, with the causes of nonresponse (cf., Groves, Presser, and Dipko, 2004 and Abraham,

Maitland and Bianchi, 2006).




2
  The only volunteering time series we know of for which published response rates are available is the American
National Election Study, which, beginning in 1992, asked the following question in five post-election surveys:
“Many people say they have less time these days to do volunteer work. What about you, were you able to devote
any time to volunteer work in the last 12 months?” The samples used for three of the five years were drawn in part
from respondents to earlier surveys. Unfortunately, this is not reflected in the published response rates, and we are
unable to compute the correct response rates for the total samples in those years. Instead, we present below the
results from the newly drawn portions of the samples. The new samples for 1996 and 2002 were quite small; in
addition, there were differences in the mode of administration across the surveys (2004 was conducted completely
in-person, 2002 completely by phone, and the others with varying percentages allocated to the two modes), which
complicates interpretation. Among the three surveys with samples large enough to produce reasonably precise
estimates (1992, 2000 and 2004), we observe the lowest percent volunteering in the sample with the highest
response rate (1992) and the highest percent volunteering in the sample with the lowest response rate (2000), though
the 2000 estimate is not significantly different from the 2004 estimate.

                  Response Rate       % Volunteered
         1992            66.3       36.6 (n=999)
         1996            51.0       40.6 (n=335)
         2000            52.1       42.8 (n=1555)
         2002            30.0       42.4 (n=276)
         2004            58.1       41.7 (n=1066)

                                                          3
        Volunteering is likely to be an exception to this pattern. The two major determinants of

response rate -- contactability (the ease of being able to make contact with an individual) and

amenability (an individual’s willingness to be interviewed) – both seem likely to be influenced

by the same factors that influence volunteering: social integration, altruism, and a sense of

responsibility. Indeed survey participation is similar to volunteering in that survey respondents

are asked to help an organization by giving their time (Knack, 1992).3 There is thus a theoretical

basis for expecting volunteering, as well as other pro-social or altruistic behaviors, to be related

to nonresponse and, therefore, to be overestimated in surveys.

        Nonresponse bias is not the only form of error that may affect survey estimates of

volunteering (or other pro-social behavior). The estimates are also subject to recall error and

social desirability bias. These two problems are minimized in the American Time Use Survey

(ATUS), which, beginning in 2003, obtained detailed reports from a sample of Americans about

how they spent their time on the day preceding the interview (Bureau of Labor Statistics and

U.S. Census Bureau, 2005). Recall error is curtailed because of the very short reference period,

and social desirability bias is unlikely because respondents are simply asked to report, in

chronological order, everything they did yesterday. Only after respondents report all their

activities does the interviewer ask whether any of them involved volunteering. As the ATUS

response rate has been only about 50 percent, however, the ATUS estimate of volunteering may

be subject to considerable nonresponse bias.

        In this paper, we assess the nonresponse error in the ATUS estimate of volunteering.

This is possible because a random subsample of the ATUS was previously part of the Current



3
  In fact, Keeter et al.’s (2000: 140) methodological experiment found significantly more volunteering in a survey
with a relatively low response rate than in a comparable survey with a much higher response rate. But in the context
of the large number of comparisons made in that study (the great majority of which showed no difference), sampling
error seemed a plausible explanation for the finding.

                                                         4
Population Survey (CPS) Volunteering Supplement, which attained a much higher response rate

than the ATUS (over 80 percent). We compare the CPS volunteering estimates for two groups

of Supplement respondents: those who became ATUS respondents and those who became ATUS

nonrespondents. We find a very large difference consistent with the hypothesis that ATUS

respondents are more likely than ATUS nonrespondents to be volunteers. In the CPS, ATUS

respondents reported volunteering at a rate 75 percent higher than did ATUS nonrespondents.

Furthermore, the nonresponse bias is evident within demographic and other subgroups, which

means that conventional statistical adjustments for nonresponse (e.g., weighting class

adjustments and response propensity models) would not correct the bias.

       Our demonstration of the impact of nonresponse on volunteering estimates, coupled with

the finding that the bias is immune to conventional nonresponse adjustments, provides an

important qualification to the recent literature on the effects of nonresponse and has profound

implications for the study of volunteering, as well as, most likely, for the study of many other

pro-social behaviors, such as making charitable contributions, donating blood or organs, and

providing help to strangers in routine or emergency situations.

       Although these analyses suggest that nonresponse plays a central role in inferences about

the amount of volunteering in the United States (as well as about changes over time in the

amount of volunteering), they are not informative about how nonresponse affects inferences

about the causes and consequences of volunteering. To that end, we next investigate the impact

of the nonresponse error on estimates of the correlates of volunteering activity. We do this by

comparing models of volunteering in the CPS estimated for ATUS respondents with models

estimated for ATUS respondents and nonrespondents combined. The results are very similar:

Although nonresponse has a powerful effect on the univariate distribution of volunteering, it

does not affect inferences about the respondent characteristics that are associated with

                                                 5
volunteering. The possibility that multivariate analyses are more immune to nonresponse than

univariate analysis has potentially far-reaching implications for surveys on a wide range of

topics.

          Finally, supplementing these analyses, which are based on volunteering estimates from

the CPS, we examine the volunteering estimates from the ATUS itself. As expected, the ATUS

univariate estimate of volunteer hours is much higher than the overall CPS estimate and closer to

the CPS estimate using only cases that later became ATUS respondents. In addition, inferences

from the ATUS sample about the relation between volunteer hours and other respondent

characteristics are similar to those from the total CPS sample, again suggesting that nonresponse

bias -- despite its impact on the level of volunteering -- does not pose a serious problem for

inferences about the correlates of volunteering.

                                              DATA

          The data used in our analysis come from two sources: the September 2003 Current

Population Survey Volunteering Supplement, and the 2003 and 2004 American Time Use

Survey. The fact that the American Time Use Survey sample is drawn from persons in

households that responded to the Current Population Survey makes our analysis possible.

Current Population Survey (CPS) Volunteering Supplement

          The Current Population Survey (CPS) is a monthly household survey sponsored by the

Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) and conducted by the U.S. Census Bureau. The survey uses an

area probability sample of the 50 states and the District of Columbia yielding almost 60,000

households per month. In order to facilitate state-level estimates, smaller states are oversampled.

CPS households are contacted for interviews in four consecutive months (Months in Sample, or

MIS, 1-4); leave the sample for the next eight months; and then return for four additional months




                                                   6
(MIS 5-8, which occur exactly one year after MIS 1-4).4 The majority of the interviews in MIS-

1 and MIS-5 are conducted in person, with about 20 percent conducted by telephone; most of the

interviews in the other months are conducted by telephone, with about 15 percent conducted in

person. The response rate to the main interview averages more than 90 percent.

         A volunteering supplement has been administered to CPS sample members each

September since 2002. The supplement is administered after the main interview, either in

English or in Spanish, and asks about all household members age 15 and older. In the September

2003 supplement, information was collected for 95,337 individuals. The overall response rate

(main interview response rate multiplied by supplement response rate) was 81 percent.

         The first two questions in the 2003 supplement were:

              Since September 1st of last year, have [you/NAME] done any volunteer
              activities through or for an organization? IF NO: Sometimes people don’t
              think of activities they do infrequently or activities they do for children’s
              schools, or youth organizations as volunteer activities. Since September 1st
              of last year, have [you/NAME] done any of these types of volunteer
              activities?

Respondents who replied affirmatively were then asked for the number of organizations for

which volunteer work was done, and the numbers of weeks and hours per week worked for each

organization (or, if the respondent said the hours per week varied, the number of hours for the

year).

American Time Use Survey (ATUS)

         The American Time Use Survey (ATUS), an annual survey begun in 2003, is also

conducted by the U.S. Census Bureau for the Bureau of Labor Statistics. The ATUS sample is

chosen randomly from households participating in the CPS. As noted above, households


4
 The CPS tracks dwelling units, not individuals or households. Thus, as individuals move into or out of the
dwelling unit, they will move into and out of the CPS sample. For other details of the survey, see Bureau of Labor
Statistics and U.S. Census Bureau (2002).


                                                         7
selected for the CPS are in the sample for a total of eight months, consisting of four consecutive

calendar months (MIS 1-4) followed by the same four calendar months a year later (MIS 5-8). In

any given month, approximately one-eighth of the CPS sample is in its final month (MIS-8).

The ATUS sample is selected from households that successfully complete the MIS-8 main

interview (about 93 percent of the MIS-8 sample do so). One randomly chosen individual age 15

years or older from each selected household is designated for ATUS participation. The ATUS

sample is selected proportional to a state’s population (thereby offsetting the CPS oversampling

of residents of small states). In addition, households with an Hispanic or non-Hispanic black

householder, as well as households with children, are oversampled. We correct for the

oversampling by using selection weights in our analyses.

       ATUS interviews are distributed across the weeks of the year, with random allocations to

reporting days: one-quarter Saturdays, one-quarter Sundays, and one-half spread equally across

the five weekdays. The interviews are administered by telephone, either in English or in

Spanish. The roughly 5 percent of the sample for whom no telephone number is available are

sent a letter asking them to call a toll free number on a specified day and offered a $40 incentive

for doing so. Respondents are asked to describe their primary activities, and how long each

lasted, from 4:00 a.m. the previous day until 4:00 a.m. the interview day. After the 24 hours are

accounted for, respondents are asked whether they did any “volunteer activities for or through an

organization” during the day and those who say “No,” are prompted with “Sometimes people

don’t think of activities they do for schools, or youth, or religious organizations as volunteer

activities.” Anyone answering affirmatively is then asked “Which of the activities you told me

about were volunteer activities?”

       Attempts to contact individuals for the ATUS begin about two months after the

household’s final CPS interview and continue for up to eight successive weeks. To minimize the

                                                  8
lag between the September 2003 Volunteering Supplement responses and the ATUS response

outcome, we use only the random subsample of cases that were MIS 5-8 in September 2003 (i.e.,

those whose final CPS interview took place in September, October, November or December

2003). Some of these 2003 Volunteering Supplement respondents were selected for the 2003

ATUS and some for the 2004 ATUS.

         Of the 95,337 individuals 15 or older for whom information was collected in the

September 2003 CPS Volunteering Supplement, there were 9,004 subsequently selected for the

ATUS who were MIS 5-8 in September 2003. The ATUS weighted response rate for these cases

was 57 percent.5 Accounting for the non-response to the CPS MIS-8 basic interview (as noted

above, about 93 percent of the sample completed that interview), the effective response rate for

the ATUS cases in our sample was about 53 percent. This is just slightly above the response

rates for the entire ATUS.6

         The Bureau of Labor Statistics provides joint ATUS-CPS files that contain identifying

information from the ATUS and a battery of demographic and labor force participation items

from the CPS final interview (MIS-8).7 We merged these variables with the appropriate year’s

ATUS interview files (2003 or 2004) and then linked the resulting file to the September 2003

CPS supplement file.


5
 Ignoring the unequal probabilities of selection (e.g., households with children were oversampled), yields an
unweighted response rate for these cases of 56 percent.
6
 In 2003, a total of 20,720 ATUS interviews were completed, for a weighted response rate of 54 percent. Budget
cuts reduced the total number of interviews to 13,973 in 2004, for a weighted response rate of 53 percent.
Accounting for nonresponse to the MIS-8 CPS interviews, these figures imply effective response rates of about 50
percent. The slightly higher response rate in our subsample dovetails with those cases having completed the
September Volunteering Supplement, whereas other cases selected for the ATUS were either nonrespondents to the
Supplement or not in the September sample. On the calculation of response rates, see Abraham, Maitland and
Bianchi (2006). For other survey details see Bureau of Labor Statistics and U.S. Census Bureau (2005).
7
 We compared these variables as measured in the final month in sample and in the month of the Volunteering
Supplement, and generally found little change. The one exception is labor force participation, which shows
movement mainly between adjacent categories of hours worked.

                                                         9
       Although the results presented in this article are based on MIS 5-8 cases from the 2003

CPS Volunteering Supplement that became part of the 2003 or 2004 American Time Use

Survey, we also conducted an analysis of MIS 5-8 cases from the 2002 CPS Volunteering

Supplement that became part of the 2003 ATUS. That analysis yielded conclusions that are

identical to those we present here.

                                                METHODS

       Our analysis begins with September 2003 CPS Supplement univariate and bivariate

distributions of volunteer activity for individuals later selected for the ATUS. These analyses are

augmented by multivariate models of the decision to volunteer and of the choice regarding how

many hours to volunteer. If the same factors determine the two decisions, a Tobit specification

might be appropriate for explaining both outcomes (Tobin 1958). Formally, the Tobit model can

be written:

               yi* = xiβ + ui, i = 1, 2, …, n

       (1)     yi = yi* if yi* > α

               yi = 0 if yi* ≤ α

where yi* is a latent variable that is observable only when its value lies above a censoring

threshold, yi is the observed variable, xi is a vector of explanatory factors, β is a vector of

coefficients, α is the censoring threshold, and ui is a residual that is assumed to be independent

and identically distributed (i.i.d.) from a normal distribution with mean zero and variance σ2. In

our case, yi* would be the latent propensity to volunteer, with actual volunteer hours yi equal to

yi* when yi* > 0 and equal to 0 otherwise. Although the Tobit specification has some appeal, a




                                                  10
formal test strongly rejected its assumption that a single set of parameters can explain both the

decision to volunteer and the number of hours volunteered.8

           A more flexible alternative specification is a two-part model of the sort proposed by

Cragg (1971). In the two-part model, a logit or probit equation is used to model whether or not a

behavior of interest occurs, and a separate regression equation is used to model the intensity of

the behavior for those who engage in it. Two-part models have been used, among other

applications, to study spending on consumer durables (Cragg, 1971), vacation spending

(Melenberg and Van Soest, 1996), and the demand for cigarettes (Raptou et al., 2005), and

frequently are employed by health economists interested in explaining health care outcomes and

medical care spending (see, for example, Duan et al 1983). All of these applications have in

common that different factors are believed to determine an outcome’s incidence (positive versus

zero) as opposed to its intensity (the positive values’ magnitude). In our analysis, we use a

probit equation to model whether or not a person reports any volunteer activity, and an ordinary

least squares regression to model hours of volunteer activity for those who report volunteering.

           Noting that:

           (2)       E(y X ) = P(y > 0 X ) x E(y y > 0, X)

the effect of the change in any explanatory variable on average volunteer hours can be written as:

                     δ E( y)   δ P( y > 0)                                    δ E ( y y > 0)
           (3)               =             x E ( y y > 0, X ) + P(y > 0 X ) x
                      δ Xc       δ Xc                                             δ Xc

In this equation, the first term on the right-hand side represents the effect on overall average

volunteer hours due to the change in the probability of volunteering and the second term

represents the effect due to the change in average volunteer hours among those who volunteer.



8
    See Greene (2003: 770), for details concerning the test of the Tobit model restrictions.

                                                            11
         Unless otherwise stated, all the estimates we report in this paper were calculated using

ATUS selection (i.e., base) weights.9 Standard errors were calculated using a replicate variance

method proposed by Fay (1989) that accounts for the increase in variance associated with the

clustering and weighting in the ATUS sample relative to the variance that would be expected in a

simple random sample of the same size. The replicate weights we used to implement this

procedure were provided by the Bureau of Labor Statistics. The DESCRIPT procedure in SAS-

callable SUDAAN was used to compute the standard errors reported in Tables 1, 2 and 4, and

also to carry out tests of statistical significance for differences in estimates across subgroups.

Stata software (SVY) was used to estimate the multivariate models and associated standard

errors reported in Table 3.

                                                     RESULTS

CPS Univariate Estimates of Volunteering

         We begin by comparing the volunteering reports from the entire CPS supplement sample

to those from our overlap subsample (which, two to eight months later, became ATUS

respondents or nonrespondents). Comparing the first two rows of Table 1, we see that the

estimates from the overlap sample are very close to those from the full sample. About 29 percent

of each group reported having volunteered in the past year, and the average volunteer time

reported by the two groups was very similar (37.9 hours versus 37.4 hours). The estimate of

mean hours among those who did any volunteering also is very similar for the two groups (131.4

in the overlap subsample versus 129.8 hours in the full sample). In each case, the estimated

value for our overlap sample is statistically indistinguishable from that for the CPS Supplement

respondents who were not selected for the ATUS.

9
  Since our aim is to assess nonresponse bias, we chose not to use the ATUS final weights that incorporate post-
stratification, which is intended to adjust for nonresponse. In fact, as already noted, our findings imply that post-
stratification will not correct for the nonresponse bias in the volunteering estimates.

                                                          12
                                          TABLE 1 ABOUT HERE

        The third and fourth rows of Table 1 show that individuals who became ATUS

respondents were over 75 percent more likely than those who became ATUS nonrespondents to

report in the CPS that they had done volunteer work: 36 percent versus 20 percent. Likewise

ATUS respondents reported an average of over 75 percent more hours worked as a volunteer

than did ATUS nonrespondents: 46.6 hours versus 26.4 hours. The second finding is entirely a

function of the first – among those who said they had volunteered, there is no difference between

respondents and nonrespondents in the average number of volunteer hours.10

        The remaining rows of Table 1 disaggregate the nonrespondents into five subgroups: two

for which telephone contact was not undertaken (because the respondent had moved away or no

valid phone number for the household was available); one that was not successfully contacted

(despite good contact information); one that refused; and a residual group, which consisted

largely of individuals who spoke neither English nor Spanish. All five groups had much lower

rates of volunteering than did respondents, but there were differences among the groups.

        ATUS contacts are not attempted with individuals who no longer live at the address at

which the CPS interview was conducted nor were in-person interviews attempted for those

individuals for whom good telephone contact information was lacking. These two groups show

lower rates of volunteering than do unsuccessful contacts and refusals, and the volunteering rates

of the “other” (mainly language barrier) group are even lower. We interpret these results in

terms of social integration: Geographical mobility, lacking phone service, and speaking neither

English nor Spanish are all indicators of weak social integration. The differences between the


10
  Interviewers were instructed to try to conduct CPS Supplement interviews with each household member, but
proxy reports were accepted where that was not feasible. As a check on whether proxy reports affected our results,
we redid the analyses including only single person households, in which proxy reports are not possible. As with the
full sample, we find that respondents are about 15 percentage points more likely to volunteer than nonrespondents
and that, as a result, they have higher average volunteer hours.

                                                        13
two remaining groups, refusals and unsuccessful contacts, are not statistically significant.

Though both show significantly higher rates of volunteering than other nonrespondents, their

volunteering rates are still much lower than those of respondents.11

CPS Bivariate Estimates of Volunteering

        The conventional approach to dealing with nonresponse bias is some form of statistical

adjustment based on weighting classes, propensity models or a related technique. As noted by

Groves (2006: 653), however, “All of these adjustment techniques require assumptions that

groups of respondents and nonrespondents share response propensities and distributional

properties on survey measures.” To the extent that respondents and nonrespondents within a

weighting class do not share the same expected values on the survey variable, the adjustment will

fail. Unlike the typical situation in which this assumption is untestable, we can examine whether

the CPS volunteering reports of ATUS respondents and nonrespondents are the same within

subclasses of background variables that have been shown to be related to volunteering.

        Wilson and Musick (1997; see also Musick, Wilson, and Bynum, 2000) argue that

volunteering is a function of three kinds of resources: human capital, social capital and cultural

capital. The CPS has no measures of cultural resources, but it does contain indicators of both

human capital and social capital, as well as other background characteristics. Our principal

measure of human capital is educational attainment, which we supplement with household

income as a rough proxy for unobserved skills that may affect earnings power. The CPS

contains six measures that we use as indicators of social capital: being in the labor force, being

married, living in a household with children, living in a household that includes no adults other


11
   The differences among the five nonrespondent groups in hours volunteered parallel the differences in volunteering
rates, though because the standard errors of these estimates are relatively larger the differences are generally not
statistically significant. Among those who claimed to have volunteered, the differences in average hours between
respondents and each of the nonrespondent groups is statistically insignificant (with the exception of the “other”
group).

                                                        14
than immediate family members, living in a home that is owned rather than rented, and living in

a household with a telephone. Finally, we account for five background characteristics: sex, age,

race/ethnicity, urbanicity and region of residence. Taken together, these constitute a potentially

rich set of variables for nonresponse adjustment.

                                    TABLE 2a ABOUT HERE

       The second column in Table 2a shows that human capital, social capital, and other

background variables are related to rates of volunteering in the expected ways. For example,

individuals with more education are more likely to report volunteering, as are those with higher

incomes, married people, those with school-age children, homeowners, women, and non-

Hispanic non-blacks.

       The more important result in Table 2a is that, within every subgroup, respondents report

higher volunteering rates than nonrespondents. There is some variation in the size of the

difference (e.g., the difference is larger for older respondents than for younger ones), but the

most striking aspect of the table is the extent to which nonrespondents are distinctive. In 51 of

the 52 subgroups, the volunteering rate among respondents is at least 25 percent greater than

among nonrespondents (and in 49 cases it is at least 40 percent higher). This is compelling

evidence against the assumption that respondents and nonrespondents within subclasses share the

same expected values on volunteering.

       Table 2b presents the same analysis, substituting overall average volunteer hours for

volunteer rates. The second column generally shows the expected associations between hours

and the independent variables. Individuals who are better educated and those who have higher

incomes report more volunteer hours, as do married people, homeowners, women, and non-

Hispanic non-blacks. More importantly, in 50 of the 52 subgroups, respondents report higher

levels of mean volunteer hours than do nonrespondents, and the difference in reported hours

                                                 15
between respondents and nonrespondents is not statistically significant in the two cases where

the reverse is true.

                                    TABLE 2b ABOUT HERE

        The fact that the volunteering difference between respondents and nonrespondents is

similarly large within subgroups is bad news for univariate analyses, because it means that

statistical adjustment for nonresponse based on observable demographic or other background

characteristics of the sample members will not correct the bias in the estimate of the overall

amount of volunteering in the population. But it is good news for bivariate (and possibly,

multivariate) analysis. If the nonresponse bias is approximately constant across subgroups,

inferences about the relationships between volunteering and the variables used to define the

subgroups will be relatively unaffected. That is, although the level of volunteering will be

exaggerated, it will be exaggerated to about the same extent across subgroups, and thus estimates

of the differences between subgroups will be little affected.

        Although comparing the second and fourth columns in Tables 2a and 2b indicates that the

bivariate associations are generally immune to nonresponse bias, given the interrelationships

among the variables we would like to know whether the same can be said about multivariate

analyses.

CPS Multivariate Estimates of Volunteering

        In this section, we estimate multivariate models of volunteering using the human capital,

social capital, and other demographic indicators, first for the full ATUS overlap sample and then

for the subsample of ATUS respondents. Adding a dummy variable distinguishing ATUS

respondents and nonrespondents to the full sample model allows us to test whether nonresponse

has a significant impact on estimates after simultaneously controlling for all the other

characteristics. Comparison of the full sample and ATUS respondent models allows us to test

                                                16
whether inferences about the factors that affect volunteering are robust to nonresponse. To the

extent that coefficients in the model including only respondents differ from those in the model

based on the full sample, nonresponse bias affects multivariate inference. To the extent that

coefficients in the model are not altered as we move from the full sample to the respondents-only

sample, multivariate inferences are not compromised by nonresponse bias.

        The first three columns in Table 3 summarize the results of using the full sample to

estimate a two-part multivariate volunteering model. The first column of the table, from a probit

analysis of the propensity to volunteer, shows the percentage point change in the volunteering

rate associated with having the particular indicated characteristic rather than the full base set of

characteristics.12 The coefficients in the second column, from an ordinary least squares

regression, show the effects of the same characteristics on annual volunteer hours among those

who volunteer. Drawing on equation (3), the two sets of coefficients can be used in conjunction

with the estimates of the volunteer rate [P(y>0 | X)] and of volunteer hours among those who

volunteer [E(y | y>0, X)] to estimate the effects of each variable on overall average volunteer

hours (for a person with the base group characteristics). These estimates are shown in the third

column of Table 3.

                                              TABLE 3 ABOUT HERE

        As can be seen in the first column of Table 3, most of the explanatory variables are

significantly related to the propensity to volunteer. The differences among groups generally

parallel those observed in the bivariate results (Table 2a), but tend to be smaller (as would be

expected given the intercorrelations among the independent variables). The main exception

involves the association between marital status and the propensity to volunteer: The higher
12
  The reference person is defined by the modal category of each characteristic. She is a married female non-
Hispanic non-black high school graduate age 31-45 who lives in the south and owns a home in the suburbs that has
telephone service. She is not in the labor force and has an annual household income in the range $20,000-$39,999.
She has no children or non-immediate family members resident in the household.

                                                       17
volunteering rate among married respondents shown in Table 2a reflects these individuals’ other

characteristics rather than their marital status.

        In contrast, the multivariate model reveals that only a few characteristics are significantly

related to volunteer hours among those who volunteered (second column of Table 3). Among

volunteers, those who had not graduated from high school and those without telephone service

reported fewer hours, and those older than 65 reported more hours. In addition, compared to

volunteers not in the labor force, those who worked less than 45 hours per week reported fewer

hours. (The remaining statistically significant effect, for cases whose urbanicity was missing, is

based on only 6 respondents.)

        These results are not comparable to the bivariate results in Table 2b since they are based

only on respondents who volunteered, whereas Tables 2b includes all respondents. The

estimates in the third column of Table 3, which show the effects on overall volunteer hours, can

be compared to the bivariate estimates reported in Table 2b. The two sets of results are generally

similar, with education, income, presence of school-age children, and not having a telephone in

the household associated with sizeable differences in volunteer hours. Except for the difference

associated with household telephone status, these large differences in average volunteer hours

are due primarily to differences in volunteer rates rather than hours worked among those who

volunteer (the difference by household telephone status reflects both of these effects).

        By adding a dummy variable for whether a person is an ATUS respondent to the

volunteer rate and volunteer hours equations reported in the first two columns of Table 3, we can

measure the degree to which ATUS respondents differ from ATUS nonrespondents in their

reported volunteer behavior once all the background characteristics are held constant. The

coefficient on the respondent dummy variable in the volunteer propensity equation is highly

significant and indicates that, among those with the reference set of personal characteristics,

                                                    18
respondents are 10 percentage points more likely to volunteer than nonrespondents. This effect

is two-thirds the size of the 15 percentage point differential in volunteering propensities

documented in Table 1 without accounting for differences in the observable characteristics of

respondents and nonrespondents. As was true absent controls for other characteristics,

conditional on volunteering, the hours reported by respondents do not differ significantly from

those reported by nonrespondents. Taken together, the two sets of coefficient estimates imply

that, all else the same, respondents volunteer annually an average of about 13 hours more than

nonrespondents.13

        By comparing the results in the last three columns of Table 3 with those in the first three

columns, we can assess the extent to which using data for respondents alone affects the

multivariate associations between volunteering and the background characteristics. Consistent

with the message of Tables 2a and 2b, the exclusion of the nonrespondents has little impact on

multivariate inferences. The coefficients in the “respondent” models generally are very similar

to those in the “full sample” models. As a more formal test, we compared models estimated for

the full sample that contained all of the background characteristics plus a dummy variable for

whether the person was an ATUS respondent to a series of models that added interactions

between the ATUS respondent dummy and selected background variables. The first of these

alternate models added interactions between the respondent dummy and the four education

dummies, the second added interactions with the four household income dummies, and so on.

For eight of the sets of background variables (labor force status, marital status, children in the

household, others in the household, telephone service, sex, urbanicity and region) the interaction

terms were not statistically significant, and in none of the five cases in which they were

13
  Adding the ATUS response dummy variable to these equations has little effect on the coefficients estimated for
the other characteristic variables. Full results are available upon request.


                                                        19
statistically significant (education, income, housing tenure, race and age) do the qualitative

inferences to be drawn about the relationship between volunteering and the background

characteristic differ between the full versus respondent samples.

ATUS Estimates of Volunteering

         To this point we have reported volunteering estimates from the CPS. Among those in the

overlap sample who said in the CPS that they had volunteered, 70 percent became ATUS

respondents compared to just 52 percent of those who said they had not volunteered. Our

expectation is that this differential nonresponse will (a) cause the ATUS volunteering estimates

to be too high, but (b) will not affect the ATUS estimates of volunteering’s correlates.

         Unlike the CPS (which has a twelve-month reporting period), the single day reporting

period of the ATUS means that the ATUS cannot produce a meaningful estimate of the

proportion of volunteers. The ATUS can, however, produce a meaningful estimate of mean

annual volunteer hours that we can compare to the CPS hours estimate. For this estimate we use

the entire ATUS sample, not just those sample members who had previously participated in the

September 2003 Volunteering Supplement. The first step in constructing the ATUS estimate of

mean annual hours is to calculate the weighted mean of the hours reported by survey respondents

on their diary day, using the ATUS sample (base) weights adjusted to account for the differing

probabilities of assignment to weekday versus weekend days. Multiplying this estimate of mean

daily volunteer hours by 365 yields an estimate of mean annual volunteer hours. We compare

estimates from the CPS supplement that refer to the September 2002-September 2003 period to

ATUS estimates for calendar year 2003.14


14
  Though the two estimates cover slightly different time periods, both cover a full calendar year and, given that the
2004 CPS volunteering supplement produced results almost identical to those from the 2003 supplement, we have
no reason to believe that the discrepancy between the starting dates for the two reference periods should have
significantly affected the findings.


                                                         20
        As noted earlier, the CPS estimate of average volunteer hours for the period September

2002 to September 2003 is 37.4 hours for the full ATUS overlap sample and 46.6 hours for the

ATUS respondents among that group (Table 1). If there were no other differences between the

surveys, we might therefore expect the estimate for the calendar year 2003 ATUS sample to be

within sampling error of 46.6 hours. In fact, the ATUS estimate of mean volunteer hours for

calendar year 2003 is slightly higher, at 53.5 hours with a standard error of 2.2 hours (Table 4). 15

Although the ATUS estimate of volunteer hours suffers from substantial nonresponse bias that

makes it much too high, the CPS estimate might suffer from recall error due to the difficulty of

the twelve-month recall task (leading to a downward bias) and from social desirability bias

(leading to an upward bias). Since the ATUS is not apt to suffer significantly from either of

these two error sources, the fact that the ATUS estimate is a little higher than the CPS estimate

based on ATUS respondents suggests that recall error is a somewhat larger problem for the CPS

estimates than social desirability bias.16

                                          TABLE 4 ABOUT HERE




15
  We can also compare the 2003 CPS estimate for ATUS respondents (46.6 hours with a standard error of 2.6
hours) to the ATUS estimate for the same respondents (58.2 hours with a standard error of 4.5 hours), but this
comparison is more severely compromised by different reference periods. All of the interviews with ATUS
respondents who completed the CPS supplement occurred between November 2003 and May 2004, with most
completed between December 2003 and March 2004. To the extent that volunteering is seasonal, ATUS estimates
based on interviews conducted during the December through March period may differ from estimates based on
interviews conducted across the whole calendar year. Further, this comparison does not benefit from overlap
between the CPS and ATUS reference periods.
16
   The ATUS and the CPS also differ in that about 5 percent of ATUS respondents were paid a $40 incentive to
participate (compared to no respondents being paid in the CPS) and all the ATUS interviews were conducted by
telephone whereas about 30 percent of the CPS interviews were conducted in person. Although ATUS respondents
who received incentives to participate reported less volunteer activity than other respondents, excluding them from
the analysis changes none of our conclusions. To assess the effect of telephone versus in person administration on
reports of volunteer activity, we compared estimates based on the full CPS supplement sample for respondents in
MIS-1 and MIS-5, most of whom were interviewed in person, with estimates for respondents in MIS 2-4 and MIS 6-
8, most of whom were interviewed by phone. MIS-1 and MIS-5 respondents were a little more likely to report
volunteering than other respondents (32.1 percent versus 30.0 percent and 43.7 hours versus 38.2 hours) but this
difference may reflect a month-in-sample effect rather than a mode effect.


                                                        21
        Table 4 also shows that, although the ATUS estimate of average volunteer hours is much

larger than that from the full CPS sample, the ATUS estimates of the associations between

respondent background characteristics and volunteer hours are similar to those from the CPS

(Table 2b). Thus at least in this case conclusions about the determinants of volunteering are

generally unaffected by nonresponse.17

                                               DISCUSSION

        The large variation in survey estimates of volunteering (including those from the CPS

volunteering supplement) might plausibly be attributed to measurement error – the difficulty

respondents have recalling an entire year’s activities and respondent exaggeration in reporting

the extent of their volunteering. These concerns about the quality of responses to volunteering

questions led scholars eagerly to await the American Time Use Survey, which provides

volunteering estimates that are unlikely to suffer from major recall error or motivated

misreporting. With this in mind, Abraham and Mackie (2005: 147) wrote that “When they

become available, data on volunteer activity from the new American Time Use Survey (ATUS)

should be more reliable than any that currently exist.” Our results, however, indicate that

although the ATUS estimates may be less susceptible to measurement error than the CPS

volunteering supplement estimates, this is outweighed by the much greater nonresponse error in

the ATUS estimates.

        We believe our finding of nonresponse bias in the ATUS sample has implications for all

surveys of volunteering. In our introduction, for instance, we noted the discrepancy in

volunteering rates between the 1996 National Household Education Survey (NHES; National


17
  Our inferences about the impact of ATUS nonresponse are based on the characteristics of those ATUS
nonrespondents (about four-fifths) for whom we have CPS Volunteering Supplement observations. The remaining
ATUS nonresponse overlaps with nonresponse to the CPS Supplement. It seems very likely that the latter
nonrespondents (for whom we have no data) are also disproportionately nonvolunteers, but to the extent this is
incorrect it could compromise our conclusions.

                                                      22
Center for Education Statistics, 1997) and the 2002 CPS Supplement (Boraas, 2003). The higher

volunteering rate in the 1996 NHES (39 percent) as compared to the 2002 CPS supplement (28

percent) is entirely consistent with the two surveys’ relative response rates (59 percent versus 81

percent).

         Similarly, the volunteering rate of 55 percent from Grimm et al.’s (2005) survey of

teenagers is likely a function of that survey’s relatively low response rate (44 percent). Thus

Grimm et al.’s conclusion that teenagers volunteer at a rate “more than one and a half times the

adult rate of 29 percent as established by the…2004 Current Population Survey figures, which

used the same questions and definitions as the Youth Volunteering Survey” is almost surely

wrong. The difference is most likely a function of nonresponse bias – that is, of teenagers who

were not volunteers being much less likely to participate (the CPS shows that teenagers are less

apt to volunteer than are middle-aged adults).18

         If we are correct that our results are due to the strong connection between the causes of

volunteering and the causes of survey participation, then surveys also will tend to overestimate

other prosocial activities. Three prior studies provide evidence along these lines. Couper,

Singer, and Kulka (1998) found that households in which respondents said they participated in

community activities were more likely to have returned their decennial census form than

households in which respondents said they did not participate in such activities. Groves, Singer,

and Corning (2000) reported that the response rate to a mail survey was higher among those who

had scored high on an index of community involvement in an earlier survey than among those

who had scored low (but only for the half sample that did not receive a $5 prepaid incentive).

18
  Parental permission is required for the Youth Volunteering Survey, and according to one of the Grimm et al.,
coauthors, parental refusals are the survey’s main source of nonresponse (N. Dietz, personal communication).
Although a growing number of high schools require students to meet “volunteer” service hours requirements in
order to graduate, fewer than a quarter of high school students were subject to such a requirement in 1999, the most
recent year for which we have been able to locate this information (Kleiner and Chapman, 1999).


                                                         23
And Kennickell (2005) found that individuals who declared larger charitable contribution

deductions on their federal income tax return were more likely to be respondents in the Survey of

Consumer Finances than those who declared smaller deductions. Although these studies

generally focused on the effect of a prosocial behavior on nonresponse, without addressing the

corresponding issue of nonresponse’s impact on estimates of the prosocial behavior, they all

suggest that nonresponse will lead to overestimating such behaviors.19

         To the extent that the size of the nonresponse bias in volunteering (and other prosocial

activities) is affected by the level of nonresponse, the secular decline in response rates means that

inferences about changes over time in volunteering (and prosocial behaviors more generally) are

apt to be distorted by the bias. Estimates of volunteering likely have increased over time (see

Figure 1) because the composition of samples changed as response rates declined. This seems to

be the most compelling explanation for why trends in volunteering over the last several decades

are so different from trends in other dimensions of social capital (Putnam 2000: 127).

         Researchers commonly rely on weights to correct for differential nonresponse across

different groups of sample members. Such weighting will ameliorate nonresponse bias only to

the extent that the characteristics used to make the weighting adjustments are correlated both

with the propensity to respond and with the variables of interest. Because there are significant

differences in volunteering between respondents and nonrespondents even after controlling for a

rich set of demographic characteristics, standard weighting adjustments cannot be relied upon to

fix the problem with estimates of volunteering. This is apt also to be the case for other prosocial

behaviors.




19
  Although the evidence is more indirect, Robinson (1989) suggests that surveys are also apt to overestimate
participation in the arts because those who engage in such activities are more likely to participate in surveys than
those who don’t engage in the arts.

                                                          24
       The importance of volunteering as a determinant of response propensity, however,

suggests a strategy to improve weighting adjustments in other survey contexts. Specifically, our

findings suggest that there is an important element of altruism in the decision about whether to

respond to a survey request. If the two basic CPS questions about volunteering were routinely

added to household surveys, that information could be used together with information from the

CPS volunteering supplements to create weighting adjustment factors that account for the share

of volunteers in the survey sample relative to the population share. The inclusion of volunteering

as a determinant of response propensity in the nonresponse weighting process should be

particularly helpful for improving estimates of other prosocial behaviors that one would expect

to be strongly correlated with volunteering, but also would improve the estimate of any variable

correlated with volunteering.

       Although our findings have troubling implications for research on the amount of

volunteering, on trends in volunteering over time, and on the usefulness of conventional

statistical adjustments based on the demographic characteristics of respondents to correct the

problems, the implications are more comforting for research on the characteristics of individuals

associated with volunteering. Our results suggest that bivariate and multivariate inferences about

the relationship of volunteering (and likely other prosocial activities) to respondent

characteristics are relatively immune to nonresponse bias. In this sense, the results resemble the

pattern of “form-resistant correlations,” the tendency for changes in survey question wording that

affect univariate distributions not to affect bivariate or multivariate distributions (Schuman and

Presser, 1981). The findings presented here suggest the same may be true of nonresponse.

Studies with measures other than volunteering are needed to determine the extent to which this

applies to survey estimates in general.




                                                 25
REFERENCES

Abraham, K., and C. Mackie (eds.). 2005. Beyond The Market: Designing Nonmarket Accounts

       for the United States. Washington DC: National Academies Press.

Abraham, K., A. Maitland and S. Bianchi. 2006. “Nonresponse in the American Time        Use

       Survey: Who is Missing from the Data and How Much Does It Matter?” Public Opinion

       Quarterly 70: 676-703.

Boraas, S. 2003. “Volunteerism in the United States,” Monthly Labor Review 126: 3-11.

Bureau of Labor Statistics and U.S. Census Bureau. 2002. Current Population Survey: Design

       and Methodology. Technical Paper 63RV.

Bureau of Labor Statistics and U.S. Census Bureau. 2005. American Time Use Survey

       User’s Guide: 2003-2004. [http://www.bls.gov/tus/atususersguide.pdf]

Cragg, J.G. 1971. “Some Statistical Models for Limited Dependent Variables with Application

       to the Demand for Durable Goods,” Econometrica, 39(5): 829-844.

Couper, M., E. Singer, and R. Kulka. 1998. “Participation in the 1990 Decennial    Census,”

       American Politics Quarterly 26: 59-80.

Curtin, R., S. Presser, and E. Singer. 2005. “Changes in Telephone Survey Nonresponse     over

       the Past Quarter Century,” Public Opinion Quarterly 69: 87-98.

Curtin, R., S. Presser, and E. Singer. 2000. “Effects of Response Rate Changes on the   Index

       of Consumer Sentiment,” Public Opinion Quarterly 64: 413-428.

Duan, N., W. Manning, C.N. Morris, and J.P. Newhouse. 1983. “A Comparison of Alternative

       Models for the Demand for Medical Care,” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics,

       1(2): 115-126.




                                                26
Fay, R. 1989. “Theoretical Application of Weighting for Variance Calculation.” Proceedings

       of the Section on Survey Research Methods of the American Statistical Association, 212-

       217.

Greene, W. 2003. Econometric Analysis. Upper Saddle River NJ: Prentice-Hall.

Grimm, R., N. Dietz, K. Spring, K. Arey, and J. Foster-Bey. 2005 “Building Active    Citizens:

       The Role of Social Institutions in Teen Volunteering.” Washington, D.C.: Corporation

       for National and Community Service.

Groves, R. 2006. “Nonresponse Rates and Nonresponse Bias in Household Surveys.”        Public

       Opinion Quarterly 70: 646-675.

Groves, R., and R. Kahn. 1979. Surveys by Telephone. New York: Academic Press.

Groves, R., S. Presser, and S. Dipko. 2004. “The Role of Topic Interest in Survey

       Participation Decisions,” Public Opinion Quarterly 68: 2-31.

Groves, R., E. Singer, and A. Corning. 2000. “Leverage Salience Theory of Survey

       Participation,” Public Opinion Quarterly 64: 299-308.

Hodgkinson, V. and M. Weitzman. 1996. Giving and Volunteering in the United States.

       Washington DC: Independent Sector.

Keeter, S., C. Miller, A. Kohut, R. Groves, and S. Presser. 2000. “Consequences of   Reducing

       Nonresponse in a Large National Telephone Survey.” Public Opinion Quarterly 64: 125-

       148.

Kennickell, A. 2005. “Darkness Made Visible: Field Management and Nonresponse Bias         in

       the 2004 SCF.” Presented at the American Statistical Association Meeting.

Knack, S. 1992. “Civic Norms, Social Sanctions, and Voter Turnout,” Rationality and Society

       4: 133-156.




                                               27
Kleiner, B. And C. Chapman. 1999. “Service Learning and Community Service Among 6th-

       through 12th-Grade Students in the United States: 1996 and 1999.” Washington, DC:

       National Center for Education Statistics.

Melenberg, B. and A. Van Soest. 1996. “Parametric and Semi-Parametric Modelling of

       Vacation Expenditures,” Journal of Applied Econometrics, 11(1): 59-76.

Merkle, D., and M. Edelman. 2002. “Nonresponse in Exit Polls: A Comprehensive

       Analysis.” Pp. 243-57 in Survey Nonresponse, ed. R. Groves, et al., New York: Wiley.

Musick, M., J. Wilson, and W. Bynum, Jr. June, 2000. “Race and Formal Volunteering: The

       Differential Effects of Class and Religion,” Social Forces 78: 1539-1570.

National Center for Education Statistics. 1997. Adult Civic Involvement in the United    States.

       Washington DC: NCES 97-906.

Putnam, R. 2000. Bowling Alone. New York: Simon and Schuster.

Raptou, E., M. Konstatinos, E. Tsakiridou, and C. Katrakilidis. 2005. International Advances in

       Economic Research, 11: 275-290.

Robinson, J. 1989. “Survey Organization Differences in Estimating Public Participation

       in the Arts,” Public Opinion Quarterly 53: 397-414.

Schuman, H., and S. Presser. 1981. Questions and Answers in Attitude Surveys. New        York:

       Academic Press.

Tobin, J. 1958. “Estimation of Relationships for Limited Dependent Variables.”

       Econometrica 26: 24-36.

Wilson, J. 2000. “Volunteering.” Annual Review of Sociology 26: 215-240.

Wilson, J., and M. Musick. 1997. “Who Cares? Toward an Integrated Theory of Volunteering.”

       American Sociological Review 62: 694-713.




                                               28
                       Fig. 1. Percent Volunteers in Gallup Surveys

60


                                                                                              49
50
                                                                                                               46
                                                                                                     41
                                                                                    39
40                                                                          36
                                      32                     31
                              29
30
     26


20


10


0
 Apr-                       Sep- Dec-                      Dec-            Mar- May- Dec- Nov-                 Feb-
  77                         81   81                        84              86   87   87   89                   91
          SOURCE: Roper Center Accession Nos. 0047361, 0031892, 0030064, 0032803, 0026314, 0026426, 0047980,
          0028183, and 0236260
TABLE 1: Volunteer rates and mean hours spent volunteering, September 2003 CPS Volunteer
supplement, various samples

                                                      Percent     Volunteer Hours
                                                       Who     Volunteer    Overall
                                                     Volunteer  Mean         Mean                 N

All volunteer supplement respondents                    28.8           129.8       37.4
                                                               (0.1)       (1.6)         (0.5)   95337

Volunteer supplement respondents in ATUS sample         28.9           131.4       37.9
                                                               (0.6)       (5.2)         (1.7)   9004

  ATUS respondents                                      35.5           131.3       46.6
                                                               (0.8)       (6.5)         (2.6)   5079

  ATUS nonrespondents                                   20.1           131.6       26.4
                                                               (0.8)      (10.1)         (2.2)   3925

     Contact not attempted                              17.4           137.3       23.8
                                                               (1.6)      (22.7)         (4.4)   946

     Inadequate/missing contact information             17.0           124.6       21.2
                                                               (1.3)      (22.6)         (4.1)   920

     Unsuccessful contact                               22.9           110.8       25.3
                                                               (1.9)      (18.2)         (4.7)   518

     Refusals                                           23.8           139.4       33.2
                                                               (1.2)       (4.0)         (4.0)   1439

     Other                                              6.7            70.5        4.7
                                                               (3.2)      (28.4)         (2.3)   102


Note: The column labeled "Volunteer Mean" reports annual hours among volunteers; the column
labeled "Overall Mean" reports annual hours for the full sample, including those who did not
volunteer. Hours were imputed for 143 individuals who reported that they volunteered but did not
report the time they spent. Entries in the first row were calculated using the CPS supplement non-
response weights and those in the remaining rows were calculated using the ATUS sample selection
weights. Except in the first row, standard errors reported in parentheses have been adjusted to
account for the clustering and weighting of the sample; the information necessary to make this
adjustment for the first row is unavailable on the CPS supplement public use file.
TABLE 2A: Volunteer rates calculated from the 2003 CPS volunteer supplement, full ATUS
overlap sample, ATUS respondents and ATUS non-respondents, by selected background
characteristics

                               Full ATUS                ATUS                   ATUS
                            Overlap Sample           Respondents          Non-respondents
                            Rate                    Rate                   Rate
                             (s.e.)    N            (s.e.)   N             (s.e.)   N


Full sample                  28.9                   35.5                   20.1
                              (0.6)    9004          (0.8)    5079           (0.8)   3925


Human Capital Indicators
Education
 Less than high school       17.4 **                24.0                   11.0 **
                              (1.1)    1718          (1.7)    830            (1.2)   888
 High school graduate        21.8 --                26.2 --                16.8 --
                              (0.9)    2715          (1.2)    1432           (1.3)   1283
 Some college                31.9 **                36.6 **                25.1 **
                              (1.1)    2363          (1.5)    1375           (1.4)   988
 Bachelor's degree           43.4 **                50.8 **                30.0 **
                              (1.5)    1469          (1.9)    929            (2.0)   540
 Graduate degree             44.2 **                50.7 **                29.9 **
                              (2.0)    739           (2.5)    513            (3.0)   226

Household income
 Missing                     21.3                   27.9                   15.4
                              (1.2)    1360          (1.9)    612            (1.4)   748
 Under $20,000               16.9 **                20.6 **                13.6 *
                              (1.1)    1734          (1.6)    833            (1.4)   901
 $20,000 to $39,999          22.1 --                24.6 --                18.9 --
                              (1.1)    2123          (1.4)    1215           (1.6)   908
 $40,000 to $74,999          33.2 **                40.5 **                21.8
                              (1.0)    2095          (1.3)    1287           (1.7)   808
 $75,000 or more             45.0 **                51.3 **                32.2 **
                              (1.4)    1692          (1.8)    1132           (2.2)   560

Social Capital Indicators
Labor force status
  Not in labor force         24.5 --                32.2 --                15.3 --
                              (0.9)    3576          (1.2)    1945           (0.9)   1631
 Work <35 hrs/wk             38.8 **                41.9 **                33.5 **
                              (2.1)    827           (2.8)    521            (3.0)   306
 Work 35-44 hrs/wk           27.3 *                 33.5 *                 19.1 **
                              (0.9)    3074          (1.3)    1708           (1.1)   1366
 Work 45 plus hrs/wk         37.3 **                42.9 **                28.5 **
                              (1.6)    1047          (2.1)    633            (2.4)   414
 Work hours vary             34.9 **                41.0 **                26.7 **
                              (2.6)    480           (3.5)    272            (3.7)   208
TABLE 2A: Volunteer rates calculated from the 2003 CPS volunteer supplement, full ATUS
overlap sample, ATUS respondents and ATUS non-respondents, by selected background
characteristics (continued)

                                 Full ATUS              ATUS                   ATUS
                              Overlap Sample         Respondents          Non-respondents
                              Rate                  Rate                   Rate
                               (s.e.)    N          (s.e.)   N             (s.e.)   N
Marital status
 Married                      34.4 --               40.4 --                24.2 --
                                (0.8)   4346         (1.1)    2714           (1.2)   1632
  Widowed                     22.3 **               31.2 **                11.9 **
                                (1.6)   756          (2.6)    415            (1.8)   341
  Divorced                    23.6 **               29.0 **                17.1 **
                                (1.5)   1141         (2.2)    628            (1.7)   513
  Spouse absent               20.9 **               21.6 **                20.1
                                (2.5)   432          (3.2)    214            (3.4)   218
  Never married               22.9 **               29.0 **                17.1 **
                                (1.1)   2329         (1.7)    1108           (1.2)   1221

Children in household
 No children under age 6      28.6 --               35.1 --                19.7 --
                                (0.6)   7293         (0.8)    4135           (0.8)   3158
  Children under age 6        30.4                  37.3                   21.8
                                (1.3)   1711         (1.9)    944            (1.7)   767
  No children age 6-17        25.1 --               31.5 --                16.7 --
                                (0.7)   5928         (1.0)    3330           (0.8)   2598
  Children age 6-17           36.4 **               43.6 **                26.9 **
                                (1.1)   3076         (1.5)    1749           (1.5)   1327

Others in household
 No relatives                 30.5 --               36.9 --                21.1 --
                                (0.7)   7272         (0.9)    4197           (0.8)   3075
  One or more relatives       25.0 **               31.5 **                17.8 *
                                (1.2)   1732         (1.8)    882            (1.4)   850
  No non-relatives            30.3 --               36.8 --                21.2 --
                                (0.6)   8286         (0.9)    4763           (0.8)   3523
  One or more non-relatives   15.2 **               19.0 **                12.2 **
                                (1.4)   718          (2.4)    316            (1.6)   402

Housing tenure
 Missing                      35.2                  42.7                   24.7
                                (3.3)   258          (4.6)    142            (4.8)   116
  Owner                       31.5 --               38.2 --                21.4 --
                                (0.7)   6136         (1.0)    3694           (0.9)   2442
  Renter                      20.6 **               24.9 **                16.5 **
                                (1.0)   2610         (1.4)    1243           (1.2)   1367
TABLE 2A: Volunteer rates calculated from the 2003 CPS volunteer supplement, full ATUS
overlap sample, ATUS respondents and ATUS non-respondents, by selected background
characteristics (continued)

                               Full ATUS                ATUS                   ATUS
                            Overlap Sample           Respondents          Non-respondents
                            Rate                    Rate                   Rate
                             (s.e.)    N            (s.e.)   N             (s.e.)   N
Telephone status
  Telephone household        29.5 --                36.0 --                20.6 --
                              (0.6)    8594           (0.8)   4933           (0.8)   3661
 Non-telephone household     12.6 **                15.5 **                11.0 **
                              (1.9)    410            (3.1)   146            (2.1)   264

Other Characteristics
Sex
 Male                        25.5 **                31.9 **                17.5 **
                              (0.9)    4023           (1.3)   2202           (0.9)   1821
 Female                      31.9 --                38.5 --                22.5 --
                              (0.7)    4981           (0.9)   2877           (1.1)   2104

Age
 Age 15-30                   25.3 **                30.6 **                20.0 *
                              (1.1)    2096           (1.7)   1025           (1.4)   1071
 Age 31-45                   34.0 --                41.0 --                24.8 --
                              (1.0)    2830           (1.4)   1591           (1.4)   1239
 Age 46-55                   33.9                   39.0                   25.1
                              (1.3)    1486           (1.9)   918            (2.2)   568
 Age 56-65                   27.7 **                34.1 **                14.9 **
                              (1.3)    1080           (1.8)   708            (2.1)   372
 Over age 65                 21.1 **                29.4 **                10.9 **
                              (1.2)    1512           (1.7)   837            (1.4)   675

Race/ethnicity
 Hispanic                    14.8 **                17.6 **                12.1 **
                              (1.2)    1115           (1.9)   548            (1.5)   567
 Non-Hispanic black          20.5 **                25.2 **                16.9 **
                              (1.3)    1267           (2.4)   561            (1.6)   706
 Non-Hispanic non-black      32.1 --                38.7 --                22.2 --
                              (0.6)    6622           (0.9)   3970           (0.9)   2652

Urbanicity of residence
  Central city               24.3 **                31.0 **                17.2 *
                              (1.3)    2224           (1.8)   1131           (1.5)   1093
 Balance of MSA              31.0 --                38.3 --                21.1 --
                              (0.8)    3774           (1.2)   2154           (1.1)   1620
 Other metropolitan          28.1                   34.3                   18.8
                              (1.5)    1278           (2.0)   739            (2.1)   539
 Non-metropolitan            30.1                   34.7                   22.9
                              (1.3)    1705           (1.7)   1039           (1.8)   666
 Not identified              26.5                   32.2                   13.5
                             (13.8)    23            (15.7)   16            (14.4)    7
TABLE 2A: Volunteer rates calculated from the 2003 CPS volunteer supplement, full ATUS
overlap sample, ATUS respondents and ATUS non-respondents, by selected background
characteristics (continued)

                                    Full ATUS                   ATUS                 ATUS
                                 Overlap Sample              Respondents        Non-respondents
                                 Rate                       Rate                 Rate
                                  (s.e.)    N               (s.e.)   N           (s.e.)   N


Region of residence
 Northeast                       26.2                       32.7                 17.6
                                   (1.1)    1739              (1.6)   994          (1.5)      745
  South                          27.3 --                    32.9 --              20.6 --
                                   (0.9)    3316              (1.3)   1754         (1.2)      1562
  West                           29.2                       36.4                 19.3
                                   (1.5)    1858              (1.9)   1064         (1.6)      794
  Midwest                        33.2 **                    40.1 **              22.0
                                   (1.1)    2091              (1.4)   1267         (1.7)      824


Note: All estimates are weighted using the ATUS sample weights. Standard errors reported in
parentheses have been adjusted to account for the clustering and weighting of the sample.

** Significantly different from reference group mean at 0.01 level
* Significantly different from reference group mean at 0.05 level
-- Reference group
TABLE 2B: Volunteer hours calculated from the 2003 CPS volunteer supplement, full ATUS
overlap sample, ATUS respondents and ATUS non-respondents, by selected background
characteristics

                               Full ATUS                ATUS                    ATUS
                            Overlap Sample          Respondents           Non-respondents
                             Hours                  Hours                  Hours
                              (s.e.)     N           (s.e.)    N            (s.e.)    N


Full sample                  37.9                    46.6                    26.4
                                (1.7)        9004      (2.6)   5079           (2.2)      3925


Human Capital Indicators
Education
 Less than high school       15.9       **           21.0 **                 11.0 *
                                (2.2)        1718      (2.7)   830            (3.3)      888
 High school graduate        28.9       --           36.2 --                 20.4 --
                                (3.2)        2715      (5.2)   1432           (3.1)      1283
 Some college                44.6       **           50.3                    36.3 *
                                (3.5)        2363      (4.7)   1375           (5.5)      988
 Bachelor's degree           60.5       **           70.3 **                 43.0 *
                                (5.0)        1469      (6.7)   929            (8.1)      540
 Graduate degree             58.7       **           67.0 **                 40.4 *
                                (5.9)        739       (7.6)   513            (8.2)      226


Household income
 Missing                     32.6                    37.2                    28.4
                                (4.2)        1360      (4.4)   612            (7.0)      748
 Under $20,000               27.6                    33.3                    22.5
                                (4.2)        1734      (7.5)   833            (4.5)      901
 $20,000 to $39,999          31.9       --           38.8 --                 23.0 --
                                (3.5)        2123      (5.7)   1215           (3.0)      908
 $40,000 to $74,999          38.2                    48.6                    21.7
                                (3.3)        2095      (4.9)   1287           (3.5)      808
 $75,000 or more             55.3       **           62.9 **                 39.8 *
                                (4.0)        1692      (4.8)   1132           (6.3)      560


Social Capital Indicators
Labor force status
  Not in labor force         40.1       --           50.8 --                 27.4 --
                                (2.8)        3576      (3.7)   1945           (4.1)      1631
 Work <35 hrs/wk             45.6                    46.7                    43.6
                                (4.6)        827       (5.8)   521            (7.8)      306
 Work 35-44 hrs/wk           28.7       **           34.7 **                 20.7
                                (2.3)        3074      (3.5)   1708           (2.5)      1366
 Work 45 plus hrs/wk         45.6                    55.8                    29.5
                                (6.6)        1047      (9.9)   633            (5.5)      414
 Work hours vary             48.5                    68.5                    21.3
                                (6.9)        480      (10.9)   272            (5.0)      208
TABLE 2B: Volunteer hours calculated from the 2003 CPS volunteer supplement, full ATUS
overlap sample, ATUS respondents and ATUS non-respondents, by selected background
characteristics (continued)

                                 Full ATUS                ATUS                  ATUS
                              Overlap Sample          Respondents         Non-respondents
                               Hours                  Hours                Hours
                                (s.e.)     N           (s.e.)    N          (s.e.)    N
Marital status
 Married                       44.8       --          53.5 --                30.0 --
                                  (2.7)        4346     (3.9)   2714          (3.2)      1632
  Widowed                      47.7                   69.9                   21.7
                                  (5.8)        756      (9.8)   415           (7.1)      341
  Divorced                     28.0       **          33.5 **                21.2
                                  (3.4)        1141     (4.8)   628           (4.7)      513
  Spouse absent                26.6       **          26.4 **                26.8
                                  (5.4)        432      (8.6)   214           (6.8)      218
  Never married                27.4       **          30.9 **                24.1
                                  (3.1)        2329     (4.5)   1108          (4.3)      1221


Children in household
 No children under age 6       39.1       --          47.9 --                27.3 --
                                  (2.0)        7293     (2.9)   4135          (2.5)      3158
  Children under age 6         31.8       *           39.6                   22.0
                                  (2.9)        1711     (4.3)   944           (3.7)      767
  No children age 6-17         35.7       --          44.2 --                24.3 --
                                  (2.0)        5928     (2.9)   3330          (2.7)      2598
  Children age 6-17            42.4                   51.3                   30.6
                                  (2.8)        3076     (4.5)   1749          (3.7)      1327


Others in household
 No relatives                  39.9       --          48.0 --                28.1 --
                                  (2.0)        7272     (2.9)   4197          (2.6)      3075
  One or more relatives        33.1                   42.6                   22.8
                                  (3.3)        1732     (4.8)   882           (4.2)      850
  No non-relatives             39.4       --          47.6 --                28.0 --
                                  (1.7)        8286     (2.6)   4763          (2.4)      3523
  One or more non-relatives    23.5       **          34.0                   15.0 *
                                  (5.8)        718     (11.7)   316           (4.4)      402


Housing tenure
 Missing                       49.2                   49.4                   48.9
                                 (12.0)        258     (13.3)   142          (23.5)      116
  Owner                        40.5       --          49.9 --                26.2 --
                                  (2.2)        6136     (3.3)   3694          (2.5)      2442
  Renter                       29.2       **          34.6 **                24.1
                                  (2.9)        2610     (4.7)   1243          (3.7)      1367
TABLE 2B: Volunteer hours calculated from the 2003 CPS volunteer supplement, full ATUS
overlap sample, ATUS respondents and ATUS non-respondents, by selected background
characteristics (continued)

                              Full ATUS                 ATUS                    ATUS
                           Overlap Sample           Respondents           Non-respondents
                            Hours                   Hours                  Hours
                             (s.e.)     N            (s.e.)    N            (s.e.)    N
Telephone status
  Telephone household        39.0      --            47.4 --                 27.4 --
                               (1.8)        8594       (2.7)   4933           (2.3)        3661
 Non-telephone household     10.3      **            12.8 **                 8.8      **
                               (2.6)        410        (4.2)   146            (3.7)        264


Other Characteristics
Sex
 Male                        33.0      **            40.6 *                  23.6 --
                               (2.5)        4023       (3.5)   2202           (3.3)        1821
 Female                      42.3      --            51.6 --                 29.0
                               (2.5)        4981       (3.7)   2877           (2.9)        2104


Age
 Age 15-30                   27.9      *             31.3                    24.6
                               (3.3)        2096       (4.9)   1025           (4.6)        1071
 Age 31-45                   37.5      --            44.4 --                 28.4 --
                               (3.1)        2830       (4.4)   1591           (3.5)        1239
 Age 46-55                   45.8                    54.2                    31.5
                               (4.3)        1486       (6.3)   918            (5.3)        568
 Age 56-65                   40.7                    47.2                    27.7
                               (4.6)        1080       (6.3)   708            (6.7)        372
 Over age 65                 43.3                    61.3 *                  20.9
                               (4.4)        1512       (6.1)   837            (5.5)        675


Race/ethnicity
 Hispanic                    18.0      **            14.7 **                 21.3
                               (3.2)        1115       (2.6)   548            (5.7)        567
 Non-Hispanic black          27.6      *             31.6 **                 24.5
                               (4.2)        1267       (5.4)   561            (6.4)        706
 Non-Hispanic non-black      42.3      --            52.0 --                 27.7 --
                               (2.1)        6622       (3.1)   3970           (2.4)        2652


Urbanicity of residence
  Central city               34.1                    46.4                    21.3
                               (3.6)        2224       (6.3)   1131           (3.0)        1093
 Balance of MSA              38.3      --            46.2 --                 27.5 --
                               (2.4)        3774       (3.0)   2154           (3.7)        1620
 Other metropolitan          33.1                    39.9                    22.9
                               (3.3)        1278       (4.8)   739            (4.0)        539
 Non-metropolitan            45.7                    52.8                    34.5
                               (4.8)        1705       (7.4)   1039           (6.2)        666
 Not identified              15.9      *             21.2 *                  4.1      **
                               (8.5)        23        (11.2)   16             (4.3)         7
TABLE 2B: Volunteer hours calculated from the 2003 CPS volunteer supplement, full ATUS
overlap sample, ATUS respondents and ATUS non-respondents, by selected background
characteristics (continued)

                                   Full ATUS                     ATUS                   ATUS
                                Overlap Sample               Respondents          Non-respondents
                                 Hours                       Hours                 Hours
                                  (s.e.)     N                (s.e.)    N           (s.e.)    N


Region of residence
 Northeast                        36.0                         45.6                 23.3
                                     (3.8)        1739           (5.0)   994          (5.9)   745
  South                           35.1       --                41.1 --              28.1 --
                                     (2.5)        3316           (3.8)   1754         (3.5)   1562
  West                            43.2                         55.9 *               25.9
                                     (3.9)        1858           (6.1)   1064         (3.9)   794
  Midwest                         38.6                         46.0                 26.6
                                     (3.0)        2091           (4.7)   1267         (4.0)   824


Note: All estimates are weighted using the ATUS sample weights. Standard errors reported in
parentheses have been adjusted to account for the clustering and weighting of the sample.

** Significantly different from reference group mean at 0.01 level
* Significantly different from reference group mean at 0.05 level
-- Reference group
Table 3: Two-part models of volunteer activity, September 2003 CPS Volunteer supplement,
full ATUS overlap sample and ATUS respondents
                                    Full ATUS Overlap Sample                                  ATUS Respondents

                                                Hrs. for           Calculated                       Hrs. for           Calculated
                            Vol. (0/1)         Volunteers          Effect on    Vol. (0/1)         Volunteers          Effect on
                              dF/dx              Coef.              Overall       dF/dx              Coef.              Overall
                            (std. err.)        (std. err.)           Hours      (std. err.)        (std. err.)           Hours
Human Capital Indicators
Education
 Less than high school       -0.046       **     -55.6        *         -20.0    -0.024              -51.9               -16.4
                                (0.016)              (22.9)                         (0.023)              (30.5)
  Some college                0.081       **      17.8                  14.7      0.076       **      9.7                11.8
                                (0.016)              (17.4)                         (0.020)              (23.0)
  Bachelor's degree           0.182       **      25.3                  29.2      0.197       **      15.3               28.2
                                (0.020)              (18.2)                         (0.027)              (24.0)
  Graduate degree             0.175       **      19.2                  26.8      0.181       **      11.6               25.2
                                (0.026)              (18.6)                         (0.032)              (23.8)


Household income
 Missing                     -0.022               13.0                    0.6     0.021              -16.5               -1.6
                                (0.019)              (24.5)                         (0.025)              (28.3)
  Under $20,000              -0.026               14.2                    0.4    -0.008               -0.2               -1.0
                                (0.019)              (27.9)                         (0.024)              (41.9)
  $40,000-$74,999             0.072       **     -18.7                    4.2     0.126       **     -25.9                8.7
                                (0.015)              (17.7)                         (0.020)              (26.1)
  $75,000 or more             0.131       **     -11.5                  13.4      0.176       **     -24.8               15.2
                                (0.021)              (20.6)                         (0.026)              (29.5)
Social Capital Indicators
Labor force status
  Work < 35 hrs/wk            0.063       **     -40.4        *          -2.5     0.018              -35.7        *      -7.1
                                (0.023)              (16.1)                         (0.029)              (17.6)
  Work 35-44 hrs/wk          -0.046       **     -53.7        **        -19.6    -0.058       **     -43.5               -18.4
                                (0.015)              (13.2)                         (0.019)              (14.5)   **
  Work 45 plus hours/wk      -0.009              -42.2                  -12.0    -0.030              -21.5               -9.2
                                (0.018)              (23.4)                         (0.024)              (29.1)
  Work hours vary             0.031              -23.7                   -2.2     0.000               21.8                5.6
                                (0.027)              (21.9)                         (0.034)              (28.2)
Table 3: Two-part models of volunteer activity, September 2003 CPS Volunteer supplement,
full ATUS overlap sample and ATUS respondent sample (continued)
                                     Full ATUS Overlap Sample                                 ATUS Respondents

                                                 Hrs. for          Calculated                       Hrs. for      Calculated
                             Vol. (0/1)         Volunteers         Effect on    Vol. (0/1)         Volunteers     Effect on
                               dF/dx              Coef.             Overall       dF/dx              Coef.         Overall
                             (std. err.)        (std. err.)          Hours      (std. err.)        (std. err.)      Hours
Marital status
 Widowed                       0.026               34.7                 12.2      0.040               39.7          15.2
                                 (0.027)              (27.8)                        (0.035)              (34.5)
  Divorced                    -0.022              -20.2                  -7.9    -0.011              -35.4          -10.5
                                 (0.018)              (20.2)                        (0.023)              (26.4)
  Spouse absent               -0.014               -8.0                  -3.8    -0.035              -18.0          -8.9
                                 (0.030)              (24.0)                        (0.037)              (36.2)
  Never married               -0.030               7.2                   -1.9    -0.015              -12.6          -5.1
                                 (0.018)              (14.9)                        (0.023)              (18.5)


Children in household
 Children under age 6         -0.019              -14.2                  -6.1    -0.015              -11.7          -4.9
                                 (0.014)              (11.3)                        (0.019)              (13.1)
  Children age 6-17            0.125       **      11.0                 18.4      0.133       **      20.7          21.6
                                 (0.015)              (11.5)                        (0.021)              (15.1)


Others in household
 One or more relatives        -0.055       **      13.1                  -3.6    -0.049       **      20.6          -0.6
                                 (0.013)              (14.0)                        (0.017)              (17.4)
  One or more nonrelatives    -0.104       **      28.4                  -5.7    -0.109       **      66.6           3.9
                                 (0.019)              (36.8)                        (0.026)              (56.8)


Housing tenure
 Missing                       0.039               14.5                   8.6     0.044              -15.2           1.4
                                 (0.034)              (31.2)                        (0.048)              (27.2)
  Renter                      -0.034       **      13.4                  -0.8    -0.038       *       8.8           -2.3
                                 (0.013)              (13.4)                        (0.018)              (15.9)


Telephone status
 Non-telephone household      -0.078       **     -53.0        *        -23.3    -0.089       *      -37.7          -20.7
                                 (0.026)              (26.1)                        (0.039)              (31.1)
Table 3: Two-part models of volunteer activity, September 2003 CPS Volunteer supplement,
full ATUS overlap sample and ATUS respondent sample (continued)
                                  Full ATUS Overlap Sample                                  ATUS Respondents

                                              Hrs. for           Calculated                       Hrs. for           Calculated
                          Vol. (0/1)         Volunteers          Effect on    Vol. (0/1)         Volunteers          Effect on
                            dF/dx              Coef.              Overall       dF/dx              Coef.              Overall
                          (std. err.)        (std. err.)           Hours      (std. err.)        (std. err.)           Hours

Other Characteristics
Sex
  Male                       -0.060 **                 4.4             -6.4      -0.061 **          -3.9               -8.5
                            (0.011)                (11.7)                       (0.013)                (14.1)


Age
 Under age 30               0.014               -0.5                    1.7    -0.007               10.2                1.8
                              (0.017)              (16.7)                         (0.020)              (21.0)
  Age 46-55                 0.018               26.4                    9.0     0.002               32.5                8.6
                              (0.018)              (15.8)                         (0.020)              (19.0)
  Age 56-65                -0.019               31.0                    5.5    -0.011               30.4                6.5
                              (0.020)              (20.1)                         (0.024)              (21.1)
  Over age 65              -0.056       **      57.2         *          7.6    -0.034               72.1        **     14.5
                              (0.024)              (24.7)                         (0.031)              (25.4)


Race/ethnicity
 Hispanic                  -0.097       **      -6.6                  -13.8    -0.113       **     -47.7        *      -26.2
                              (0.018)              (22.8)                         (0.023)              (19.8)
  Non-Hispanic black       -0.048       **      2.8                    -5.3    -0.054       *       -4.0               -7.6
                              (0.016)              (21.9)                         (0.029)              (25.8)


Urbanicity of residence
 Central city              -0.013               12.2                    1.4    -0.006               28.7                6.8
                              (0.015)              (15.2)                         (0.020)              (19.2)
  Other metropolitan        0.002               -2.1                   -0.3     0.000               4.3                 1.1
                              (0.018)              (12.6)                         (0.022)              (15.8)
  Non-metropolitan          0.038       *       30.0                  12.4      0.029               27.4               10.6
                              (0.016)              (17.9)                         (0.018)              (22.8)
  Not identified           -0.006              -66.5         *        -17.7     0.005              -52.8               -13.1
                              (0.146)              (27.9)                         (0.155)              (41.5)
Table 3: Two-part models of volunteer activity, September 2003 CPS Volunteer supplement,
full ATUS overlap sample and ATUS respondent sample (continued)
                                         Full ATUS Overlap Sample                                 ATUS Respondents

                                                  Hrs. for           Calculated                        Hrs. for           Calculated
                                 Vol. (0/1)      Volunteers          Effect on      Vol. (0/1)        Volunteers          Effect on
                                   dF/dx           Coef.              Overall         dF/dx             Coef.              Overall
                                 (std. err.)     (std. err.)           Hours        (std. err.)       (std. err.)           Hours
Region of residence
 Northeast                         -0.027           4.0                    -2.4       -0.017             16.4                2.2
                                      (0.014)          (16.1)                           (0.019)             (18.1)
  Midwest                          0.026           -17.2                   -1.2       0.040       *     -16.3                0.6
                                      (0.015)          (11.4)                           (0.019)             (15.1)
  West                             -0.001           16.5                    4.1       0.023              26.8                9.8
                                      (0.016)          (15.0)                           (0.020)             (20.1)


Constant                                           125.0        **                                      122.6        **
                                                       (25.4)                                               (31.7)


N                                     9004            2609                               5079              1804
R2                                                  0.0356                                               0.0430

Note: The volunteer propensity equation is a probit model. The numbers reported in the first and fourth columns are
estimates of change in the volunteering rate implied by the probit coefficients. The volunteer hours equations in the second
and fifth columns are least squares regressions estimated for those with positive volunteer hours. Estimated effects on
overall hours appear in the third and sixth columns. All estimates are weighted using the ATUS sample weights. Standard
errors reported in parentheses have been adjusted to account for the clustering and weighting of the sample.

** Statistically significant at the 0.01 level
* Statistically significant at the 0.05 level.
TABLE 4: Volunteer hours calculated from the 2003 American Time
Use Survey, by selected demographic characteristics

                                   Hours
                                    (s.e.)           N


Full sample                        53.5
                                       (2.2)        20720


Human Capital Indicators
Education
 Less than high school             34.8
                                       (5.3)        3634
  High school graduate             37.6        --
                                       (3.5)        5790
  Some college                     58.4        **
                                       (4.6)        5524
  Bachelor's degree                74.7        **
                                       (6.7)        3668
  Graduate degree                  82.0        **
                                       (7.7)        2104
Household income
 Missing                           40.2
                                       (5.0)        2451
  Under $20,000                    40.3
                                       (5.6)        3506
  $20,000 to $39,999               48.2        --
                                       (4.4)        4726
  $40,000 to $74,999               57.2
                                       (4.7)        5330
  $75,000 or more                  67.1        *
                                       (5.7)        4707
Social Capital Indicators
Labor force status
  Not in labor force               66.2        --
                                       (4.1)        7657
  Work <35 hrs/wk                  70.4
                                       (7.4)        2125
  Work 35-44 hrs/wk                37.4        **
                                       (2.9)        7098
  Work 45 plus hrs/wk              46.7        **
                                       (6.1)        2754
  Work hours vary                  47.3
                                      (11.5)        1086
Marital status
 Married                           62.8        --
                                       (3.1)        10825
  Widowed                          53.9
                                       (8.4)        1655
  Divorced                         35.7        **
                                       (5.3)        2510
TABLE 4: Volunteer hours calculated from the 2003 American Time
Use Survey, by selected demographic characteristics (continued)

                                   Hours
                                    (s.e.)           N
Marital status (continued)
 Spouse absent                     49.8
                                      (17.8)        914
 Never married                     39.1        **
                                       (4.2)        4816
Children in household
 No children under age 6           55.4        --
                                       (2.5)        16778
 Children under age 6              42.5        *
                                       (4.4)        3942
 No children age 6-17              46.7        --
                                       (2.7)        13217
 Children age 6-17                 66.4        **
                                       (4.0)        7503
Others in household
 No relatives                      58.8        --
                                       (2.6)        16945
 One or more relatives             39.4        **
                                       (4.4)        3775
 No nonrelatives                   54.5        --
                                       (2.2)        19366
 One or more non-relatives         40.8
                                       (9.9)        1354
Housing tenure
 Owner                             59.1        --
                                       (2.7)        15584
 Renter                            31.8        **
                                       (3.2)        5136
Telephone status
  Telephone household              54.1        --
                                       (2.6)        20168
 Non-telephone household           22.6        *
                                      (12.6)        552
Other Characteristics
Sex
 Male                              49.2
                                       (3.1)        9049
 Female                            57.1        --
                                       (3.1)        11671
Age
 Age 15-30                         35.0        **
                                       (4.4)        4327
 Age 31-45                         52.7        --
                                       (4.1)        6775
 Age 46-55                         60.5
                                       (6.0)        3779
TABLE 4: Volunteer hours calculated from the 2003 American Time
Use Survey, by selected demographic characteristics (continued)

                                          Hours
                                           (s.e.)           N


Age (continued)
 Age 56-65                                53.7
                                              (5.7)        2652
  Over age 65                             73.0        *
                                              (6.5)        3187
Race/ethnicity
 Hispanic                                 27.0        **
                                              (5.7)        2300
  Non-Hispanic black                      52.0
                                              (9.5)        2396
  Non-Hispanic non-black                  56.8        --
                                              (2.4)        16024
Urbanicity of residence
  Central city                            39.8        *
                                              (4.4)        4603
  Balance of MSA                          54.3        --
                                              (3.6)        8894
  Other metropolitan                      61.5
                                              (5.8)        3039
  Non-metropolitan                        58.0
                                              (5.1)        4131
  Not identified                         189.8
                                           (105.6)          53
Region of residence
 Northeast                                50.3
                                              (4.7)        4119
  South                                   51.7        --
                                              (3.4)        7135
  West                                    57.0
                                              (5.1)        4259
  Midwest                                 55.1
                                              (5.2)        5207



Note: All estimates are weighted using the ATUS sample weights, adjusted
to account for the disproportionate assignment of cases to weekend days
as compared to weekdays. Standard errors reported in parentheses have
been adjusted to account for the clustering and weighting of the sample.

** Significantly different from reference group mean at 0.01 level
* Significantly different from reference group mean at 0.05 level
-- Reference group
