                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         MANAGING PUBLIC INVESTMENT FUNDS:
                         BEST PRACTICES AND NEW CHALLENGES

                                          Olivia S. Mitchell
                                            John Piggott
                                            Cagri Kumru

                                        Working Paper 14078
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14078


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2008




Funding for this research was provided by the Economic and Social Research Institute/Cabinet Level/
Government of Japan, the Pension Research Council, and the Australian Research Council. We are
grateful to Eric Hou for his research assistance and for comments from Yoshibumi Aso, Junichi Sakamoto,
Hideaki Tanaka, and participants at the 2008 ESRI meetings. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Olivia S. Mitchell, John Piggott, and Cagri Kumru. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Managing Public Investment Funds: Best Practices and New Challenges
Olivia S. Mitchell, John Piggott, and Cagri Kumru
NBER Working Paper No. 14078
June 2008, Revised August 2008
JEL No. G18,G2,G22,G23,G28,G32,H5,H54,H55

                                            ABSTRACT

Large publicly-held pools of assets are playing an increasingly prominent role in the global investment
arena. We compare three distinct forms of such public funds, namely foreign exchange reserve funds,
sovereign wealth funds, and public pension funds, to highlight their differences and similarities. We
review previous studies on ways to better secure prudent and economically sound public fund management
practices in these funds, as well as how to evaluate their governance and investment policies and how
to better protect the assets from political interference. Drawing from the pension and corporate finance
literature, we also link their management to governance practices and country-specific characteristics,
and contrast those with empirical findings on linkages with corporate governance.


Olivia S. Mitchell                                 Cagri Kumru
Dept of Insurance & Risk Management                Department of Economics
University of Pennsylvania, Wharton School         Australian Business School
3620 Locust Walk, St 3000 SH-DH                    University of New South Wales
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6302                        Sydney, Australia 2052
and NBER                                           cs.kumru@unsw.edu.au
mitchelo@wharton.upenn.edu

John Piggott
School of Economics
University of New South Wales
Sydney 2052, Australia
j.piggott@unsw.edu.au
                                                                                                      1



                                     Managing Public Investment Funds:
                                      Best Practices and New Questions

                              Olivia S. Mitchell, John Piggott, and Cagri Kumru


           Governments everywhere are amassing large pools of resources held by and managed for the

public sector. The media calls these asset pools variously “future funds,” “sovereign wealth funds,”

and “government investment funds,” and these entities afford their sponsoring nations both

opportunities and risks depending on how these national endowments are managed. As these

publicly-held wealth funds grow, they are assuming an increasingly prominent role in news-making

international investments, including providing support to some of the world’s most important and

often-troubled financial institutions (Scheherazade and Blitz 2007). Analysts regularly comment on

the size and potential international clout of these financial behemoths (Morgan Stanley Global

2007), and some of the investment choices made by these funds have prompted policymakers

including the governments of France and Germany to worry publicly about the potential economic

impact of these funds’ global reach (Economist 2008). In parallel, international agencies including

the OECD and the International Monetary Fund have begun to ask questions publicly about what

these funds are and how they should be managed. 1

           Our paper analyzes new information about ‘best practice’ management techniques for such

publicly-managed investment pools, focusing particularly on governance and reporting patterns

along with how one might seek to protect the assets from political interference. We do so to glean

lessons on which governance and accountability approaches appear to be well suited in the case of

these publicly-held wealth funds, and we also draw out policy inferences regarding governance

reform. We show that these publicly-managed investment funds have many different historical

roots, including a purposeful buildup of fiscal surplus against future economic shocks (e.g.
1
    See also Musalem and Palacios (2004).
                                                                                                         2



Australia, New Zealand); a focused effort to mitigate the effects of demographic disequilibrium on

the social security balance (e.g., Japan); or a desire to set aside some portion of revenue associated

with the exploitation of natural resources (e.g. Norway). In value terms, the Japanese public

pension reserve is among the largest, with some US$912 billion in accumulated funds (Matsui and

Suzuki 2007). Other large funds include that of the United Arab Emirates (US$875B), Singapore’s

GIC fund ($330B), and Norway’s Pension Fund (US$300B); see the Economist (2007).

       In what follows, we take up several questions of key importance to public investment funds.

First, we ask what constitutes “good management practice,” by which we mean the protocols and

practices regarding fund governance, accountability, and investment policies (below we outline

what we mean by each of these). Second, we ask how good management of public investment funds

affects fund performance. In order to do so, it is necessary to evaluate what types of performance

metrics exist and whether they might depend on the type of fund. We also review the literature

regarding the effect of management practice on performance of public investment funds. Third, we

explore whether good management practices for public investment funds for governance,

accountability, and investment policies appears to be linked to key aspects of a nation’s economic,

political, and social conditions. In particular, we evaluate the association between a nation’s

publicly-run asset pools and its management practices, economic environment, political/legal

structure, and practice regarding transparency/ reporting/accountability. We also assess whether the

size of future calls on resources, measured here by the aged dependency ratio, influences

management practices. As nations become aware of promises made in the form of aged-care

benefits, and as financial market upheaval provides these public investment pools with new

opportunities and challenges, there will surely be stronger calls for better public fund investment

performance.
                                                                                                           3




The Nature and Variety of Public Investment Pools

       In this paper we refer to public investment funds as those investible assets under the control

of the public sector. In practice, these take three main forms: foreign exchange reserve funds held

for stabilization purposes; sovereign wealth funds accumulated from natural resource taxes or fiscal

surpluses; and public pension funds built up either through an explicit funded arrangement or the

result of an excess of contributions over benefits during a demographic transition.

       From the perspective of investment discretion, we place currency stabilization funds at one

end of the spectrum. These assets must be liquid and are usually held in the form of short term

paper or commodities. Moving along the spectrum, sovereign wealth funds (SWFs) are government

investment vehicles that manage their assets separately from official foreign exchange reserves. As

a rule, their assets tend to be invested internationally, though sometimes they have been used for

domestic investments (e.g. infrastructure). Some analysts are quite specific in what they refer to as

SWFs: for example, Jen (2007) specifies that the pool must be managed by a government

(sovereign entity); it must have high foreign currency exposure; it must have no explicit liabilities;

it must have high risk tolerance; and it must have a long investment horizon. In what follows, we

take a broader view in encompassing investible publicly managed funds more generally.

       A third type of publicly managed money consists of reserves built up for public pension

purposes. Due to their long term nature of their liabilities, these funds are typically less constrained

by the need for immediate liquidity. Nevertheless, also because of their liability profile, the asset

allocations in these funds are often weighted toward domestic currency assets as this is the currency

of the pension promises. In particular, public pension funds are often concentrated in government

bonds as a result of explicit policy or institutional tradition. For instance, the US Social Security
                                                                                                       4



Trust Fund of almost US$2 trillion is held entirely in special-issue nonnegotiable US government

bonds.

         Of the three types of public investment funds, sovereign wealth funds seem to be growing

most rapidly and have been permitted the greatest investment flexibility. Some SWFs were

established to manage the intertemporal allocation of resources generated by the discovery and

exploitation of a non-renewable natural resource, while others were set up to absorb government

fiscal surpluses expected to be spent in the future. One way or another, both pension funds and

SWFs have an inter-temporal or even an intergenerational dimension in their objectives. We explore

the form and function of each, in what follows.

Currency Stabilization Funds. Though currency stabilization funds are not the central focus of the

present paper, it is worth noting that they are the largest of the three categories of public investment

funds. Available estimates place the total at around US$4.5 trillion (see Table 1). These have been

rationalized by perhaps the oldest and most conventional explanation for government-held funds,

namely the central monetary authority’s desire to smooth currency fluctuations. In practice, it is

often stated that three months’ of reserves is a prudent cushion for exchange rate shocks (Rietveld

and Pringle 2007). In point of fact, many nations hold far more than the minimum level of assets

required to manage currency stabilization, giving rise to more aggressive investments via sovereign

wealth funds. For example, in China, Russia, and Singapore, SWFs are responsible for both foreign

exchange reserves and fiscal surpluses. An important stimulus behind the recent growth in SWFs

has been the rising central bank reserves in rapidly growing countries such as South Korea and

Taiwan. Official reserves in such funds have expanded at US$600 billion per year over the past

half-decade (Patelis 2007), and reserves held for currency stabilization are expected to rise in the
                                                                                                       5



future. Nevertheless, as our present concern is with asset pools held for the long run, we do not

further consider stabilization pools below.

Table 1 here

Sovereign Wealth Funds. Despite substantial media and policymaker interest in SWFs of late,

their precise magnitude is unknown for reasons to be discussed below. One estimate suggests they

hold between US$1.5-$3.1 trillion (Kern 2007; Patelis 2007). Truman (2007a,b) identifies around

two dozen SWFs which he contends control around US$2 trillion in assets; he also separately lists

foreign exchange reserves held by governments totalling about US$4 trillion and he includes

Japan’s approximately US$800 billion pension fund. Conservative estimates from Watson Wyatt

(2006, 2007) suggest that SWFs and public pensions together hold about US$4 trillion. Figure 1

provides a comparison of assets held by both public and private funds, and it indicates that currency

stabilization and pension funds are far larger than SWFs, while SWFs in turn are larger than hedge

funds in the global capital market.

Figure 1 here

       Many of the early SWFs were set up in countries holding natural resources (e.g. petroleum)

which then became exposed to unpredictable revenues due to commodity price volatility. As an

example, if a country's oil revenue represented 20 percent of its gross domestic product, then a one

standard deviation shock to oil prices would create a revenue decrease equivalent to six percent of

GDP (Hausmann and Rigobon, cited in Devlin and Titman 2004). Chile’s Economic and Social

Stabilization Fund and the Venezuela Macroeconomic Stabilization Fund are examples of

stabilization funds designed to offset such commodity price fluctuations. One way that governments

might seek to handle commodity price risk could be to transfer risk to international capital markets

so as to smooth economic performance over the relatively short term (Arrau and Claessens 1992).
                                                                                                                      6



But the thinness of international insurance markets and apparent borrowing constraints are believed

to make self-insurance a more natural choice for oil-producers to protect themselves against such

price volatility. Indeed, self-insurance is recommended by Shabsigh and Ilahi (2007) who contend

that the benefits from public expenditures on lumpy investments when oil prices are high exceed the

costs of shutting them down when oil prices are low. Commodity-exporting countries may self-

insure against volatile commodity prices either by diversifying their export structure or

accumulating financial assets. Since diversifying export structure requires long-term structural

reform and may reduce comparative advantage, financial asset accumulation can be a better choice

given available alternatives. 2

        There is some controversy about the economic rationale for such stabilization funds. For

instance Davis et al. (2001) find that fiscal stabilization funds may be less efficient than sound fiscal

policy in protecting against commodity price volatility. On the other hand, Shabsigh and Ilahi

(2007) analyze the effects of stabilization funds not only in terms of fiscal but also in terms of

macroeconomic stability. The latter study concludes that inflation and price volatility prove to be

lower when countries keep stabilization funds, and it weakly supports the proposition that

commodity funds could be useful macroeconomic stabilizers. On the whole, the economics

literature suggests that commodity funds will be small when motivated by commodity price

fluctuations, since larger funds distort the domestic economy and can trigger suspicions about the

fund's activities in international financial markets (Devlin and Titman 2004).

        A separate justification for SWFs is that they permit nations to set aside money for future

generations derived from exploiting exhaustible resources today. For instance, the first commodity

SWF was the oil fund established by the Kuwait Government in 1953; shortly thereafter the nation


2
 See Arrau and Claessens (1992), Shabsigh and Ilahi (2007), and Fasono (2000) for a more detailed discussion on the
necessity of fiscal stabilization funds.
                                                                                                            7



of Kiribati established a commodity fund in 1956 in order to manage revenues from phosphate

deposits (Petelis 2007; Truman 2007b). More recent examples include the state of Alaska which has

put 2.5 percent of its oil royalties into its Alaska Fund. This practice is thought to improve

intergenerational equity, smoothing the time path of revenues generated by nonrenewable resources

(Olters 2007).

       A theoretical grounding for this conclusion is offered by Gerlagh and Keyzer (2001) who

use a model of a government-run “trust fund" that pays future generations claims for revenues

generated by the natural resource. They construct a simple pure exchange overlapping generations

(OLG) setup with an exhaustible resource. Exhaustibility is the irreversible degeneration of the

resource, while the resource’s “amenity value” refers to the services provided by exploiting it.

Inasmuch as natural resource extraction today reduces the resource’s amenity value tomorrow, a

regulatory mechanism is required to promote intergenerational equity. Agents maximize lifetime

utility by selecting consumption levels of private and public goods, and aggregate welfare is the

summation of individual lifetime utilities. The model considers three alternative regulatory

scenarios. In a first, there is zero extraction preventing the use of natural resources for all

generations, akin to keeping an oil field idle. The second scenario, termed ‘grandfathering,’ leaves

the ownership of the natural resource to the first generation, while future generations pay to mitigate

pollution. This is equivalent to the distribution of all oil or mineral revenues to the first generation.

The third scenario introduces a trust fund which entitles all generations to an equal claim over the

natural resource. The authors consider the trust fund as an independent institution that can ensure

future generations receive their claims; it is like a saving fund to keep some of the revenues

generated by an exhaustible resource for future generations. A comparison of the three scenarios in

terms of social welfare indicates that grandfathering improves efficiency compared to the zero
                                                                                                       8



extraction policy, but it favors the first generation over others. By comparison, establishing the trust

fund improves welfare for subsequent generations.

       An alternative, though related, model of a SWF fund has been termed a financing fund, built

up when a government has a budget surplus that it wishes to dedicate to investment instead of

current spending. Some argue that this sort of investment pool is more likely to constitute true

“saving,” as compared to a stabilization fund, because the latter tends to be paid for via borrowing

(often implicitly; c.f. Fasono 2000). Of course, such financing funds are often seen as promoting

intergenerational equity and fiscal stability; examples include the Norway Government Pension

Fund-Global (GPFG), the Kuwait General Reserve Fund, and the Timor-Leste Petroleum Fund.

Table 2 provides a listing of the major SWFs and their asset holdings, as well as their stated

objectives and sources assembled from a variety of recent sources.

Table 2 here

       There is also much interest regarding SWF investments, a topic of particular salience of late

as key global financial institutions receive massive inflows from important Asian funds including

the Singaporean Government Investment Corporation and the Chinese government investment fund.

One reason these transactions have garnered so much public comment is that public investment

pools have traditionally not revealed much about their holdings or governance structure. Such

nontransparency has been justified on grounds that it preserves investment flexibility and protects

business opportunities, but of course this also means that one cannot obtain much useful

information regarding the majority of SWF funds’ asset allocation patterns. Furthermore, inasmuch

as most SWFs do not acknowledge specific liability profiles, they rarely to finance any specific

time path of benefits or cashflows denominated in domestic currency.
                                                                                                         9



       How SWF asset managers tend to invest their government-managed pools is difficult to

ascertain. Some information for four of the more transparent funds is reported in Table 3. Here we

see that Norway’s SWF has a 100 percent global portfolio with a roughly 40-60 split between

equities and bonds. New Zealand’s fund holds about half its assets in international equities; it holds

no foreign bonds but has nearly a quarter of its portfolio in “other investments” which may include

domestic real estate. Ireland’s SWF holds nearly 90% of its assets in international securities, mostly

equities. Australia’s very new public investment pool is unique in holding mainly domestic

securities but this is changing as procedures are established for global diversification.

Table 3 here

Sovereign Pension Funds. The third category of government-controlled asset pools we scrutinize

here consists of the reserves held by government-run public pension funds where, in principle at

least, the assets are earmarked for the payment of current and future retiree benefits. These reserves

might be generated through an intentionally-funded pension scheme, or they can alternatively be

built up as ‘transitional’ reserves generated by population aging where contributions from a large

cohort of workers result in a temporary flow of funds in excess of current benefits payouts. A

number of countries have well-funded national pension schemes, and several of them have

accumulated substantial assets associated in their future fund accounts. According to Watson Wyatt

(2007), public pension funds around the world are 1.7 times as large as the total estimated size of

SWFs. Iglesias and Palacios (2000) document most of the publicly-mandated pension funds and the

amount of assets held by these funds as a percentage of GDP. Table 4 lists the major sovereign

pension funds and their asset holdings.

Table 4 here
                                                                                                                       10



         What usually characterizes public pensions is that contributions and payouts tend to be

linked through some implicit or explicit contractual arrangement to pay old-age benefits. 3 In such a

circumstance, a public pension fund may build up assets to cover future pension liabilities without

necessarily changing the fundamental tax and benefit structure of a pay-as-you-go (PAYG) system.

Many economists see a pure PAYG system as welfare-reducing, since it tends to decrease an

economy’s capital stock by taxing the young generation with a high propensity to save, so as to pay

retiree pensions to those with a high propensity to consume (Kumru and Thanopoulos 2007). By

contrast, a funded public pension can invest excess contributions for future generations which can

prove useful in the face of demographic aging (Abel 2001). Building up ‘future funds’ in this

context can mitigate the negative welfare effects of a pure PAYG system, though they can also

increase intergenerational inequality in a closed economy by benefiting one cohort over another

(Lucas, 2001; Oshio 2004; Auerbach and Lee, 2008). In other words, saving excess contributions in

a future fund may still be less desirable from a welfare standpoint, to lowering taxes on younger

generations.

         Recognizing that public pension pools of assets do exist in many nations, it is of interest to

examine how such schemes invest their assets. Economists look at this issue in various ways. Some

use actuarial or asset liability management (ALM) perspectives to link fund assets and liabilities,

while others employ a general equilibrium framework to consider the effects of an investment

change on the whole economy. For instance, MaCurdy and Shoven (2001) adopt an actuarial

framework to explore the consequences of an asset reallocation from bonds to stocks in the U.S.

Social Security Trust Fund. Specifically they examine whether selling government bonds and

buying corporate stocks would improve the finances of the mainly PAYGO old-age system. The

3
  A further distinction in these funds relates to the form of payout. Defined benefit (DB) plans promise a payout defined
in terms of salary achieved; defined contribution (DC) arrangements rely on investment performance of accumulated
contributions. See United Nations (2007).
                                                                                                                            11



conclude, using historical return data, that such a reallocation would carry significant risk to

participants (that is, the relocation might yield lower returns than expected). Using a general

equilibrium framework, Abel (2001) analyzes the effects of asset reallocation in Social Security on

the equilibrium equity premium and the equilibrium growth rate of the capital stock. He concludes

that when a national pension fund moves into equities, the expected income of the trust fund will

rise but the welfare consequences are ambiguous. 4 Similarly, Bohn (1999; 2002) shows that welfare

effects of the asset reallocation depend largely on the specific pattern of macroeconomic shocks, the

risk characteristics of equities, and individual preferences. In general, it is not assured that

intergenerational equity results from increasing assets held by the public pension. 5

         Various empirical studies have analyzed publicly-managed pension fund performance and

governance structures (Iglesias and Palacios 2000; Carmichael and Palacios 2003; Mitchell and

Useem 2000), and there are also several empirical studies analyzing the investment performance of

public pension funds (Mitchell and Hsin 1997; Mitchell and Hustead 2000; Mitchell and Smith

1994; Useem and Mitchell 2000). Nonetheless, relatively little has been written on how one might

link public sector pension investments to the specific structure of pension obligations that the funds

face. Table 5 provides a comparison of the asset allocations of four publicly-held pension funds that

do report their data in a public manner. The first two of these, the Canadian and Swedish plans, are

essentially funded add-ons to national social security programs; this drives their relatively heavy

portfolio concentration in foreign equities. The Korean and Japanese funds, by contrast, represent a


4
  In a defined-contribution system, the gains from increased pension fund earnings are distributed to retirees. Hence,
young individuals start to save less since they expect higher pension benefits in the future. This, in turn, reduces the
current capital stock and social welfare. In a defined-benefit system, increased pension fund earnings reduce payroll
taxes. In response to increased current income, young individuals increase their savings, and hence, the current capital
stock increases (Abel 2001).
5
  Some researchers (Barro 1979) view such a “demographic dividend” as the natural result of optimal tax smoothing.
Yet the timing is critical: because social security taxes are tied to benefits payable far into the future, these tax
collections generate large current financial reserves in the control of the public sector making them potentially at risk
for spending on other purposes.
                                                                                                                         12



demographically-driven temporary accumulation of contributions held mainly in domestic

securities. This latter pattern is consistent with the fact that these funds’ liabilities are also

denominated in domestic currencies though it is unclear whether a formal portfolio optimization

reflecting this aspect of the liability profile has been undertaken. In the case of Japan, publicly-held

pension resources amount to about 30% of GDP, a substantial amount responsive to the rapid aging

of the Japanese population. Yet the fund falls far short of what is needed to pay future liabilities:

KNH system liabilities of 550 trillion yen are several times larger than the government’s old-age

system reserve fund of around 179 trillion yen (Takayama 2006). Also, estimates suggest that the

future shortfall might be substantially reduced through superior investment of these resources.6

Table 5 here

Public Pension Fund Asset/Liability Considerations. Many analysts who work on private-sector

pensions have concluded that some form of asset-liability joint management works best if one links

investment policy and payout promises (c.f. Blake 2006). It is striking, therefore, that the vast

majority of discussions of SWFs as well as publicly-managed pensions are silent about the need to

link portfolio management goals to any particular obligation stream. One recent study by Maurer et

al. (2008) investigates how a tax-sponsored public pension fund might invest pension contributions

to relieve government budgets taking into account the risk and rewards from capital market

diversification. While the analysis is a case study of a German civil servant pension, the more

general contribution of the work is that it explicitly models the pension fund manager’s appetite for

risk and reward.

         An outcome of that study is that it provides recommendations for portfolio investments

which control the expected economic costs of providing the promised pensions, while at the same


6
 Lu et al. (2007) suggests that a 1 percentage point increase in returns, from 3% to 4%, might bolster by 11 times the
system’s reserves in the year 2100.
                                                                                                                      13



time controlling investment risk. Both the expectation and the Conditional Value-at-Risk of

economic pension costs are simulated using a stochastic simulation process for pension plan assets,

allowing the authors to simultaneously set both the optimal contribution rate and the optimal capital

market allocation. Of key importance is the fact that the plan sponsor may occasionally be forced to

make supplementary contributions, which, as in the real world, brings with it a penalty.

Conversely, the authors also prohibit the public pension from being used as a hedge fund, so excess

assets are withdrawn according to a pre-set rule. In the German case, the authors demonstrate that

the optimal pension fund investment strategy given a 20 percent of salary contribution rate requires

investing the public fund 30 percent equities and 70 percent in bonds. 7

        Naturally specific portfolio allocations must vary with capital market parameters, but the

general approach is useful in making explicit a public fund manager’s performance objectives when

developing fund investment policies. Furthermore, given the nature of publicly-managed funds,

when managers make their portfolio allocation decisions, the objective function must surely include

intergenerational considerations (Weinberger and Golub 2007). 8 Just as in the case of corporate

pensions, this will require developing dynamic multi-period simulation models which take into

account both the risks and returns associated with risky investment including Value-at -Risk

models. 9



Good Management Practice in Public Investment Funds


7
  Current taxpayers only have to pay regular contributions of 15 percent but the portfolio is invested 43 percent in
equities. In this way future generations may benefit from contribution holidays and withdrawals, while providing an
acceptable level of risk of supplementary contributions resulting from under-funding. For a related model see Haberman
et al. (2000)
8
  In the US of late, the question of how to value public pension liabilities has become quite fraught (Pension Research
Council 2008), particularly regarding whether these should be ‘marked to market’ using risk-free discount rates.
9
  In an interesting extension, Gray (2007) proposes that governments should move to using value at risk for all
macroeconomic risks, by building a comprehensive national balance sheet and simulating national assets, liabilities, and
contingent claims.
                                                                                                      14



       The literature on what constitutes good management in public investment funds has thus far

focused primarily on public sector pensions rather than publicly-managed asset pools more

generally. One reason is that, until fairly recently, public pensions were the main form of publicly-

managed funds. For instance, Palacios (2002) estimated that such reserves amounted to around

one-quarter of world GDP, mainly held in the US. Another reason is that there is a paucity of data

on sovereign wealth funds, which we will discuss in greater detail below. In any event, we will

argue in this section that many of the same governance principles apply to all forms of publicly-

managed investment pools (Impavido 2005).

       Management practice in the public sector context can be described using three sets of

standards initially proposed by the World Bank: Governance, Accountability, and Investment

practices, referred to here as the GAI scores. Of these three components, governance refers to “the

systems and processes by which [an entity] manages its affairs with the objective of maximizing the

welfare of and resolving the conflicts of interest among its stakeholders” (Carmichael and Palacios

2003:7). Accountability refers to the process by which governance outcomes and decisions are

reported and disclosed to stakeholders. For instance, a public pool invested in this way would

provide access to information about funding shortfalls, conduct publicly-reported audits, and

disclose consultancies and contractual arrangements. Investment practices refer to the process of

developing investment profiles that balance risk and return, taking into account liabilities where

these have been made explicit. Naturally in the case of pension reserves, benefit promises constitute

the liability profile as noted above.

       The literature on corporate governance serves as a useful point of departure in framing the

discussion of public fund management, beginning with Jensen and Meckling (1976) and recently

surveyed by Shleifer and Vishny (1997). Generally speaking, the problem is cast in a principal-
                                                                                                         15



agent framework where stakeholders must be protected against possible strategic actions by

managers who may act in their own best interest unless they are constrained. Empirical evidence

has demonstrated the key role of good management practices in corporate performance: for

example, Gompers et al. (2003), using a US database of some 1500 firms through the 1990s, shows

that firms with stronger shareholder rights have higher market value, higher profits, and higher sales

growth, as well as lower capital expenditure and fewer corporate acquisitions. In the emerging

market context, Klapper and Love (2004) analyze firm level data across 14 emerging markets and

find that better corporate governance is associated with better operating performance and market

valuation. Importantly in the present context, they also find that governance provisions matter more

in countries having weak legal environments.

       In the corporate sector, controls to handle the principal-agent conflict revolve around clarity

of objective, appropriate rules about conflict of interest, clear incentives/accountability for each

player, and disclosure of decisions and performance. By contrast in the public sector, the challenge

is that there is frequently no agreed-on metric by which agents (taxpayers, public sector employees)

can readily measure the long-term performance of the principals acting on their behalf

(policymakers). However if fund manager objectives are clear, corporate-type governance,

accounting, and investment principles can still be applied and will go a long way to providing

adequate information about performance. On the other hand, experience shows that government

involvement in the financial sector is also susceptible to conflicts of interest and therefore, from a

governance perspective, in need of special attention. Such conflicts can arise from the extensive

participation of government in financial systems through its role as regulator and owner of financial

institutions; as a (non-atomistic) market participant and fiduciary agent; and through direct

interventions in the operations of the market.
                                                                                                                    16



Public Pension Plan Management. To illustrate how good management practices apply to

publicly-managed asset pools, Panel A of Table 6 reports a World Bank-developed checklist for

GAI criteria pertinent to public pension managers (Carmichael and Palacios 2003). The governance

questions are designed to avoid undisclosed conflicts of interest, ensure autonomy from political

intervention, secure staff competence, and in general make the criteria comparable with private

sector rules. The accountability scoresheet focuses on information communication, information

credibility, and process transparency. And the investment criteria focus on potential conflict of

interest issues, along with the dilemmas created by market dominance in particular sectors, or

overall in a country. It is also worth nothing that, though this GAI checklist was developed

specifically for public pension funds, it makes no explicit mention of the public plan’s liability

profile. 10

Table 6 here

         An alternative set of guidelines devised by the OECD (2005, 2006, and 2007) for pension

managers is also summarized in Panel B of Table 6, reorganized here under our three GAI headings

to emphasize the commonalities and differences. Clearly-defined responsibilities for various

members of management, suitability of personnel, and control over conflict of interest, appear on

both lists, while the OECD offers some useful additional performance benchmarks that do not

appear in the World Bank guidelines. One relates to redress, or what happens when promises made

are not kept. A second pertains to “self-investment,” which the OECD sees as contrary to sensible

diversification of investment risk. 11 Thirdly, the OECD explicitly recognizes the importance of a



10
  Liabilities are mentioned in the Accountability checklist, in terms of open reporting.
11
 In the public pension context, “self investment” could be interpreted as purchase of own domestic government bonds.
Whereas many countries do require their public pension reserves to be heavily invested in this asset class, it must be
questioned when, for instance, Japan’s GPIF recently suffered when the investment quality of national government
bonds was downgraded. This may explain recent reports indicating that the Japanese may begin investing some portion
of the nation’s reserves as a soon-to-be created sovereign wealth fund (Lewis 2008; Pesek 2008).
                                                                                                                    17



fund’s liability profile in developing investment strategies and fund objectives. In this sense these

guidelines bring together the purpose and conduct of the fund, more in keeping with the advice

offered in the corporate sector. 12

Sovereign Wealth Fund Management Principles. The need for strong public sector governance

in SWFs arises from the same sources that call for strong corporate governance (Carmichael 2002).

Of particular note is recent research by the Peterson Institute (PI) on public fund management which

proposes a “scoreboard” for comparing management practices of Sovereign Wealth Funds (Truman

2008a, b). This approach identifies four categories of SWF management practice focusing on fund

(1) structure, (2) governance, (3) transparency/accountability, and (4) behavior. The structure and

transparency/accountability categories are further divided into subcategories, such that in total, there

is a total of 33 yes/no questions where either a 1 0.50, or 0.75). Using this formulation the author

ranks SWFs across 31 countries. This tally shows that New Zealand’s Superannuation Fund tops the

list followed by Alaska’s Permanent Fund, while at the bottom are the Abu Dhabi Investment

Authority and Corporation of U.A.E. and the Qatar Investment Authority of Qatar.

        This approach offers a useful way to systematize thinking about this relatively new corpus

of public sector activity (a full list of variables and funds by name appears in Appendix I and II).

To elaborate somewhat on how the scoring works, under the heading structure, the rubric identifies

SWF clarity of objective, source of funding, and investment strategy. Topics addressed cover

communication of the fund’s objective, the specification of both sources and uses of funds, whether

there is frequent intervention in source and use (presumably an indicator of multiple or expedient

objectives in fund use), and the fund’s relationship with the broader government budget. Clarity of


12
  Alternatively, SWF outcomes could be developed using the proposed voluntary guidelines for private equity firms
recently drawn up by The Walker Group (Walker 2007). This group, however, seeks to emphasize communication of
decisions and outcomes, rather than to implement decision-making structures or measure suitability of investment
outcomes.
                                                                                                              18



investment strategy and separation from international reserves are also considered. From these

elements, the picture that emerges has a “good” SWF being the public investment fund that has long

term objectives other than strictly currency stabilization, explicitly or implicitly linked to some

intertemporal allocation and/or distributional objective. Relating this to the elements of good

management we have already identified, structure in the PI terminology encompasses some

elements of governance along with investment strategy. The question of the fund’s objective, and its

scoring, is subject to caveat. This is because most funds examined in the PI study scored positively

on this, but there was no attempt to link the stated objective with any other practice. Therefore the

tally gives credit to a fund that explicitly lists its objectives, but it does not then additionally credit

funds where other aspects of management practice support the stated objective, nor does it penalize

funds where they do not.

        In the PI formulation, the second heading, governance, speaks to the independence of the

fund’s investment strategy and the independence of the role of manager in executing investment

strategy. Also under this rubric indicators for the existence of corporate responsibility and ethical

guidelines are included, as well as indicators of whether the policies are publicly announced and

followed. The notion of governance falls somewhat short of what might be expected given the

corporate governance literature. For instance, there is no inquiry about the role of the governing

board, or about the incentives available to operational roles in the organization.

        The third major category proposed in the PI index pertains to how the SWF behaves in terms

of transparency/accountability. Matters considered include reporting on activities and performance,

public disclosure of investment portfolios, geographic location of direct investments, specific

investments, currency of investments, and the identity of investment agents. The category also

includes information about audits, regularity, public availability, and independence. The final PI
                                                                                                         19



category, behavior, asks about the nature and speed of adjustment of the SWF portfolio, and this is

the least clearly explained. It should be noted that of the 33 PI questions, 14 fall under the

transparency heading, and several of the questions listed under the structure heading could also

plausibly be placed there as well. While this is an important component of overall fund

management, the fact that only five items are included under the governance heading is rather

arbitrary and most likely incomplete.

       Below we will use these scoreboard measures as a way to begin to link SWF performance

measures to factors that might drive these outcomes. It must be noted again here that the PI

scoreboard is again silent on the links between management of assets and liabilities, which could be

deleterious to fund performance inasmuch as investment policy is likely to vary depending on the

objectives of the funds. This is generally because most SWFs funds do not explicitly state their

objectives, whereas for public pensions, the benefit streams that consist of the funds’ liabilities can

be (more or less) valued cleanly. Even then, it is often the case that pension system liabilities tend

not to be well-integrated into investment policy.



Do Public Management Practices Affect Performance?

       Next we turn to a review of studies seeking to show how public fund management practices

shape key outcomes. Inasmuch as most of the work on management practices focuses on corporate

performance, we begin with an overview of this topic, and then we turn to a discussion of what is

known about management of public sector funds.

       Empirical research tying corporate management practices to firm-level outcomes is

extensive. Much of the research through the mid-1990’s is reviewed by Schleifer and Vishny

(1997); since then, additional studies have emerged in response to the 2002 Sarbanes-Oxley Act
                                                                                                                       20



(SOX) requiring US public companies to institute a range of procedural and structural reforms

intended to enhance stakeholder confidence in the post-Enron era. The range of outcomes addressed

in this literature is vast, including the corporation’s return on assets, market valuation, stock returns,

success at making acquisitions, and Tobin’s Q (or the firm’s market value of assets as a proportion

of the replacement value of its assets), among others. 13 The measures of ‘good managerial practice’

used by empirical analysts are several, and include most prominently key metrics of corporate

governance. This, per Schliefer and Vishny (1997: 737), refers to the “ways in which suppliers of

finance to corporations assure themselves of getting a return.” In particular, the literature

emphasizes how investors may gain power through legal protection (e.g. via protection of minority

rights and limits on managerial self-dealing), and also via large investor blocks which control

managerial behavior directly. Accordingly, the literature has found important relationships between

countries’ legal efficacy scores, which indicate whether an enterprise is founded on common or civil

law, and variables indicative of shareholder control rights. Many studies also examine policies

regarding transparency and accountability, on the argument that rules enhancing financial reporting

are likely to result in better protection for the investor.

        The literature on public enterprise management builds on this private sector foundation in

seeking to craft indicators of good-quality management and relate them to successful public firm

outcomes. One problem is that public entities often do not conform to private-sector accounting and

reporting standards, and another is that output measures used in the private sector frequently have

no counterpart in the public sector. Nevertheless analysts have found it natural to use for public

sector entities the same principal-agent framework mentioned above and popularized in the


13
  For a recent review of the empirical governance literature see Michaud and Magaram (2006); among the most cited
studies are Gompers et al. (2003) and Schliefer and Vishny (1997). There are also numerous examinations of the links
between good management practices and executive compensation which are beyond the scope of the present study; a
recent review includes Gerakos (2007).
                                                                                                        21



corporate world. In this context, the taxpayer and other members of the public represent the

principals, while the agents are the government managers guiding the public enterprise (c.f.

Ambachtsheer 2007b; Coronado et al. 2003). Thus in theory it would be feasible to evaluate

whether particular management practices can shape outcomes of public sector enterprises, though

with some adaptations depending on the type of public firm in question.

       In the specific case of public entities of key interest here - namely public pension plans and

sovereign wealth funds - the conventional measures of corporate outcomes such as shareholder

wealth, firm profitability, and market share do not readily apply. For this reason, analysts have

turned to other metrics to determine whether public sector enterprise performance is enhanced as a

result of particular management practices. For instance one outcome of interest might be

investment-related. In the simplest case, for instance, public pension funds which hold some assets

can report their target annual return (e.g. 3.2% in the case of the Japanese GPIF). More elaborately

perhaps, some public plan managers may indicate their risk-adjusted returns vis a vis some

benchmark. Relatively few focus on the dynamic path of liabilities as well as assets, about which

we say more below.

       The few existing studies linking public pension plan investment strategies and investment

returns tend to show that these are often influenced by governance factors such as board

composition (Mitchell and Hsin 1997). For instance, having more retirees tends to lower

performance due to greater weighting toward a fixed income portfolio. Again in public pensions,

Useem and Mitchell (2000) show that governance variables account for over 20 percent of the

cross-pension plan variation in investment strategies, which in turn are positively associated with

subsequent investment return performance on the pension fund assets. Yang and Mitchell (2008)

examine how pension plans’ funded status (or the ratio of plan assets to liabilities) and investment
                                                                                                       22



returns respond to measures of pension board composition, management practice, reporting

practice, and investment practice. They show that many pension boards have political appointees as

well as active and/or retired workers on the roster, both of which can be problematic when these

board members may not be particularly financially expert.

       Another issue is that sometimes public entity trustees have used fund assets to further their

own (or their party’s) political/social objectives. Hsin and Mitchell (1997) find that several pension

management factors are statistically significant and economically important. For instance, ceteris

paribus, having more plan participants on the pension board, whether retired or active, reduces plan

funding levels and the point estimates imply that adding an additional active member reduced stock

funding by 0.7 percentage points, while adding one more retired member decreases funding by 1.7

percentage points. Further, investment yields on the public pension plan assets appear significantly

lower when retiree representation increases, perhaps due to lack of investment expertise. Enhanced

pension reporting, including making annual reports on financial, actuarial, statistical, and

investment information to stakeholders, can improve returns by 2.1 percentage points annually.

       Research on public pensions and mutual funds by Ambachtsheer (2007a, b) uses as the

dependent variable “net value added” or the fund’s gross investment return minus its benchmark

return and the fund’s total expenses. This outcome proves statistically related to a lengthy list of 45

measures of governance quality obtained by interviewing public fund CEOs. Ambachtsheer (2005:

196-7) reports that of the entire lengthy list of indicators, six governance-related and five

management-related measures in his CEO survey are significant. In that author’s words,

“statistically significant governance statements (are)…related mainly to effective fiduciary behavior

and selection processes, clarity in delegation of authority, and a high level of trust between the

governing and managing fiduciaries. The statistically significant management statements (are)
                                                                                                                     23



related mainly to clear strategic positioning and to the effective development and execution of the

fund’s strategic plan.”

How Can Fund Objectives Be Incorporated? The studies of public funds mentioned above focus

primarily on asset-related outcomes such as returns and funding patterns. 14 Yet as we have argued

above, one should also consider integrating the asset/investment management effort with the

evolution of plan liabilities. For instance, in the case of a public pension system, the goal is

generally agreed to ensure that retiree benefits can be paid without large and unexpected increases

in the cost of maintaining the solvency of the system. Nevertheless, as Ambachtsheer (2005:198)

emphasizes, “fund managers of late have made no measurable effort to take into account the

financial characteristics of their liabilities when structuring their fund policy portfolios.” Indeed, a

reason that managers may have found it difficult to do so is that it may be troublesome to convert

the broad objective of “paying pension benefits” into specific fund management rules and

performance criteria. Sometimes the liability path will be difficult to model and simulate. Or public

pension plan investment policy may be set independently of liability paths on purpose; for instance

this is the case for the US Social Security Trust Fund which is permitted to hold only special issue

government bonds. 15 Still an additional reason that asset-liability management is not undertaken in

a concerted, coherent form may be because policymakers may not wish to make explicit what their

risk appetite is in terms of shortfalls and surpluses.

        Nevertheless, in the last several decades, great strides have been made in analysts’ ability to

model and solve for ways to implement asset-liability models, and this could be even more useful in

the future. Of course, to select an appropriate investment strategy in the face of these stochastic


14
   Insofar as we are aware, there are very few studies that report investment performance for the SWFs that are not
pension related, much less risk adjusted or benchmark-linked returns. One of the view reporting public pension returns
by country and time period is that of Carmichael and Palacios (2002).
15
   For a discussion of investment practices of 15 other publicly-managed pension fund systems see UN (2007).
                                                                                                                     24



liability patterns, policymakers must make explicit their risk budgets, or how they balance the

unavoidable and dynamic tensions between investment returns, benefit payments, and contribution

requirements. Such risk budgets must take into account both the uncertainty of system revenues,

including investment returns earned on pension fund assets, and stochastic pension liabilities as

discussed above. Recent discussion on these points includes including Moore (2007) and Boender et

al. (2001), the latter of whom implement this approach for Dutch pension funds. Maurer et al.

(2007) examine public sector employee pensions in Germany. In general, these evaluations must

specify how plan outlays will depend on projections of earnings, patterns of labor market

attachment, retirement trends, longevity forecasts, and many other factors. 16 In turn, investment

portfolios can be optimized to take liability variations into the decision of how to structure the asset

mix given capital market trends. Other examples of asset-liability management in the public pension

fund arena include the work of Bogentoft et al. (2001) and several of the excellent papers in Ziemba

and Mulvey (2001).

        One of the most clearly exposited papers in this vein is by Merton (2001), who implements

this approach in the case of a university endowment fund. His model is relevant to the present

research as it recognizes that such entities draw not only on their endowment pools but may also

count on other cash flows including contributions from donors, tuition and other business income,

and grants. He makes the crucial point that these revenue flows are also volatile and so should be

modeled as part of the plan’s resources. This approach has a logical parallel in the case of public

pension funds and SWFs which may receive contributions from a variety of sources, while they can

also draw down their investment pools to meet specific obligations. Insofar as some of the


16
  Other examples of this in the US include efforts by the Congressional Budget Office (CBO 2004) to build a stochastic
model to evaluate the impacts of possible changes in the national old-age benefits program. The US Social Security
Administration (US SSA 2008) has also developed a stochastic model used to project probability distributions for future
outcomes of the system’s financial status.
                                                                                                                   25



contribution sources have the same risk characteristics as equities, for instance, the entity may

decide to invest less in stock. In its simplest form, the Board’s preference structure for the

university is taken to be a lifetime utility function of the form:

                  MaxE0 ⎡ ∫ (Q1 ,...Qm , t )dt ⎤
                            ∞
                                                                              (1)
                        ⎢⎣ 0                   ⎥⎦

where Qj(t) is the quantity of the preferred activity j (e.g. education, research, etc) in which the firm

engages at time t, and the utility function is well behaved. The entity is assumed to be indefinitely

lived, making the upper limit on the integral infinity. (Other more complex formulations can be

permitted). The remainder of the model specifies cost functions for producing the firm’s outputs,

and dynamics for cash flows for contributions and investment earnings. Over time the university

selects a vector of activities Q, and a portfolio allocation in its endowment fund, to achieve

maximum utility (1). Similarly, a pension fund can also be modeled as seeking to pay benefits,

subject to constraints over revenue, investment patterns, and perhaps some risk aversion regarding

extreme cash shortfalls that would otherwise require massive transfusions of new cash. To the

extent that a university (in Merton’s case) or a pension fund (in our case) faces different risk

profiles for its revenue streams and different cost profiles, this will produce different optimal

investment strategies for the endowment pools.

        The important lesson that emerges from these analyses is that good management practice has

a material positive impact on corporate performance, but this cannot yet be shown for publicly-

managed funds in view of the dearth of data on this topic. 17 Furthermore, most studies of public

fund management have emphasized only financial or actuarial outcomes such as net returns,

funding, or investment expenses. Only a handful have constructed clearly-formulated models that


17
  In Ambachtsheer’s (2005) words, the research is suggestive of “a noteworthy convergence between what are deemed
to be generally good governance and management practices in the for-profit and not-for-profit sectors as a whole and
what we now find is important in the governance and management of pension funds.”
                                                                                                                         26



link fund contributions and investments to measures of anticipated future benefits that these funds

seek to deliver. So the challenge is to “determine a jointly optimal dynamic strategy for the asset

and liability instruments which balances the interests and requirements of all agents involved”

(Boender et al. 2001:564). In particular, public fund managers must take into account the ability of

the fund to meet other objectives (e.g. not raising taxes too sharply on any given generation in the

event of a revenue shortfall).



Empirical Analysis of Determinants of Public Investment Fund Management

         Next we turn to a brief empirical examination of key factors associated with variation in

observed SWF management attributes. We focus on the measures of governance, accountability,

and investment (GAI) described above and explore what might influence how these asset pools

function along these dimensions. A first implementation step requires us to group the multiplicity of

scores reported on SWFs in the PI scoreboard into our three preferred headings. We do so by

computing the G, A, and I scores by summing the subcomponents for each of the SWFs, and then

we add these to form an aggregate GAI index. 18 Next, we link the GAI indicator using multivariate

regression models to factors descriptive of the national environments in which these publicly

managed funds are found, following the empirical strategy outlined in the corporate governance

literature described above. Our particular focus is on indicators of country-specific governance and

political participation, human capital and the business environment, and demographic controls to be



18
   Appendix I and II indicate how we reallocate the PI scoreboard items into our three GAI categories. Accountability is
quantitatively the most important of the three components, comprising 15 of the 33 questions on the PI list. We omit the
PI indicator of whether a SWF is integrated within the overall government budget. In analysis not reported here in
detail, we conducted principal components analysis on the entire vector of underlying scores to determine whether any
subset of factors is particularly useful in summarizing larger set of analysis. However this exercise does not return a few
key factors that explain most of the variability, so we use GAI and its subcomponents as our independent variables. Not
surprisingly, Appendix IV shows that the governance, accountability, and investment measures of fund success are
strongly positively correlated.
                                                                                                       27



described in more detail below. We report OLS regression coefficients for the aggregate GAI scores

using the following framework:

               GAI score = f (National governance and political participation indicators; Indicators
               of human capital and business environment; Demographic controls).

       The national governance and political participation variables employed in this formulation

are derived from the World Bank Governance Indicators (WBGI; see Kauffman et al. 2007) which

include six factors relating to different aspects of governance: Voice and Accountability; Political

Stability; Government Effectiveness; Regulatory Quality; Rule of Law, and Control of Corruption.

Country-specific measures of the quality of human capital and the efficacy of the business

environment are taken from World Economic Forum indices of global competitiveness (GCI; see

Sala-i-Martin et al. 2007). The GCI indicators focus on economic performance including

macroeconomic stability, as well as education and business sophistication. To render the many

World Bank and GCI indices more tractable, we use Principal Component Analysis (Hamilton

2006) to combine them into a Modified World Bank Governance Index (MWBGI) and Modified

Global Competitive Index (MGCI). In alternative models, we substitute some of the underlying

factors indicative of the political environment for the overall indexes; these include “Voice and

Accountability” measuring participation in government and freedom of expression, and

“Government Effectiveness” which measures civil service quality. The rationale is that freedom of

expression should enhance all dimensions of the GAI score because of the greater risk of public

exposure for incompetence or fraud. Similarly, high quality public service should be able to deliver

better public sector management. Market efficiency can be proxied by a business sophistication

metric, on the grounds that this would be positively associated with public investment fund

accountability. A nation’s legal environment can be represented by regulatory quality (by which we

mean policies that enhance private sector performance) or rule of law (by which we mean a strong
                                                                                                        28



judicial system), following Klapper and Love (2004) and Shleifer and Vishny (1997) who show that

better legal systems help protect shareholder rights.

           To this reasonably conventional list of control variables we add a measure of a nation’s old-

age dependency ratio, to test whether the performance indicators are related to intertemporal

objectives even if these are implied rather than explicit. In a few cases, some countries had multiple

SWFs with differing GAI scores. To handle this, we compute an asset-weighted average of the GAI

scores to come up with a single combined fund metric for that country. Also a few small countries

had exceptionally high GAI scores along with very low GCI and Governance scores. 19 Inasmuch as

these developing/emerging market funds are probably influenced by international organizations’

views of good fund management practice, we control on the log of SWF assets to reflect this

diversity. Variable definitions and descriptive statistics on our empirical variables are reported in

Appendix III.

           The multivariate coefficient estimates for the GAI model appear in Table 7. As there are

only 26 SWFs for which full data are available, we are parsimonious in selecting which explanatory

variables to include. We see that larger funds tend to score lower on the GAI ranking when

statistically significant. We also see that better governance is associated with a higher old-age

dependency ratio in columns 1-3, suggesting that when the elderly grow relatively more numerous,

their voice tends to be reflected in larger economic claims driving better SWF management.

Curiously, however, only the current dependency ratio is statistically significant, while projected

old-age ratios tend not to be.

           Turning next to the governance and economic variables, Column 1 indicates that the World

Bank governance index is positive and significant at only the 10% level, while the GCI index is not

significant and negative. Columns 2-4 further explore the relationship between relevant national
19
     This list includes Azerbaijan, Botswana, Timor Leste and Trinidad and Tobago.
                                                                                                       29



characteristics and the GAI scores, where we see not much statistical association between good

SWF governance and business sophistication, regulatory quality, and rule of law. Only the Voice

and Accountability factor is positively associated with good fund governance.

Table 7 here

       Our results thus differ from one recent study on private pension funds by Servaes and

Khorana (2007), who argue that more efficient mutual funds are found in countries with better-

functioning judicial systems and more educated populations. Overall we find little evidence that

national characteristics strongly shape the governance, accountability, and investment structures of

national sovereign wealth funds.



Conclusions

       We have examined management practices for publicly-managed asset pools, seeking to draw

lessons about how these institutions might better manage their funds. Our review of the main types

of public investment pools having long-term objectives indicates that pension fund and SWFs share

many commonalities with regard to their objectives and rationales. Nevertheless, empirical

evidence on these outcomes for publicly-managed asset pools is scarce, and what there is tends to

be silent on the structure of liabilities implicitly or explicitly associated with these funds. Building

on prior studies, we devise performance criteria regarding fund governance, accountability, and

investment policies. When we relate these GAI measures for sovereign wealth funds to a range of

national governance and political participation indicators, measures of human capital and business

environment, and demographic controls, we find that the current aged dependency ratio appears to

be a consistently important explanatory factor associated with good management. This suggests that
                                                                                                        30



nations subject to the most pressure from population ageing tend to be more careful with SWF

governance.

       Policy analysts would benefit from better understanding of what constitutes best practice for

the management of the substantial global reserves held in SWFs and public pensions. To this end,

information is needed linking performance indicators to goals, presumably including good measures

of intertemporal and intergenerational objectives. Unfortunately, as SWFs have grown, they appear

to be demonstrating an increasing risk appetite with little transparency, and virtually no clarity of

objectives. As a result, their growth is spurring debate in recipient countries and among financial

market intermediaries, along with calls for regulatory reform in the international sphere and a move

toward financial protectionism or even the explicit prohibition of SWF investments. For instance,

the European Commission is drafting a plan to prohibit non-European Union members from

investing in the European energy business. German Chancellor Angela Merkel has mentioned

designing a system similar to that implemented in the US where a governmental Committee on

Foreign Investment must review and approve foreign-based investments that might be deemed a

threat to national security (EurActive.com 2007). Such financial protectionism might be avoided if

these publicly-managed investment pools were made more transparent, clearer in their objectives,

and more accountable to the many stakeholders in these funds.
                                                                                                           31



References

Abel, Andrew. 2001. “The Social Security and Trust Fund, the Riskless Interest Rate and Capital
       Accumulation.” Risk Aspects of Investment-based Social Security Reform. Eds. J.Y. Campbell and
       M. Feldstein. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press: 153- 93

Ambachtsheer, Keith. 2007a. “The Ideal Pension Delivery Organization.” Presented at the Conference on
      “Exploring the Future of Pension Finance and the Dynamics of Institutional Pension Reform”
      sponsored by De Nederlandsche Bank, Netspar, and the International Organization for Pension
      Supervision, March 22-23 2007, Amsterdam.

Ambachtsheer, Keith. 2007b. Pension Revolution: A Solution to the Pensions Crisis. John Wiley & Sons.

Ambachtsheer, Keith. 2005. “Why Pension Fund Management Needs a Paradigm Shift.” In Reinventing the
      Retirement Paradigm. Eds. Olivia S. Mitchell and Robert L. Clark. Oxford: Oxford University Press:
      188-205.

Arrau, P. and S. Claessens. 1992. “Commodity Stabilization Funds.” World Bank Policy Research Working
        Paper. Washington DC: World Bank.

Auerbach, Alan J. and Ronald Lee. 2008. “Welfare and Generational Equity in Sustainable Unfunded
       Pension Systems.” Presented at the NBER Summer Institute, Cambridge, MA.

Australia Future Fund. 2008. Annual Report. www.futurefund.gov.au/

Barro, R. J. 1979. “On the Optimal Level of Public Debt.” Journal of Political Economy, 87 (5): 940-971.

Blake, D. 2006. Pension Finance. London: Wiley.

Boender, CGE, PC van Aaslst, and F. Heernserk. 2001. “Modeling and Management of Assets and Liabilities
       of Pension Plans in The Netherlands.” In Worldwide Asset and Liability Modeling. Eds. William
       Ziema and John Mulvey. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press: 561-580.

Bogentoft, E., H. E. Romeijn, and S. Uryasev. 2001. “Asset/Liability Management for Pension Funds Using
       CVaR Constraints.” Journal of Risk Finance 2(3): 57-71.

Bohn, Henning. 2002. “Government Asset and Liability Management in an Era of Vanishing Public Debt”
       Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 34(3): 887-933.

Bohn, Henning. 1999. “Should the Social Security Trust Fund Hold Equities? An Intergenerational Welfare
       Analysis.” Review of Economic Dynamics 2: 666-697.

Canada Pension Plan Investment Board. 2008. Annual Report. www.cppib.ca

Carmichael, Jeffrey and Robert J. Palacios. 2003. “Managing Public Pension Funds: A Framework.” Paper
       presented to 2nd Public Pension Fund Management Conference. World Bank, Washington DC, May
       2003.

Congressional Budget Office (CBO). 2004. The Outlook for Social Security. US Congress. June.
        http://www.cbo.gov/ftpdocs/55xx/doc5530/06-14-SocialSecurity.pdf
                                                                                                                   32



Coronado, Julia L., Eric M. Engen and Brian Knight. 2003. “Public Funds and Private Capital Markets: The
       Investment Practices and Performance of State and Local Pension Funds.” National Tax Journal
       56(3): 579–94.

Das, U. S. 2007. “Sovereign Wealth Funds.” IMF Global Financial Stability Report: 45-50.

Davis, Jeffery M., Rolando Ossowski, James Daniel, and Steven Barnett. 2001. “Stabilization and Savings
        Funds for Non-renewable Resources: Experience and Fiscal Policy Implications.” IMF Occasional
        Paper 205. International Monetary Fund, Washington, D.C.

Devlin, Julia and Sheridan Titman. 2004. “Managing Oil Price Risk in Developing Countries.” World Bank
        Research Observer 19: 120 - 139.

Economist. 2007. “The World’s Most Expensive Club.” May 26.

Economist. 2008. “The Invasion of the Sovereign Wealth Funds.” January 19.

EurActiv.com. 2007. “EU to Consider Protection from State-funded Foreign Takeovers.” 24 July.
       www.euractiv.com/en/innovation/eu-consider-protection-state-funded-foreign-takeovers/article-
       165798?_print

Gerakos, Joseph. 2007. “CEO Pensions: Disclosure, Rent Extraction, and Incentive Contracting.” Pension
       Research Council Working Paper WP2007-05. The Wharton School.

Gerlagh, Reyer and Michiel A. Keyzer. 2001. “Sustainability and the Intergenerational Distribution of
       Natural Resource Entitlements.” Journal of Public Economics 79: 315–341

Gompers, Paul A., Joy L. Ishii, and Andrew Metrick.2003. “Corporate Governance and Equity Prices.”
      Quarterly Journal of Economics 118(1):107-155.

Gray, Dale. (2007). “A New Framework for Risk and Sovereign Wealth Management.” In Sovereign Wealth
       Management. Eds. J. Johnson-Calari and M. Rietveld. London: Central Banking Publications: 117-
       138.

Haberman, Steve, Z. Butt, and Ch. Megaloudi. 2000. “Contribution and Solvency Risk in a Defined Benefit
      Pension Scheme.” Insurance: Mathematics and Economics 27: 237-259.

Hamilton, Lawrence C. 2006. Statistics with Stata (Updated for Version 9). Brooks/Cole.

Hsin, Ping-Lung and Olivia S. Mitchell. 1997. “The Political Economy of Public Pensions: Pension Funding,
        Governance, and Fiscal Stress.” Revista de Analisis Economico. Eds. P. Arrau & K. Schmidt-
        Hebbel. 9 (1): 151-168.

Iglesias, Augusto and Robert J. Palacios. 2000. “Managing Public Pension Reserves. Part I: Evidence from
         the International Experience.” Social Protection Discussion Paper 3. Washington, D.C.: World Bank.

Impavido, Gregorio. 2005. “Governance of Public Pension Plans: The Importance of Residual Claimants.”
       Working Paper. The World Bank. info.worldbank.org/etools/docs/library/153011/6-Impavido(2004)04-02-13.pdf

India Employees' Provident Fund Organisation. 2008. Annual Report. http://epfindia.nic.in/epfbrief.htm

Ireland National Pension Reserve Fund Commission. 2006. Annual Reports and Financial Statements 2006.
        www.nprf.ie/Publications/NPRF_Annual_Report_2006.pdf
                                                                                                                         33



Japan Government Pension Investment Fund. 2008. Annual Report. www.gpif.go.jp/eng/index.html

Jen, Steven. 2007. “The Definition of a Sovereign Wealth Fund.” Morgan Stanley. October 26.
         www.morganstanley.com/views/gef/archive/2007/20071026-Fri.html#anchor5727

Jensen, William and Michael Meckling. 1976. “Theory of the Firm: Managerial Behavior, Agency Costs
        and Ownership Structure.” Journal of Financial Economics.

Kern, S. 2007. SWFs: State Investments on the Rise. Deutsche Bank Research. September.

Klapper, Leora and Inessa Love. 2004. “Corporate Governance, Investor Protection and Performance in
       Emerging Markets.” Journal of Corporate Finance, November.

Korea National Pension Fund. 2008. Annual Report. www.nps.or.kr

Kumru, C. S. and Athanasios C. Thanopoulos. Forthcoming."Social Security and Self Control Preferences."
       Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control.

Kuwait International Social Security Review. 1998. “Social Security in Kuwait.” International Social
       Security Review 51 (2): 57-61.

Lewis, Leo. 2008. “Japan to create £25bn sovereign fund as fears mount on global sub-prime loss.” The
        Times. January 26. business.timesonline.co.uk/tol/business/industry_sectors/banking_and_finance/article3254209.ece

Lu, Bei, Olivia S. Mitchell, and John Piggott. 2008. “Notional Defined Contribution Pension and Public
        Reserve Funds in Ageing Economies.” International Social Security Review. Forthcoming.

Lucas, Deborah. 2001. “Investing Public Pensions in the Stock Market: Implications for Risk Sharing,
        Capital Formation and Public Policy in the Developed and Developing World.”International Review
        of Finance. 2(3) September: 179-202.

MaCurdy, T. E. and John Shoven. 2001. “Asset Allocation and Risk Allocation: Can Social Security
      Improve Its Solvency Problem by Investing in Private Securities?” In Risk Aspects of Investment-
      based Social Security Reform. Eds. J.Y. Campbell and M. Feldstein. Chicago: The University of
      Chicago Press.

Malaysia Employees' Provident Fund. 2008. Annual Report.
         www.kwsp.gov.my/index.php?ch=p2corporateinfo&pg=en_p2corporateinfo_geninfo&ac=1856

Matsui, Akira and Makiko Suzuki. “Japan's Public Pension Fund to Invest in Small Stocks.” Bloomberg June
        13, 2007. www.bloomberg.com/apps/news?pid=20601101&sid=af16cLNcW3a0&refer=japan#

Maurer, Raimond, Olivia S. Mitchell and Ralph Rogalla. 2008. “The Victory of Hope over Angst? Funding,
       Asset Allocation, and Risk-Taking in German Public Sector Pension Reform.” In Frontiers in
       Pension Finance. Eds. D. Broeders, S. Eijffinger, and A. Houben. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.

Merrill Lynch. 2007. The Overflowing Bathtub, the Running Tap, and SWFs in Global Economy. Merrill
        Lynch.

Merton, Robert. 2001. “Optimal Investment Strategies for University Endowment Funds.” In Worldwide
       Asset and Liability Modeling. Eds. William Ziema and John Mulvey. Cambridge: Cambridge
       University Press: 371-396.
                                                                                                           34



Michaud, Dennis Wright and Magaram, Kate A. 2006. “Recent Technical Papers on Corporate Governance.”
      April. http://ssrn.com/abstract=895520

Mitchell, Olivia S. and Ping-Lung Hsin. 1997. “Managing Public Sector Pensions.” In Public Policy Toward
        Pensions, Eds. J. Shoven and S. Schieber. 20th Century Fund. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press: 247-266.

Mitchell, Olivia S. and Ping-Lung Hsin. 1997. ‘Public Sector Pension Governance and Performance.’ In The
        Economics of Pensions: Principles, Policies and International Experience. Ed. Salvador Valdes
        Prieto. Cambridge University Press: Cambridge: 92–126.

Mitchell, Olivia S. and Hustead, Edwin.2000. Pensions for the Public Sector. Pension Research Council.
        Philadelphia, PA: University of Pennsylvania Press.

Mitchell, S. Olivia and Robert Smith. 1994. “Pension Funding in the Public Sector.” Review of Economics
        and Statistics 76(5): 278–90.

Morgan Stanley Global. 2007. “How Big Could Sovereign Wealth Funds Be By 2015?” May 3.

Moore, James F. 2007. Changing Paradigms in Asset Allocation for Pension Plans. PIMCO.

Musalem, Alberto and Robert Palacios, eds. 2004. Public Pension Fund Management. Washington DC:
      World Bank.

New Zealand Superannuation Fund. 2008. Annual Report. http://www.nzsuperfund.co.nz

Norges Bank Investment Management. 2006. Government Pension Fund-Global Annual Report 2006.
        http://www.norges-bank.no/Pages/Report 65332.aspx

OECD. 2005. OECD Guidelines for Pension Fund Governance.

OECD. 2006. OECD Guidelines on Pension Fund Asset Management.

OECD. 2007. Pension Markets in Focus. November (4).

Olters, Jan-Peter. 2007. “Old Cures, New Approaches? Fiscal Benchmarks for Oil Producing Countries in
         Sub-Saharan Africa.” IMF Working Paper.

Oshio, Takashi. 2004. “Social Security and Trust Fund Management.” Journal of the Japanese and
        International Economies, 18 (4): 528–550.

Palacios, Robert. 2002. “Managing Public Pension Reserves part II: Lessons from Five Recent OECD
        initiatives.” Social Protection Discussion Paper Series, Social Protection Discussion Paper no. 0219,
        World Bank. www.worldbank.org/sp.

Patelis, A. 2007. “The Overflowing Bathtub, the Running Tap and SWFs.” Merrill Lynch Global Economics.

Pension Research Council. 2008. “The Future of Public Employee Retirement Systems.” Working Paper
       2008-08, Wharton School. http://www.pensionresearchcouncil.org/publications/document.php?file=434

Pesek, William. 2008. “Japan's Economy Needs a Sovereign Wealth Fund.” Bloomberg.com. January 28.
       www.bloomberg.com/apps/news?pid=20601039&sid=aAODASRjKLA8&refer=home#
                                                                                                          35



Rietveld, Malan and Robert Pringle. 2007. “The Evolution of Sovereign Wealth Management.” In Sovereign
        Wealth Management. Eds. J. Johnson-Calari and M. Rietveld. London: Central Banking Publication:
        1-11.

Sala-i-Martin, X., J. Blanke, M. D. Hanouz, T. Geiger, I. Mia, and F. Paua. 2007. “The Global
        Competitveness Index: Measuring the Productive Potential of Nations.” The Global Competitveness
        Report 2007-2008. Hampshire: Palgrave Macmillian: 3-51.

Scheherazade, Daneshkhu and James Blitz. 2007. “UK Warns Over Push for State Protection.” Financial
       Times. 25 July.

Servaes, Henri and Ajay Khorana. 2007. “Competition and Conflicts of Interest in the in the U.S. Mutual
        Fund Industry. LBS Working Paper. May.

Shabsigh, Ghiath and Nadeem Ilahi. 2007. “Looking Beyond the Fiscal: Do Oil Funds Bring Macroeconomic
       Stability?” IMF Working Paper.

Shleifer, Andrei and Robert W. Vishny. 1997. “A Survey of Corporate Governance” The Journal of Finance
        52 (2): 737-783.

Singapore Central Provident Fund. 2008. Annual Report. mycpf.cpf.gov.sg/Members/home.htm

Sweden First AP Fund. 2008. Annual Report. www.ap1.se/en/About-AP1/

Takayama, N. 2006. “Reforming Social Security Pensions in Japan: Is NDC the Answer?” In Pension
      Reform-Issues and Prospects for Non-Financial Defined Contribution (NDC) Schemes. Eds. R.
      Holzmann and E. Palmer. Washington, D.C.: World Bank: 639-648.

Truman, Edwin. 2008(a). "A Blueprint for Sovereign Wealth Fund Best Practices." Peterson Institute Policy
      Review. Washington DC: Peterson Institute for International Economics.

Truman, Edwin. 2008(b). “The Rise of Sovereign Wealth Funds: Impact on US Foreign Policy and
      Economic Interests." Testimony before the Committee on Foreign Affairs, US House of
      Representatives. May 21.

Truman, Edwin. 2007(a). Sovereign Wealth Funds: The Need for Greater Transparency and Accountability.
      Washington, DC: Peterson Institute for International Economics.

Truman, Edwin. 2007(b). “Sovereign Wealth Fund Acquisitions and Other Foreign Government Investments
      in the United States: Assessing the Economic and National Security Implications.” Testimony before
      the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, United States Senate. November 14.

United Nations (UN). 2008. World Population Prospects: The 2006 Revision Population Database.
       Population Division. esa.un.org/unpp/index.asp?panel=2

United Nations (UN). 2007. Responsible Investment in Focus: How leading public pension funds are meeting
       the challenge. Environment Programme Finance Initiative Asset Management Working Group and
       UK Social Investment Forum Sustainable Pensions Project 2007 Report.

US Social Security Administration (US SSA). 2008. “Stochastic Projections.” Social Security Online. Office
       of the Chief Actuary. http://www.ssa.gov/OACT/stochastic/.
                                                                                                          36



Useem, Michael, and Olivia S. Mitchell. 2000. “Holders of the Purse Strings: Governance and Performance
       of Public Retirement Systems.” Social Science Quarterly 81(2): 489–506.

Walker, David. (2007). “Guidelines for Disclosure and Transparency in Private Equity.” The Walker
       Working Group, London. www.walkerworkinggroup.com.

Watson Wyatt Worldwide. 2006. The World's 300 Largest Pension Funds. Washington, DC: Watson Wyatt
       Worldwide.

Watson Wyatt Worldwide. 2007. “The World's Sovereign Wealth Funds.” Washington, DC: Watson Wyatt
       Worldwide.

Weinberger, Fred and Bennett Golub. 2007. “Asset Allocation and Risk Management for Sovereign Wealth
      Funds.” In Sovereign Wealth Management. Eds. J. Johnson-Calari and M. Rietveld. London: Central
      Banking Publication: 71-102.

World Bank. 2008. Key Development Data and Statistics. http://go.worldbank.org/1SF48T40L0

Yang, Tongxuan (Stella) and Olivia S. Mitchell. (2008). “Public Pension Governance, Funding, and
       Performance: A Longitudinal Appraisal.” In Pension Fund Governance: A Global Perspective.
        Eds. John Evans and John Piggott. London: Edward Elgar: 179-199.
Ziemba, William and John J. Mulvey, eds. 2001. Worldwide Asset and Liability Modeling. Cambridge:
       Cambridge University Press.
                                                                             37



Table 1. List of Currency Stabilization Funds by Nationality and Size



 Country                       Assets (US$M' 2007)      Assets as % of GDP
 Algeria                               83,000                   63.1
 Australia                             67,166                    7.4
 Brazil                               155,617                   11.8
 China                              1,334,590                   41.1
 Hong Kong                            136,267                   65.9
 India                                220,223                   20.0
 Indonesia                             49,406                   11.4
 Japan                                907,346                   20.7
 Korea                                250,667                   26.2
 Libya                                 64,000                  112.2
 Malaysia                              91,240                   48.9
 Mexico                                78,172                    8.8
 Norway                                56,658                   14.5
 Poland                                52,286                   12.4
 Russia                               407,495                   31.6
 Singapore                            144,056                   89.3
 Taiwan                               266,287                   69.5
 Thailand                              69,000                   28.1
 Turkey                               67,000                    10.1
 UK                                    42,000                    1.5
 US                                   55,086                     0.4

 Sources: Merrill Lynch (2007), Truman (2007a, b), and World Bank (2008).
                                                                                                                                                  38



Table 2. Sovereign Wealth Funds by Name, Year of Inception, Source, Stated Objective, and Size
                                                                                                                                               Assets
                                                                      Year of                                                      Assets     as % of
  Country                         Fund Name                          Inception                Sources            Objectives     (USM$'2007)    GDP

 UAE           Abu Dhabi Investment Authority and Council               1976         Oil revenues               Savings           875,000      454.3
 Singapore     Government of Singapore Investment Corporation           1981         Trade surpluses            Savings           330,000      204.5
 Singapore     Temasek Holding                                          1974         Fiscal surpluses           Savings           110,000      68.2
                                                                                                                Savings &
 Norway        Government Pension Fund - Global                         1990         Oil revenues               stabilization     375,000      95.8
 China         State Foreign Exchange Investment Corporation            2007         Trade surpluses            Savings           200,000       6.2
 China         Central Hujin Investment Corporation                     2003         Trade surpluses            Savings           100,000       3.1
                                                                                                                Savings &
 Kuwait        Kuwait Investment Authority                              1953         Oil revenues               stabilization     213,000      191.3

 Russia        Stabilization Fund of the Russian Federation             2003         Oil revenues               Stabilization     128,000       9.9
 Russia        Future Generation Fund of the Russian Federation         2008         Oil revenues               Savings            32,000       2.5
 U.S.          Alaska Permanent Reserve Fund Co.                        1976         Oil revenues               Savings            37,000       0.3
 U.S.          New Mexico State Investment Office Trust Funds           1958         Royalties on State lands   Savings            5,000       0.04
 U.S.          Permanent Wyoming Mineral Trust Fund                     1974         Mineral revenues           Savings            4,000       0.03
 Australia     Future Fund                                              2006         Fiscal surpluses           Savings            53,000       5.8
               Brunei Investment Authority General Reserve
 Brunei        Fund                                                     1983         Oil revenues               Savings            35,000      282.6
 Ireland       National Pension Reserve Fund                           2001           Fiscal surpluses            Savings           31,000     12.0
 New
 Zealand       Superannuation Fund                                     2001           Fiscal surpluses            Savings           10,000      7.8
 Total                                                                                                                            2,538,000
 Sources: Das (2007), Kern (2007), Truman (2008a, b), Watson Wyatt (2007), Ireland National Pension Reserve (2006), and World Bank (2008).
                                                                                                                                                                   39



Table 3. Reported Asset Allocation and Return for Four Sovereign Wealth Funds
                                                                                                                                                         Return
Fund Name                                       Country                                          Reported Asset Allocation (%)                           (%)
                                                                   Domestic Fixed    Domestic         Foreign Fixed      Foreign       Other
                                                                   Income            Equities         Income             Equities      Investments
Government Pension Fund - Global
(GPF-G)                                         Norway                    0                 0              59.4             40.6              0             7.9
New Zealand Superannuation Fund
(NZSF)                                          New Zealand             17.3               7.3               0              52.6            22.8            14.6
National Pension Reserve Fund
(NPRF)                                          Ireland                   0                 0              12.6              76             11.4            12.4
Future Fund                                     Australia                74                3.5              0                3.9            18.6            7.39

Sources: Australia Future Fund (2008), Norges Bank Investment Management (2006), New Zealand Superannuation Fund (2008), and Ireland National Pension
Reserve Fund Commission (2006).
Notes:
1. In Norway, the GPF-G invests only in global markets. The other wealth fund of the Norwegian government GPF-Norway invests only in local markets. The
table reports the nominal return from the whole portfolio in 2006. The portfolio real return (adjusted for inflation) in 2006 was 5.65%. Nominal returns from
equities and fixed income instruments in 2006 were 17.04% and 1.93% respectively. The annualized nominal return from the portfolio between 1997 and 2006
was 6.49%. The actual asset allocation refers to the situation at the end of 2006.
2. In New Zealand, the NZSF annual reports do not separately report the portfolio share of domestic and foreign fixed income securities, and hence, the
portfolio share of domestic bonds (both in benchmark and actual assert allocation cases) includes the portfolio share of the foreign bonds. The remainder of the
NZSF portfolio is held in other asset classes such as local and global property, commodities, and private markets. The table reports the nominal return (adjusted
for fees but not for inflation) between June 2006 and June 2007. The annualized nominal return from the whole portfolio was 14.81% between 2003 and 2007.
The actual asset allocation refers to end June 2006.
3. In Ireland, the NPRF does not hold Irish government bonds. The portfolio is heavy in alternative asset classes such as property and commodity investments.
Foreign bonds consist of only Eurozone bonds and Eurozone equities (including Irish equities); the latter total about 45% of the portfolio. Since Ireland is a
member of the European Union, one might consider Eurozone bonds and equities as domestic for Ireland. The table presents the 2006 nominal rate of return;
annualized it was 6.5%. The asset allocation refers to end 2006.
4. Australia's Future Fund investment program started in June 2007; the benchmark portfolio has not yet been declared and to date the majority of the portfolio
has been kept in cash (the table reports the portfolio share of the cash in the cell of domestic fixed income securities) and Telstra shares (this is an Australian
telecommunication company). The portfolio share of Telstra Corporation, which is 18.6%, is not reported in the table. The nominal return from the portfolio
from June 2006 to June 2007 is reported in the table. The real return (the nominal return after the price inflation adjustment) is 5.29 in the same period. Actual
asset allocation is as of June 2007.
                                                                                                                   40



Table 4. Publicly-Managed Pension Asset Pools by Size
                                                                          Inception      Assets       Assets as
    Rank       Fund Name                                      Country       year      (US$M’ 2006)    % of GDP
      1        Social Security Trust Fund                     U.S.          1940       2,048,112         15.5
      2        Government Pension Investment                  Japan         2001        935,569          21.6
      3        National Pension Fund                          Korea         1988        190,842          21.5
                                                              South
      4        GEPF                                           Africa        n.d.        177,559          69.6
      5        Postal Savings Fund                            Taiwan        n.d.        128,194          18.8
               National Pension Funds (AP1, AP2, AP3,
      6        AP4, AP6)                                      Sweden        2000        117,468          30.5
               National Social Security Fund and Social
      7        Insurance Funds                                China       2001/1951     104,350          3.9
      8        Canada Pension Plan                            Canada        1997         86,392          6.9
      9        Employees Provident Fund                       Malaysia      1991         82,256          55.2
     10        Central Provident Fund                         Singapore     1955         70,468          53.3
     11        Fondo de Reserva de la Seguridad Social        Spain         1997         44,875          3.7
     12        Public Institute/Social Security               Kuwait        1977         40,482          50.1
     13        Fond de Reserve des Retraites                  France        2000         39,140          1.8
     14        Employees Provident Fund                       India         1952         31,581          3.5
     15        The State Pension Fund                         Finland       1990         12,929          6.2
     16        Social Security Fund                           Thailand      1990         9,074           4.4
                                                              Saudi
     17        General Organization for Social Insurance      Arabia        1973         8,622           2.8
     18        Social Security Financial Stabilization Fund   Portugal      1989         8,330           4.3
     19        IMSS Reserve                                   Mexico        n.d.         7,392           0.9
     20        Social Security Corporation                    Jordan        1980         6,023           42.5
     21        Employees' Old-Age Benefits                    Pakistan      1976         1,822           1.4
     22        Demographic Reserve Fund                       Poland        n.d.         1,760           0.5
     23        Social Security Fund                           Denmark       1964          659            0.2
    Total                                                                                 4,153,899
 Sources: OECD (2007), Canada Pension Plan Board (2008), Watson Wyatt Worldwide (2006), World Bank (2008), India
 Employees’ Provident Fund Organization (2008), Singapore Central Provident Fund (2008), Malaysia Employees’
 Provident Fund (2008), and Kuwait International Social Security Review (1998).
 Note: n.d. = no date
                                                                                                                                                              41

Table 5. Reported Asset Allocation and Return for Four Publicly-Managed Pension Funds
 Fund Name                                     Country          Asset Allocation in the Actual Portfolio (%)                                      Return (%)
                                                                              Domestic      Domestic      Foreign     Foreign         Other
                                                                                Fixed       Equities       Fixed      Equities     Investments
                                                                               Income                     Income
 Canada Pension Plan Investment Board                        Canada             24.6          25.2           0          40                             12.9
 (CPPIB)                                                                                                                                0
 First National Pension Fund (AP1)                           Sweden             10.6           13           21         44.4            11               9.8
 National Pension Fund (NPF)                                 Korea              79.3          12.1          7.3         0.4            0.9             5.39
 Government Pension Investment Fund (GPIF)                   Japan              48.4          26.3         10.4        14.9             0              14.3


 Sources: Canada Pension Plan Investment Board (2008); Sweden First AP Fund (2008); Korea National Pension Fund (2008); Japan Government Pension
 Investment Fund (2008).
 Notes:
 1. For Canada, the table shows the nominal rate of return at the end of fiscal 2007. The annualized nominal rate of return between 2004 and 2007 was 13.6%.
 The actual asset allocation refers to the situation in 2007.
 2. For Sweden, the table shows nominal returns in 2006. The annualized nominal return between 2001 and 2006 was 5.3%. The actual asset allocation refers to
 2006. The asset holdings of the other AP funds (AP2, AP3, and AP4) are pretty much same as those of AP1. Fund AP6 is very small and invests only small and
 medium Swedish companies; it is excluded from the table.
 3. For Korea, the benchmark portfolio was not available; the table shows nominal returns in 2005. The annualized nominal return between 2003 and 2005 was
 7.27. The actual asset allocation refers to 2005.
 4. For Japan, the table indicates nominal returns in 2005. The annualized nominal return between 2001 and 2005 was 4.1. Actual asset allocation refers to 2007.
                                                                                                                                                                   42

Table 6. International Guidelines for Public Pension Fund Management
Panel A: World Bank Checklist                                                                                         Panel B: OECD Checklist
GOVERNANCE                                                                                                            GOVERNANCE
Are the roles of the respective parties in the public pension scheme clear?                                           Identification of responsibilities; Governing
Are the terms under which the managing agency and its governing members appointed and terminated well                 body; Expert advice; Custodian; Suitability;
understood?                                                                                                           Redress; Self-investment.
Are there adequate fit and proper person protections to prevent the agency from being deliberately manipulated
by the government or the Board of the agency?
Is the management agency open and transparent about its governance structures?
Is the scheme open to periodic review; do the government and/or the managing agency welcome constructive
criticism?
How well does the agency’s internal and/or external governance systems compare with those imposed by the
regulator of private pensions?
ACCOUNTABILITY                                                                                                        ACCOUNTABILITY
Does the public have access to adequate information about the governance structures of the public pensions            Auditor; Actuary; Accountability; Internal
scheme and its managing agency, either through explicit laws, annual reports, publications and/or web sites?          controls; Reporting; Disclosure; Rigorous
Is disclosure of potential conflicts of interest of Board members required and imposed?                               process for investment; Publicly available
Is the scheme subject to regular independent audit for both governance and performance?                               investment policy; Identification of
Are the financial performance and financial state of the scheme revealed publicly on a regular basis based on         investors; Procedures for investment policy
sound accounting standards?                                                                                           review; Transparent and market based
Is the scheme’s financial performance reported against established benchmarks?                                        valuation and accounting.

Is the government open about its liabilities under the scheme and subject to independent actuarial reviews?
Are the incentive structures within the scheme transparent to the public, linked to delegated responsibilities and
risk based?
INVESTMENT                                                                                                            INVESTMENT
Is the investment policy fully documented and publicly available?                                                     Retirement income objective and prudential
Is the stated purpose of the scheme to benefit the members of the scheme and, if not, are there potential conflicts   principles; Prudent person standard;
between stated objectives?                                                                                            Fiduciary duty; Clear investment objectives
Does the policy permit lending to government and/or members and, if so, are there transparent guidelines              (liabilities); Strategic asset allocation; Risk
identifying the issues involved and governing how such investments will take place?                                   management; Investment options; Portfolio
Is the target rate of return based on a long-term funding ratio objective and is it consistent with this objective?   limits; International investment; Regular
Does the investment policy identify how it will deal with actual or potential market dominance?                       assessment of limits and controls.
Have all major risks been identified and taken into consideration in forming the investment policy? Has the
tolerable level of risk been defined by the Board.
Are the processes involved in delegating the implementation of the investment policy to managers clearly
defined? Are benchmark criteria for hiring and firing managers clear and the information needed by the Board to
act on them available?
Are the investment parameters defined in terms of restrictions and prohibitions or in terms of modern portfolio
concepts?
Source: Carmichael and Palacios (2003).                                                                               Source: OECD (2005).
                                                                                                            43



Table 7. Empirical Estimates of Aggregate GAI Scores

                                                1               2                3                4
 Log assets                                    -1.61 **        -1.34             -1.25           -2.41 **
 Current old-age dependency ratio               0.96 **         0.78 **           0.77 **
 Future old-age dependency ratio                                                                  0.16
 MWBI                                           1.62 *
 MGCI                                          -0.75
 Business sophistication                                       -0.76             -0.37           -0.54
 Regulatory quality                                             0.74
 Voice and accountability                                       2.49              2.92 *
 Rule of law                                                                                      0.69
 Government effectiveness                                                                         3.45
 R-squared                                      0.68            0.68              0.68            0.41
 N                                                26              26                26              26

Note:* significant at 10% level; **significant at 5% level. For data sources see Appendix I and II,
and for variable definitions see Appendix III.
                                                                                                         44



Figure 1. Relative Size of Global Asset Pools

                 Hedge funds          1.4
     Sovereign Wealth Funds            3.1
   Currency reserves ex gold            4.2
         Insurance companies                       16
                Pension funds                       17.9
             Investment funds                            21
        Public debt securities                             23.4
        Private debt securities                                      36.3
  Stock market capitalization                                                42
                  World GDP                                                       45
                  Bank assets                                                                    63.5

                                  0           10    20        30       40              50   60      70
                                                              US$ tr ('05)


Source: Kern (2007)
                                                                                                                                        45

Appendix I: Governance, Accountability, and Investment (GAI) Scores
Country                           Fund                                              Governance   Accountability   Investment   Total
SWFs
Algeria                            Revenue Regulation Fund                              1              4               4          9
Australia                          Future Fund                                          4              11            10.5       25.5
Azerbaijan                         State Oil Fund                                       4              12             8.5       24.5
Botswana                           Pula Fund                                            3              7               7         17
Brunei                             Brunei Investment Agency                             1              4               1          6
Canada (Alberta)                  Alberta Heritage Savings Trust Fund                  3.5            11.5            8.5       23.5
Chile                              Economic and Social Stabilization Fund              3.5            12.5             6         22
China                              Central Huijin Investment Company                    1              4              4.5        9.5
Hong Kong                          Exchange Fund                                        2              11              8         21
Iran                              Oil Stabilization Fund                                1              5              1.5        7.5
Ireland                            National Pension Reserve Fund                        5              14             8.5       27.5
Kazakhstan                         National Oil Fund                                   3.5             9              7.5        20
Kiribati                           Revenue Equalization Reserve Fund                    1              4              3.5        8.5
Korea                              Korea Investment Corporation                         3             5.75             7        15.75
Kuwait                             Kuwait Investment Authority                          4             5.25            5.5       14.75
Malaysia                           Khazanah Nasional                                   1.5             8               3        12.5
Mexico                             Oil Income Stabilization Fund                        2             7.5              5        14.5
New Zealand                        Superannuation Fund                                  5              15            10.5       30.5
Nigeria                            Excess Crude Account                                 0              5              3.5        8.5
Norway                             Government Pension Fund - Global                    4.5             15             10        29.5
Oman                              State General Reserve Fund                            2             3.5             0.5         6
Qatar                              Qatar Investment Authority                           1             1.25           0.75         3
Russia                             Stabilization Fund                                   1             8.5            6.25       15.75
Sao Tome and Principe              National Oil Account                                 4              6               5         15
Singapore                          Government of Singapore Investment Corporation       3             5.5              4        12.5
Singapore                          Temasek Holdings                                     3             9.5             2.5        15
Sudan                             Oil Revenue Stabilization Fund                       1.5             4               0         5.5
Timor-Leste                        Petroleum Fund                                       3              14             8.5       25.5
Trinand&Tobago                    Heritage and Stabilization Fund                       4              8              4.5       16.5
UAE (Abu Dhabi)                    Abu Dhabi Investment Authority and Council           1             0.75           1.25         3
UAE (Abu Dhabi)                    Mubadala Development Company                         1             1.5             2.5         5
UAE (Dubai)                        Istithmar World                                      1             2.5              1         4.5
US (Alaska)                        Alaska Permanent Fund                                4              15             11         30
US (New Mexico)                    Severance Tax Permanent Fund                        3.5             12             12        27.5
US (Wyoming)                       Permanent Mineral Trust Fund                         5              12             12         29
Venezuela                          Macro Stabilization Fund                             1             4.5              2         7.5
Venezuela                          National Development Fund                            1             4.75             1        6.75
Average                                                                                2.5            7.7             5.4       15.6
Sources: Truman (2008a, b) and authors' calculations; see Appendix II.
                                                                                                                                                      46
Appendix II. Criteria for Sovereign Wealth Fund Management Practices
 Governance (G)

 Are the guidelines for fiscal treatment generally followed without frequent adjustment? (Structure)
 Is the SWF separate from the country's international reserves? (Structure)
 Does the SWF ethical guidelines that it follows? (Governance)
 Is the audit independent? (Transparency and Accountability)
 Are decisions on specific investments made by the managers? (Governance)
 Accountability (A)
 Is the SWF's objective clearly communicated? (Structure)
 Is the source of the SWF's funding clearly specified? (Structure)
 Is nature of the subsequent use of the principal and earnings in the fund clearly stated? (Structure)
 Does the SWF have in place and publicly available guidelines for corporate responsibility that it follows? (Governance)
 Does the SWF provide at least an report on its activities and results? (Transparency and Accountability)
 Does the SWF provide quarterly report on its activities? (Transparency and Accountability)
 Do regular reports on the investments by the SWF include the size of the fund? (Transparency and Accountability)
 Do regular reports on the investments by the SWF include information on the return it earns? (Transparency and Accountability)
 Do regular reports on the investments by the SWF include information on the types of investments? (Transparency and Accountability)
 Do regular reports on the investments by the SWF include information on the geographic location of investments? (Transparency and Accountability)
 Do regular reports on the investments by the SWF include information on the specific investments? (Transparency and Accountability)
 Do regular reports on the investments by the SWF include information on the currency composition of investments? (Transparency and Accountability)
 Are the holders of investment mandates identified? (Transparency and Accountability)
 Is the SWF subjected to a regular audit? (Transparency and Accountability)
 Is the audit published? (Transparency and Accountability)
 Investment (I)
 Is the overall investment strategy clearly communicated? (Structure)
 Is the procedure for the changing the structure clear? (Structure)
 Is the role of the government in the setting the investment strategy of the SWF clearly established? (Governance)
 Is the role of the manager in executing the investment strategy clearly established? (Governance)
 Does the SWF indicate the nature and speed of adjustment in its portfolio? (Behaviour)
 Does the strategy use benchmarks? (Transparency and Accountability)
 Does the strategy limit investments based on credit ratings? (Transparency and Accountability)

 Does the SWF have limits on the size of its stakes? (Behaviour)
 Does the SWF not take controlling stakes? (Behaviour)
 Does the SWF have a policy on the use of leverage? (Behaviour)
 Does the SWF have a policy on the use of derivatives? (Behaviour)
 Are derivatives used primarily for hedging?
                                                                                                                                                                                                              47

Notes: Authors' re-classification of Truman's (2008a, b) PI scores for SWF structure, governance, transparency and accountability, and behaviour variables into our measures of governance, accountability, and
transparency. The PI scoreboard question is shown in italics.
                                                                                                                                                                                48

Appendix III. Variable Definitions and Sources for Empirical Analysis of Public Fund Management Practices
                                                                                                                            Standard
 Variable                                                       Definition                                          Mean    Deviation   Min     Max         Data source
                                                                                                                                                        Truman (2008a) &
 Total                 Sum of Governance, Accountability, and Investment scores.                                    16.80     8.49      2.25    29.94
                                                                                                                                                        authors' calculations
                                                                                                                                                        Truman (2008a) &
 Governance            Measures how well a SWF is governed.                                                         2.64      1.37      0.00    5.00
                                                                                                                                                        authors' calculations
                                                                                                                                                        Truman (2008a) &
 Accountability        Measures degree of accountability.                                                           8.13      4.38      0.20    15.00
                                                                                                                                                        authors' calculations
                                                                                                                                                        Truman (2008a) &
 Investment            Measures how well the SWF investment activities are structured.                              6.03      3.25      0.50    11.20
                                                                                                                                                        authors' calculations
                                                                                                                                                        Truman (2008a) &
 Log Asset             Log of assets held by the sovereign wealth fund.                                             3.46      1.67      0.69    6.80
                                                                                                                                                        authors' calculations
 Current old-age
                       Ratio of population age 65+ to population age 15-64 (in 2005).                               10.96     6.10      1.00    22.00   UN (2008)
 dependency ratio
 Future old-age
 dependency ratio      Ratio of population age 65+ to population age 15-64 (in 2040).                               28.50    13.88      7.00    59.00   UN (2008)
 in 2040.

 Modified World        Measure of good national governance practices with indicators of voice and
                                                                                                                                                        Kaufmann et al..
 Bank                  accountability, political stability, government effectiveness, regulatory quality, rule of
                                                                                                                    -0.22     2.31      -3.99   3.02    (2007) & authors'
 Governance            law, and control of corruption. Principal components analysis is used to generate data-
                                                                                                                                                        calculations.
 Index (WBGI)          weighted aggregate score of national governance practices.


                       Measure of economic competitiveness: index of national competitiveness derived by
 Modified Global       measures of quality of institutions, infrastructure, macroeconomy, higher education/                                             Martin et al.. (2007)
 Competitiveness       training, goods market efficiency, financial market sophistication, technological            -0.33     2.91      -6.49   4.08    & authors'
 Index (GCI)           readiness, market size, business sophistication, and innovation. Principal components                                            calculations.
                       analysis is used to generate data-weighted aggregate measure of competitiveness.


 Business              Measures quality of a country's overall business networks and firms' operations and
                                                                                                                    4.41      0.75      2.78    5.60    Martin et al. (2007).
 sophistication        strategies; higher scores indicate more business sophistication.

 Regulatory            Measures government’s ability to generate/implement policies that benefit the private                                            Kaufmann et al.
                                                                                                                    0.49      1.06      -1.47   1.95
 quality               sector.                                                                                                                          (2007)
 Voice and             Measures citizenry's participation in selecting government; freedom of expression;                                               Kaufmann et al.
                                                                                                                    0.07      0.99      -1.66   1.64
 accountability        freedom of association; and free media                                                                                           (2007).
                                                                                                                                                        Kaufmann et al.
 Rule of law           Measures quality of judicial system.                                                         0.47      1.14      -1.39   2.02
                                                                                                                                                        (2007).
                       Measures quality of public and civil services; independence of public and civil services
 Government                                                                                                                                             Kaufmann et al.
                       from political pressures; quality of policy formulation and implementation; and              0.60      1.05      -0.96   2.20
 effectiveness                                                                                                                                          (2007).
                       government credibility.


 Source: As indicated and authors' calculations; see text.
                                                                                                                                         49

Appendix IV. Correlation Matrix for Empirical Variables
                                           1       2        3     4       5       6      7      8      9     10     11     12     13
1. GAI                                   1.00
2. G                                     0.81    1.00
3. A                                     0.97    0.73    1.00
4. I                                     0.96    0.73    0.89    1.00
5. Log Fund Assets                       -0.22   -0.19   -0.26   -0.14   1.00
6. Current old-age dependency ratio      0.72    0.46    0.70    0.76    0.11    1.00
7. Future old-age dependency ratio       0.34    0.33    0.29    0.36    0.36    0.70   1.00
8. MWBI                                  0.47    0.53    0.43    0.42    0.31    0.50   0.55   1.00
9. MGCI                                  0.38    0.38    0.34    0.38    0.46    0.59   0.74   0.85   1.00
10. Business sophistication              0.31    0.34    0.28    0.29    0.43    0.47   0.67   0.76   0.96   1.00
11. Regulatory quality                   0.41    0.46    0.41    0.34    0.29    0.44   0.48   0.93   0.78   0.71   1.00
12. Voice and accountability             0.69    0.65    0.64    0.65    -0.07   0.63   0.45   0.81   0.64   0.56   0.68   1.00
13. Rule of law                          0.42    0.50    0.37    0.39    0.37    0.46   0.56   0.98   0.89   0.81   0.88   0.76   1.00
14. Government effectiveness             0.46    0.45    0.45    0.40    0.34    0.52   0.54   0.97   0.83   0.73   0.95   0.75   0.93

Source: Authors' calculations; see text and Appendix III.
