                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  ESTIMATING THE PRODUCTIVITY SELECTION AND TECHNOLOGY SPILLOVER
                        EFFECTS OF IMPORTS

                                         Ram C. Acharya
                                         Wolfgang Keller

                                       Working Paper 14079
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w14079


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2008




We are grateful to Jan DeLoecker, Ann Harrison, Margaret McMillan, Gianmarco Ottaviano, Carol
Shiue, Catherine Wolfram, and Stephen Yeaple, as well as seminar audiences at the European Central
Bank and UC Berkeley (Haas) for comments. Thanks also to Ray Fisman, Mark Roberts, and Virginia
Sarria-Allende who helped with the data. Views expressed in the paper are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect those of Industry Canada, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Ram C. Acharya and Wolfgang Keller. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Estimating the Productivity Selection and Technology Spillover Effects of Imports
Ram C. Acharya and Wolfgang Keller
NBER Working Paper No. 14079
June 2008, Revised October 2008
JEL No. F1,F2,O3,O33

                                              ABSTRACT

Economists emphasize two channels through which import liberalization affects productivity, one
operating between and the other within firms. According to the former, import competition triggers
market share reallocations between domestic firms with different technological capabilities (selection).
At the same time, imports can also improve firms' technologies through learning externalities (spillovers).
We present evidence for a sample of industrialized countries over the period 1973 to 2002. First, in
the long run, import liberalization lowers productivity in domestic industries through selection. This
finding confirms the prediction of models with firm heterogeneity, including Melitz and Ottaviano
(2008), in which unilateral liberalization lowers the profits of domestic relative to foreign exporters.
Second, if imports involve advanced foreign technologies, liberalization also generates technological
learning that can on net raise domestic productivity. Third, for short time horizons of up to three years,
a surge in imports typically raises domestic productivity. Because the number of firms at home and
abroad does not change much in the short-run, new competition from foreign firms has a pro-competitive
effect. We also find that high entry barriers, especially regulation, slow down the process of market
share reallocation between firms. Over- all, the results support models in which trade triggers both
substantial selection and technological learning.


Ram C. Acharya
Industry Canada
10-East, 235 Queen Street
Ottawa, Ontario
Canada K1A 0H5
Acharya.Ram@ic.gc.ca

Wolfgang Keller
Department of Economics
University of Colorado at Boulder
Boulder, CO 80309-0256
and NBER
Wolfgang.Keller@colorado.edu
1         Introduction

The recent growth of international trade has made for a much more integrated world. Many

observers hold that trade contributes to the ‡ow of ideas across borders because a major part

of imports are new products.1 These innovations positively a¤ect productivity if they trigger

domestic technological learning within …rms. Importing high-technology intermediate goods

may also generate learning spillovers. How important, for example, were the United States

intermediate imports of the emerging Irish computer industry for the recent productivity

transformation of Ireland?2

        International trade also changes the intensity of domestic competition and leads to pro-

ductivity selection through the reallocation of market shares between …rms that di¤er in

their productivity (Melitz 2003). If trade barriers to a foreign market fall, this improves

the relative pro…tability of high-productivity …rms, since low-productivity …rms tend to sell

only domestically. Weak …rms exit and market shares are reallocated to high-productivity

…rms, which raises average productivity (positive selection). At the same time, this makes it

more di¢ cult for …rms of the liberalizing country–and speci…cally its relatively strong …rms,

the potential exporters–to compete abroad. In the liberalizing country, thus, the pro…ts for

the relatively productive …rms decline, market shares shift to less productive …rms, and rel-

atively weak …rms start operating. As a result, import liberalization leads to lower industry

productivity (negative selection) in the liberalizing country.3

    1
     This has been documented recently by Broda and Weinstein (2006).
    2
     An overview of the literature on international technology di¤usion is presented in Keller (2004).
   3
     The seminal work by Melitz (2003) analyzes multilateral liberalization. Unilateral liberalization in a
model with variable mark-ups is examined in Melitz and Ottaviano (2008); these authors show in addition
that trade liberalization has a pro-competitive, productivity-raising impact in the short-run. Important


                                                    3
    While both the within and the between …rm channel has been emphasized in recent work,

relatively little is known on how the joint impact of selection and spillovers from imports

liberalization shapes the location decisions of …rms and the size of industries. This question

is central for welfare analysis. For one, technology spillovers have a positive e¤ect while the

welfare e¤ect through productivity selection can either be positive or negative. Consequently,

openness more likely improves welfare if spillovers are relatively strong.4 Moreover, policy

makers need to know how productivity selection across …rms works in order to adopt sound

policies towards …rm entry and exit.

    We present evidence for a sample of industrialized countries over the period 1973 to 2002.

First, import liberalization lowers domestic productivity in the long-run, a …nding which is

consistent with recent models of …rm heterogeneity because unilateral liberalization lowers

the pro…ts of domestic versus foreign exporters. Second, if imports are relatively technology-

intensive, liberalization also generates technological learning that can on net raise domestic

productivity. We also study the impact of entry and exit on the productivity consequences

of import liberalization. In the short run of up to three years, there are productivity gains

in the liberalizing country. In addition, the selection e¤ect is muted when …rm turnover is

low or entry regulation is high. Overall, the results support models in which trade triggers

both substantial selection and technological learning.

    What is the evidence on …rm selection and spillovers recently? Empirical work has

extensions of Melitz (2003) include Demidova (2006) and Falvey, Greenaway, and Yu (2006). Earlier papers
showing that unilateral trade liberalization in the presence of free entry can lower welfare by shifting …rms
from the domestic country to foreign countries include Horstmann and Markusen (1986).
   4
     A case where trade liberalization with heterogeneous …rms and no technology spillovers leads to lower
welfare is discussed in Demidova (2006).



                                                     4
emphasized that increased openness can generate changes in competition and market share

reallocations that add up to substantial domestic productivity improvements (Pavcnik 2002).

At the same time, some studies point to a negative, not positive selection e¤ect from increased

openness. In their study of foreign direct investment (FDI) into Venezuela, for example,

Aitken and Harrison (1999) demonstrate that FDI has lowered productivity among domestic

plants, with one possible explanation being that foreign …rms hire away the best workers. As

for technology spillovers, Keller (2002) and others have shown that imports generate bene…ts

from foreign R&D investments. Moreover, Gri¢ th, Harrison, and van Reenen (2006) …nd

evidence for technology spillovers through outward FDI. And while the pioneering work

found little evidence for learning from exporting (Bernard and Jensen 1999, Clerides, Lach,

and Tybout 1998), the evidence is stronger in some more recent papers (van Biesebroeck

2005, De Loecker 2007). Indeed, surveys of the evidence on productivity gains from trade in

micro studies conclude that foreign competition often improves intra-plant e¢ ciency, citing

technology spillovers as a possible explanation (Tybout 2003).

   These …ndings notwithstanding, to the best of our knowledge there is no research that

quanti…es the relative importance of the competition and learning impact of imports in a

single framework. This paper combines the broad coverage and focus on technology invest-

ments in industry studies with …rm-level statistics, speci…cally the typical size of …rms across

industries. The analysis encompasses about 85% of all manufacturing R&D in the world.

Moreover, we observe R&D spending by both importers and exporters. This information

on technology investments is crucial; without it, learning externalities will likely be missed.

Studies of the e¤ects of trade liberalization using micro data rarely employ rich information


                                               5
on technology investments, in part because the information is unavailable: the micro unit is

often a plant, whereas R&D decisions are made at the …rm level.

   The relatively large cross-sectional dimension of this study, twenty-two industries in six-

teen countries, means that our …ndings are representative for many economies. Another

advantage of our setting is that we trace out productivity and imports dynamics over three

decades (years 1973 to 2002), because it allows to distinguish the long-run from the short-

run e¤ects of imports liberalization. The detailed information technology investments for a

broad sample comes at the cost of having no micro-level information on market shares. At

the same time, we have data on the number of …rms by industry. This re‡ects net entry

rates (entry minus exit), picking up an extensive margin in the …rm selection process. More-

over, information on the number of …rms is used to compute average …rm size. In models

of productivity heterogeneity, productivity and average …rm size typically move together,

because the reason why some …rms are small (large) in the …rst place is that they have low

(high) productivity. Therefore, changes in average …rm size triggered by imports gives an

alternative measure of selection that can be studied.

   This research also contributes to what we know about the churning of …rms across in-

dustries and countries. It is well-known that churning across industries varies considerably

in terms of entry and exit barriers (Dunne, Roberts, and Samuelson 1988). Moreover, re-

cent work has shown that di¤erences in entry regulation across countries plays an important

role in explaining countries’growth experiences (Djankov, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and

Shleifer 2002)). We highlight one major reason for …rm churning, namely increases in foreign

competition through imports. Consistent with recent work, we show that variation in nat-


                                              6
ural and policy-induced entry barriers are important in explaining productivity outcomes.

In the present context, high entry barriers slow down the exit of relatively productive, and

the entry of relatively unproductive domestic …rms, thereby raising productivity. Of course,

as this research emphasizes, the overall welfare impact of entry regulation will depend on its

e¤ect on both selection and technological learning.

        Related to our work is the paper by Chen, Imbs, and Scott (2006). These authors

extend the Melitz and Ottaviano (2008) model to study trade-induced changes in prices

and mark-ups with data on European industries. Chen, Imbs, and Schott’s work addresses

the competition e¤ects of trade, both short-run and long-run, whereas the present paper

focuses on long-run predictions in a framework where imports can a¤ect both the degree of

competition and technological learning.5

        In the remainder of the paper, we …rst introduce the data in section 2 before outlining

the estimation approach in section 3. This is followed by the empirical results (section 4).

Section 5 provides a concluding discussion.




2         Data

Since technical discoveries tend to emerge in an uneven way across industries, we study trade

and productivity at the industry-level. During the 1990s, most of the technological break-

    5
     Some parallels also exist with work by Combes, Duranton, Gobillon, Puga, and Roux (2007), who an-
alyze …rm selection and agglomeration e¤ects on productivity. This paper di¤ers, …rst, in that our focus is
on technology spillovers, not agglomeration economies. Second, …rm selection and spillovers have qualita-
tively di¤erent productivity implications in our setting, namely negative for unilateral trade liberalization,
and positive for technological learning. In contrast, Combes, Duranton, Gobillon, Puga, and Roux exam-
ine the e¤ect of larger market size, which raises productivity, albeit di¤erentially, via both selection and
agglomeration.


                                                      7
throughs came in the information and communication technology (ICT) industries. While

the ICT innovations were important even at the manufacturing or the economy wide-level,

for us a su¢ cient degree of industry detail is crucial. This paper examines manufacturing

disaggregated into twenty-two industries.6 The classi…cation allows to isolate key sectors

such as computers and communication equipment technologies.

       The analysis covers manufacturing activity in seventeen industrialized countries.7 Through-

out the three decades of our sample (the years 1973 to 2002), these countries, located in four

continents, accounted for a large portion of the world’s manufacturing activity. The technol-

ogy trends we study are truly global in the sense that during these three decades the sample

encompasses more than 85% of the world’s manufacturing R&D investments.

       Internationally comparable …gures on employment, output, and sectoral prices come from

Groningen Growth and Development Centre (GGDC) database (van Ark et al. 2005) for the

years 1979-2002. The GGDC project represents an extension of the OECD’s STAN database

in that output and price measures for sectors that were key drivers of technological change

are separately included. We have combined this with information on employment, output

and sectoral prices for 1973-78 from the OECD’s STAN database (OECD 2008a).8 Also

from the STAN database comes the information on physical capital investment. Figures

on R&D spending are from the ANBERD database (OECD 2008b), and information on

bilateral trade at the industry level comes from the BTD database (OECD 2008c).9

   6
     They are listed in Table 6.
   7
     The countries are listed in Table 3.
   8
     More details on the sources and construction of this data is given in Acharya and Keller (2007).
   9
     The output measure is the value added produced in an industry. Labor services are measured in terms of
the number of workers. Information on physical capital investment has been employed to construct capital
stocks, and similarly, we have calculated R&D stocks based on data on R&D spending.


                                                    8
       This provides a rich basis for the empirical work in that the sample goes beyond earlier

studies in terms of variation in the country, industry, and time dimensions. In addition, we

have obtained …gures on output and the number of establishments in order to study …rm

size dynamics. This information comes from data collected by the United Nations Industrial

Development Organization (UNIDO) and prepared by Nicita and Olarreaga (2006). It yields

a measure of average …rm size that can shed additional light on market share reallocations

analyzed by heterogeneous …rm models.10 The UNIDO data provides average …rm size

information for the years 1981 to 2002 at the three-digit ISIC level.11

       This study also employs measures on …rm entry and exit from the following sources.

First, there is information on the regulation of entry from the World Bank Investment

Climate Surveys, as reported in Djankov, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (2002).

Figure 1 shows the number of procedures that need to be completed to start a business across

countries, with high numbers indicating relatively strong entry barriers. In our sample, this

varies from sixteen in Italy to two in Australia and Canada, while the number for the U.S.,

with four, is also relatively low. The dynamics of …rm entry and exit also varies due to

industry-speci…c characteristics. We employ data on U.S. gross turnover (equal to …rm entry

plus …rm exit divided by number of …rms) derived from Dunne, Roberts, and Samuelson

(1988). Since for all industries, policy barriers in the U.S. are relatively low, the variation

  10
     For the purposes of this paper, we use the terms establishment and …rm synonymously. To the best
of our knowledge, cross-country, cross-industry data for a broad sample that allows this distinction at the
empirical level does not exist. In any case, our de…nition of average size, industry output divided by the
number of establishments, corresponds to the notion of a …rm in Melitz (2003) and others.
  11
     For a small number of industries, this is more aggregated than the information on R&D and trade
volumes, and in these cases we apply the three-digit average …rm size …gures to all sectors that belong to
this three-digit ISIC industry. See Table A1 for details.




                                                    9
in gross turnover can be viewed as picking up natural, or not policy-induced, barriers to

entry and exit. For a limited set of countries, it has recently become possible to estimate

comparable turnover rates by country and industry (Bartelsman, Haltiwanger, and Scarpetta

2007). Figure 2 shows this data for Italy and the UK. As expected from the relatively high

entry barriers in Italy across the board (Figure 1), turnover rates in Italy are lower for each

industry. At the same time, Figure 2 con…rms that the industry ordering of turnover is

similar across countries.

      Table 1 presents summary statistics for some key variables. There are typically about

10,000 observations, which re‡ects the fact that there are only a few missing observations.12

The exception is information on average …rm size, which is available for a somewhat smaller

number of years and countries. Both R&D and productivity have grown over these three

decades, with R&D growth generally outpacing productivity growth (Table 2). At the same

time, the rate of total factor productivity (TFP) growth, of around 3% per year, is itself quite

high by historic standards. The average growth of imports from the U.S. is almost twice

as large as the growth of U.S. R&D over this period. In terms of our study, the increased

product market integration helps to identify any productivity selection and spillovers that

imports might initiate.

      Tables 3 and 4 provide some initial information on the sample variation across countries.

Over these three decades, the United States has been the productivity leader, with the highest

average productivity level, and Canada is a close second in the productivity ranking (Table

3). Productivity growth was highest in South Korea, in part because it is still catching-up

 12
      With 17 countries, 22 industries, and 30 years, there are 11,220 possible observations.


                                                      10
to the more advanced countries. The country with the second-highest productivity growth

rate is Finland, which may be related to high productivity growth in industries such as

communication equipment.

   The United States is the largest creator of new technology in the world, measured by

its R&D spending (Table 4). This is the reason for our focus on selection and spillovers

associated with U.S. R&D and imports. The importance of U.S. imports relative to domestic

production becomes clear from Table 5. The U.S.’important role for Canada is well known,

with U.S. imports being almost three-fourths of domestic value added on average in the

1990s. But also in Ireland and Australia, U.S. imports are large relative to the domestic

industry size, and even in the large OECD countries such as Germany or the U.K., U.S.

imports amount to between 3% and 15% of domestic industry size.

   Tables 6 and 7 show the variation across industries. Most technology creation as measured

by R&D occurs in the aircraft, motor vehicles industries, and communications equipment

industries, but also computers, chemicals, and pharmaceuticals account for a relatively large

share of total R&D (Table 6). While this is based on R&D in the United States, the distri-

bution of R&D across industries in other OECD countries is in fact quite similar. Finally,

Table 7 looks at the importance of U.S. imports by industry, and shows that the relative

importance of imports from the U.S. is highest for the aircraft and computer industries,

followed by instruments and communication equipment.

   In the following section we describe the estimation approach.




                                             11
3       Estimation

This paper analyzes productivity dynamics by extending the R&D-and-production function

framework pioneered by Griliches (1979) and others to include imports. Earlier work has

yielded a positive relationship between R&D expenditures and total factor productivity.

R&D spending in one …rm may raise the productivity of other …rms if there are technological

externalities, or spillovers. These may also be important at the industry- or country-level.

      When …rms with di¤erent productivity levels compete, market share reallocations are

an independent reason for changes in industry productivity. In the context of international

trade, an increase in imports is indicative of a relatively less pro…table competitive position

of domestic …rms. With free entry, this lowers average productivity at home. One reason

for a surge in imports is often that the domestic market has become more accessible in

terms of trade costs (e.g. tari¤s, non-tari¤ barriers, or transport costs have fallen). Another

reason for increased imports might be that an increase in R&D spending has made foreign

…rms relatively more competitive. If so, this reallocates export opportunities away from

domestic and towards foreign …rms. The reduction of expected pro…ts for domestic …rms

will shift domestic market shares from high- to low-productivity …rms, thereby lowering

industry productivity.13

      Thus, an increase in imports and foreign R&D may lower domestic productivity through

selection, and it may raise domestic productivity to the extent that there are signi…cant tech-

 13
      See Melitz and Ottaviano (2008), Demidova (2006) and Falvey, Greenaway, and Yu (2006) for details.




                                                    12
nology spillovers. To estimate their relative importance, consider the following framework:


                                                      X                        X
                             tf pcit =        d
                                           d rcit +           c0   rcf0 it +            c0 mcc0 it   + "cit ;                        (1)
                                                       c0                      c0



where tf pcit is a measure of total factor productivity in industry i and year t of country c;with

i = 1; :::; 22, c = 1; :::; 16; and t = 1973; :::; 2002. Since the assumption of constant returns to

scale is not rejected, we impose it and construct TFP as tf pcit = ycit                                         lcit (1     )kcit ; where

ycit is value added, lcit employment (number of workers), and kcit is the capital stock, all in

logs. We choose        = 0:72; which is equal to the median labor share in the sample.14 The

           d
variables rcit and rcf0 it in equation (1) are domestic and foreign R&D (in logs), and mcc0 it is

the log imports of country c’s industry i from the same industry in country c0 in year t: The

variable "cit is an error term that will be de…ned below.

       In principle, we could study the relationships between all OECD countries symmetrically.

However, relatively small countries such as Belgium or Denmark are unlikely to have a

comparable impact on other OECD countries as have larger countries. As shown above, the

United States, in particular, is relatively large in terms of R&D and exports to all other

sample countries, and for the most part we focus on imports- and R&D e¤ects of the U.S.

in 16 other OECD countries. Equation (1) is specialized to



                                          d            f                                    f              f
                 tf pcit =     0   +   d rcit   +   U rU it   +      m mU cit       +    J rJit   +     G rGit   + "cit ;            (2)

  14
     Acharya and Keller (2007) obtain production function elasticity estimates for these industries, showing
that the labor (capital) elasticity is very close to the labor (one minus the labor) share. We have also employed
alternative TFP measures that incorporate information on industry-speci…c factor shares; as Table A3 shows,
this leads to similar results.



                                                                  13
where rUf it ; rJit
                f        f
                    and rGit are log R&D stocks in the U.S., Japan, and Germany, and mU cit

is log imports from the United States. Japan and Germany are the second- and third-

largest countries in terms of R&D in the sample, and they may have signi…cant e¤ects on

productivity independent of U.S. R&D and exports.15

       In order to better assess the relative importance of selection and technology spillovers,

we also add the interaction of imports with R&D


                                                                                     h                      i
                                                   f
                          tf pcit =      +      U rU it   +   m mU cit    +      e       mU cit    rUf it       + "cit ;       (3)



                             d          f          f
where          =     0+   d rcit +   J rJit +   G rGit .   The parameter                  e   indicates whether the productivity

impact of U.S. imports varies with the technology embodied in these imports, which we

capture by multiplying U.S. imports with U.S. R&D.

       Two generic issues in estimating equation (3) are possible omitted variables and endo-

geneity. To address these, we employ two di¤erent estimators: (1) …xed e¤ects (’within’)

estimation and (2) dynamic instrumental variable (IV) estimation. In the former, the error

term is speci…ed as

                                                     "w
                                                      cit =     ci   +    t   + ucit ;                                         (4)


where         ci   are deterministic …xed e¤ects for each country-by-industry combination,                                 t   is a

…xed e¤ect for each year, and ucit is a mean-zero but possibly heteroskedastic disturbance.

The      ci   …xed e¤ects will control for any heterogeneity across industries that is omitted from

  15
    Adding R&D variables of other major countries (e.g., France, the U.K., Canada, or Italy) does not a¤ect
our key results.



                                                                     14
(3) and constant over time.

       Results using the IV estimator proposed by Arellano, Blundell, Bond, and others are also

presented (Arellano and Bond 1991, Blundell and Bond 2000). In that case, the regression

error is given by
                                           "bcit =      c   + &i +     t   +   cit


                                                                                                         (5)

                                                  cit   =     cit 1   + ucit

Here,      c,   & i , and   t   are deterministic …xed e¤ects for each country, industry, and year,

respectively. The random shock              cit   changes over time following an AR(1). This approach

yields moment conditions for combining equations in the variables’levels with equations in

the variables’di¤erences for a so-called System GMM approach. In both sets of equations,

one essentially uses lagged values to construct instrumental variables for current variables.

       An advantage of the Systems GMM estimator is that it deals with possible endogeneity.

The cost is in the form of additional assumptions and added complexity, as well as a smaller

sample due to the lags needed to construct the instruments. In this case, we …nd qualitatively

similar results using either estimation method.16

  16
    We have also considered the Olley and Pakes (1996) estimator, and found that the results are quite
similar in this context; see van Biesebroeck (2004) who analyzes the robustness of several related estimators
more generally.




                                                             15
4        Estimation results

4.1       Productivity selection and spillovers from imports

This section presents our empirical results. We begin with …xed-e¤ects estimates in Table

8 before turning to IV results in Table 9. The …rst column of Table 8 gives results for the

following speci…cation:


                                                      f              d            f            f
                      tf pcit =   ci   +   t   +   U rU it   +    d rcit   +   J rJit   +   G rGit   + ucit ;



where      ci   and   t   are …xed e¤ects that are treated as parameters. The sample consists of

the years 1973 to 2002, though the sample is somewhat smaller because all independent

variables are lagged by two years in order to reduce endogeneity problems.17 The domestic

R&D elasticity is 0.11, and those for U.S., Japan, and Germany are about 0.24, 0.21, and

0.07, respectively; these …gures are in line with what earlier studies found (see Griliches

1995). Replacing the U.S. R&D variable with imports from the U.S., the import coe¢ cient

is negative (column 2).

       When both U.S. imports and R&D are included together with their interaction mU cit

rUf it , it is the latter that is estimated to have a positive e¤ect on productivity; the direct

U.S. imports and R&D impact actually lower domestic productivity (column 4). This is

consistent with substantial productivity selection through the product market impacts of

foreign R&D and imports, as predicted by heterogeneous …rm models. In addition, the

  17
    Since we want to estimate the e¤ects from U.S. imports and R&D, we also eliminate the 22 U.S. industries
from the sample; it consists of the remaining 16 OECD countries, times 22 industries.


                                                                 16
positive coe¢ cient on the imports-R&D interaction indicates that if the imports from the

U.S. are highly technology-intensive, this generates technological externalities that raise

productivity in the importing country.

       The IV results are presented in Table 9. The …rst speci…cation is comparable to column

(3) in Table 1, except that the IV regression has about 1,000 fewer observations due to lags

needed to construct instruments. According to both the …xed e¤ects and the IV results,

U.S. R&D raises domestic productivity while imports from the U.S. tend to lower it. We

also report Hansen’s J from the test of overidentifying restrictions. The p-value of 0.655

indicates that one cannot reject the null hypothesis that the instruments as a set are valid.18

Adding the imports-R&D interaction yields a positive coe¢ cient, as before (Table 9, column

2). Tables 8 and 9 also report the 90% con…dence interval for the U.S. imports and U.S.

R&D impacts. While the mean imports e¤ect is close to zero (-0.02 for the …xed e¤ects, and

-0.01 for the IV), the con…dence interval covers both sizable positive and negative elasticities,

ranging at least from -0.09 to 0.06. Overall, the …xed e¤ects and IV estimators lead to quite

similar results.

       An important question is whether our the estimated US R&D- and imports e¤ects are

truly re‡ecting productivity selection as emphasized in recent …rm heterogeneity models, or

indeed something else. To address this issue, we utilize information on the number of …rms

by industry and analyze the dynamics of average …rm size and the number of …rms.

       As noted above, in the typical …rm heterogeneity model, productivity and …rm size move

together. This means that the average …rms size in an industry should be a¤ected in the

  18
       The set of instruments is given at the bottom of Table 10.


                                                      17
same way as productivity by U.S. R&D and U.S. imports. Table 10 shows regressions of

the log of average …rms size as an alternative dependent variable to TFP. We also employ

the number of …rms in an industry, which directly re‡ects (net) entry and exit. Unilateral

import liberalization leads to a lower threshold that a …rm’s productivity has to surpass

in order to break even. Thus, the lower industry productivity through unilateral import

liberalization should be associated with an increase in the number of …rms. We examine this

in Table 10 by employing the (log) number of …rms as an alternative dependent variable.

TFP speci…cations analogous to those in Table 8 for the years 1981-2002, for which the

number of …rm data is available, are shown as well.

   We see, …rst, that U.S. R&D has a positive impact on productivity and …rm size, while

it has a negative e¤ect on the number of …rms. The former provides additional support that

U.S. R&D generates technological learning, and the fact that productivity and average …rm

size are a¤ected in the same way is consistent with recent heterogeneous …rm models. The

negative impact of U.S. R&D on the number of …rms in (3) and (6) suggests that relatively

productive …rms tend to bene…t more from U.S. R&D than weaker …rms. Second, U.S.

imports a¤ect productivity and …rm size qualitatively in the same way. High-technology

imports raise …rm size, low-tech imports reduce …rms size, and the average e¤ect is close to

zero. From speci…cation (6), the impact of U.S. imports on the number of …rms is the reverse:

the number of …rms goes up if the imports are low-technology, and the number of …rms falls

if imports are high-technology. The …nding suggests that a surge of imports unaccompanied

by technological learning leads to the net entry of relatively weak domestic …rms. It provides

strong evidence that we estimate the long run heterogeneous-…rm selection e¤ect, since in


                                             18
the typical homogenous-…rm model a surge in imports would displace domestic …rms, not

add to their number.

   How large are the selection and spillover e¤ects quantitatively? The elasticity of TFP with

respect to U.S. imports and U.S. R&D is reported in Tables 8 and 9 at the bottom. The

average imports elasticity appears to be negative but close to zero; for these speci…cations,

the values range from -3.7% to -1.0%. The impact of U.S. imports on domestic productivity

varies strongly, however, depending on how technology intensive imports are: for the …xed

e¤ects speci…cation (4) in Table 8, the value for the 5th percentile of the import elasticity

(low-technology imports) is -0.09, while at the 95th percentile (high-technology imports), it

is 0.06. respectively. Selection is generally quite important: about two thirds of all industries

experience lower productivity as a consequence of an increase in U.S. imports (speci…cation

(4) in Table 8).

   In contrast to imports, the average U.S. R&D elasticity is positive, at about 25%. From

the point of view of the importer, the amount of U.S. R&D determines whether imports from

the U.S. lead to higher or lower domestic productivity. For example, a change of U.S. R&D

spending from the 25th to the 75th percentile is associated with a 6.4 percentage points

increase in the imports elasticity (for (4), Table 8). With an average imports elasticity of

-2.0%, it is clear that how technology-intensive imports are is critical for the productivity

consequences in the liberalizing economy. Overall, the results are consistent with models in

which trade generates both major selection processes and technology spillovers.

   The robustness of the estimates has been analyzed. We have, …rst, asked whether the

imports and R&D of other major countries such as Japan and Germany also generate a


                                               19
mix of selection and spillover e¤ects, or whether these are speci…c phenomena for the United

States.19 Second, the productivity variable is based on the same labor- and capital elasticities

for all industries. In Table A3, we report results for an alternative TFP variable, which is

based on input elasticities that vary by industry.20 Both sets of results are similar to those

discussed above.

       The following section studies how …rm entry and exit a¤ect spillover and selection e¤ects.



4.2       Extensive margin-dynamics, selection, and spillovers

Our analysis of how …rm dynamics shape selection due to imports begins by employing mea-

sures on the gross turnover of …rms compiled by Bartelsmann, Haltiwanger, and Scarpetta

(2007). This information varies both by industry and by country, which is attractive because

…rm dynamics may vary importantly across both dimensions (recall Figure 2).21 We de…ne

an indicator variable IciLT which is equal to one if gross turnover in a particular industry is

in the lowest quartile of all industries’ turnover. Turnover may be low in these industries

both due to certain industry characteristics such as high set-up costs and heavy entry and

exit regulation. As a result, such industries are characterized by relatively low entry and

exit rates, which one would expect to slow down the …rm selection process.

  19
      In Table A2, we compare the results for the U.S. with those for Japan and Germany. Table A2’s column
(1) repeats the earlier results for the U.S. from Table 8, (4), while columns (2) and (3) report analogous
results for Japan and Germany, respectively.
   20
      The alternative TFP indices use ~ i as labor’s share, which is the median labor share for each industry
i, together with the assumption of CRS. Most of the variation in the labor shares is in the industry, not
country or time dimension.
   21
      There is country-speci…c data for eight of our sample countries; for the others, we employ the average
values. The turnover values are averages from annual data, typically for the period 1984-98, see Bartelsman,
Haltiwanger, and Scarpetta (2007), Table 1.




                                                     20
       In Table 11, we present evidence on this by examining whether the impact of US R&D

and imports is signi…cantly di¤erent in low-turnover industries. Column (1) reports again the

results of (3), Table 8 as a benchmark. Column (2) adds the domestic R&D-low turnover

interaction, which is not signi…cant. Columns (3) and (4) indicate that the productivity

bene…ts of US R&D are about one third lower in low turnover-industries. This suggests that

there is a reduced level of within-…rm technological learning in industries that are among

the least vibrant in terms of …rm entry and exit.

       The US imports-low turnover interaction in column (4) enters with a positive sign. This

says that relatively low …rm turnover is associated with smaller productivity losses due to

selection triggered by a surge in imports. Interestingly, the interaction coe¢ cient is equal

to 0.048, which is the same absolute value as the imports selection coe¢ cient (at -0.048).

Thus, if …rm turnover is low, this can completely bring to a halt the impact from selection.

       One concern is that country-speci…c turnover rates may be endogenous in these regres-

sions. While it is unlikely that endogeneity plays a major role since we do not employ annual

information on turnover, we address this issue further by using information on gross turnover

in US industries throughout, instead of the country-speci…c turnover data. The results are

shown in column (5) of Table 11. The impact of …rm dynamics on spillovers and selection is

unchanged: U.S. R&D generates a lower bene…t in low-turnover industries, and U.S. imports

trigger a smaller productivity loss in low-turnover industries. This suggests that the results

with country-speci…c turnover information are not importantly driven by endogeneity.22

  22
    This is also consistent with Dunne and Roberts (1991) who argue that variation in turnover across
industries in the US is likely going to be similar to the industry variation in other countries. Note, however,
that the domestic R&D impact in low turnover industries is larger when US- compared to when country-
speci…c turnover data is employed.

                                                      21
   Next, we examine the impact of policy-induced entry barriers. Let the indicator variable

IcHR be equal to one if the observation is in the highest quartile in terms of the numbers

of procedures that need to be completed before a business can start operating, and zero

otherwise. We expect that a high degree of regulation will lead to a relatively low rate

of …rm entry. Table 12 shows these results. First, consider the impact of domestic R&D

in a high-regulation environment. The domestic R&D-high regulation interaction is …rst

positive (speci…cations (1) and (2)), but it is negative in the full speci…cation (3), suggesting

that domestic R&D yields smaller productivity gains in a highly regulated environment (not

signi…cant at standard levels). Second, there is no major di¤erence between regulated and

not regulated industries in terms of their technology spillovers from U.S. R&D (columns

(2) and (3)). At the same time, the imports e¤ect on productivity is signi…cantly lower in

highly regulated industries (column (3)). This is consistent with entry regulation being to

some extent a shield against the negative impact of imports-induced long-run productivity

selection.

   The last column of Table 12 includes both the low turnover- and high regulation variables

jointly, which allows to see whether they have independent e¤ects. The productivity impact

of a surge in US imports is reduced by both a high degree of regulation and a low level of …rm

turnover. In contrast, while technology spillovers from the U.S. are generally higher in high

turnover industries–the U.S. R&D-low turnover coe¢ cient is negative–, there is no evidence

that technology spillovers from the US are lower speci…cally due to high levels of regulation.

Overall, we …nd that factors slowing down entry and exit can have a major in‡uence on

market share reallocations between …rms with di¤erent productivities.


                                               22
4.3       Selection over time

In the light of these results, it is plausible that time is another determinant of the size of the

selection e¤ect: natural entry barriers and entry regulation should have its strongest impact

in the short-run, when it is very costly to overcome these barriers. In the heterogeneous

…rm model of Melitz and Ottaviano (2008), for example, unilateral import liberalization has

a positive impact on domestic productivity in the short-run, when the number of …rms at

home and abroad is given, and a negative impact in the long-run, when …rm entry and exit

has set in. More generally, the short-run response of industry productivity to additional

import competition might be quite di¤erent from the long-run response.

       To examine this empirically, we run a set of time-di¤erenced regressions. Consider the

following equation



                           q
                               (tf pcit ) =   1
                                                  q
                                                      rUf it +   2
                                                                     q
                                                                         (mU cit ) + X 0 + vcit ;       (6)



            q
where           is the time-di¤erence operator of length q; so that q = 1 are one-year di¤erences,

q = 2 are two-year di¤erences, and so forth. We consider q = 1; ::; 10, that is, one-year to

ten-year di¤erences. One-year di¤erences estimate a relatively short-run impact, while a time

horizon of one decade picks up a more long-run e¤ect. As control variables, X; we include

changes in own R&D, Japanese, and German R&D, as well as time …xed e¤ects.23 Also

  23
    We also restrict the sample period to the years 1983 to 2002. Since the sample covers the years 1973 to
2002, 1983 is the …rst year for which we can form ten-year di¤erences. This ensures that the results are not
a¤ected by the inclusion or exclusion of the early years in our sample.




                                                            23
results for time-di¤erenced regressions with the R&D-Imports interaction will be shown:


                                                                         h                             i
       q
           (tf pcit ) =   1
                              q
                                  rUf it +   2
                                                 q
                                                     (mU cit ) +     3
                                                                             q
                                                                                 rUf it   q
                                                                                              (mU cit ) + X 0 + vcit : (7)



Table 13 reports the estimates of                    1   and   2   of equation (6) for di¤erent time horizons, and

Figure 3 gives a graphical depiction of the average elasticities.24 The productivity e¤ect of

imports is signi…cantly positive for a one- to three-year time horizon. For the four- to six-

year time horizons, the imports e¤ect is close to zero, while for a seven-year or longer time

horizon, the productivity impact of unilateral import liberalization is signi…cantly negative.

Also shown in Figure 3 are the average TFP e¤ects of imports based on the interaction

speci…cation, equation (7), which are very similar. The fact that the imports e¤ect almost

monotonically declines as the time horizon becomes longer is exactly what one expects if

productivity selection through …rm entry and exit at home and abroad is evolving over

time.25 Moreover, the …ndings strikingly con…rm the predictions of recent heterogeneous

…rm models such as Melitz and Ottaviano (2008). By contrast, the marginal e¤ect of US

R&D on productivity varies relatively little for di¤erent time horizons.

       To summarize, productivity selection from imports is moderated when …rm turnover is

low, entry regulation is high, and in general over short time horizons.

  24
   As shown above, the impact of imports varies with their technology intensity.
  25
   While small sample size precludes precise estimation for longer time di¤erences, it appears that the
imports e¤ect does not change any further beyond about 13 years.




                                                                   24
5     Conclusions

Does importing a¤ect domestic productivity through selection and technology spillovers? To

answer this question, we analyzed the productivity dynamics in response to U.S. exports

in several major countries. It is particularly revealing to look at changes triggered by US

exports, both because the U.S. is an important and sometimes even dominant trade partner,

and because the United States is the single most important source of technology creation in

the world, accounting for about 40% of the world’s R&D spending. To examine the impact

of imports, we study productivity dynamics at the industry-level. The analysis focuses on

the productivity e¤ects of imports through selection and technology spillovers. Admittedly,

international product market competition need not take the form of trade, and productivity

might be a¤ected by factors other than selection and spillovers. However, these mechanisms

are central to recent theoretical and empirical work, and they are much-emphasized in the

policy discussion as well. Our empirical results strikingly demonstrate that selection and

technology spillovers must …gure prominently in any successful explanation according to

which international trade a¤ects productivity.

    It would have been impossible to arrive at these results without extensive data. To this

end, we constructed a unique database on manufacturing inputs, outputs, and international

trade volumes for most of the industrialized world and a relatively long thirty-year sample

period. The analysis includes su¢ cient detail to isolate major technology drivers such as

the computer and communication equipment industries. This is combined with information

on the typical …rm’s size to trace out market share reallocations in response to a surge in



                                             25
imports.

      Our main conclusions are as follows: First, import liberalization lowers domestic pro-

ductivity in the long-run through the selection e¤ect. This con…rms the prediction of recent

models of …rm heterogeneity because unilateral liberalization shifts pro…ts from domestic

to foreign exporters. Second, if imports are relatively technology-intensive, liberalization

also generates technological learning that can on net raise domestic productivity. Third, we

show that in the short-run of up to about three years, a surge in imports raises domestic

productivity. Because the number of …rms at home and abroad does not change much in

the short-run, new competition from foreign …rms has a pro-competitive e¤ect. We also …nd

that the selection e¤ect is muted when …rm turnover is low or entry regulation is high.

      Overall, the results indicate that market share reallocations between …rms in response to

changes in foreign competition are important. Moreover, the evidence lines up very well with

recent heterogeneous …rm trade models such as Melitz and Ottaviano (2008). Speci…cally,

we …nd that …rm selection induced by imports liberalization raises domestic productivity in

the short-run, and it reduces it in the long-run. The level of entry regulation matters for

the extent that …rm churning in response to import competition contributes to the overall

change in productivity. This …nding is consistent with an emphasis on …rm dynamics as a

key explanation for performance di¤erences across countries.26

      At the same time, the evidence shows that we need models in which imports lead to both

selection and technology spillovers. The inclusion of both selection and spillovers matters

more for long-run than short-run policy advice, since as we have seen in the short-run a surge

 26
      See Bartelsman, Haltiwanger, and Scarpetta (2007) and Ahn (2000) for an overview.


                                                    26
in imports yields productivity gains. In the long-run, the net impact of imports hinges on

the relative size of the selection and the technology spillover e¤ect. If new imports primarily

amount to increased product market competition, the selection e¤ect dominates and domestic

productivity falls. In contrast, if imports are a signi…cant source of new technology, this can

outweigh the competition e¤ect, leading to a long-run increase in domestic productivity.

It is plausible that our results analogously apply to exports and foreign direct investment,

although at this point this is a conjecture.

       It is also important to ask why most studies to date tend to …nd that productivity rises

with increased foreign competition, whereas our results are not as clear-cut in this respect.

We can think of at least two reasons for this. First, this study has examined changes in

import competition over roughly three decades. This sample period is substantially longer

than what is typically considered in studies of the productivity e¤ects of trade liberalization.

We believe that the relatively long sample period is crucial for estimating the long-run

selection e¤ect of imports predicted by in‡uential recent papers. At the same time, for

relatively short time horizons, we …nd a pro-competitive e¤ect from import liberalization.

From this perspective, our results are not so much in con‡ict with existing results as that

they add a new …nding, on the long-run impact of import liberalization.

       Another reason, not mutually exclusive, might be that in the presence of increased for-

eign competition in fact there is technology upgrading and learning taking place.27 While

relatively few micro studies of trade liberalization employ data on technology investments, it

  27
    There is evidence that …rms make technology investments to prepare for more intensive competition,
which by itself might lead to higher productivity. An example is Hallward-Driemeier, Iarossi, and Sokolo¤
(2002).



                                                   27
is quite possible that unobserved simultaneous technology investments are a¤ecting the ob-

served productivity levels.28 Future research will have to analyze the importance of these and

possibly other determinants of the impact of increased openness on domestic productivity

and welfare.




 28
      In this regard, the papers by Bustos (2007) and Verhoogen (2007) are noteworthy.


                                                    28
References

[1] Acharya, R., and W. Keller (2007), "The Evolution of the World’s Technology Frontier,

   1973-2002", Industry Canada Working Paper # 2007-03.


[2] Ahn, S. (2000), "Firm dynamics and productivity growth: a review of micro evidence

   from OECD countries", OECD Economics Department working paper # 297.


[3] Aitken, B., and A. Harrison (1999), "Do Domestic Firms Bene…t from DFI? Evidence

   from Venezuela", American Economic Review 89: 605-618.


[4] Arellano, M. and S. Bond (1991), "Some Tests of Speci…cation for Panel Data: Monte

   Carlo Evidence and an Application to Employment Equations”, Review of Economic

   Studies 58: 277-97.


[5] Bartelsman, E., J. Haltiwanger, and S. Scarpetta (2007), "Measuring and analyzing

   cross-country di¤erences in …rm dynamics", working paper, Free University Amsterdam,

   December.


[6] Bernard, A., and B. Jensen (1999), "Exceptional Exporter Performance: Cause, E¤ect,

   or Both?", Journal of International Economics 47: 1-25.


[7] Blundell, R., and S. Bond (2000), "GMM Estimation with Persistent Panel Data: An

   Application to Production Functions”, Econometric Reviews 19: 321-340.


[8] Broda, C., and D. Weinstein (2006), "Globalization and the Gains from Variety", Quar-

   terly Journal of Economics 121: 541-585.


                                          29
 [9] Bustos, P. (2007), "Multilateral Trade Liberalization, Exports and Technology Upgrad-

    ing: Evidence on the Impact of MERCOSUR on Argentinean Firms", working paper,

    Universitat Pompeu Fabra, July.


[10] Chen, N., J. Imbs, and A. Scott (2006), "The dynamics of trade and competition",

    National Bank of Belgium working paper no. 91.


[11] Clerides, S., S. Lach, and J. Tybout (1998), "Is Learning by Exporting Important?

    Micro-dynamic Evidence from Colombia, Mexico, and Morocco", Quarterly Journal of

    Economics 113: 903-947.


[12] Cohen, W., and D. Levinthal (1990), "Absorptive capacity: a new perspective on learn-

    ing and innovation", Administrative Science Quarterly 35: 128-152.


[13] Combes, P., G. Duranton, L. Gobillon, D. Puga, and S. Roux (2007), "The productivity

    advantages of large markets: Distinguishing agglomeration from …rm selection", October

    2007.


[14] De Loecker, J. (2007), "Do Exports Generate Higher Productivity? Evidence from

    Slovenia", Journal of International Economics 73: 69–98.


[15] Demidova, S. (2006), "Productivity Improvements and Falling Trade Costs: Boon or

    Bane", Penn State working paper.


[16] Djankov, S., R. La Porta, F. Lopez-de-Silanes, and A. Shleifer (2002), "The Regulation

    of Entry", Quarterly Journal of Economics 117: 1-37.



                                            30
[17] Dunne, T., M. Roberts, and L. Samuelson (1988), "Patterns of …rm entry and exit in

    the U.S. manufacturing industries", RAND Journal of Economics 19: 495-515.


[18] Dunne, T., and M. Roberts (1991), "Variation in Producer Turnover Across US Manu-

    facturing", in P.A. Geroski and J. Schwalbach (eds.), Entry and Market Contestability,

    Basil Blackwell, 1991.


[19] Falvey, R., D. Greenaway, and Z. Yu (2006), "Extending the Melitz Model to Asym-

    metric Countries", University of Nottingham research paper 2006/07.


[20] Gri¢ th, R., R. Harrison, and J. van Reenen (2006), "How special is the special rela-

    tionship?", American Economic Review 96: 1859-1875.


[21] Griliches, Z. (1995), “R&D and Productivity: Econometric Results and Measurement

    Issues”, Chapter 3 in P. Stoneman (ed.), Handbook of the Economics of Innovation and

    Technological Change, Basil Blackwell: Oxford.


[22] Griliches, Z. (1979), "Issues in Assessing the Contribution of R&D to Productivity”,

    Bell Journal of Economics 10: 92-116.


[23] Hallward-Driemeier, M., G. Iarossi, and K. Sokolo¤ (2002), "Exports and Manufacturing

    Productivity in East Asia: A Comparative Analysis with Firm-level Data", NBER

    Working Paper # 8894.


[24] Horstmann, I., and J. Markusen (1986), "Up the average cost curve: ine¢ cient entry

    and the new protectionism", Journal of International Economics 20: 225-247.



                                            31
[25] Keller, W. (2004), "International Technology Di¤usion”, Journal of Economic Literature

    XLII: 752-782.


[26] Keller, W. (2002), "Trade and the Transmission of Technology", Journal of Economic

    Growth 7: 5-24.


[27] Melitz, M. (2003), "The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate

    Industry Productivity", Econometrica 71: 1695-1725.


[28] Melitz, M., and G. Ottaviano (2008), "Market Size, Trade, and Productivity", Review

    of Economic Studies 75: 295-316.


[29] Nicita, A., and M. Olarreaga (2006), "Trade, Production, and Protection, 1976-2004",

    World Bank Economic Review 21(1).


[30] OECD (2008a), Structural Analysis (STAN) Database, OECD, Paris.


[31] OECD (2008b), Analytical Business Expenditure in Research and Development (AN-

    BERD) Database, OECD, Paris.


[32] OECD (2008c), Bilateral Trade Database (BTD), OECD, Paris.


[33] Pavcnik, N. (2002), "Trade Liberalization, Exit, and Productivity Improvements: Evi-

    dence from Chilean Plants", Review of Economic Studies 69: 245-276.


[34] Tybout, J. (2003), "Plant- and Firm-Level Evidence on the ‘New’Trade Theories", in

    Handbook of International Trade, Choi and Harrigan (eds.), Oxford: Basil-Blackwell.




                                            32
[35] van Ark, B., et al. (2005), Groningen Growth & Development Database, Groningen,

    The Netherlands, http://www.ggdc.net/.


[36] van Biesebroeck, J (2005), "Exporting Raises Productivity in sub-Saharan African Man-

    ufacturing Firms", Journal of International Economics 67: 373-391.


[37] van Biesebroeck, J. (2004), "Robustness of Productivity Estimates", NBER Working

    Paper # 10303.


[38] Verhoogen, E. (2007), "Trade, Quality Upgrading and Wage Inequality in the Mexican

    Manufacturing Sector", working paper, Columbia University.


[39] Windmeijer, F. (2005), "A …nite sample correction for the variance of linear e¢ cient

    two-step GMM estimators", Journal of Econometrics 126: 25-51.




                                           33
Table 1: Summary statistics for key variables


Variable                              Obs       Mean     Stdev

TFP                                  9,659       2.36     0.72
US Imports                           10,098     11.54     1.98
US R&D                               10,176      9.00     1.54
US Imports x US R&D                  9,738      105.33   30.23
Domestic R&D                         9,525       5.38     2.28
Japan R&D                            10,560      7.48     2.45
Germany R&D                          10,432      6.76     2.58
Av. firm size                        5,433       8.77     1.44


All variables in logarithms
Table 2: Sample dynamics

                                    1973 - 1987                  1988 - 2002
                                                                                       Growth
Variable                      Obs     Mean        Stdev   Obs      Mean        Stdev   of Mean

TFP                       4916         2.11       0.74    4743      2.62       0.61      0.51
Domestic R&D              4759         4.95       2.38    4766      5.81       2.09      0.86
US R&D                    5248         8.70       1.56    4928      9.33       1.45      0.63
US Imports                5280        10.99       1.91    4818     12.14       1.88      1.16
Japan R&D                 5632         6.91       2.30    4928      8.14       2.46      1.22
Germany R&D               5632         6.28       2.62    4800      7.33       2.41      1.05
Av. Firm size             2339         8.48       1.37    3094      9.00       1.44      0.52

All variables in logarithms
Table 3: Productivity across countries

                              1973 - 1987                 1988 - 2002
                                                                                Growth
                        Obs     Mean        Stdev   Obs     Mean        Stdev   of Mean

Australia               296      2.25       0.47    280      2.62       0.50      0.37
Belgium                 328      2.17       0.59    308      2.76       0.52      0.59
Canada                  352      2.42       0.68    308      2.87       0.50      0.45
Denmark                 322      2.13       0.69    294      2.43       0.53      0.30
Finland                 348      1.88       0.64    308      2.55       0.61      0.68
France                  316      2.27       0.74    308      2.71       0.56      0.45
UK                      322      1.98       0.69    308      2.64       0.57      0.66
Germany                 350      2.13       0.60    308      2.54       0.47      0.41
Ireland                                             165
Italy                   346      2.19       0.79    308      2.59       0.42      0.40
Japan                   346      1.96       0.80    308      2.49       0.67      0.53
Korea                   352      1.53       0.94    308      2.28       0.78      0.75
Netherlands             322      2.20       0.71    308      2.61       0.46      0.41
Norway                  346      2.16       0.75    308      2.47       0.49      0.31
Spain                   230      2.45       0.60    308      2.69       0.62      0.25
Sweden                  340      2.04       0.65    308      2.56       0.63      0.52
United States           322      2.54       0.69    308      2.93       0.56      0.39


Table 4: R&D across countries

                              1973 - 1987                 1988 - 2002
                                                                                Growth
                        Obs     Mean        Stdev   Obs     Mean        Stdev   of Mean

Australia               352      4.15       1.81    308      5.29       1.14      1.14
Belgium                  22                         308      5.17       1.62
Canada                  352      5.14       1.86    308      5.94       1.72      0.81
Denmark                 352      3.32       2.17    308      4.01       2.13      0.69
Finland                 352      3.41       1.65    308      4.93       1.18      1.52
France                  352      6.51       1.72    308      7.35       1.53      0.84
UK                      352      6.86       1.61    308      7.14       1.56      0.28
Germany                 352      6.70       2.12    300      7.82       1.54      1.13
Ireland                 198                         308      3.17       1.86
Italy                   346      5.11       2.05    308      6.31       1.62      1.19
Japan                   352      7.37       1.51    308      8.68       1.32      1.31
Korea                                               154
Netherlands             352      4.86       2.07    308      5.58       1.70      0.72
Norway                  333      3.70       1.69    308      4.48       1.24      0.77
Spain                   352      4.25       2.12    308      5.57       1.26      1.32
Sweden                  340      4.94       1.84    308      5.73       1.55      0.78
United States           328      8.70       1.56    308      9.33       1.45      0.63

All variables in logs
Table 5: The importance of imports from the United States by partner country


                              1973 - 1987                                    1988 - 2002

                                         Import                                     Import
                            Obs          Share*                         Obs         Share*   Change

Australia                   352           0.11                          308          0.15      0.04
Belgium                     352           0.08                          308          0.12      0.04
Canada                      352           0.47                          308          0.73      0.26
Denmark                     346           0.03                          308          0.04      0.01
Finland                     352           0.03                          308          0.04      0.01
France                      352           0.03                          308          0.03      0.01
UK                          352           0.15                          308          0.08      -0.07
Germany                     352           0.02                          308          0.03      0.01
Ireland                     240           0.13                          294          0.15      0.01
Italy                       352           0.05                          308          0.03      -0.01
Japan                       352           0.02                          308          0.04      0.02
Korea                                                                   198          0.09
Netherlands                 352           0.05                          308          0.11      0.06
Norway                      352           0.06                          308          0.09      0.02
Spain                       322           0.04                          308          0.04      -0.01
Sweden                      352           0.07                          306          0.05      -0.02

*Median ratio of imports from US to domestic value added across industries
Table 6: US R&D by industry*

                                     1973 - 1987                 1988 - 2002
                                                                                       Growth
                               Obs     Mean        Stdev   Obs     Mean        Stdev   of Mean

Food products                  256     8.68        0.19    224     9.11        0.03     0.43
Textiles                       256     6.73        0.22    224     7.54        0.17     0.80
Wood products                  256     7.94        0.23    224     7.22        0.19     -0.72
Paper products                 256     8.54        0.23    224     9.14        0.23     0.60
Petroleum products             256     9.41        0.13    224     9.44        0.13     0.03
Chemicals                      256     10.16       0.27    224     10.82       0.07     0.66
Pharmaceuticals                256     9.87        0.24    224     10.79       0.25     0.92
Rubber & plastics              256     8.23        0.13    224     8.82        0.25     0.59
Non-metallic mineral prod.     256     8.19        0.18    224     8.43        0.09     0.24
Iron and steel                 256     8.05        0.13    224     7.83        0.10     -0.21
Non-ferrous metals             256     8.05        0.04    224     8.05        0.07     0.00
Metal products                 256     8.39        0.15    224     8.86        0.15     0.46
Machinery and eq.              160     9.44        0.32    224     10.06       0.20     0.62
Computers                      256     5.29        1.64    224     10.39       1.40     5.10
Elect. Machinery               160     9.47        0.31    224     9.78        0.20     0.31
Communication eq.              160     10.24       0.08    224     11.25       1.01     1.01
Instruments                    256     10.06       0.25    224     10.91       0.27     0.85
Motor vehicles                 256     10.87       0.12    224     11.33       0.08     0.47
Ships                          160     8.52        0.37    224     7.42        0.23     -1.10
Aircraft                       256     11.94       0.08    224     11.86       0.18     -0.08
Railroad equipment             256     6.85        0.65    224     8.13        0.15     1.29
Other manufacturing            256     7.45        0.58    224     7.99        0.12     0.54

* log of U.S. R&D stock
Table 7: The importance of US imports by industry


                                             1973 - 1987                    1988 - 2002

                                                      Import                      Import
                                            Obs       Share*                Obs   Share*   Change

Food products                               239         0.04                219     0.03    -0.01
Textiles                                    239         0.03                219     0.04    0.01
Wood products                               239         0.05                219     0.05    0.00
Paper products                              239         0.03                219     0.03    0.01
Petroleum products                          234         0.08                219     0.07    -0.01
Chemicals                                   234         0.14                219     0.13    -0.02
Pharmaceuticals                             234         0.05                219     0.09    0.04
Rubber & plastics                           234         0.03                219     0.05    0.02
Non-metallic mineral prod.                  239         0.01                219     0.02    0.00
Iron and steel                              234         0.01                219     0.01    0.00
Non-ferrous metals                          234         0.10                219     0.09    -0.01
Metal products                              234         0.04                219     0.02    -0.02
Machinery and eq.                           229         0.09                219     0.12    0.02
Computers                                   229         1.03                219     0.99    -0.05
Elect. Machinery                            229         0.09                219     0.12    0.02
Communication eq.                           229         0.17                217     0.24    0.07
Instruments                                 234         0.36                219     0.36    0.00
Motor vehicles                              234         0.05                219     0.06    0.00
Ships                                       234         0.02                219     0.03    0.01
Aircraft                                    213         0.88                205     1.13    0.25
Railroad equipment                          229         0.02                219     0.06    0.05
Other manufacturing                         239         0.02                219     0.04    0.02

*Median ratio of imports from US to domestic value added across countries
Table 8: Technology Transfer and Selection - Fixed Effects Results


                                          (1)               (2)                (3)            (4)

US R&D                                  0.239                                0.247           -0.116
                                       (0.015)                              (0.015)         (0.035)

US Imports                                                 -0.023            -0.037          -0.303
                                                          (0.008)           (0.008)         (0.028)

US Imports x US R&D                                                                          0.031
                                                                                            (0.003)

Domestic R&D                            0.110              0.190             0.113           0.101
                                       (0.011)            (0.013)           (0.011)         (0.010)

JPN R&D                                 0.209              0.263             0.203           0.178
                                       (0.017)            (0.015)           (0.017)         (0.016)

GER R&D                                 0.067              0.140             0.065           0.097
                                       (0.011)            (0.013)           (0.011)         (0.011)

# of obs                                 7902              8169              7902            7902

Rsq                                     0.718              0.685             0.719           0.728

Elasticity US R&D                                                                             0.25
(5th%, 95th%)                                                                             (0.14, 0.34)

Elasticity US Imports                                                                         -0.02
(5th%, 95th%)                                                                             (-0.09, 0.06)


Fixed effect regressions; dependent variable: log total factor productivity
All regressions include fixed effects at the country x industry level and for each year
Robust standard errors in parentheses
Table 9: Technology Transfer and Selection - System IV GMM Results


                                                  (1)                       (2)

US R&D                                           0.336                     0.058
                                                (0.048)                   (0.098)

US Imports                                       -0.014                    -0.201
                                                (0.023)                   (0.065)

US Imports x US R&D                                                        0.022
                                                                          (0.007)

Domestic R&D                                     0.061                     0.056
                                                (0.020)                   (0.019)

JPN R&D                                          0.121                     0.116
                                                (0.043)                   (0.039)

GER R&D                                          0.070                     0.078
                                                (0.023)                   (0.022)

# of obs                                         6915                      6915

AR(1) test                                      -1.78                      -2.01
[p-value]                                       [0.08]                     [0.04]

AR(2) test                                       1.47                       1.39
[p-value]                                       [0.14]                     [0.17]

Hansen OverID J                                   4.16                      3.56
[p-value]                                       [0.655]                   [0.736]

Elasticity US R&D                                                           0.26
(5th %, 95th %)                                                         (0.19, 0.33)

Elasticity US Imports                                                       -0.01
(5th %, 95th %)                                                         (-0.20, 0.06)



Dependent variable: log total factor productivity
All regressions include fixed effects for year, country, and industry
Robust Windmeijer (2005)-corrected standard errors in parentheses
Instruments: Domestic R&D lags4-6, US imports lags 2-6,
Imports x US R&D lag 2, US R&D lag 2; other IVs contemporaneous
Table 10: Productivity, size, and the number of firms


                                          TFP                Firm Size             No. Firms                 TFP                 Firm Size       No. Firms
                                           (1)                  (2)                   (3)                     (4)                   (5)             (6)

US R&D                                    0.175                 0.444                 -0.156                -0.517                 -0.743           0.103
                                         (0.023)               (0.039)               (0.027)               (0.053)                (0.092)          (0.063)

US Imports                                -0.008                0.031                 0.002                 -0.514                 -0.842           0.193
                                         (0.011)               (0.020)               (0.016)               (0.040)                (0.067)          (0.046)

US Imports x US R&D                                                                                         0.059                  0.101            -0.022
                                                                                                           (0.005)                (0.008)          (0.005)

Domestic R&D                              0.051                 0.099                 0.072                 0.019                  0.050            0.083
                                         (0.014)               (0.026)               (0.020)               (0.012)                (0.025)          (0.020)

JPN R&D                                   0.195                 0.028                 0.205                 0.164                  -0.029           0.217
                                         (0.024)               (0.035)               (0.019)               (0.012)                (0.029)          (0.019)

GER R&D                                   0.183                 0.220                 -0.064                0.197                  0.244            -0.070
                                         (0.022)               (0.040)               (0.027)               (0.020)                (0.036)          (0.027)

# of obs                                  4844                  5082                  5092                  4844                   5082             5092

Rsq                                       0.639                 0.300                 0.245                 0.670                 0.334             0.248

Elasticity US R&D                                                                                           0.245                0.447              -0.156
(5th %, 95th %)                                                                                        (-0.035, 0.350)       (0.096, 0.766)    (-0.226, -0.080)

Elasticity US Imports                                                                                       -0.032                0.070             -0.006
(5th%, 95th%)                                                                                          (-0.102, 0.167)       (-0.124, 0.347)   (-0.066, 0.037)


Fixed effects regressions; dependent variable on top of column, in logs; years 1981 to 2002
All regressions include fixed effects at the country x industry level and for each year; robust standard errors in parentheses
Table 11: Firm dynamics and selection


                                                         Country-specific turnover data                 U.S. turnover data

                                                (1)               (2)                 (3)       (4)            (5)

Domestic R&D                                  0.113             0.114                0.105     0.109          0.099
                                             (0.011)           (0.012)              (0.012)   (0.024)        (0.012)

U.S. R&D                                      0.247             0.247                0.265     0.265          0.264
                                             (0.015)           (0.015)              (0.017)   (0.017)        (0.017)

U.S. Imports                                  -0.037            -0.037               -0.036    -0.048        -0.047
                                             (0.008)           (0.008)              (0.008)   (0.009)        (0.009)

Dom R&D x Low Turnover                                          -0.004               0.042     0.024          0.073
                                                               (0.013)              (0.016)   (0.017)        (0.023)

U.S. R&D x Low Turnover                                                              -0.094    -0.108        -0.146
                                                                                    (0.025)   (0.027)        (0.031)

U.S. Imp x Low Turnover                                                                        0.048          0.049
                                                                                              (0.013)        (0.016)

Rsq                                           0.719             0.719               0.720     0.721           0.721



Fixed effects regression; dependent variable: log TFP
Each specification includes country x industry fixed effects, year fixed effects,
as well as JPN R&D and GER R&D (coefficients not reported)
Robust s.e. in parentheses; number of observations: 7,902
Table 12: Entry regulation, turnover, and selection


                                                                (1)                  (2)                   (3)                  (4)

U.S. R&D                                                      0.246                 0.24                 0.265                 0.26
                                                             (0.015)               (0.015)              (0.017)               (0.017)

U.S. Imports                                                 -0.036                -0.036               -0.048                -0.058
                                                             (0.008)               (0.008)              (0.009)               (0.010)

Domestic R&D                                                  0.107                 0.11                 0.113                 0.111
                                                             (0.011)               (0.011)              (0.011)               (0.013)

U.S. R&D x High Regulation                                                          0.018                0.015                 0.012
                                                                                   (0.026)              (0.026)               (0.026)

U.S. Imp x High Regulation                                                                               0.037                 0.039
                                                                                                        (0.014)               (0.014)

Domestic R&D x High Regulation                                0.015                 0.004               -0.009                -0.014
                                                             (0.015)               (0.018)              (0.019)               (0.020)

U.S. R&D x Low Turnover                                                                                                       -0.109
                                                                                                                              (0.027)

U.S. Imp x Low Turnover                                                                                                        0.047
                                                                                                                              (0.013)

Domestic R&D x Low Turnover                                                                                                    0.026
                                                                                                                              (0.018)

Rsq                                                           0.719                 0.719                0.720                 0.721


Fixed effects regression; dependent variable: log TFP
All specifications include country x industry fixed effects, year fixed effects, as well as JPN R&D and GER R&D (coefficients not reported)
Robust s.e. in parentheses; number of observations: 7,902
Table 13: Selection over time


                            Time horizon in years

                                  1              2              3             4              5              6              7             8              9        10

U.S. Imports                    0.016         0.022          0.013          0.001          -0.007        -0.012         -0.022         -0.028         -0.037    -0.045
                               (0.006)       (0.007)        (0.008)        (0.007)        (0.008)       (0.008)        (0.008)        (0.008)        (0.008)   (0.009)

U.S. R&D                        0.296         0.321          0.331          0.309          0.308         0.305          0.302          0.292          0.281      0.27
                               (0.034)       (0.026)        (0.022)        (0.021)        (0.019)       (0.018)        (0.018)        (0.017)        (0.016)   (0.015)

# of observations               6120           6061          6002           5942           5800           5649          5498           5369           5239      5109


Time-differenced OLS regressions; dependent variable: change in log TFP; estimations exploit variation from changes over one year to changes over ten years
All regressions include the change in log domestic R&D, JPN, and GER R&D, and time fixed effects
Robust standard errors in parentheses
                               Number of proc to start a business




                       0
                           2
                               4
                                     6
                                           8
                                                  10
                                                         12
                                                               14
                                                                    16
               Ita
                  ly                                                     18

           Fr
             an
               ce

             Ko
               re
                 a
             Ja
               pa
                 n
             Sp
               ain
        Ge
            rm
                an
                   y
          Be
             lgi
    Ne           um
       the
           rla
              nd
                  s
          Sw
              ed
                  en

Un        Fin
  ite          lan
     d             d
       Ki
         ng
             do
                m
          No
            rw
                                                                              Figure 1: Entry barriers across countries




              ay
         De
           nm
             ar
               k
           Ire
              lan
                 d
         Au
           str
              ali
                 a
          Ca
   Un        na
               da
     ite
        d
          St
            ate
                s
                                                         % entry + exit
                     Co
                         m
                             pu




                                           5
                                               10
                                                    15
                                                               20
                                                                          25
                                                                               30
                                 ter                                                35
                                      s
                               Ot
                                  he
                                       r
                               Sh
                                   ips
                            Ai
                               rc
                                  ra
                         Ra ft
                              i
                    Ins lroa
                        tru d
                             m
                                en
                                    ts
                              G
                     Co lass
                          m
                             m
                                 .e
                                    q.
                                 Ca
                                      rs
                                Fo
                                    od
                           Te
                 El
                   . M xtile
                        ac            s
                            hin
                                 er
                      M             y
                         ac




United Kingdom
                             hin
                                  er
                                      y
                              W
                                  oo
                                      d
                              Pa
                                  pe



Italy
                        M
                           eta r
                                l
                                                                                         Figure 2: Gross turnover by country and by industry




                       Pe prd
                           tro
                               leu
                                    m
                           Pl
                              as
                      Ch tics
                          em
                                ica
                                     ls
                              D
                      Iro rugs
                          n&
                  Ot          S
                     he teel
                         rM
                              eta
                                   ls
                                           Figure 3: The productivity impact of US R&D and US imports over different time horizons

                                   0.04                                                                                               0.35


                                   0.03
                                                                                                                                      0.3
                                   0.02
Average TFP impact of US imports




                                                                                                                                      0.25




                                                                                                                                             Average TFP impact of US R&D
                                   0.01


                                      0
                                                                                                                                      0.2

                                   -0.01

                                                                                                                                      0.15
                                   -0.02


                                   -0.03                                                                                              0.1

                                   -0.04
                                                                                                                                      0.05
                                   -0.05


                                   -0.06                                                                                              0
                                           1        2         3        4           5           6             7        8   9      10
                                                                               Time horizon in years

                                                                  US Imports     US Imports w/ interaction       US R&D
Table A1: The matching of industries for the firm size variable


Classification of this study                                ISIC 3 digit classification employed by UNIDO

1           Food, beverages, and tobacco                        311     Food products               313     Beverages                   314   Tobacco
2           Textiles, apparel, footwear                         321     Textiles                    322     Apparel                     323   Leather products    324   Footwear
3           Wood products, furniture                            331     Wood products               332     Furniture
4           Paper and printing                                  341     Paper                       342     Printing, publishing
5           Petroleum products                                  353     Petroleum refineries        354     Petroleum products
6           Chemicals                                           351     Industrial chemicals
7           Pharmaceuticals                                     352     Other chemicals
8           Rubber & plastics                                   355     Rubber products             356     Plastic products
9           Non-metallic mineral prod.                          361     Pottery, china              362     Glass                       369   Other n-met. min.
10          Iron and steel                                      371     Iron and steel
11          Non-ferrous metals                                  372     Non-ferrous metals
12          Metal products                                      381     Metal products
13          Machinery and eq.                                   382     Machinery*
14          Computers
15          Elect. Machinery                                    383     Electrical machinery**
16          Communication eq.
17          Instruments                                         385     Instruments
18          Motor vehicles                                      384     Transportation equipment***
19          Ships
20          Aircraft
21          Railroad equipment
22          Other manufacturing                                 390     Other manufacturing


Notes:
Information on the number of firms is form Nicita/Olarreaga (2006), based on UNIDO data; it is generally available for the years 1981-2002
Major exceptions are France, where 23% of all possible observations are available, as well as Ireland and Germany (about 45%).
* These values are applied to both industries 13 and 14
** These values are applied to both industries 15 and 16
*** These values are applied to industries 18, 19, 20, and 21
Table A2: Productivity and Imports from the United States, Japan, and Germany


                                            Imports                  Imports                  Imports
                                          from the US              from Japan              from Germany
                                         (Foreign = US)          (Foreign = JPN)          (Foreign = GER)

Foreign R&D                                    -0.116                   0.177                  -0.040
                                              (0.035)                  (0.027)                (0.025)

Foreign Imports                                -0.303                   -0.135                 -0.108
                                              (0.028)                  (0.017)                (0.020)

Imports x Foreign R&D                          0.031                    0.015                  0.013
                                              (0.003)                  (0.002)                (0.003)

Domestic R&D                                   0.101                    0.072                  0.132
                                              (0.010)                  (0.010)                (0.012)

U.S. R&D                                                                0.157                  0.176
                                                                       (0.014)                (0.018)

JPN R&D                                        0.178                                           0.218
                                              (0.016)                                         (0.019)

GER R&D                                        0.097                    0.050
                                              (0.011)                  (0.011)

# of obs                                       7902                      7891                  7898

Rsq                                            0.728                    0.737                  0.710

Elasticity For R&D                             0.25                     0.33                    0.12
(5th%, 95th%)                              (0.14, 0.34)             (0.26, 0.39)            (0.08, 0.15)

Elasticity For IMP                            -0.02                     -0.01                  -0.01
(5th%, 95th%)                             (-0.09, 0.06)             (-0.05, 0.02)          (-0.05, 0.02)


Dependent variable: log total factor productivity
All regressions include fixed effects at the country x industry level and for each year
Robust standard errors in parentheses
Table A3: TFP Based on Industry-Specific Factor Shares



                                             Fixed Effects                 System IV GMM
                                                  (1)                            (2)

US R&D                                           -0.118                            0.058
                                                 (0.034)                          (0.098)

US Imports                                       -0.255                           -0.164
                                                 (0.027)                          (0.065)

US Imports x US R&D                               0.027                            0.018
                                                 (0.003)                          (0.007)

Domestic R&D                                      0.075                            0.037
                                                 (0.010)                          (0.021)

JPN R&D                                           0.170                            0.123
                                                 (0.015)                          (0.038)

GER R&D                                           0.098                            0.067
                                                 (0.011)                          (0.022)

# of obs                                          7902                             6915

Hansen OverID J                                                                    9.38
[p-value]                                                                         [0.153]




Dependent variable: log total factor productivity with industry-varying factor shares
Column (1) includes fixed effects for year and country-by-industry
Column (2) has fixed effects for country, year, and industry
Robust standard errors in parentheses; Windmeijer-corrected in column (2)
In column (1), all right hand side variables are lagged by two years
Instruments column (2): Domestic R&D lags4-6, US imports lags 2-6,
Imports x US R&D lag 2, US R&D lag 2; other IVs contemporaneous
